: a person's cognitive map  or knowledge of large-scale space  is built up from observations gathered as he travels through the environment. it acts as a problem-solver to find routes and relative positions  as well as describing the current location. the tour model describes the multiple representations that make up the cognitive map  the problem-solving strategies it uses  and the mechanisms for assimilating new information. the representations have rich collections of states of partial knowledge  which support many of the attractive qualities of common-sense knowledge. 
descriptive terms: spatial knowledge  cognitive maps  commonsense knowledge  partial knowledge  representations. 
1. introduction 
the puluwat islanders of the south pacific are famed for their navigational abilities. they frequently set out in small canoes  without the aid of modern instruments  and arrive reliably at a small island destination after travelling over a hundred miles of open ocean. much less dramatically  each of us finds his way consistently between home  work  and other familiar destinations without the use of map or compass  and usually without conscious thought. a  sense of direction  is the way certain kinds of spatial abilities are often described. it is not often noted  however  that it is possible to have a sense of direction within two restricted regions  say harvard square and downtown boston  while lacking any notion of how they are related. this suggests that a  sense of direction  is not a property just of the individual  but also of the location. 
what these anecdotes have in common is that they deal with a person's cognitive map: the mental description which a person maintains of his environment. this research is restricted to common-sense knowledge of large-scale space obtained without the use of maps or instruments. from a functional point of view  the cognitive map is viewed as a black box which takes as input simple observations made while following a route  and produces as output a description of the current position  and the answers to route-finding and position-finding questions. in this case  however  the contents of the black box change as a consequence of the observations. 
the scientific problem addressed by this research is to describe the contents of the cognitive map  how it is created from available observations  and how it answers questions about routes and positions. the answer to this problem is a descriptive formalism for the knowledge in the cognitive map  and a collection of inference rules: 1f-a1ded rules to accomplish the assimilation of new observations into the cognitive map  and if-needeo rules to answer questions. 
a small set of metaphors for the cognitive map can illuminate the descriptive methods needed to characterize it. the first is the  map in the head  theory  which states that the cognitive map is just like a printed map  only examined by the mind's eye. this cannot be true of human cognitive maps because they often lack the global consistency of different relative position vectors that characterizes a printed map. 
the tatchwork map  theory modifies this to suggest that the cognitive map is like an atlas of printed maps  each of which contains consistent relative position vectors  but which cannot necessarily be compared. this is quite a good theory  as we shall see below in the  orientation  section  but ignores the capacity of human cognitive maps to represent route descriptions independently of relative position information. 
the  street network  theory focusses on the ability of the cognitive map to represent the topological properties of route descriptions and street patterns  omitting geometrical information. like the  patchwork map  theory  this is quite a good metaphor in that it recognizes an important kind of partial knowledge that people are prone to have in their cognitive maps. however  the use of uniform algorithms from graph theory to explain routefinding is unwarranted because it ignores geometical strategies that people are quite conscious of using. 
thus  neither of these metaphors alone can explain the cognitive map. in this paper  i describe a hybrid theory  taking some aspects of each of these mini-theories. a great deal of additional mechanism is required to make such a theory work  and it has been extended to explain acquisition of the cognitive map as well as its use in problem-solving. 
this paper focusses on the representation for spatial knowledge in the cognitive map  and on the inference rules used for assimilation. these representations have been implemented as a large lisp program and tested on extensive examples. this research is reported in greater detail in  kuipers 1 . 
a great deal of data on human spatial cognition has been collected by psychologists and urban planners  lynch  1; downs and stea  1; siegel and white  1; moore and golledge  1 . inevitably  these observations often do not directly address the issues involved in the creation of a computational model. thus  in many cases  design decisions were made from general computational characteristics of commonsense knowledge. a representation for common-sense knowledge should support many states of partial knowledge  so that initial acquisition of information is very easy  assimilation into more elaborate representations can take place through a series of small steps  and performance can degrade gracefully when resources are restricted. 
1. the tour model 
the model of spatial cognition  called the  tour model   contains three different classes of representations for knowledge: 
　1. representations for knowledge about a particular environment; 
　1. a description of the current position; 
　1. representations for inference rules which manipulate knowledge of the other two kinds. 
the purpose of the tour model is to show how knowledge in these different representations is combined  and how the inference rules translate it from one representation to another. many of the inferences are organized around the process of following a route description through the cognitive map. 
knowledge about particular environments is encoded by the tour mods! in five different representations: 
1. an imperative route representation directs a traveller along 
knowledge* rep r.-1: 	kuipers 1   particular route through the map. 
　1. a topological representation for local properties of street networks  including the ordering of places on a street and the local geometry of streets at an intersection. 
　1. frames of reference  called  orientation frames   define relative positions of objects. positions defined with respect to different orientation frames are not comparable unless a relationship between the orientation frames is represented explicitly. 
　1. dividing boundaries provide a qualitative representation for position that can easily be transformed into a route. 
　1. a structure of containing regions provides levels of abstraction for stating relations among their elements. 
these representations consist of descriptions of routeinstructions  places  paths  regions  and orientation-frames. a description is made up of a number of properties and their values  implemented in lisp as the property list of a generated atom and a collection of associated access functions. 
the current position of the traveller is represented by a small working memory called the  you are here  pointer  which describes the current position in terms of place  path  onedimensional orientation on that path  current orientation frame  and two-dimensional orientation with respect to that orientation frame. 
you are here: 
place:   place description   
path:   path description   
direction:   1-d orientation: +1 or -1   
orient:  orientation-frame description  
heading:   1-d orientation: 1 to 1   
most manipulations of knowledge in the tour model take place through an interaction between the environmental descriptions and the  you are here  pointer. furthermore  the only environmental descriptions which are accessed are typically the ones referred to by the  you are here  pointer and the current route instruction. these amount to a focus of attention for the inference rules that manipulate the descriptions. 
both the  you are here  pointer and the environmental descriptions may be incompletely specified. in most cases the tour model will function with incompletely specified descriptions  although with degraded performance. for example  it may be possible to follow a poorly specified route description from source to destination  but not to add information to place or path descriptions or to maintain orientation knowledge in the  you are here  pointer. 
the inference rules that manipulate knowledge embedded in these various representations are represented as productions: simple modules that wait for a certain set of conditions to be true and then perform some action. they are organized around a process that follows a route description as a sequence of instructions to move the  you are here  pointer through the environmental description. since this process resembles a 
computer executing a computer program  the collection of inference rules is known as the  tour machine.  the inference rules also fall into several categories  corresponding roughly to the kinds of environmental representations. 
　1. rules which compare the current route instruction  the  you are here  pointer  and the topological descriptions of the environment. they can act to fill gaps in each representation with information from the others. in particular  this is how the topological description is originally created from information in the route description. 
　1. rules for maintaining the current heading  or twodimensional orientation  with respect to the current orientation frame. they operate with the relation between the one- and two-dimensional orientations represented in the  you are here  pointer and in the current place and path descriptions. 
　1. rules which detect special structural features of a part of the environment  such as paths which act as dividing boundaries separating places. these rules act within the focus of attention provided by the current route instruction and the  you are here  pointer. 
　1. rules which solve route-finding and position-finding problems using knowledge in the hierarchy of regions and in the descriptions of orientation frames and boundaries. 
1. route and topological representations 
information is first presented to the tour model as incomplete route descriptions. these are assimilated into a topological description of the environment in terms of paths and places. the more global descriptions of the environment are built on the foundation of this topological description.  an exception to this is a strategy for exploring unknown territory which is discussed in section 1 below.  
the topological representation consists of place and path descriptions. the path description includes a partial order of places which are on that path. this partial order represents partial states of knowledge about the total order which places actually have on a path. a path has a one-dimensional orientation with respect to this order: *1 represents facing in the direction of the order  and -1 represents facing against the order. the partial order datastructure is a list of sequences such that each place is in at least one sequence. 
path: 
name:  name  
row:  partial order datastructure  
a place description includes a description of the local geometry of paths which intersect at that place. this local geometry describes the relations among paths  their one-dimensional orientations  and their radial headings in the local frame of reference of this intersection. the local geometry makes it possible to predict the results of turns. 
place: 
name:  name  
on:  list of paths  
star:  local geometry datastructure  
for the purposes of the topological representation  the  you are here  pointer describes three aspects of the current position: the current place  the current path  and the current onedimensional orientation on that path. some of these may be left unspecified  of course. 
you are here: 
place:  place description  
path:  path description 
direction:   +1 or -1   
the route description is a sequence of go-to and turn instructions leading from one place to another. go-to instructs the tour machine to move the  you are here  pointer from one 
  given place to another  in a given direction along a given path. turn instructs the tour machine to move the  you are here  pointer from one path and direction  through a certain number of degrees  ending on another path and direction  though at the same place. 

knowledge repr.-1: kulpers 
1 

the tour model treats an instruction as a simple observation by assuming that the instruction is realizable: both places linked by a go-to are on the given path with the given direction between them  and two paths have the relation required by the turn instruction involving them. 
when following a route description  the tour machine initializes the  you are here  pointer to the source of the route. each instruction has the effect of changing the  you are here  pointer to its destination until the end of the route has been reached. meanwhile the inference rules that make up the tour machine take fragments of information from one description and put it into parts of the others that have been left unspecified. these inferences are of several kinds: 
　1. inference rules that take information about the current position in the  you are mere  pointer and use it to fill unspecified parts of the current instruction. for example  the  you are here  pointer may have a direction component provided by previous inferences  and it can be used to supply the missing 1irect1n component of the current go-to instruction. 
　1. inference rules that take information from the current instruction and add it to the description of the current place or path  specified by the  you are here  pointer . for example  if a go-to instruction states that two places are related by a given direction on a given path  this information can be added to the 
partial order of places which is part of that path description. at a more basic level  these rules add a new place or path description to the cognitive map when required by the current instruction. 
　1. inference rules that take information from the current place or path description  specified by the  you are here  pointer  to provide missing information for the current instruction. for example  the current path description may be able to supply missing information about the direction component of a go-to instruction. 
　1. a fourth kind of inference fills gaps in a route description by posing them as problems for the problem-solving component of the tour model. the solution to the problem can itself be an incomplete route-description  requiring further calls on the problem-solver. 
the states of partial knowledge in the route and topological representations result from the partial order and local geometry descriptions  and from the ability of the tour machine to tolerate underspecified descriptions of route and environment. when these descriptions are fully specified  the tour machine has a greater ability to fill in missing parts of new descriptions. 
these states of partial knowledge make it possible for the individual inference rules to be very simple  so that a single pass through a route-description can assimilate useful amounts of information into the topological representations at low cost. usually  several passes through a particular route-description are necessary before all the useful information is extracted. even before this is done  the partially assimilated knowledge can be used. 
1. topological assimilation example 
this example shows how the route description and the environmental descriptions interact to fill unspecified parts in each other. the scenario takes place near central square in cambridge  whose simplified map is: 
knowledge repr.-1: kulpers 
1 

at this point  the local geometry description in the star properly of place1 can be used to predict the result of the turn. the local geometry associates a heading with certain 
 path direction  pairs as they radiate from a place  and the amount of the turn specifies the new heading which can  perhaps  specify a new  path direction  pair. the absolute values of these headings are meaningless  and can only be used to compute such differences. in this case  the result is to specify the turn instruction completely: 
turn: 
at:  place1: central square  st1:  path1: prospect street  
1ir1: +1 
	amt: 	1. 
st1:  path1: mass ave  
	dir1: 	-1 
the final operation is to update the  you are here  pointer to reflect the result of the turn instruction. 
you arc here: 
	place: 	 place1: centrel square  
	path: 	 path1: mm ave  
	oir: 	1＼ 
the second sentence of our brief tour takes us to putnam circle  which is shown on the map above  but which is completely new to the program  so it must create a new place description for it.  take mass ave to putnam circle.  
go-to: 
from: 
to:  place1: putnam circle  path:  path1: mess ave  oir: 
the  you are here  pointer again provides the current context  including the direction along mass ave that we are travelling  so we can fill in the missing parts of the go-to instruction: 
1-to: 
from:  place : centrel squere  to:  place1: putnam circle  
path:  path1: mass ave  oir: zi. 
when processing the previous turn instruction  the place description was used to add information to the instruction. here the completely specified go-to instruction will be able to add information to the description of the environment. first  we add to place1 the fact that putnam circle is on mass ave. 
place1: 
	name: 	putnam circle 
1 n :
    	cpath1: mais ave  star: 
second  since the go-to instruction gives an order relation  -1  between central square and putnam circle  we can add this information to the partial order in path1. notice that we don't know where putnam circle is with respect to harvard square  but we do know that both are on the same side of central square. 
path!: 
	name: 	mass ave 
	row: 	 place1 place1 place1  
 places place1  
it is illuminating to consider the effect of a partially specified  you are here  pointer. if there had been no local geometryinformation in place1 about central square  for example  the direction of travel would have been unspecified in the go-to instruction  and the partial order in path1 showing the position of putnam circle would have been: 
pathl: 
	name: 	mess ave 
	row: 	 place 1 place1 place1  
 place1  
the route description still contains the information that a right turn from prospect street at central square points you toward putnam circle  but it is not represented in the more easily accessible place and path descriptions. 
this example has shown how the topological properties of places and paths are represented in their descriptions  and how information is assimilated from the relatively inaccessible route instructions into the more globally useful environmental descriptions. the assimilation process takes place through very simple  and computationally inexpensive  interactions between the current instruction  the environmental descriptions  and the  you are here  pointer. notice that  since the only environmental descriptions accessed are those referred to by the current instruction and the  you are here  pointer  that processing time is independent of the amount of information represented. 
1. orientation 
a sense of direction is the ability to define one's current heading  or two-dimensional orientation  with respect to the positions of remote  and often invisible  places. the topological representation supports only a one-dimensional orientation with respect to the order on a particular path. thus  we must augment the tour model to include descriptions of frames of reference  two-dimensional headings in the  you are here  pointer  and knowledge in the path and place descriptions about the relation between one- and two-dimensional orientations. 
an orientation-frame is a common frame of reference for the heading component of positions relating two places  and for the heading component of the  you are here  pointer. by having many different orientation-frames  a person may represent the positions of many places without the requirement that they fit into a single consistent framework. thus the constraints on newly added position information are relatively weak  so the position representation has more states of partial knowledge. knowledge about the relation between two orientation-frames is represented as part of the orientation-frame descriptions. 
this independence of orientation-frames is required because it is quite common for a person to be well-oriented within each of two different regions  but have yery little rfotion of the relation between them. knowledge about the relation between two orientation frames can be learned or forgotten separately from the position information within each one. 
the  you are here  pointer must be augmented to include the current orientation-frame and the current heading with respect to that orientation-frame. 

knowledge repr.-1: kuipers 
1 
the domain of a given orientation-frame can also propagate along 
you are here: lines of frequent travel. assume that we arrive at putnam circle 
place:  place description  and make a turn  so that information must be added to its local 
path:  path description geometry description. rather than creating a new  local direction:   +1 or -1   

orient:  orientation-frame description  heading:   integer in  1    
place and path descriptions may contain information about the relationships between one-dimensional and two-dimensional orientation. the local geometry of a place can be defined so that its headings are consistent with those of a particular orientation-frame. the path description may contain a number of different headings for travel along its +1 direction  defined with respect to a number of different orientation-frames. 
as the tour machine drives the  you are here  pointer along the route  its problem is to maintain the current heading and to transfer orientation information between the  you are here  pointer and the place and path descriptions. there are three kinds of inference rules to accomplish this: 
　1. inference rules that update the current heading for a turn whose amount is known  bnd that check to see that the path of a go-to is straight before allowing the heading to remain fixed. 
　1. inference rules that set heading or direction in the  you are here  pointer by examining the current place and path descriptions. 
　1. inference rules that add information to the current place 
 nd path descriptions about the interaction between the current heading and direction as they appear in the  you are here  pointer. 
in addition to representing knowledge from visual observation or verbal report  knowledge of heading can be used to implement a  dead reckoning  technique for computing the relative positions of the source and destination of a given route. dead reckoning requires the ' you are here  pointer to hold x and y values for the current position in rectangular coordinates with respect to the current orientation frame. the distance travelled by a go-to on a known heading can be converted to those rectangular coordinates  and the result at the end of the route converted back to polar coordinates. 
1. two-dimensional orientation example 
information about the current heading is maintained and updated in much the same way as the topological information in the previous example. for example  in the  turn right  instruction at central square  the enlarged  you are here  pointer would acquire a heading and orientation-frame from the local geometry. description in place1. 
place*: 
nahe: central square 
	on: 	 pathl: mass ave  
cpatm1: prosptct s t r t t t   
	star: 	 1. pathl - i   
 1. path1 -1  
　　　　 iso. pathl +1  orient: orients 
you are here: 
	place: 	 place : ctntral squart  
path:  pathl: jit si avt  dir: -1 
	orient: 	1rient1 
	heading: 	1 
orientation-frame for just that place  its local geometry would be defined with respect to orient1  and would thus be closely related to the local geometry of central square. 
two orientation-frames collide when one defines the local geometry of the current place  while the other defines the heading in the  you are here  pointer. a collision can have two outcomes. if one of them is local to its particular place  it is usually replaced by the orientation-frame with the larger domain  which therefore continues to propagate. if both have substantial domains  the relationship between them is stored in the orientation-frame descriptions. in either case  the heading in the  you are here  pointer can be maintained and updated along a route that travels quite far from where its orientation-frame was defined. 
at the same time  the heading property of a path description can hold the heading of that path  in the +1 direction  with respect to a given orientation frame. in this case: 
pathl: 
	nahe: 	mtss avt 
	row: 	 place1 place1 places  
 place1 place1  
	heading: 	 1rient1  
if more than one heading is put into the same path description  we again have an opportunity to compute and store the relationship between two orientation-frames. 
1. boundaries 
dividing boundaries are very useful in specifying the location of a place. for example  i can describe the location of the cambridge public library by saying that it is: on the other side of prospect street  on this side of mass ave  between broadway and cambridge streets  beyond trowbridge street  before quincy street. 
in each part of this description  i am using a street to draw a boundary  dividing the world  or at least a small part of it  into two regions  then specifying which of those regions contains the place i am describing. a boundary in this sense is not a barrier: it acts to define groups of positions  not to impede travel. naturally  a barrier like the charles river can also function as a boundary. 
when a path acts as a boundary  the sides on the right and the left when facing the +1 direction are represented by regions  sets of places  in the right and left slots of the path description. 
path: 
name:  name  row:  par ial order of places  heading:  list of pairs: 
 orientation-frame heading    
right:  region  
left:  region  
know1 h*e repr.-1: ku n*rs 1 thus  specifying where a place lies with respect to a dividing boundary provides partial knowledge about its position. this knowledge is particularly easy to acquire  easy to combine with other similar pieces of knowledge  end easy to apply to routefinding problems. 
a single turn in a route description can specify where a place lies with respect to a dividing boundary. if the route to the cambridge public library involves a left turn off mass ave  then the cambridge public library is on the left side of mass ave  no matter how tortuous the rest of the route is.  providing  of course  that it doesn't cross back over mass ave.  
although in principle the two regions defined by a boundary extend to infinity  in practice they include only places whose relationship to the boundary has been brought to the attention of the tour machine. thus  if a street is involved in a large variety of different routes  it will have many boundary relationships with different and distant places. otherwise the division it represents may apply only to the immediate neighborhood.. 
the description of the position of the cambridge public library translates readily into useful constraints on a route from here to there. prospect street and trowbridge street are both potential intermediate subgoais  while mass ave and quincy street can act as barriers in case the route strays too far from the goal. in fact  any of the given streets can act as skeletons for a route  since they all have known relationships with both source and goal. if connections are found from source to skeleton and from skeleton to goal  then the skeleton street can join the pieces into a complete route. 
if two boundaries are known to be parallel  then the regions on their sides have further useful relationships. for example  prospect street and trowbridge street are parallel and both lie between here and the cambridge public library. by knowing the order of the two parallel boundaries  prospect street can be chosen as the first subgoal  followed by trowbridge street. a bundle of parallel streets allows subgoais to be ordered into a sequence of small steps that can be easily joined to construct a route. 
two streets can be found to be parallel by examining their headings. the two streets fall within the focus of attention of the tour machine when they are cross-streets encountered on a 
go-to instruction. this allows  local parallel  relations to be found linking two streets. when a particular street has several local parallel relations to other streets  a gathering operation is initiated to follow the local parallel links and gather up and order a bundle of parallel streets. 
a rectangular grid structure on an area amounts to two such bundles  perpendicular to each other. this makes route-finding even easier because the sequence of subgoais can be found within one bundle  while the connections are in the other. thus  the rectangular grid is a useful description of the geography because it allows certain route-finding strategies to be used very powerfully. since this route-finding power is relatively ins'ensitive to irregularities in the geography  people are led to apply the grid description even when it is incorrect. 
1. exploration 
finally  we can discuss an interesting technique for exploring unknown territory. how does a person explore an unfamiliar area before he knows the topology of the street network  it is clear that accomplished explorers use their sense of direction to find the way back to familiar places while learning the new area. if an explorer can maintain his own heading with respect to a familiar street  and if he knows what side of that street he is on  he can always navigate back toward it when he wants to. what it the knowledge that permits him to do this  
a person in a new area can define an orientation frame by the position of a prominant landmark  for example the john hancock building in boston. this orientation frame can allow him to define the heading of a familiar street. then  while exploring  he must maintain his current heading with respect to that orientation frame  and remember what side of the familiar street he is on. he can maintain the heading by attending only to the amounts of turns and the curves of streets. if the unknown territory can be assumed to have a grid structure  the problem becomes much easier  because the heading can have only four values. then he always knows the relative heading of the familiar street  and can always guide himself toward it  even with no knowledge of the street network. 
observations of people learning an area have revealed that while newcomers orient themselves with respect to conspicuous landmarks  long-time residents very seldom do.  lynch 1  those with detailed cognitive maps of an area can orient themselves by local features of each place in the street network. furthermore  they often have a sufficient stock of familiar routes that they need not orient themselves at all  but can just follow route descriptions. 
this example shows how very small amounts of orientation and boundary knowledge can combine to make a powerful technique for exploring unknown territory. only because the representations have rich collections of states of partial knowledge can such small amounts of information be used so effectively. 
1. regions 
regions allow places to be grouped and referred to collectively. 
as such  they provide levels of abstraction for stating facts and answering questions. for example  i can give a route for getting from the west coast to the east coast and hope that it can be used to solve problems concerning particular places in the two regions. 
regions are often defined in terms of legislative boundaries  visual texture  typical activities  ethnic composition  and other characteristics that are not strictly aspects of spatial cognition. thus  unlike the other aspects of the cognitive map  i will not talk about how a region description is created  only how it is used. the problem is how the relationships among different region descriptions allow information to be stated at one level of abstraction and used at another. 
dave rumelhart  1  of ucsd has discussed the problem of sensitivity to geographical context in question-answering. when in san diego  why is it far from ucsd to the airport  but boston seems near to new york  the answer he provides in his  room theory  is that the geography is described with a hierarchy of nested regions. the first step in answering such a question is to find the room: the smallest region containing all the places of interest  those in the problem plus the reference position of the conversation . then the answer is stated in the context of that room. if the questions are asked in san diego  then the room for considering the airport is quite small so the distance must be considered large. however  the room containing san diego  boston  and new york is the whole country  within which boston is quite near to new york. 
k n o w l e d g e 	r e p r . - 1 : 	k u t p e r s 
1 a hierarchy of nested regions can be represented quite easily by having a region description point to the next larger containing region.  for purposes of this discussion  a place and a region  re indistinguishable.  the set of nested regions about a given place forms a sequence  so it is easy to compare two to find the smallest common region. unfortunately  it is difficult to add a new region to such a structure  since its relationship with all other regions must be known before it can be merged into the sequence. in the tour model  the nesting requirement is relaxed to provide many more states of partial knowledge without great loss of performance. 
in the tour model  a region description points to an unordered collection of containing regions. when a problem is posed concerning a particular place  the set of regions containing it is obtained by following these  upward pointers  and ordering them with the same partial order mechanism we have seen twice before. the longest totally ordered subset is taken from this partial order to be used for problem-solving. this makes it possible to miss relationships which are actually represented  but only in cases where the order is partial  and then only involving the least closely related regions. 
to implement room theory problem solving  the sequences of containing regions from the places of interest are compared from the htop down  to find the smallest containing room. the diverging parts of the two sequences are then examined to see if the desired relationship is found between regions contained in the room. if several applicable relationships are found  the most specific is used. as well as being computationally efficient  this top-down access fits the experimental results of stevens  1   who tested the relative difficulty people encountered in answering questions about geography. 
when an abstract relationship is found between regions containing two places of interest  it must still be matched to the concrete problem as originally stated. if my original problem was to get from stanford to mit  i might discover that a good route from northern california to new england was to take 1 to cleveland  then 1 to new england. to complete the details of the route  i must shift my focus of attention at the endpoints of the route to make them more specific. 
this requires that a region description include information to permit a mapping from a general description of a place to a more specific one. the region northern california does not correspond to a particular more specific place or region  but northern california on 1 does correspond to a specific place in san francisco  actually  several places . then i can reformulate my problem to get from stanford to that place. similarly  i can get from 1 in new england to mit. 
thus  the structure of containing regions permits generally useful information to be stated at an abstract level and used at a more specific one. the containment relations permit a particular place to have a partially ordered set of containing regions  rather than simply a sequence. this places fewer constraints on the creation of new region descriptions. only when a problem is posed are the local containment relations merged into a unified structure. it is necessary to have a downward mapping  going from more abstract to more specific descriptions of places. this is impossible if it relates only place descriptions  but can be implemented by mapping more abstract values of the  you are here  pointer to more specific ones. 
1. conclusions 
to summarize all this  i have presented the tour model as a model of spatial knowledge  consisting of a number of representations with rich collections of states of partial knowledge. the tour model initially divides into environmental descriptions  the  you are here  pointer  and the inference rules that manipulate them. a second division of the representations 
distinguishes five different kinds of knowledge: route descriptions  topological street networks  orientation-frames for position knowledge  dividing boundaries and grids  and structures of containing regions. 
considered as a psychological theory  the tour model provides a plausible explanation for the observations that have been made about human spatial cognition. most importantly  it provides a framework for stating detailed empirical questions and for representing their answers. this kind of data will allow the model to make detailed predictions about spatial understanding. 
the empirical questions which can be asked include questions about the distortions and geographical paradoxes that people are prone to  the extent of individual variation in spatial abilities* the relative difficulties of different inferences  and the order in which spatial abilities  are acquired by children. the answers to these questions will be represented in the detailed structure of the environmental descriptions and the collection of inference rules that manipulate them. 
considered as a method for representing common-sense 
knowledge  the tour model provides several useful representations with rich collections of states of partial knowledge. furthermore  it shows how knowledge is assimilated from an initial  very local representation into more powerful and global descriptions. since people often apply spatial metaphors to other kinds of knowledge  there is promise that these representations can be applied to other  non-spatial domains of common-sense knowledge. 
1. 