t r u t h m a i n t e n a n c e systems f o r p r o b l e m s o l v i n g 
jon doyle 
artificial intelligence laboratory 
massachusetts institute of technology 
1 technology square 
cambridge  massachusetts 1 
　　　　　
this summarizes the full report  jon doyle   truth 
maintenance systems for problem solving   m i t ai lab tr1  which describes progress that has been made in the ability of a computer system to understand and reason about its own reasoning faculties. a new method for representing knowledge about beliefs has been developed. this representation  called a non-monotonic dependency system  extends and clarifies several similar previous representation forms for such knowledge  and has been employed in developing new strategies for representing assumptions  backtracking  and controlling problem solving systems. 
　　　　　a truth maintenance system is a combination of a 
　　　　　representation for recording justifications for program beliefs and procedures for effecting any updating of beliefs necessary upon the addition of new information. such a system can easily be used by processes for reasoning about the recorded program reasoning. in particular  processes for nonchronological  dependency-directed backtracking and hypothetical reasoning are particularly straightforward in implementation given the representations of a truth maintenance system. 
　　　　　the basic operation of a truth maintenance system is to attach a justification to a fact. a fact can be linked with any component of program knowledge which is to be connected with other components of program information. typically  a fact might be connected with each assertion and rule in a data base  or might be attached  with differing meanings  to various subsystem structures. the truth maintenance system decides  on the basis of the justifications attached to facts  which beliefs in the truth of facts are supported by the recorded justifications 
　　　　　a belief may be justified on the basis of several other beliefs  by the conditional proof on one belief relative to other beliefs  or by the lack of belief in some fact. the latter form of justification allows the consistent representation and maintenance of hypothetical assumptions. 
　　　　　truth maintenance processing is required when new justifications change previously existing beliefs. in such cases  the status of all beliefs depending on the changed beliefs must be redetermined. from the justifications used in this judgement of beliefs  a number of dependencies between beliefs are determined  such as the set of beliefs depending on each particular belief or the beliefs upon which a particular belief depends. 
knowleh e 
　　　　　several useful processes are supported by the above functions and representations. it is a straightforward matter to interrogate the truth maintenance system representation for the basic material of explanations of beliefs. more sophisticated uses of the recorded justifications are in hypothetical reasoning  generalization  separation of levels of detail  and in dependency-directed backtracking. 
　　　　　hypothetical reasoning is supported by the use of conditional proof justifications. these are justifications which support belief if a specified belief follows from a set of other beliefs. this capability is instrumental in summarizing discoveries in a manner independent of the hypotheses leading to their derivation. 
　　　　　the processes of generalization and separation of levels of detail are also supported by the mechanism of conditional proof. by using conditional proofs to remove dependence of beliefs on other beliefs  results can be justified independent of the particular quantities used in their 
computation  and results at one level of detail can be supported by reasons which are independent of results at lower levels of detail. 
　　　　　dependency-directed backtracking is a powerful technique based on the representations of the truth maintenance system. this method employs the recorded dependencies to locate precisely those hypotheses relevant to the failure and uses the conditional proof mechanism to summarize the cause of the contradiction in terms of these hypotheses. because the failure is summarized independent of the hypotheses causing the failure  future occurrences of the failure are avoided. 
this research is supported by a fannie and john hertz foundation graduate fellowship. this research was conducted at the artificial intelligence laboratory of the massachusetts institute of technology. support for the laboratory's artificial intelligence research is provided in part by the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense under office of naval research contract n1-1-c-1. 
repr. - 1 : 	doyle 
1 
