the generation of continuous semantic constraints from semantic propositions 
gregg c. oden 
university of wisconsin madison  wisconsin 
     language comprehension is an exceedingly complex process which requires the extensive use of many different kinds of information in order to be successfully accomplished. one potentially very important type of information which has to date been largely ignored is the degree to which possible interpretations are sensible. while the sensibleness of candidate interpretations has long been recognized to be important  sensibleness has usually been treated as if it were an all-or-none property. however  it is clear that many things are more-or-less sensible and  therefore  the relative sensibleness of alternative interpretations may well be extremely useful information. for example  oden  1  has argued that degree of sensibleness information is required in order to disambiguate sentences to obtain the meaning that people normally do and has proposed language processing mechanisms which would use this information. 
     the degree of sensibleness of an interpretation depends on the degree to which the semantic constraints of that interpretation are satisfied. therefore  to account for the continuous nature of sensibleness  semantic constraints must be fuzzy restrictions  zadeh  1 . a semantic constraint will be defined to be a function associated with a particular semantic relation which specifies  for every combination of semantic elements which may enter into that relation  the degree of sensibleness of the resultant semantic structure. the present paper outlines how such semantic constraints may be generated from the kinds of knowledge already represented in current semantic memory models  e.g.  norman & rumelhart  1   plus the fuzzy predicates and operations which will be necessary in order to handle other problems like the continuousness of subjective class membership. 
     defining semantic constraints to be functions makes it natural to think of complex semantic constraints as being compositions of simpler constraints. furthermore  since semantic constraints are considered to be bound to particular semantic relations  the decomposition of a constraint may be expected to parallel the decomposition of its associated semantic relation. this appears to be what happens in most cases  but there are certain  configural constraints  which do not seem to be derivable from component constraints corresponding to primitive semantic relations  see oden  1  for details . however  such configural constraints seem to be relatively exceptional and  consequently  semantic constraints will still be  cognitively economical.  more importantly  it will be argued below that elementary  non-composed  semantic constraints  whether directly associated with primitive semantic relations or configural  are based upon specific semantic propositions which would be in semantic memory anyway. 
     in a fundamental sense  all knowledge is constraining. for example  knowing that it is -1бу today affects the sensibleness of the statement  maxine went swimming in lake mendota this morning.  more generally useful knowledge specifies information about the normal and/or necessary properties of things which may enter into particular case relations with particular verbs. the most elementary knowledge of this sort  selectional restrictions  is often considered to be part of the basic meaning of the verb. however  the more interesting semantic constraints are those which are based on much less elementary knowledge  such as that only people normally drive trucks  which we might represent as: 

the obvious interpretation of the constraint exerted by this knowledge is that it only makes sense for someone to drive a truck if that someone is human. 	however  i propose that in fact the constraint is that the degree to which it makes sense for someone to drive a truck is equal  assuming that all other constraints are satisfied  to the degree to which it is true that the person is human: 

in general  it is proposed that knowledge of the form: 

leads to corresponding semantic constraints of the form: 

that is  that the sensibleness of the proposition is equal to the degree to which the predicate is true for the specified arguments  where the predicate may be arbitrarily complex and may itself be decomposable. 
     in summary  it has been proposed  1  that semantic constraints are functions which specify the degree of sensibleness of semantic structures   1  that complex semantic constraints are compositions of elementary semantic constraints and  1  that elementary semantic constraints are derived directly from knowledge about the expected properties of case nouns for particular verbs. 
