: this paper presents a discussion of means of describing the discourse and its components which makes speech act interpretation and anaphora disambiguation possible with minimal search of the knowledge in the database. a portion of this paper will consider how a frames representation of sentences and common sense knowledge provides a mechanism for representing the postulated discourse components. finally some discussion of the use of the discourse model and of frames in a discourse understanding program for a personal assistant will be presented. 
introduction 
       the person who communicates with a personal assistant  whether human or machine  wants to request some action of the assistant via sentences in english. generally  a single sentence is insufficient to capture all the information that is to be given as well as an unnatural way to make a request. however  as several example dialogues below will show  the human user does not tightly relate the sentences s/he speaks about a particular subject. it is instead the job of the hearer to interpret how the incoming sentence is related to the previous discourse. 
       each sentence or clause of a discourse that makes some demand upon the hearer must be interpreted for the kind of demand being made. these demands are generally referred to as speech acts {1}. however  the speech acts are not just strings of individual requests. they have a connecting pattern which the hearer must extract as the discourse goes on. thus the hearer's task is two-fold: to interpret the speech act in a clause and to relate that speech act to the overall discourse. in this paper this two-pronged task will be referred to as speech act interpretation. 
       closely associated with speech act interpretation is the process of understanding what the various noun and pronoun phrases of the incoming sentence refer to. speakers denote previously mentioned objects in a variety of ways with apparent ambiguity in the choice of referents. objects associated with some previously mentioned object  such as the time when a meeting has been mentioned  are not marked in any linguistic manner  and the hearer must decide what if any connection exists between the two. this process  which will be called anaphora disambiguation  determines the relation between terms in the current sentence and those in previous ones. 
       the two processes described above are central features of discourse interpretation. in this paper i will discuss a means of describing the discourse and its components which makes speech act interpretation and anaphora disambiguation possible with minimal search of the knowledge in the database. i will show how speech act interpretation plays a vital role in anaphora disambiguation. in a portion of this paper  i will discuss how a frames representation of sentences and of common sense knowledge provides a representation mechanism for the postulated discourse components. finally some discussion of the use of the discourse model and frames representation in a discourse understanding program for a 
       personal assistant wilt be presented. 
       the two processes of speech act interpretation and anaphora disambiguation require a detailed descriptive representation as the structure of the discourses becomes more complex. by looking at several sample discourses of increasing complexity  more can be seen about the kinds of capabilities which must be included in anaphora disambiguation and speech act interpretation. figures 1 and 1 present various problems in anaphora disambiguation and speech act interpretation which will be discussed by examples. the problems are ordered by increasing complexity  and this complexity will be considered in the section following the figures. special terms like topic  surface inference  contractive reference and stacked topic will be defined in the course of this paper. 
anaphora 
problem 
-choosing the referent of a unique proper name 
-reference of definite noun phrases where the noun phrase is previously used 
-anaphoric references of topic of a request 
-anaphor of definite noun phrases to a concept associated with the topic by 
surface inferences 
-anaphora referring to objects besides topic 
-reference of definite noun phrase described in previous discourses 
-anaphor of definite noun phrases where the discourse implies the concept to which the 
noun phrase refers 
-contrastive references 
-anaphora referring to unmentioned objects 
-references to stacked topics 
-anaphora of definite noun phrases to a concept associated with the topic by deep inferences 
figure 1 
speech acts 
problem 
-recognition of a speech act when no previous discourse exists 
-recognition of a speech act which is related to discourse by the same topic 
-recognition of a speech act which is related to discourse but which seems to have different topic 
-recognition of the role of assertions and questions to other speech acts 
-recognition of multiple speech acts of the same type with different topics 
-recognition of speech acts that have different topics but which are 
related by deep inferencing 
figure 1 
some discourse examples 
n a t u r a l 	l a n g u a r g - 1 	: 	bullwinkle 
1 in the examples below  different aspects of the problem 
of determining both the referent of definite noun phrases and anaphoric phrases will be presented. these examples will also show what kinds of interactions can occur between different speech acts and how these interactions are reflected in the references. 
 1  i want to schedule a meeting with ira. it should be at 1 p.m. tomorrow. we can meet in bruce's office. 
       in  1  above  there are two kinds of speech acts. the first is a request for some action to be performed  i.e. scheduling a meeting. the sentences that follow contain a second kind of speech act  an assertion about when the meeting ought to occur. a speech act has a central concept which the speech act is about. in this paper this central concept is called the topic; here the topic is the meeting. a basic problem of speech act interpretation is to determine what topic a particular speech act refers to. once a topic can be chosen for a speech act  the topic becomes the focal point of reference resolution. topic choice is difficult because two different speech acts may be related only by reference to the same topic  and yet the topic may not be explicitly stated in both. the references in this example range from easily resolvable ones like / and a meeting  to simple anaphora  it  and to references requiring some database search  bruce  bruce's office . later a frames representation will be presented to permit reference and anaphor resolution with a minimum of  or no  search. 
 1  i want to schedule a meeting with prof. goldstein. the time should be 1 p.m. on thursday. we can meet in his office. 
       in  1   the speech acts are the same as in  1   but an object associated with the meeting  the time  is not clearly stated as referring to the time of the meeting. instead this is assumed to be determinable from the context and the hearer's knowledge of meetings. also in  1   the referent of his ought to be resolvable with a minimum of search. 
 1a  ira wants to have a party at his house. it's going to be at 1 o'clock p.m. invite  everyone at the lab; mitch  dave  candy  bruce and beth} to attend. 
 1b  ira wants to have a party at his house. it's at 1 wildwood st. invite {everyone at the lab; mitch  dave  candy  bruce and beth} to attend. 
       in  1a  and  1b   a new speech act  invite  has been introduced. this speech act makes a request  and there is no clear indication of what the inviting has to do with the previous context. again it is left to the hearer to determine from what s/he knows about meetings and scheduling a meeting to decide what the connection is. 
        1a  and  1b  add further complexity to the use of anaphora disambiguation. the it's in sentence 1 of  1a  and  1b  refers to party. most existing systems misinterpret the anaphoric reference in  1b  because house occurs between the pronoun and its referent. correct disambiguation requires some knowledge of what has been talked about so far  which is the topic  and how sentence 1 relates to this topic. sentence 1 of  1a  and  1b  shows two alternative ways to tell who is to be invited. one is a string of names which can be disambiguated just as all the previous examples of names are. the other uses a quantifier over a set. while the current work does not claim a solution to the quantifier problem  it is introduced here to show what complexity can be expressed in the most simple looking discourses. finally  the ellipsis of what is being attended by everyone must be resolved to determine what relation the people have to the invitation. 
 1a  i want to get together with bruce. our meeting should be before friday. we can meet in my office. can mitch attend also  
 1b  i want to get together with bruce. our meeting should be before friday. we can meet in my office. can i also attend the staff meeting this week  
       example  1a  points out two new problems. the first 1 sentences  though similar to those above  offer a new reference problem. the first sentence implies a meeting to which the phrase our meeting in sentence 1 refers. by the use of topic  this relationship can be determined without searching the database of all meetings for the referent. the last sentence of  1a  points out another feature of speech acts. it requests the answer to a question which is not independent of the context. in general  questions may or may not take this form. an acceptable alternative discourse which does not have this form would be one like  1b . 
 1  i want to re-schedule the pa-meeting. change it to thursday. 
       in example  1  a new speech act is used  but this speech act is not significantly different from the speech act of schedule. this example illustrates the reference problem of the pa-meeting. while no previous discourse exists in which to find the referent of this term  the term may have a unique referent even when several pa-meetings have been scheduled  due to the participants  places and times . this suggests that previous discourses must be saved in a form suitable for providing necessary information to disambiguate the reference. 
 1  i want to schedule two meetings. one should be on thursday at 1 with ira. the other is with bill on the 1th at 1. the thursday one may last quite a while so schedule 1 hours for it. 
 1  next week on monday  i want to meet with bruce. please arrange it for us. also you scheduled a meeting on monday at 1 a.m. that's too early. make it 1 a.m. at the earliest. 
       the next several discourses present examples of speech acts which have different topics and different discourse structure  and yet the speech acts being requested are the same. the first of these   1   has a structure with two different parallel requests about the same kind of events. it uses a kind of contrastive referencing  the one.the other  that is often used for showing contrast between two similar notions. in addition there is an assertion about the first request after the statement of the second request. the second example   1   also requests two separate scheduling events  but the requests have a sequential form. these discourses suggest that there may be several ways to structure speech act requests to convey the request completely but with minimal repetition of information. consideration of discourse structure when interpreting these requests assists in anaphora disambiguation: the structure shows whether one or more objects are being discussed within the context. 
       in addition to the speech act structure  example  1  points to an interesting problem. there is no previous referent for the use of it in sentence 1 of  1  1 . this  as well as other examples not reproduced here  suggest that special techniques are needed for finding anaphoric referents that fail to refer to some syntactic object. such anaphora are 

generally understood. inferencing about the topic of the overall discourse speech act may be recognized. in  1  as we context as a nominal similar to those in  1a  will permit the have seen  the first speech act is a scheduling request. this correct association. becomes the discourse theme. the second sentence has an 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　assertion as its speech act. to relate the two speech acts and  1  dave  bruce and i are working on a new program sentences  one must recognize that the assertion gives together. we need to meet once a week for a additional information about the event for which scheduling is month. schedule a regular meeting time for us. requested. in general  any discourse theme can have associated to it certain speech acts such as assertions  example  1  contains two speech acts  one a fact about questions or further requests. the speech acts can be some work being done and the other a request for a meeting assumed to be related because they are about the same time. the two speech acts are related because the first is a requested event. in  1  that event is a meeting. 
reason for the second. a similar relation exists between the clauses of sentence 1 of example  1 . as with  1  and  1   
                                                                                                     topic determination of the possible structures of discourse aids in the interpretation of the speech acts of  1 . 
       every speech act is assumed to be about something  that is  a speech act has a central concept it states. this 
 1  the pa group will want to meet next week. 	the 	concept is the topic. 	a request for scheduling makes the meeting should be on wednesday. 	the last 	request about a meeting. the assertion of information is an meeting  which was at 1  was too late  so schedule 	assertion about some object or event. 	the topic is not this one earlier. 	necessarily assumed to be the neutral case of the sentence case frame  or direct object of the sentence . 	often the 
　　　in the last example above  the phrase the last meeting neutral case may contain the topic. however  this is an artifact bears an important relation to the phrase the meeting. in of the kinds of sentences that are considered in this article. order for a reference finder to determine what the last most of them are requests by a speaker for some action to be meeting refers to  it is necessary to know that a  the meetings performed. since the speaker as agent is well-identified  the are related along some linear dimension to which last can hearer knows  in some sense  who the speaker is   the neutral apply  and b  that the last meeting was a meeting of the pa or temporal or locative are candidates for the topic  the group. this example suggests that semantic knowledge and neutral being preferred over the other two. in discourses  some pragmatic assumptions must be available to an anaphora notably stories  the agent may contain the topic. however  
disambiguation program. 	even in such discourses  the teller of the tale may include 
                                                                 him/herself as agent  and then the topic will be the neutral or sentence 1 shows another difficulty: the focus of the some other non-agent case. 
discourse shifts to the last meeting and then back to meeting via the use of this one. the use of this and that to point to when a theme of discourse is chosen  the topic of its different foci of a discourse appears to be similar to the use related sentence becomes the discourse topic. once a topic is of the one.jhe other. example  1   like the previous three chosen for a discourse  subsequent sentences provide more examples  contains the use of an assertion serving as a reason information about the topic. they may use any of the case for some other request. in  1   the link between assertions frame slots associated with their own sentence predicates. and requests is needed to resolve the ellipsis associated with very often  as in the examples above  a reference to the topic earlier. will appear in the agent slot. this is consistent with the 
old/new distinction  moore  1  because a reference to the 
	components of discourse 	topic  which is old information after one sentence  often 
                                                                 appears at the beginning of a succeeding sentence. now let us turn our attention to describing components 
of a discourse. here i will use the old notion of topic {1} and sub-topics describe a computational model of discourse which uses this notion. i will also describe the notion of theme  not in the a discourse may expand various aspects of a topic and sense of kuno  or halliday   but in the sense of then end the discussion of that topic. alternatively  it may the theme of a paragraph  discourse or story. mention one aspect of the topic and describe it in detail. for example  in a discourse about meetings  we may want to spend discourse organization centers around the theme and several sentences specifying the time for the meeting  why the topic. the theme of the discourse is the speech act that time is best and so on. 
request or assertion which is being made by the discourse. it is not necessarily the verb in a sentence; it is the request or at the point in the discourse where time is being assertion being made using a particular verb. discourse discussed instead of the topic meeting  one would like to themes can be difficult to identify  but generally in the kinds of declare a change of topic so that the assertions or requests in discourses discussed here  the leading sentence suggests the the subsequent sentences will be taken to be about time. discourse theme. to illustrate  note that in example  1   the however  the meeting should not be  forgotten  entirely theme is a scheduling request since the discourse is taken to because the discourse may eventually return to it. in this be a request for scheduling. it is the use of a want modality case  the meeting topic can be said to have a background role together with schedule which suggests this theme. the to the new topic of time. to maintain both topics  one in the combination of the two are necessary  for in example  1  foreground  and the other in the background  the topic of below  a variation of  1   the use of schedule in the second meeting can be thought of as being stacked so that it can be sentence suggests an assertion  not a request for scheduling. retrieved for later use {1}. this process of switching from a discourse topic to a concept that is related to the topic will be 
 1  i have a meeting with mitch. it is scheduled for 	called sub-topic shift  and the topic which is stacked is 
	1 a.m. on monday. 	referred to as the stacked topic. 
	each sentence of a discourse has its own speech act. 	recognizing the occurrence of sub-topics can be a 
these must be determined from sentential verbs  so that the 	difficult task. one might choose the following criterion for 
	n a t u r a l 	l a n u a g e 	r u l l w l n k l e 
us 

determining sub-topic shift: a sub-topic shift occurs whenever a sentence has as its topic a concept which is not identical to the existing discourse topic. in example  1   listed as  1  below  this criterion would cause sub-topic shift to time  and then to office  since these noun phrases are the topics of the individual sentences. 
 1  i want to schedule a meeting with prof. goldstein. the time should be 1 p.m. on thursday. we can meet in in his office. 
however  discourse  1  is about a meeting  and sentences 1 and 1 provide additional information about it. shifting the disourse topic to time and then to office loses this connecting thread. 
       as the reader may have seen  the problem of sub-topic shifts is that they cannot be predicted; they are detectable only after they occur. consider the first two sentences of  1a  below: 
 1a  i want to schedule a meeting with george  jim  steve and mike. we can meet in my office. it's kind of small  but the meeting won't last very long anyway. 
in this discourse  after sentence 1  the discourse topic is still meeting. sentence 1 has provided information about one aspect of the meeting. the first clause of sentence 1 changes the topic since it is an assertion about my office. to determine the relation of the sentence to the discourse  and to interpret the anaphor correctly  one must be aware that a sub-topic shift has occurred. the skeptical reader may begin to suspect a contradiction: in order to interpret it's kind of smell  one must know a shift has occurred  but to do the shift one must have interpreted the sentence! 
       the solution to this problem is to be aware that a subtopic shift is possible once sentence 1 of  1a  is interpreted. office is a potential object of further discussion  as are any concepts associated to meetings . however  sentence 1 introduces office as a potential anaphoric referent while other concepts related to meeting do not have this property. in this way  the first clause of sentence 1 can be interpreted as referring to my office. of course  the nature of the assertion on which it centers is signficant. it must be possible for an assertion of smallness to be made about my office before a referential connection can be assumed and the sub-topic shift made. this implies the need for semantic knowledge about what can be predicated of objects in the domain. the knowledge is fairly limited  however  because the decision is strictly a yes-no question about a particular object  not a 
       decision among competing objects. should semantic knowledge reject such an association  as in  1b  below  the discourse topic it immediatedly available as the referent of the anaphor. 
 1b  i want to schedule a meeting with george  jim  steve and mike. we can meet in my office. it won't take more than 1 minutes. 
       however  semantic marker type checks are not sufficient to conclude that the sentence it's kind of small is  bout an office. the speech act of asserting must also fit within the context. for  1s   the distinction of speech acts rests on subtle criteria  the use of present tense with no modality. since meeting has been discussed only in a modal context in  1a   a non-modal assertion about meeting would be unacceptable whereas the non-modal assertion is acceptable for office. were the first part of sentence 1 in  1a  it wilt be kind of smell  the hearer is likely to associate meeting with the anaphor it. 
       potential sub-topics have a short lifetime. if a potential sub-topic does not become the topic as the result of processing the sentence following the one in which the potential is seen  it is dropped as a potential sub-topic. thus in  1b  by the end of the third sentence  my office is dropped as a potential sub-topic. hereafter if office is discussed  it cannot be referred to using it until some sentence r e introduces office as a potential anaphoric referent. 
       naturally  a sub-topic must eventually be popped when the topic shifts back. in  1a   the meeting is a reference to the stacked topic. generally whenever a reference to the stacked topic occurs  the sub-topic is popped  and the stacked topic becomes the topic again. 
       sub-topic shifting is only one way to delineate the references in a discourse. in some discourses  the topic is not shifted to a sub-topic. in such a discourse  the topic and a second object  which can be related to the topic in one of several ways  are discussed in parallel. to distinguish between the topic and the second object  a different set of anaphora are used  generally of the class of this-that or the one...the other. the topic is referred to as this while the second object as that. similarly for the one.the other  as can be seen in example  1 . 
discourses for the personal assistant 
       as part of the personal assistant project at the a.i. lab at m.i.t.  a natural language understanding program  called pal  is being developed to understand discourses such as those in examples  1  to  1 . the remainder of this paper will describe how the notion of speech act  topic  theme and discourse are used in a frames representation  and how the frames structure can be used to model sentences of the discourse. in this discussion  the author will assume the reader has a knowledge of some of the concepts of case frame semantics. a brief discussion of how these are currently implemented may be found in bullwinkle . the mapping of constituent phrases into case frames  and to instantiated frame format will also not be discussed here and can be found in bullwinkle. this article wilt instead concentrate on concepts and processes that can be described with frames and which make anaphora disambiguation and speech act interpretation possible. 
       the notion of frames used here refers to the frames representation language  frl  developed by goldstein and roberts . in this system a frame is a generalized property list where each generalized property is called a slot. the slot has several properties  called keys  the most important of which is the value  ivalue  key. when this key is filled  attached procedures are run to produce  automatic  additional results. a frame for a meeting  such as the one below  gives common sense information about meetings for use by various database procedures. frames like this exist in the database before discourses are introduced. they act as prototypes for constructing additional frames. the frame gives a-kind-of  ako   default and preference information about the times  places  and participants that are associated with the frame as well as some details about what to do when a slot is filled  sif-added   what instances of meeting exist  and the default of the semantic relation of possessives. 
 meeting 
 ako  ivalue  communication    
 1 scheduling has several default options  schedule  sdefault 
 cancel  

n a t u r a l 	l a n g u a g e - 1 : 	r u m w i n k l e 

 reschedule  
 begin-later  
 end-earlier  
 postpone  
 advance  
 change-participant    
 participant 
  preference   exists-chairman     
 sif-added   select-chairman     
 instance  ivalue  pa-meeting    
1 the marker    means  look in the 
r frame-slot-key listed here for the 
r information needed   i.e. -  is a pointer 
 time  ipreference 
  -  pa-project  meeting time  spreference   
  -  ira  meeting time  spreference   
  -  rbr  meeting time  spreference     
 place  idefault 
  -  pa-project  meeting place  idefault   
  -  ira  meeting place  idefault   
  -  rbr  meeting place  idefault    
  preference 
  -  ira  meeting place  spreference     
 possessive  idefault   participant      
       frames exist for actions as well as objects. the frame for schedule given below contains information about how it is used in discourse  in the synonomy and discourse slots  which are discussed later  as well as some pragmatic information which is discussed in bullwinkle . 
 schedule 
 ako  ivalue  action    
 pramatics 
  requirement  pragmatics-for-schedule    
 synonomy  ivalue    assert activity      
 discourse  ivalue    assert activity       
       the discourse topic as it is used in pal is an extrasentential device. it is used for finding referents that cross sentence boundaries. intra-sentential referencing is needed 
 s  si  and  s1  below show. 
 s1  he said he was going.  s1  john washed himself. 
without intra-sentential referencing  the co-referentiality of himself to john and possible co-reference of the two uses of he in  si  would be impossible. sentential referencing rules following the work of ross   lasnik  and keyser & postal  are used. 
structure of the topic to make the inference. 
       the frames structure limits the type and number of concepts that can be discussed for a given topic. it limits the concepts to those that are slot-values for the topic frame. rosenberg  call this limited set the context horizon of the topic. this structural limitation has a useful effect since it provides a limited number of ways to interpret subsequent sentences. this limitation makes necessary the process of sub-topic shift so that a sentence about one of the slot-values  for example  size  of the slot-value  for example  place  of the topic  for example  meeting  can be processed. yet while the context horizon limitation forces the additional mechanism of sub-topic shift to be used in discourse interpretation  it also focuses the sub-topic shift to a limited set of concepts  i.e. the slots of the topic. hence  while the context horizon limitation is a limit on the structure of frames and discourse  it is a productive limitation. 
       since the initial stages of this research project  i have used the notion of context in one way or another. at first  context was simply a list of all frames that were built at any one of the language understanding modules {1}. it was believed that this data structure provided a list of what could and could not be referenced by anaphora and definite noun phrases. however  further research suggests that the topic itself provides the structure for anaphoric references  while the topic as a frame together with expectations computable from the theme and topic provide for most definite references. thus  the topic and the theme serve as a context mechanism in and of themselves. to see why a simple list of frames is inadequate as a context  consider example  1  below. 
 1 t george wants me to have a meeting with sally this tuesday. it will be at 1 p.m. we can meet in my office. before the meeting  bill will ask him to speak. 
       most informants tell me that they do not immediately have a referent for the phrase him in the last sentence  and that they have to re-read the discourse for something that could be the referent. if a simple list of frames is used  a frame for george will be on the list of possible referents and be chosen as referent since bill will be excluded due to intrasentential reflexivization rules. however  if a theme-topic model is used  the topic is the meeting and george does not appear in any of the slots of meeting  thereby making it difficult to refer to him with an anaphoric reference. 
solutions to examples 
       using the topic and theme notions  and frames as described above  it is possible to determine the references of 

       as defined previously  the theme is the overall request which is invoked in the discourse. each theme is represented as a frame which contains in the discourse slot some information about what kinds of speech acts can be used to extend the discourse. this information  which i will call the discourse description  allows the frame for the theme to  see  an additional sentence as making an assertion about some slot of the topic or as introducing an additional request. a theme can have potentially many different kinds of topics  e.g. schedule as a theme can have meetings  parties  lectures  etc. as topics. the theme does not keep a list of all the slots of each one of these on its own frame. rather it computes the topic slots from the topic itself which is also represented as a frame. the results of this computation are expectations of what the remaining sentences of the discourse are likely to discuss. inferences made about sentences using these expectations are surface inferences since they use the slot noun and pronoun phrases in the examples  1  to  1  above  as well as interpret the speech acts of these examples. in finding referents a miminum of search is done  and the search is directed by knowledge of what the discourse is about. to see how this is done  examples  1  and  1  will be sketched in detail  and then a briefer sketch of the solution to some problems in the remaining examples will be given. 
 1  i want to schedule a meeting with ira. it should be at 1 p.m. tomorrow. we can meet in bruce's office. 
       from case frame information and parse tree information  frames for words of sentence 1 are created. below are two of the several frames which are built by this process. the self slot of these frames carries most of the parse information about the frame while the other slots contain much of the 

n a t u r a l 	language*- 1 : 	b u l l w i n k l e 

interpreted case frame information. the abbreviation siv  stands for linguistic-value and contains a caseframe or parse tree node for that slot. details of case-frame interpretation may be found in bullwinkle . 
 frame1 
 self  ideterminer  frame1   
 ihead  meeting   
 inode   n1de1 . 1     
 ako  ivalue  meeting    
 participant  ivalue  referenced  
 $lv   n1de1 . 1      
 frame 1 
 self  itense  infinitive   
 stype  unfinitive-s    
 ihead  schedule   
 inode   n1de1 . 1     
 ako  ivalue  schedule    
 actor  ivalue  reference1   
 ilv   n1de1 . 1     
 activity  ivalue  frame1   
 ilv  casefr1     
       during the case-frame interpretation of sentence 1  a referent for ira is chosen from the instances of people vta a 
       program that knows the syntax and semantics of proper names. following interpretation of sentence 1 of  1   the theme is set to the frame of schedule and the topic to meeting. 
       after sentence 1 is interpreted for case-frame information  discourse and reference interpretation is done. a referent for / is assumed to be the speaker while the referent of it is chosen to be the topic because the topic passes gender  number and simple semantic agreement checks. in general  the discourse topic is used for determining anaphoric references  either because it is the referent of pronouns like it or because its slot structure contains the referents for pronouns like we  she  he or they. 
       the discourse description for the theme schedule accepts assertions which provide additional information about the discourse topic. the second sentence is accepted as an assertion about the discourse topic because it contains a time phrase which the discourse module determines can be used to talk about meetings and because sentences with be verbs are taken as assertions by the synonomy slot of that verb as shown in the frame below. in general the synonomy slot of a verb contains the list of speech acts which can be associated to a verb within some discourse context. since the list of speech acts can be greater than 1  it is the job of the discourse module to determine which speech act can be used in the given context. 
 be  ako  ivalue  action    
 when  irequirement 
  ako-ref  :value finterval     
 place  irequirement 
  ako-ref  :value 'place     
 synonomy  ivalue    assert thing       
       by the above discourse information  sentence 1 is judged to be part of the schedule discourse. likewise  sentence 1 is an assertion of information that can be associated with the discourse topic  and this sentence is taken to assert the place of the discourse topic. sentence 1 exemplifies pal's ability to use speech acts that do not directly specify the topic to which they refer. 
the resolution of brace's office in  1  occurs in two 
parts; first a referent for bruce is found via the name program mentioned above. second  if bruce's office is not mentioned as a slot in the frame for bruce  then an office is searched for among the instances of offices in the frames database such that this office has bruce as an occupant or owner. the search is minimal because it occurs among a relatively small collection of likely objects rather than ail the objects that exist in the database. 
 1  i want to schedule a meeting with prof. goldstein. the time should be 1 p.m. on thursday. we can meet in his office. 
       the processing for example  1   sentence 1 proceeds as in  1   sentence 1. in processing sentence 1  the reference finder expects the discourse topic either to be the referent of the time or to contain a slot to which the time refers. the reference finder finds the latter to be the case for two reasons: 1  time is not the same as meeting  and 1  meetings can potentially have a time slot. this use of surface inferencing for definite noun phrases is possible because of the slot structure of frames and the use of the ako hierarchy 
of a frame to find its potential form. processing of sentence 1 is similar to example  1  except for the anaphora disambiguation of his. the referent is found by considering instantiated slots in the topic frame which contain additional information about the topic  namely  the time and participant slots. since time slots fail a simple gender check  a referent is found among the values listed on the participant slot. 
       from example  1  it can be seen that the semantics of the reference finder are somewhat limited. ideally  a reference finder should consider only those slots of a frame which can be filled by objects of the same semantic type as the pronoun. this is possible  however  only if there is knowledge in a frame about what kinds of objects could potentially fill a slot of the frame. this knowledge has not yet been incorporated into the frames for pal and the reference finder. 
 1  ira wants to have a party at his house. it's at 1 wildwood st. invite {everyone at the lab; mitch  dave  candy  bruce and beth} to attend. 
       example  1  shows the first use of intra-sentential referencing for determining the co-reference between his and ira by means of a procedure based on the precede and kommand rule of lasnik . pal chooses the party of sentence 1 as the referent of the it in sentence 1 because party is the discourse topic. the house as a referent is entirely overlooked because it plays no part as the topic and because it is not a potential topic. 
       to understand the last sentence of  1   pal is currently being programmed to understand requests within a schedule request. this will permit pal to interpret requests for invitations as well as re-statements of the initial discourse request  which often occur in short discourses. using the discourse description in this way  pal will be able to conclude that the invitation request is a request for the guests to attend the event denoted by the topic. this same method  when applied to questions  will create the link between the scheduling discourse and the question in example  1a . 
       example  1  requires the addition of other speech act requests to pal  using frames and discourse descriptions in the same manner as a scheduling request. it also requires  as was pointed out earlier in this paper  that previous discourse be saved in some organized fashion. this requirement is currently handled in the following way. any topic instantiated 

natural 	lnnpuae;e-1 : 	rull w i n k l e 
u1 

by a discourse is an instance of the prototype frame of which examples are insightful and convinced me that the notion ought it is a kind. thus a pa-meeting frame was generated in the to be explicit in my work. i have not retained his term for the discourse which occurred sometime before discourse  1 . that notion  as topic is more in line with older notions of topic  such pa-meeting  call it pa-meeting1  is an instance of the general as that of moore  . 
pa-meeting frame. when a referent is sought for the pameeting in  1   because there is no previous discourse  the {1} deutsch  first showed that this sort of phenomena database pa-meetings  which includes pa-meeting1  are occurrred in discourse. 
searched. by use of pragmatic rules {1}  which associate the speaker with a meeting as a participant  the possible matches  1} the modules include building frames from case frames  for the pa-meeting in  1  are small and pa-meeting1 can be resolving intra-sentential reference and pragmatics. see selected. one experimental hypothesis not fully tested is that bullwinkle . 
for any definite noun phrase in discourse which presupposes 
 n existing object  the database will have a frame  like pa- {1} pragmatic rules used in pal are rules of common sense meeting 1  which uniquely matches that noun phrase. knowledge. they include rules such as  the speaker who requests a meeting to be scheduled is likely to be a participant.  pragmatic rules are discussed in bullwinkle 
further work 
 1} 
from these examples and the description of reference 
