an interactive program for conversational elicitation of decision structures 
antonio leal* and 
judea pearl 
school of engineering and applied science university of california  los angeles 
　　　an interactive computer program has been designed and implemented that e l i c i t s a decision tree from a decision maker in an english-like conversational mode. it emulates a decision analyst who guides the decision maker in structuring and organizing his knowledge about a particular problem domain. 
　　　decision analysts are often c ailed upon to assist in the solution of planning problems ranging over a large variety of domains  in most such cases the decision analysts posses s less specific knowledge about the problem domain than their 
customers  and their contributions are confined primarily to the phases of formali zation and optimization. while optimization is usually performed on electronic computers  the formalization phase invariably has been ace omplished 
manually  using lengthy interviews with persons intimately familiar with the probl em domain. 
　　　the major drawback of manual interviews is their length and cost. since real-time analysis of decision trees is beyond the limitation of human computational capability  it invariably happens that many hours of interviews are spent on eliciting portions of the decision tree which do not have decisive bearing on the problem s  at hand. this fact can only be discovered at a 
later stage once the problem structure is formalized  and a sensitivity analysis has been 
conducted on an electronic computer. during the interview i t s e l f   however  it is impossible for the analyst to process the entire information obtained by him up to that point  and to select the optimum course for conducting future inquiries. 
　　　this paper describes an i n i t i a l attempt to automate the formalization phase using an interactive computer system which guides the decision maker through a structured english-like dialogue and constructs a decision tree from his responses. the objectives of this work are threefold:  1  to provide the decision analysis industry with a practical automated tool for e l i c i t i n g decision trees in cases where manual elicitation techniques are either infeasible or non-economical   1  to cast the decision analysts' behavior into a formal framework in order to examine the principles 
portions of this work are contained in antonio leal's ph.d. dissertation in the school of 
engineering and applied science at ucla  june  
1. he is currently a research scientist at perceptronics  inc.  woodland h i l l s   calif. work reported herein was supported in part by nsf grant gj-1. 
governing the e l i c i t a t i o n procedure and gain a deeper understanding of the analysis process i t s e l f   and  1  to provide experimental psycholo-
gists with an automated research tool for coding subjects' perception of problem situations into a standard and formal representation. 
　　　the approach centers on the realization that the process of conducting an elicitation dialogue is structurally identical to conducting a heuristic search on game trees  as is commonly practiced in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence programs. heuristic search techniques  when applied to tree e l i c i t a t i o n   permit real-time rollback and sensitivity analysis as the tree is being formulated. thus  it is possible to concentrate effort on expanding those parts of the tree which are crucial for the resolution of the solution plan. the program requires the decision 
maker to provide provisional values at each 
intermediate stage in the tree construction  that estimate the promise of future opportunities open to him from that stage. these provisional values then serve a role identical to a heuristic evaluation function in selecting the next node  scenario  to be explored in more detail. the difference is only that the heuristic function is supplied i n i t i a l l y by the programmer and it is defined over the entire state space  while the u t i l i t y values are supplied by the decision maker interactively with the elicitation program. fig. 1  
　　　the program is domain independent  as it assumes no prior knowledge specific to any problem environment  and can therefore be used as a universal decision-aiding tool. although the program makes almost no effort toward language understanding  the conversation seems to follow a natural discourse. this is due to the simplicity of the structure underlying decision trees. the user's verbal responses are mapped directly into one of the following data types: events  actions  likelihood relations  value estimates  or experiment descriptions. the final result of the computer interview is a  solution plan  that recommends an action for all anticipated contingencies. 


knowledge 	a c q . - 1 : leal 
1 
