comex: a commodities support system. 
jim stansfield 
m.i.t. a.i. lab 
　　　we are developing an intelligent support system  comex  to manage the data that a commodities analyst receives in agricultural reports. comex must have the following capabilities: 1  finding relevant facts  1  determining implications  1  checking reliabilities  1  monitoring  1  alerting  1  reporting  1  answering queries. the research involves natural language  representation  common sense reasoning  qualitative simulation and user modelling. here  i address representation and reasoning by describing comex-1 a working prototype of a module of comex. 
　　　comex-1 uses frames  minsky  1    goldstein & roberts  1  for representing knowledge. about twenty types of event are represented  together with crop-states  weather  commodities  quantities and prices. frame structures are interwoven with procedures. comex-1 builds frame structures by means of a formal dialogue with a user: each frame has procedures for requesting information to instantiate its slots. procedures attached to slots check that responses satisfy the requirements of the slot. unsatisfied requirements complain giving a reason for unacceptability. 
representing evants. 
　　　　events relate objects and actors around several central actions. represented events include transfer  give  buy  sell  transport  change  take  increase  decrease  cause  exchange  move  export and import. comex-1 forms new event representations in two ways  instantiation of an event and aggregation of several events. 
　　　instantiation is illustrated by moving which is a kind of changing. a pseudo-english version of part of the moving frame is shown in figure 1. 
	moving is a 	changing 
	changed 	 must be a location slot  
	subject 	 must be the frame which changed  
	old-value 	 must be a place  
	new-value 	 must be a place  
figure 1 
　　　moving has an extra subject slot for the thing moved and has requirements that give more detailed specifications of the slot values. it inherits time information from changing which  in turn  inherits from event. if-added and requirement procedures  as well as assertions  are inherited. 
　　　　aggregation is exemplified by exchanging which has two parts  both of them transferings  which occur at the same time. when we instantiate exchanging  mapping commands use definitions to construct the subcomponents so as to represent that act1 transfered 1bject1 to act1 and act1 transfered 1bject1 to actor 1. this mapping makes inferences  since assertions about transfering have become available through expanding the definition of exchanging. mappings take account of constraints among slots of the sub-components. they are like merlin mappings  moore and newell  1  but are used differently. parts of a defined structure which use different frames but contain common elements are mapped into each other. a more complex event that comex-1 can build is exporting. this includes a trading and a transporting as subevents. the trading is an instance of exchanging and has two transfers. the transporting is a causing to move. the move is a change. 
　　　generic frames have instructions for building their instances. these specify the parts  their arrangement and the constraints between them. controlling the effects of constraints is the hardest part. the power of comex-1's representation scheme depends on further solutions to this. 
inferencing. 
inferencing is done in three ways: 1  definition expansion 
1  constraints 1  matching. expansion has been dealt with already. 
　　　constraints are exemplified by supply-demand frames which specify amounts of wheat in various sectors of the market. constraints between slots of this frame  e.g. old-supply * production - new-supply  are represented as if-added theorems attached to the slots. no search is needed to invoke these. 
　　　matching is a third inference mechanism. when two matching structures represent one object  each may have some unique information. when merged  the information will all be directly related. comex-1 can match arbitrary frame structures. the requirements restricting values of a slot are used when the slot is matched against a structure. local matching functions specify how to match against specific frame types. the test for matchability of two frames is whether a generic description of each fits the other. 
conclusion 
　　　comex-1 is being extended to include a qualitative simulation of wheat growth. by this we mean it deals with descriptive and incomplete information as well as exact quantitative data. the event representation mechanism is being used to set up qualitative process scenarios such as rain and snow falling on  being absorbed by and running off soil. 
