 
　　　a theory and system are described for the semantic analysis of complex  coherent english texts. the principal question addressed in this paper is how the meanings of the smaller elements of ian* guage compose into the meanings of larger stretches of text. within sentence boundaries  this is achieved by an operation  called predicate interpretation  which provides a mechanism for general words  especially those having a spatial flavor  to acquire specific interpretations in context. eeyond sentence boundaries it is achieved by an operation which matches successive sentences against a small number of common patterns and builds up a tree-like structure representing the text's patterns of coherence. 
　　　in isolation  words and sentences do not have specific meanings so much as they have the potent i a l for acquiring a variety of specific meanings in particular contexts. in this paper we ask how the meanings of the smaller elements of language compose into the meanings of larger stretches of text. the answers proposed come out 
of work on an inferencing system being developed for the semantic analysis of complex  coherent texts in english  called sate . this system is intended to be general and is being applied to sets of directions  hobbs 1   algorithm descriptions 
  hobbs 1   and complex expository texts  hobbs 1b . 	section 1 of this paper briefly describes the system and the collection of world knowledge axioms it rests on. 	section 1 considers the question within sentence boundaries  addressing the problems of how words should be defined  how context influences the meanings of words  and how metaphors are to be interpreted. 	sections 1 and 1 discuss how the relations between sentences can be discovered and hence how the structure of paragraph-length texts can be built up. 
	1. 	the inferencing system 
　　　the data of the semantic analyzer is of two sorts - the text and the lexicon. the text may be thought of as episodic memory and the lexicon as permanent memory. the lexicon contains type nodes  the text token nodes. initially  the text contains the information explicit in the paragraph being analyzed  expressed in a simple logical notation produced by a syntactic preprocessor  grishman et al 1  hobbs and grishman 1 . the logical notation makes explicit the functional relationships between elements in the sentence by expressing the information in the form of logical propositions  and distinguishes between material which is asserted and material which is grammatically subordinated  or presupposed. in the course of semantic processing  certain semantic operations augment the text by drawing inferences  interrelate it by identifying phrases in different parts of the paragraph which refer to the same entity  and structure it by discovering relations between sentences. 
　　　the semantic operations work by searching for chains of inference in the lexicon  which is the store of lexical and world knowledge. the lexicon contains the  definitions  of english words  where a definition is viewed simply as the set of inferences which may be drawn from the use of that word. these inferences include  superset  relations  such as the fact that a bank is a building  
　　　bank:  vy bank y   *  building  y   and that to walk is to go from one place  z.  to another  z  . 
　　　walk:  vy    1 z 1 ' z 1     w a l k w  * g o t y         these axioms are part of the definitions of  bank  and  walk   respectively. the definitions also include lexical decompositions  e.g. that for y. to go from y to y is for y ' s being at y1 to become or change into y 's being at y : 
go:  vy 1  y 1  y 1   go y 1  y 1  y 1    * become  at  y1#y1   atcy y     
  in the use of higher predicates like  become   we go beyond standard predicate calculus notation.  also included are axioms having more of a  world knowledge  flavor  such as the fact that a building has a roof: 
	building: 	 vy   1z   building  y  ＊* roof  z y   
no distinction is made among these various sorts of axioms  nor between  linguistic  and  non-linguistic  knowledge. 
　　　inferences are not drawn freely  but only in response to the specific demands of semantic operations. 	these demands take two forms  i.e. they invoke one of two inferencing procedures: 
forward inferencing: from p a  try to infer something of a given pattern. 
backward inferencing: 	find something in the text from which p a  could be inferred. 
　　　a dynamic ordering determined by context is imposed on the axioms in the lexicon. the axioms are divided into clusters  perhaps overlapping  roughly according to topic. the clusters are given an initial measure of salience according to their anticipated relevance to the text at hand. the measures of salience are modified in the course of semantic processing in response to changes in topic. when a fact in a cluster is used  the entire cluster is given maximum salience; while the facts in a cluster are not being used  its salience decays. the text itself is treated as having maximum salience. 
natural 	lan*ua♀e-1  ' ho bs 1 　　　the search for a chain of inference is then an ordered heuristic search whose evaluation function depends upon this dynamic ordering and upon the length of the chain of inference. the search is discontinued after the evaluation function reaches a certain thresh old   for example  a chain of inference of five steps might be found if the axioms involved are of high salience  whereas with axioms of very low salience the search would be cut off after just one step. 
　　　this is more than just a device for efficiency. there may be more than one chain of inference satisfying the requirements  each leading to a different interpretation of the text. the one chosen is the first one encountered in the ordered heuristic search. thus  not only the inferencing process but also the interpretations it produces are made highly dependent on global context  and context is not merely the current state of the text  but also the current state of the dynamically ordered lexicon. 
　　　the bulk of the axioms are classed as only  normally  true  which means an inference is not drawn if it would result in a contradiction. for example  we can normally infer from  john walks  
that  john balances on his feet   but if we have  john walks on his hands   we simply refrain from drawing that inference  cf. cercone and schubert 1. 
there are four principal semantic operations: 
1. predicate interpretation  which is described in part 1. 1
* detection of intersentence relations  described in part 1. 1* knitting  which identifies and merges redundancies and secondarily resolves some pronoun 