  individuals such as properties  events  nations or feelings. this view is nominalism  and leads to a quite different sort of semantic i n t u i t i o n   in which  for example  red denotes not a property of physical individuals  but the  rather disconnected  individual consisting of a l l pieces of red stuff in the world. 
　　　other similar confusions are also made. for example  logic is no worse  and no better  than conceptual dependency at representing warm  human facts about people h i t t i n g each other  
 1  logic doesn't give  the ultimate in decomposition of knowledge . 	winograd  in his widely cited 
discussion  of the assertional/procedural controversy  draws a distinction between logic's atomi s t i c view of knowledge  in which a representation is seen as a set of separate disconnected facts  
and the proceduralist's holistic view in which 
interactions between procedures have prominence. but this is exactly the opposite of the t r u t h . the interactions sanctioned by logic between assertions are far richer and more complicated than the interactions between procedures in a procedural language  any procedural language . thus  explicit recursive procedure calls  lisp  are more restricted than explicit coroutine calls  simula   these more restricted than pattern-directed coroutineing 
 conniver   these more restricted than resolution  which allows both caller and callee to have variables bound during the matching process  and f i n a l l y resolution i t s e l f is a special case of general logic inference rules of instantiation and 
cut. in each case  one pattern of interactions is a special case of  and can be imitated by  the next. in each case  the more general interaction pattern allows more interactions and hence yields a more complex search space  and a more d i f f i c u l t search problem. it is precisely the restrictions on interactions in procedural languages which make them so useful. 
　　　again  winograd claims that procedures  unlike assertions  mean very l i t t l e in isolation but acquire meaning from their interactions with other procedures; and again has got it exactly the wrong way round. a procedure may well mean a lot in isolation. random    for example  or print x : any procedure whose body contains code but no calls of other procedures. whereas the function and predicate symbols in a logical axiomatisation  like the tokens at nodes of a semantic net  l i t e r a l l y mean nothing unless their meaning is specified by axioms. the model-theoretic account of meaning makes this absolutely precise; as one conjoins assertions  so the set of interpretations possible for the symbols occurring in them is restricted  and the set of possible inferences from them is enlarged. their meaning is progressively tightened  as more facts involving them become inferrable.  1  the tendency to replace representational languages by purely procedural languages goes hand in hand with a tendency to judge representational issues in computational terms. thus minsky 1  in 
attacking what he sees as the malevolent influence of logic  dimisses predicate calculus by observing that the machinery of p.c. inference - instantiation and tree-growing  basically - is available as a 

theorem prov rip:-1: mav 1 

	last word 	1. 
　　　i have argued the case for taking logic's notion of meaning seriously. i do not  however  wish to argue that this is the only important 1. issue in considering representational languages. process control is important  of course: questions of ease of r e t r i e v a l   of focussing of attention  of relevance  are also of great significance. 1. neither is syntactic convenience completely unimportant. these issues are however a l l receiving considerable attention already. semantics - 1. questions of meaning - tend to be discussed less. 
acknowledgements 
                                                               1. i have had helpful conversations and correspondence with bruce anderson  richard bornat  	1. eugene charniak  jack lang  bob wielinga and 
yorick wilks. alan bundy  aaron sloman and terry winograd made useful comments on the f i r s t draft 1. 
of the paper. 	this work was supported in part by the science research council. 
	