ion space. solutions to tactical details  necessary to bind a strategy to an actual situation  will be based upon similar 
strategies 	at 	lower 	abstraction levels. 	the problem 	solving 	system 	will 	be 	expected 	to operate 	in 	situations 	where 	several  	non-indepen-dent 	goals 	await 	satisfaction. 	to 	function effectively 	in 	such 	situations  	the 	system 	must be able to coordinate its execution of the independently generated solution strategies. 
       there are two general approaches to strategy coordination. both utilize recognized interactions between the current situation and states of the pending strategies. the first approach would combine the separate solution strategies into one  overall plan  sacerdoti  1 . the other approach would postpone coordination decisions  making appropriate action selections during execution of the strategies. this second approach has the advantage that new strategies can become pending at any time without replanning costs. also  the system can take advantage of interactions between a current situation and states of the pending strategies which may not be foresee-
able at the time or abstraction level of prior  overall planning. the aims of the research reported here are to define and solve problems associated with multiple goal satisfaction and to develop formalisms which facilitate effective execution coordination. what follows is a description of important aspects of an initial model of the action selection approach to strategy coordination. 
       the current situation is a set of propositions which describes the relevant  present state of the world. a  generalized  strategy is a tree of strategy states with goal state as root. a strategy state is made up of two component sets of propositions: ssn and sso. ssn consists of propositions which no operator of the system can satisfy  i.e. weather conditions . each proposition of the sso component has at least one operator associated with it capable of adding a satisfying proposition to the current situation. a current situation which satisfies all propositions of a strategy state exemplifies that strategy state. operators are defined in a usual way - as sets of add  delete  and precondition propositions. at higher levels of abstraction  the tactical specification and execution of an operator are problems to be solved using appropriate world models and other strategies. 
       a strategy is developed in a breadth-first manner from the goal state. a new strategy state may be linked to a given state by a relation  labelled with the name of an operator. the new state consists of the union of the preconditions of the operator with the given state  minus the propositions of that state's sso component added by the operator. a proposed state with a nonempty sso component is not added to a strategy if it is eguivalent to a prior state. a leaf state of the strategy tree has an sso component which is empty or which can be produced only from prior states. 
       when a problem is presented  the strategy associated with the goal state is added to the set of pending strategies. the system coordinates execution of pending strategies by a cyclic 
process 	which 	initially 	classi'fies 	strategy states. 	a 	strategy 	state 	is 	classified 	as relevant if 	its 	ssn 	component 	is 	satisfied 	by 	the current situation. 	this 	reduces 	each 	strategy to 	a relevant 	substrategy. 	a 	relevant 	state 	is classified as realized if it is exemplified by the current situation. if all pending strategies are associated with independent goals  the system can select an operator leading from a realized state and then complete the cycle by specifying and executing that operator. whenever a goal state is realized  its strategy is removed from the pending set. 
       however  the solution of a problem may require that a conjunctive set of goal states be satisfied by a current situation. execution coordination of the associated strategies is then more complex. a state is classified as critical if it lies on all paths from leaf states to goal state of a pending  relevant substrategy. a strategy of a conjunctive set is classified as ungrounded if its goal state denies realization of a critical state of another strategy in the set. the goal state of that other strategy should be realized prior to the goal state of the ungrounded strategy. when a goal state of a conjunctive set is realized  strategies in the conjunctive set which are ungrounded solely due to 
interaction with the completed strategy become grounded. grounded strategies not in the conjunctive set which have a critical state denying the newly realized goal state become ungrounded. when all goal states of the conjunctive set are real 'zed  such ungrounded strategies become grounded again. during each cycle  the system selects an operator leading from a realized state of a grounded strategy to a state not denying a realized goal state of a pending  conjunctive set. criteria for operator selection include cost estimates and goal state priorities. 
       a program embodying the above model has been written to solve a class of block pile problems. questions concerned with the satisfiability of conjunctive goal sets and with limited resources are under study. 
