 	humans on closely related tasks. 1. the study of naturally occurring language to discover regularities of usage and to determine how these regularities contribute to the communicative aspects of language. 

       the comprehension of dialogue is an important concern for those interested in natural language processing for several reasons: dialogue gives particularly good access to human communication phenomena  it is less contrived than authored text  and human dialogue provides useful analogies for improving man-machine communication. in naturally occurring dialogues  the goals of the participants play a key role in structuring their language interactions. people know how dialogue is used to achieve goals  and they use this knowledge to comprehend what they hear. 
       we have represented this knowledge in structures called dialogue-games  which differ from other multisentential knowledge structures by representing knowledge about how language is used to pursue goals rather than the structure of the content being conveyed. these dialogue-games  which govern such activities as helping  information seeking  giving instructions  announcing  and testing someone's knowledge  are part of a strongly goal-oriented model of language comprehension. this model is composed of autonomous processes which operate on shared memories. each of the four memories  a long-term memory and a short-term memory for each of two participants  is a collection of predicate expressions representing the individual's fixed knowledge and current awareness. 
       an important part of this research has focused on the problem of model evaluation. benchmarks for use in evaluating model performance have been developed  creating opportunities for empirical validation of the effectiveness of natural language process models. 
       the modeling effort described here has led to progress on several problems of natural language comprehension - it provides an explanation for topic changes  serves as a basis for limiting inferences  accounts for the comprehension of a number of different kinds of implicit communication  and suggests ways that formal man-machine communication could be improved. it thus illustrates the utility of an overall goal-oriented view of language. 
it has been further limited to: 
1. only 	modeling 	the 	receptive 	aspects 	of communication  
1. only examining dialogue  
1. only modeling dialogue conducted over a restricted medium so that there is no visual or intonational communication   which would not be captured in the transcript.  
       a model  in this research  is a set of interacting processes which takes a transcript of an actual dialogue  turn by turn  as input  and repeatedly updates a memory  called a workspace  whose content represents the current awareness of the receiver  hearer  of the most recent turn  figure 1 . the model is evaluated by comparing the changes of the two workspaces with human judgments about the input transcript; judgments for which there are corresponding workspace changes are model successes. 


the research reported in this paper was supported in part by the personnel and training research programs of the office of naval research  contract n1-c-1  under direction of the cybernetics technology office of the advanced research projects agency. 
model of 
person a model of 
person b figure 1. 	simplified information flow of the dialogue modeling system. 

n a t u r a l 	l a n r r u a r e -	mann 
1 

       the research has dealt not only with the traditional problem of model creation  but also with the problem of model success identification  especially of eliciting suitable human judgments so that model successes become significant. 
	past research on 	language 	comprehension 
       there is a great diversity of research potentially relevant to modeling language comprehension  at levels of detail ranging from units smaller than words to communication behavior taken in aggregales of many years  many individuals and many thousands of words. the level of detail of interest here contains individual transactions  accomplished in a short time  of the order of seconds or minutes   and unit sizes ranging from morphemes to short conversations. within these limits there is still an abundance of work and of viewpoints. we take the most relevant to be those of theoretical linguistics  including syntax  semantics and higher   computer science  mainly artificial intelligence   and cognitive psychology. these three provide a number of constructive suggestions on model form as well as constraints on performance. 
       we are particularly interested in issues of how symbols affect the intended receiver  how they change his state. how does the state-change produced by a sentence depend on previous sentences  on understandings about how language is used  or on shared knowledge of the world  there is a widespread recognition that there are regularities of language use that ordinarily span multiple sentences. narrative stories have been studied by several groups to identify their recurrent knowledge structures. a specific model for the form of this multisentential knowledge is the  story schema   organized within a story grammar  rumelhart  1 . this model has been supported by the results of story recalls  rumelhart  1; thorndyke  1 . other similar kinds of theoretical constructs for organizing multiple sentences of stories have been proposed called:  frames   minsky  1; charniak  1    scripts   schank & abelson  1   and  commonsense algorithms   rieger  1 . 
       to account for the conduct and comprehension of dialogues  multisentential knowledge units have also been proposed by linguists and sociolinguists to explain certain kinds of regularities observed in naturally occurring dialogues. these regularities have been called  rules  by labov & fanshel 
 1  and  sequences  by sacks  schegloff  & jefferson  1 . 
       once these multisentential knowledge units are evoked  they serve as a basis for comprehending the successive inputs. this is achieved by generating expectations and by providing a framework for integrating the comprehension of an utterance with that of its predecessors. recently  we proposed  levin & moore  1  1  multisentential knowledge units that are specified primarily by the speaker's and hearer's goals. these differ from the other proposed multisentential units by representing knowledge about how language is used to pursue goals rather than representing the structure of the content being conveyed. these goal-oriented units  which we call dialogue-games*  specify the kinds of language interactions in which people engage  rather than the specific content of these interactions. 
       other closely related research by barbara grosz has investigated the structure of task oriented dialogues between expert and novice.  deutsch  1; grosz 1j grosz 1  she found that significant parts of the dialogue structure were derived from the goal structure of the shared task. this structure was active in resolving 