from conversations to stories: 
an analysis of differences between oral and written language comprehension 
ann d. rubin 
         bertram bruce bolt beranek and newman inc. 
1 moulton street 
cambridge  mass. 1 
　　a t r a d i t i o n a l view of reading comprehension has been that it is the sum of oral comprehension s k i l l s and decoding s k i l l s ; the educational corollary to this belief has been a heavy emphasis on the teaching of decoding. as part of our work at the center for the study of reading  we are examining some important differences between oral and written language. we hypothesize that  while many of children's highly-developed oral language s k i l l s serve them well in the context of reading comprehension  additional processes are necessary for their understanding of t e x t . children may even exhibit  bugs  which derive from a too-general transfer of oral language processes to the reading s i t u a t i o n . 
　　some of the more obvious differences between oral and written language are the following: the presence of stress and other intonation features in speech  presence vs. absence of shared spatial and temporal context  the predominantly interactive mode of children's oral language  paragraph structure in t e x t   the permanence of written language and different syntactic and discourse structure of conversations and text. much of our work to date has consisted of the development of a detailed taxonomy of the differences between the language experience a child is familiar with  e . g .   conversations  and the new one  reading  he or she is attempting to master. we have divided the distinctions into medium and message-related differences and distinguished several dimensions in each of these categories. the result is a view of language experiences which designates children's conversations and stories as extremes along several dimensions. it also suggests many intermediate points which share some characteristics with both extremes. these intermediate points represent tasks requiring a p a r t i a l transition from oral conversation s k i l l s to reading s k i l l s . 
　　two of the dimensions in this analysis are spatial and temporal commonality. children's conversational experiences generally assume a shared spatial and temporal context. as a result of this consistency  children may develop comprehension  and production  strategies that take advantage of the fact that they and their listener are in the same place  at the same time and can see the same objects  as well as each other. 
children's language experiences contain many instances of deixti.c expressions  terms whose interpretation depends upon the temporal and spatial context of the utterance as well as i t s speaker. 
　　we hypothesize that children's reliance on shared context in their language experiences may be a source of trouble in reading comprehension. to this end  we are investigating the following two issues: 
a. do children have problems interpreting deictic terms in text  notice that correctly understanding  the next day  i n : 
esmerelda told king arthur she would v i s i t his castle the next day. 
requires the child to create a time point that exists solely in terms of the text  the time of esmerelda's comment to king arthur  and interpret the deictic phrase in terms of that manufactured e n t i t y . 
b. what devices in text perform the function of deictic phrases in speech  do children have trouble with such mechanisms  the function of deictic expressions such as  this chair  or  that doggie   often accompanied by pointing  is to designate a particular object which is in the shared context of speaker and l i s t e n e r . in text  the designation of objects is often accomplished by noun phrases   the blue chair    jack's doggie  . however  the objects often do not actually e x i s t ; rather  they  or a description of them  must be constructed by the child without a physical referent. 
　　we are investigating whether these added levels of complexity may be sources of d i f f i c u l t y for children learning to read. 
　　
natural language-1: rubin 1 
