a random access picture digitizer  display  and memory system* 
raymond eskenazi 
robert cunningham 
jet propulsion laboratory 
	pasadena  california 	1 
　　　the jpl robotics research program is developing techniques that might be applicable in the future to planetary missions  to the assembly of large structures in earth o r b i t   or to free-swimming underwater vehicles where there is a need for the integration of a computer vision system with mechanical effectors. in each of these applications there is a necessity for real-time processing and a size limit on the on-board processor. to meet these objectives  a random access picture digitizer and memory system  rapid  has been developed which provides  in effect  real-time random access television cameras to the computer. this short report describes the impact of rapid on the robotics program  both in terms of the hardware design and software organization. 
robot vision system 
　　　the robot vision system  ref. 1  consists of two solid-state cid television cameras mounted on the robot  a random access video memory  the scene analysis algorithms  and the image displays. the software also has access to data from the laser ranger. the vision system shares the general automation spc-1 minicomputer with the other robot subsystems. 
the general electric cid television cameras  
'providing a resolution of 1 pixels by 1 lines  were selected to solve the problem of image l i n e a r i t y and s t a b i l i t y . also  the ge cameras could be easily locked to the digitizer sampling window assuring that each stored pixel was from only the center of an active detector on the cid chip. while resolution was lost from previous silicon target vidicons  necessitating more frequent camera motion  a major problem of scene constancy was eliminated. rca  ge  fairchild  and texas instruments now offer devices with equal or higher resolution. 
　　　rapid  ref. 1  was developed to increase the image-processing speed and permit such real-time functions' as object tracking. 	this was accomplished by eliminating unproductive computer bus t r a f f i c   providing fast access to any pixel  1 us  and updating the image memory at video rates  a new image every 1 s . 	through a unique buffering scheme  rapid provides concurrent digitization and display at video rates as well as random word or byte access from the computer. 
　　　the algorithms for object detection  object tracking  ref. 1   region growing  ref. 1   scene segmentation  ref. 1  and stereo measurement  ref. 1   originally developed for the robot  have been used for studying viking  mars  imagery  maze puzzles  facial changes following surgery  ref. 1   and changes in astronaut body volume. 
video display and memory 
　　　rapid  fig. 1  combined with the television cameras provides  in effect  live random access television images. any byte or word in rapid memory can be accessed  read or write  by the computer without interfering with the sequential storage and retrieval of eia rs-1 standard video. rapid is organized as a 1 pixel by 1 line byte memory using eight byte buffers and high-speed ttl logic in order to operate at video rates without interference. similar units  ref. 1  are now available but at a cost higher than the jpl development cost and lacking capabilities believed to be important. some additional features of rapid are: six computer selectable input channels  stereo 
mode that interleaves two images in memory  freeze mode that inhibits video input  interrupt at the end of the video frame  automatic compensation of known camera blemishes  and computer-controlled cursor. 
　　　incoming video is digitized continuously at 1 ns/pixel to a resolution of eight bits and stored sequentially in one of two eight-byte input 
buffers. 	using a double buffer scheme  the eight bytes of the input buffer are written into memory at one time  alternating between the two input buffers. 	the same double buffer technique is used in reverse for video output. 	the memory cycle time for reading or writing the 1 bit buffers is 1 ns. 	since 1 us  1 ns x 1  elapses between reading or writing a buffer  1 us is available for handling a computer request for access to the video memory. 	the minimum time between computer requests for access to rapid is 1 us. 	since the video memory is continuously accessed for video output even when video input is inhibited  no separate circuitry or time is needed to refresh the dynamic memory. 
real-time image analysis 
　　　an example of scene analysis is the object location sequence for manipulation. the f i r s t step is image transformation which provides the edge enhancement and image reduction to one sixteenth the original size. the image is sampled at one-quarter resolution and partitioned into two by two c e l l s . for each c e l l   a l l six differences are computed  and the absolute values are averaged to obtain an eight-bit value  which is then stored in rapid as one p i x e l   producing the second one-quarter reduction. small values in the tranformed image correspond to areas of uniform intensity  while large values indicate a sudden change in intensity  which is usually the edge of an object. the transformed image is scanned line by line in the second step to obtain a l i s t of regions that 

this paper presents one phase of research carried out at the jet propulsion laboratory  
california institute of technology  under contract nas 1  sponsored by the national aeronautics and space administration. 
	robotics-1: 	fskenazi 
1 

correspond to possible objects of interest. the regions are connected clusters of pixels that exceed an edge confidence threshold. the third step is to select one region from the l i s t   read the f u l l digitized image into rapid again from the 
cameras  and obtain the outline of the object in f u l l resolution using a region growing algorithm. the shape of the object is determined at this point  and the short axis is computed to determine 
the orientation for the manipulator hand in grasping the object. 	the fourth step is to obtain a 1-d measurement at the image centroid. 	this location and the orientation are sent to the 
manipulator  which is then commanded to fetch the object. the entire scene analysis sequence runs in about 1 s and requires no operator intervention 
other than the command to begin. this represents an increase in speed of ten to twenty times over similar schemes in use before the advent of rapid. 
　　　1-d measurements are necessary for manipulation  object location  and navigation  terrain 
mapping . 	a correlation algorithm matches 
conjugate image points in the l e f t and right 
images. the pair of points thus obtained corresponds to a unique point in three-space that is 
determined as the intersection of two rays. a typical correlation time  1 correlations  1 
points per correlation  is approximately 1 s  
with grey level acquisition from rapid accounting for approximately 1 s  or about 1% of the total time. this is opposed to 1 s for the same images accessed from disc f i l e s . 
　　　an object tracking algorithm has been implemented using correlation techniques similar to the 1-d program to track arbitrary objects moving in a single television image. the tracking speed 
ranges from 1 to 1 pixels/s  depending on the 
number of points used to define the feature being tracked  1 to 1 points . 	the capability is 
directly attributable to rapid for two reasons: 
 1  the gray level data are accessed rapidly and 
 1  fast digitization  1 s/frame  gives the next position in the shortest possible time at standard 1 . 
1. 
1. 
1 . 
1. 
1. 
1. 
1. 