history of artificial intelligence 
p. mccorduck  session chairman   univ. of 
pittsburgh! m. minsky  mit: 1. selfridge  
bolt beranek and newman  h. a. simon  
carnegie-mellon university 
the early history 
p. mccorduck 
　though our discussion is entitled  the history of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence   in fact we are focusing here on one brief but highly significant moment in that history  the moment when art metamorphosed itself into science  from wish and dream to something like reality. as you w i l l learn from each of the discussants  this metamorphosis took place at several locations during the early to mid-1s  and its catalyst was the recognition that the computer was the most promising medium yet in which to realize what had been a human dream since earliest times  the creation of man-made  rather than begotten intelligence. 
　let me remind you of some of the f i r s t manifestations of that dream. a great many a r t i f i c i a l intelligences  or automata  appear in greek mythology  put together to be useful or to carry out some task that the gods themselves find burdensome. 
　around 1 b.c.  homer tells us about poor old ugly hephaestus  the god of fire and the divine smith  who  because he is crippled  has to fashion attendants to help him walk and assist him in his forgei 
these are golden  and in appearance like living young women. 
there is intelligence in their hearts  and there is speech in them 
and strength  and from the immortal gods they have learned how to do things. 
　from the immortal gods they have learned how to do things. there's a phrase so fraught with implications it takes your breath away. for humans to behave like gods--because godlike it is to imbue the inanimate with animation--is hubris i n deed  and no opponent of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence has failed to express shock at the blasphemous behavior of humans who 
aspire to divinity. 
　these opponents themselves  persistent and articulate as nearly everyone in the field must know from personal experience  represent a tradition as ancient as the urge to create a r t i f i c i a l intelligences. 
　slightly before homer was codifying what were surely already ancient traditions  another set of codes was brought down from mt. sinai by an unwilling prophet named moses. we know these codes as the ten commandments  and i t ' s the second one which is germane here:  thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above or that is in the earth beneath  or that is in the water under the earthj thou shalt not bow down thyself to them nor serve them  for i the lord thy god am a jealous god...  
　indeed. no matter that the lawgiver promptly violates that very commandment in the instructions for building the ark of the covenant; the message is clear. if you dabble in that sort of thing  you violate the territory of gods  and we a l l know who rushes in where angels fear to tread. 
　i like to think of these two attitudes as the hellenic and the hebraic. the hellenic is curious  enthusiastic  a word which itself means f i l l e d with the breath of the divine  and generally at ease with the idea of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. the hebraic  on the contrary  holds that the idea of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence is fraudulent  wicked  and even blasphemous. 
　this is an arbitrary distinction when it comes to the actual business of doing art i f i c i a l intelligence. past and present  there are devout jews and christians untroubled by the idea. for example  among the ardent christians in the past who f i g ure in this history is ramon lull  a 1th century spanish mystic who renounced the dissolute ways of his youth and went off to convert the muslims  cohen  1 . it isn't recorded that he had much effect on them  but they had a profound effect on him: they introduced him to an arabic thinking machine called a zairja. and he rushed back to christendom with the idea of constructing a thinking machine of his own called  more grandly  the ars magna. 
invited panel-1: mccorduck 1  this translates to the great work of art; lull was right at home in a field not known for its humility.  the aim of the ars magna was to bring reason to bear on a l l subjects  and thereby arrive at truth without the trouble of thinking. be that as it may  lull's scheme seems to me remarkable not for its grandiose claims  but because without hesitation it presupposed that human thought could be mechanized. 
　other well-known christians were said to own brazen heads  that is  automata they had made themselves which were not only proof of their wisdom in being able to construct such things  but which then went on as consultants to amplify the wisdom of their creators. my favorite story is about the brazen head albertus magnus was said to own.  a lovely woman who could speak   says one source  and she so offended albertus's pupil  the young thomas aquinas  that he burned it upon the death of his teacher  von boehn  undated . what on earth did she say  alas  the story loses some of its p i quancy with the fact that albertus outlived his celebrated pupil by some six years. 
　the story of rabbi loew of prague and his creation joseph golem is so familiar that i t ' 1 hardly worth repeating: i merely want to remind you that the legend exists  and is all the more charming for the fact that several of the scientists associated with cybernetics and a r t i f i c i a l intelligence have family traditions that trace their genealogy back to the rabbi. 
　in short  my division between the hellenic  or positive  or progressive  or irresponsible attitude  depending on your inclination  and the hebraic  or negative  or backward  or responsible attitude  again  depending on your inclination  is merely a convenient way of illustrating that the two attitudes have coexisted 
with equal duration and intensity  which show no sign of abating. 
　in imaginative literature  the hebraic attitude seems usually to have prevailed. dr. frankenstein found out to his chagrin what creating an a r t i f i c i a l i n t e l l i gence w i l l get you  though the real story is more complicated than that  as are the issues. later writers have been mostly pessimistic for the future of the human race side by side with a r t i f i c i a l i n telligences  by definition smarter  faster  and immune to human frailties. i don't know whether i count as pessimistic or optimistic asimov's final story in his robot series  which gives us a paternalistic intelligence doing things for our own good and even making us like that state of affairs  asimov  1 . 
　you may begin to suspect that until the early 1s  a l l the media in which a r t i f i c i a l intelligences appear belonged to the realm of make-believei legend  fantasy  novel  play. if you classify scientific speculation as fantasy  this is probably true  but if by scientific speculation we mean not only a dream to be pursued but a possible means by which it can be accomplished  then we are in different territory. 	in that case  f i r s t prize goes to charles babbage and his colleague the countess lovelace. 
　in 1  lady lovelace published a long and detailed description of babbage's analytical engine  and contrary to the implications of her widely quoted remark that machines can do only what we t e l l them to do  she added that the question of whether such an engine could be said to think would have to remain open until they actually constructed one and tried it out  morrison and morrison  1 . 
　in any event  babbage and lady lovelace considered building a quick chess machine in order to finance the building of the larger analytical engine  and were only dissuaded when they discovered that tom thumb was what the public was willing to pay to see  and not an automatic chess machine. 
　later on  in 1  two chess machines which played the endgame were constructed by leonardo torres y quevedo  a gifted spanish inventor. while he declined to claim that his automata were actually thinking  he suggested that we'd better refine our definitions of that process  and that his automata could certainly do many things which were popularly classified as thinking  randell  1 . 
　but the most passionate champion of machine intelligence was a man of breathtaking intelligence himself  alan turing. an intelligent machine might only be imp l i c i t in his famous proposal of the turing machine in 1  but nobody was more eager than he to make those implications explicit. he endured a lot of condescending derision for his dream  but he continued to pursue i t   though the archives give the impression that except for one year  he was never able to pursue it as more than a serious hobby. 
　at the same time that turing was at work  there was on the opposite side of enemy lines--this was by now world war ii--a young engineer who had built the world's f i r s t up-and-running digital computer  installed in his parents' berlin parlor. his name was konrad zuse  and he too was fascinated by the notion of intelligent machines. the possibilities of his machine's intelligence were clear in his mind: by 1 he was wondering whether it could play a master in chess  and by 1 he had developed a programming language called the plankalkul which  he felt certain  could be used not only for mathematical problem solving but also for programming a r t i f i c i a l i n t e l l i gence problems of many kinds  though he believed that real artificial intelligence 
　
invited panel-1: mccorduck 1 
　
was one or two generations away. isolated by germany's defeat and post-war prohibitions against electronic development  it came as a great shock to him to discover the mid-1s work of some of the people here. 
　in other words  the intelligent machine was an idea whose time had come  and it was not only that the computer presented a medium with which such a dream could be realized. there was a constellation of events  most notably the shift from one dominant paradigm  the physicist's notion of energy  to a new paradigm  the cyberneticist's notion of information  and there were the continuing efforts to describe psychological and biological phe-
nomena in mathematical terms. 
　because of these convergences  a young assistant professor of mathematics at dartmouth college named john mccarthy  who himself had been fascinated by these issues for quite a while  suggested to his friends that some real progress could be made if only a l l of the people at work on these problems--all ten of them--spent the summer of 1 together  helping each other. these three friends  who were marvin minsky  another young scholar who was a harvard junior fellow in mathematics and neurology  nathaniel rochester  manager of information research at ibm's research center in poughkeepsie  n  y.  and claude shannon  then a mathematician at bell laboratories who had much indeed to do with the paradigm shift from energy to information  agreed that it might not be a bad idea  and joined mccarthy in submitting a proposal to the rockefeller foundation for  a two-month ten man study of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence to be carried out during the summer of 1 at dartmouth college in hanover  new hampshire. the study is to proceed on the basis of the conjecture that every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle be so precisely described 
that a machine can be made to simulate 
i t .   
　this was the f i r s t time the term a r t i f i c i a l intelligence had been used o f f i cially. john mccarthy won't swear he hadn't heard it before  but he was the f i r s t to apply it to the kind of work 
which was going on in this field  he promoted the term  and despite some other proposals and certain grumbling  a r t i f i c i a l intelligence has stuck. 
　rockefeller provided $1 and the i n i t i a l four invited others who shared their faith. among them were trenchard more  arthur samuel of ibm  oliver selfridge and ray solomonoff of mit  and two vaguely known persons from the rand corporation and carnegie-tech in pittsburgh named allen newell and herbert simon. 
　after a l l this time  no one is quite certain how the cambridge people got in touch with the carnegie-rand group  though there are several possibilities: oliver selfridge had given a talk at rand the previous f a l l   and had mightily impressed allen newell  indeed  had turned his scientific l i f e around. marvin minsky was a consultant at rand and might have known about the work of newell and simon that way. 
　in addition  others oame for short visits to talk about related work. among these visitors was alex bernstein  then a programmer for ibm in new york city  who was invited to talk about the chess playing program he was working on  a program which was to receive a lot of subsequent publicity  to the horror of ibm  which feared that the idea of intelligent machines would be so threatening it would keep customers from buying computers. 
　if i were to share some of the things the dartmouth conference was supposed to accomplish  you might be tempted to laugh. john mccarthy recently took a look at the old proposal and he laughed  and suggested that by changing a few names and dollar amounts  the proposal might well be submitted today  more than twenty years later  and get a serious reading. he jests. nobody really expected to accomplish a l l the things on the agenda for that summer  but neither did anyone intend to map out his professional l i f e for the next twenty years  which in some cases is what happened. 
　this must be a very parsimonious version of the early history of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence  and i have hardly attended to those who held--and s t i l l hold--that 
a r t i f i c i a l intelligence is impossible  undesirable  and not worth the energy spent on i t . the opposition isn't composed entirely of cranks --among the skeptics was john von neumann--and only time 
will t e l l who is right. 
　but it seems to me a fine thing that some of the greatest visionaries  geniuses and crackpots of the western world have put their hand to the task of manmade intelligence. we sometimes forget that most scientific fields began with ideas that seem a bit loony to us now  and as a field takes on respectability  it would prefer to forget its disreputable antecedents. if we detect lunacy among the earliest forerunners  we had better admit that it is our very own  and here to stay. it is a l l of us humans who harbor that mysterious but ancient 
　
invited panel-1: mccorduck 1 
　
urge to reproduce ourselves in some essen-
t i a l but extraordinary way. artificial intelligence comes blessed with one of the richest and most diverting histories in science because it addresses itself to something so profound and pervasive in the human spirit. 
　meanwhile  my story has come to the place where you can have eyewitness reports. to aid us a l l in understanding  i've asked these distinguished eyewitnesses to address some of the following questions: 
　first  when did the paradigm shift happen for you  put another way  what did you think you were doing before a r t i f i cial intelligence  what did that field look like  why wasn't it sufficient  
　second  what is it that made the computer the instrument of choice  	were you looking for i t   or did it pop up just in time  
　third  what made one project or problem more attractive than another at the time  why did certain kinds of projects seem more appropriate at certain times  what were the canons of taste  
　finally  what should have been the strategy for ai in the f i r s t few years 
after the dartmouth conference in 1  
　transcripts of the panelists' remarks w i l l be published later in an appropriate 
journal. 
