generation of descriptions for line drawings 
a. h. dixon 
assistant professor 
department of computer science 
the university of western ontario london  canada n1a 1 
　　　　a line drawing is often represented by a graph with the two primitives  edges and vertices  corresponding to lines and their intersections. both primitives usually have additional properties associated with them. the problem is to generate a concise description such that it is the most appropriate among a set of alternate descriptions and also that it is complete -- a l l observable properties and relations in the diagram are given by or derivable from statements in the description. the concept of  appropriateness  is a qualitative one  to be measured by comparison with the responses of humans when generating descriptions. 
　　　　it is obvious that knowledge of the domain from which the diagrams w i l l be chosen can affect the formation of a description. such knowledge certainly includes objects and relations which can be constructed from the primitives. more importantly  however  some instances of this knowledge take the form of contextual properties within the diagram. as an example  the domain of euclidean geometry diagrams provides such additional information in at least two ways. consider the following diagram. 

　　　　one possible description corresponds to i t s i n i t i a l internal representation as a graph 
with seven labelled vertices and twelve edges. exploiting knowledge about possible constructs could include looking for triangles and might yield:  triangles ame  amf  bmf  bmd  cmd  cme . this description does not exhaust the possible triangles that may be found  nor would one wish a description which included explicit reference to a l l of them. rather  they should be deducible from the description  in this case possibly by exploiting collinear relationships which themselves are deducible from the coordinate positions of the points. 
　　　　the diagram can also be described as   t r i angle abc  with cevians ad  be  cf intersecting at point m . among practising geometers  this is likely to be a popular choice. but what contextual information is available for directing the analysis toward this description  the fact that the triangle in the diagram is labelled  abc  and that it is e x p l i c i t l y referred to in the description suggests that labelling plays an important role. it draws attention to particular parts of the diagram for special scrutiny. this is so only because certain conventions have been adopted to minimize the d i f f i c u l t y of identifying salient features. of course  the interpreter must be aware of the conventions  and this information is included in his corpus of knowledge about 
euclidean geometry 
　　　　while labelling provides important cues in affecting the formation of a description  selective orientation of parts of the diagram can also be used to capture attention. the main point is that there is a set of rules which constrain the way diagrams are presented. these conventions  if embedded in a knowledge base  can influence which of several possible interpretations is generated. 
       using an euclidean geometry textbook as a source for diagrams  a set of heuristics corresponding to some of the conventions followed by that text has been implemented in a system for generating descriptions. the rules form a heterarchy of experts so that the effect of rule omission on description quality can be conveniently assessed. pre-conditions for elaboration of some rules depend on a partially completed description. as this description is a function of which rules were used to generate i t   the effect of the order of application of rules can also be observed. 
　　　　to f a c i l i t a t e these design considerations  the system was programmed in a planner-type language. the content of an associative database reflects the current description of a diagram during execution. the description is modified by insertions into the database which have the sideeffect of invoking antecedent theorems. these theorems in turn control the formulation of further refinements to the description including the removal of redundant information. execution terminates when no further changes can be made. the final description is the collection of insertions s t i l l in the database. 
