 
　　　a learning system in a complex  real-world domain w i l l require a significant amount of knowledge to be used in order to  1  deal with large numbers of features  most of which are irrelevant  and  1  find similarities between the concepts that are inferred from the observed data. use of knowledge-free  syntactic approaches to generalization in complex environments w i l l result in a combinatorial explosion in the number of possible generalizations. moreover  the important semantic features are not   i n   the data; rather they must be hypothesized using prior knowledge. 
　　　the learning system described in this paper uses a multi-level knowledge-directed approach in order to cope with these problems. 	this paradigm is explored in the action-oriented game of base-
b a l l . the system attempts to interpret observed activity in terms of general knowledge provided about competitive games. this approach to learning can be viewed as a type of recognition  where the level of i n i t i a l knowledge is general and 
where the specific observations mold a particular structure from the general knowledge. the system is organized into multiple levels of pattern descriptions  processing  and knowledge  r e f l e c t ing the logical structure of the problem. in 
moving through those levels of description  the system f i l t e r s out irrelevant features  hypothe-
sizes additional semantic features  goals and relationships  and forms a hierarchy of generalized classes that extract the similarities in the descriptions. examples of learning by a working computer program are presented. 
	i. 	introduction 
1 learning as knowledge-directed interpretation or recognition 
　　　based on our experience with a working computer system  we shall discuss several important issues involved in the tasks of learning in a complex real-world problem. the approach we have taken to learning is eloquently expressed in the following quote taken from jordan's  commentary on sir aired north whitehead's view of the nature of explanation and generalization. 
　　　 faith in reason should not totter in the face of incoherence. observers on mars  without our knowledge  have planted a 'probe' with television cameras and are now watching a game of rugby football being played in england. they want some explanation of what the cameras are recording 
this work was supported by ari grant dahc1g-1. 
which w i l l cohere with their general theories of what happens on our planet. the ranges of the cameras are not powerful enough for the martians to see the 
b a l l ; it appears that a lot of men in patterned shirts are performing a dance or orgy. 	the martians' attention is drawn to the goalposts. 	they connect these with similarly shaped objects to 
be seen on the roofs of some nearby houses. now it is to be imagined that the martians understand religious notions but have no sporting instincts. they conclude that the game is a religious dance r i t e and that the buildings with the h-shaped signs are temples. 
　　　the roof signs  of course  are television aerials  and their resemblance to rugby goalposts are accidental. the martians are wildly mistaken. but their guess i l l u s t r a t e s cohesion. they are trying to find meanings in the things seen which w i l l l i e together in a harmony that excludes the merely arbitrary. this is precisely the nature of the philosopher's faith in reason  a faith widely asserted in spite of the frustrations to which the above fantasy points.  
　　　one interprets and thereby understands new situations in the world in terms of the frame of reference that one brings to the learning situation. for example  our curious martian friends used their understanding of religion and religious ceremonies to focus on specific features in the environments under observation; they attended to the t.v. antennas and the goalposts rather than the thousands of other features in the  countryside scene  and the  athletic-contest scene.  they interpreted these features in the context of religion and then classified both scenes as similar  i . e .   as different aspects of a religious ceremony. the knowledge which the martians used to perceive the world permitted this classification - religion wasn't   i n   the observations  but rather  religion was   i n   the heads of the martians. 
　　　the form of learning discussed above can alternatively be described as a type of recognition. the martians recognized various features in the observations as examples of a religious ceremony. the difference between recognition in a learning situation and recognition in speech understanding or scene analysis is the degree of detail in the knowledge which the system i n i t i a l l y possesses. in the learning situation that knowledge often is very general and not tuned to the specific observations. in the perceptual tasks  knowledge of more specific details is usually 

specialized 	systems-1: s o l o w v 1 

necessary in order to achieve minimal levels of performance. in both cases recognition of examples of stored concepts must occur. this view of learning as a form of recognition can be traced back to the greek philosophers  e.g.  plato  jowett  1 . 
1 	use of a multi-level organization for 
learning 
　　　in order to explore knowledge-directed learning  we have built a computer system that observes human a c t i v i t y in the domain of action-oriented games  namely  baseball. the system discovers some of the concepts and structure in that game. a hierarchical network is constructed which relates the similarities in the acquired concepts at various levels of abstraction. for example  the system moves from observing actions such as catch  run  and throw to inferring concepts such as infield single and groundout  to ultimately understanding those acquired concepts as examples of more general classes such as   h i t s   and  outs.  
　　　the organization of the knowledge  processing  and pattern description is decomposed into the levels shown in figure 1.  unless otherwise 
noted  a l l further 