robot learning and error correction 
leonard friedman 
jet propulsion laboratory 
	pasadena  california 	1 
　　　we describe a learning paradigm designed to improve the performance of a robot in a partially unpredictable environment. the paradigm was suggested by phenomena observed in animal behavior and it models aspects of that behavior.  see fl for details.  an implementation as a working program is under way  intended for incorporation in the now operational jpl robot. rieger's csa system is the implementation language and includes a plan synthesizer  rl . a brief overview of the robot's existing system organization is given in thompson's paper on robot navigation in these proceedings  tl   
the paradigm includes these components: 
 1  a pattern interpretation discrimination net. 
　　　the terminations of this net are pointers to pre-defined recognizable states. a subset of the nodes called default nodes  are i n i t i a l l y empty  but a default branch defines a path to a selected termination for this case. 
 1  a group of outcome discrimination nets  one for each  action  of the robot's behavior repertoire. 
　　　each termination of a given outcome net includes a set of measurable attributes that define a recognizable state. 	a l l the states of that net are the foreseeable outcomes of the corresponding action. 	for example  the outcomes of the action  grasp  may lead to states measured by attribute sets like  touch sensors on  and  finger spread d  for a successful grasp. 	the outcome net terminations also contain advice to an execution monitor such as  abort action    alter action parameter.  
 1  a packet of demons  one for each outcome net. 
　　　there is a demon for each termination in the outcome net looking for the corresponding attributes in the sensory input stream. 
　　　the learning paradigm depends on an environment already functional in the jpl robot. for example  the scene analysis subsystem is capable of segmenting an input image of the environment into objects 
with measurable attributes such as size  shape  etc. the paradigm also assumes that plans are available to an execution monitor before the actions are exe-
cuted via prestored plans or a plan synthesizer. 
　　　during plan execution  f i r s t the interpretation net is traversed during information gathering  and an interpretive termination is selected. 	the execution monitor looks ahead to find the next action to 
be executed and activates the outcome net and demon packet corresponding to that action. the outcome net uses the feature provided by the interpretation net to select an expected outcome. the execution monitor looks in the selected termination for advice to modify the action about to be executed. when that action is executed  the demon triggered by the actual outcome is compared with the expected outcome. the experienced outcome also provides a back pointer to a corresponding termination in the interpretation net. the execution monitor then starts a backward chaining or reverse search operation up the interpretation net starting from this termination. first  the execution monitor requests the attribute set 
r o b o t i c s - 1 : 
1 
describing the target of the action executed. if the experienced outcome was the expected default choice  the attribute set describing target appearance is placed in a l l the default nodes in the l i s t pointing to the default path. 	if the experienced outcome was not the expected choice  the reverse search determines the last default node common to the path leading to the experienced termination and the path to the selected termination. 	the monitor 
places the object attribute set at this node in the l i s t pointing in the direction of the experienced termination. 
many things can go wrong with this process: 
 1  	some measured attributes may not be germane. 
　　　the attribute sets retained may be refined by repetition of similar experiences. depending on whether the expectation is confirmed or refuted by experience  a partial match of the attribute set already resident at the node may seek for a set of similar or differing attributes and eliminate attributes not found to be relevant.  see hr1  fl  .  1  the appearance of the object is not related to the intrinsic property sensed by the outcome experi-
ence. 	partial matching may eliminate a l l stored attributes. 
 1  several intrinsic properties that correspond to recognizable states may be present j o i n t l y   and the proper course of execution may not be clear. 
 1  objects with similar appearances may have opposing properties  like  dangerous  and  safe  . depending on the context  a choice in favor of one path or the other may be indicated  although this may permanently exclude some favorable outcomes  fl .  1  	the outcome pattern experienced may not correspond to any activated demon. 
　　　as we implement this paradigm and gain experience with i t s performance  we shall attempt to deal with these weaknesses and the others that no doubt w i l l be encountered. 
　　　error correction here refers to the ultimate achievement of a goal state after an i n i t i a l execution failure. learning refers to avoiding the failure in subsequent attempts to achieve similar goals. errors may be detected with outcome nets. an investigation of error correction techniques for execution failures of the robot has been made 
 si . these techniques  involving failure reason analysis and multiple outcome analysis w i l l be incorporated as an integral part of the robot learning system. 
