structuring mathematical knowledge 
edwina r. michener 
department of mathematics 
massachusetts institute of technology 
       when a mathematician says he fully understands a theorem or a theory  he has a lot more in mind than just the deductive details. he also has command intuitively  if not self consciously  of certain special classes of examples and heuristic advice. 
       at least three broad categories of information are necessary to represent mathematical knowledge: results which contain the traditional logical aspects of mathematics  i.e.  theorems and proofs; examples which contain illustrative material; and concepts which include mathematical definitions and heuristic advice. 
       just as results can be structured by the relation of logical deduction in which a --  b means that result a is used to prove result b  examples and concepts can also be organized by relations. examples can be ordered by the relation of 
fabricational derivation in which a -   b means that example a is used to construct example b. for instance  the cantor function is fabricated from the cantor set  which in turn is fabricated from the unit interval. concepts can be structured by the relation of pedagogical ordering which embodies the pedagogical judgement that concept a should be introduced before concept b. 
       these three fundamental categories of items together with the special relations define three representation spaces for a mathematical theory: re suits-space  examples-space  conceptsspace. 
       recognizing that some theory items serve different functions than others in our understanding  we single out those that play special roles by establishing epistemological classes 
       for instance  when we learn a theory for the first time  there are certain perspicuous start-up examples which we can grasp immediately. reference examples are examples that we refer to over and over again as we wend our way through a theory. model examples are paradigm situations that suggest to us the essence of a result or concept. and of course  there are counter-examples. 
       in addition to definitions  concepts-space contains the heuristic advice that we give to ourselves  and to others  while working in a theory. mega-principles provide kernels of wisdom in the form of powerful suggestions such as  let n=1 . counter-principles are cautions that indicate possible sources of blunders or troubles  such as the warning  don't divide by 1 . 
       results-space also has many subclasses of items among them are basic results which establish elementary  but important  properties of concepts  and culminating results which are results towards which the theory drives. 
       when we consider a theory item  we can fit it into its representation space by determining its predecessors and successors. we can also consider the items outside of its  home  space to which it is attached. the dual idea highlights relations between the three representation spaces which are said to act as epistemological dual spaces to each other. for instance  the dual of a result consists of the examples motivating it and the concepts needed to state and prove it and also the concepts and examples that are derived from it. thus each item has two associated sets of dual items. 
       while the placement of an item within its graph determines one definition of closeness  the dual idea leads to additional definitions. for instance  two results are related or close in the example dual sense  if they share common examples the power of the dual idea is that it provides a good first approximation to the intuitive notion of what it means for two items to be related or close in one's understanding of a theory two items can be considered equivalent  or identified  if their dual items are the same. 
       the resulting epistemology and the interconnections among its items provide a rich representation for mathematical theories which is sufficiently precise for the specification of a knowledge base for mathematics and a functional model of expert understanding. these ideas suggest powerful methods to help one understand  teach or explore mathematics 
       this analysis is the foundation of the design of the proposed interactive crokker system  gs  to enable mathematicians to easily retrieve and manipulate mathematical knowledge  especially in dense  richly-developed subjects such as real analysis. it can be augmented by the grokker learning advisor  gla  which is designed primarily to help neophytes understand mathematics. it forms its advice from its epistemological knowledge  its model of expert understanding  and its assessment of the user's current level of understanding. 
       the combined cs/gla system could enter into partnership with a theorem prover or an analogy-generating program by guiding and advising the program's search for relevant information. 
bibliography 
michener  e.r. epistemology  representation  understanding and interactive exploration of mathematical theories. doctoral dissertation  department of mathematics  mit  1. 
       
specialized 	systems-1: 	michener 
1 
