 
　　　several modular processes are used to build relationships between a  two-dimensional regions and boundaries in a segmented image  and b  the hypothesized surfaces  volumes and objects of a three-dimensional world. a variety of bottom-up and top-down strategies coordinate the processes of shape  perspective  shadow  and occlusion to construct these relationships in the visions system. 
introduction 
　　　there are three major types of processing which lead to model construction at the region  
surface  volume  object and frame levels:  i  curve f i t t i n g of region boundaries and analysis of contours in terms of primitive 1d shapes  
  i i   hypothesizing surfaces and volumes using the 1d shape descriptions  the results of perspective  shadow  and occlusion analyses  and additional semantic information  and   i i i   object verification using a spatial processor which matches 1d projections generated from a 1d description of the object against regions and contours from the image  marr and nishihara  1 . 
representation 
　　　objects in the data base are described in terms of primitive volumes. a generalized cylinder description is maintained in object-centered coordinates for each of the component volumes of an object. we are currently investigating the use of binford's f u l l generalized cylinder description  agin  1; marr and nishihara  1 . this description allows cross sections which are orientable in the plane  such as triangles  rectangles  and ellipses . relationships between the primitive volumes  surfaces  contours  and regions are explicitly stored in the data base of long term knowledge. for example  the fact that a cylinder may project as a circle when viewed on end or as a rectangle when viewed from the side is explicitly stored in the knowledge base. these relationships provide some of the pathways between two and three dimensions. 
　　　in addition to an object-centered coordinate system  we need to represent partial three-dimensional information available from image data in a 
　　　viewer-centered coordinate system  duda and hart  1 . a representation has been developed which allows a simple encoding of hypotheses about viewed object plane angles  konolige  1 . this representation provides a simple relationship between vanishing points and object plane angles  and a separate encoding 
this work was supported in part by onr grant n1-c-1 and nsf grant dcr1. 
1 
a. hanson is a f f i l i a t e d with hampshire college  amherst  massachusetts 1. 
v ! s   o n - 1 : 
1 
of scale and angle information. this latter point is important because scale information is available 
via knowledge about the size of recognized objects  while angle information is derived from hypotheses about image data. 
curve fitting and analysis of contours 
　　　the chain-encoded boundary segments are smoothed and f i t t e d with straight lines  conies  and exponentials. vertices are analyzed in terms of internal angles and classified according to type  duda and hart  1 . syntactic and heuristic methods are used to analyze these vertexsegment descriptions to produce region descriptions in terms of stored 1d primitive regions. during the process  syntactic cues allow regions to be s p l i t and/or merged to form contours which are more easily analyzed in terms of the primitive 1d shapes. 
　　　specific information for the later use by knowledge sources  ks's  is extracted at this level. strong geometric forms such as triangles or squares are labelled for the shape ks. strong straight lines are also labelled and points of convergence of these lines are found for later hypotheses about vanishing points. non-adjacent regions with similar features are marked for further analysis by the occlusion ks. 
generation and verification of hypotheses 
　　　a l l primitive 1d shapes in the data base are associated with the surfaces and volumes which project as those 1d shapes. once a region or contour in the image has been classified as a primitive 1d shape  we can then index into the knowledge network to obtain possible surfaces and volumes which may be present in the scene. perspective  shadow  and occlusion information on the orientation and extent of surfaces  such as the ground plane  the horizon line  etc.  may be used to confirm  refute  or refine hypotheses. finally  objects or parts of objects may be hypothesized on the basis of high-confidence volume hypotheses. it should also be noted that  in addition to shape analysis  the matching of color/texture attributes of regions and objects is a companion path to object hypothesis and verification. 
overall strategy 
　　　figure 1 shows the results of applying one of the segmentation processes  region planning  of visions to an image. we are currently investigating a variety of volume-surface construction strategies for applying the various ks's to this processed data and using the results of other ks's. which strategy is actually applicable at a given point in the model construction process depends on a number of factors  including the 
konolige 

information available at that point and the r e l i a b i l i t y of that information. one such strategy  which incorporates both data-directed hypotheses and the use of semantic clues  is given below. 
example strategy 
　　　often regions representing the ground and sky planes can be inferred from color characteristics and knowledge of where they appear in natural scenes. contour analysis can find the strong straight lines in the image. these could be used by the perspective ks to f i x the horizon of the ground plane  and by the shape ks to recognize the triangle and square. knowledge of the 1d projection of 1d shapes suggest either a pyramid or a 
wedge for the image triangle; a wedge is hypothesized if the roof line of the house is found. then the spatial processor would orient the wedge to give the correct projection. at this point the shape ks could index into i t s data base of objects to suggest a house roof for the wedge ; then a 
range for the distance of the house could be estimated from stored house size ranges. finally  since the ground line of the house is above the hypothesized horizon  an upward ground slope to the house can be postulated  which in this case is a correct hypothesis  and computed using the estimated house distance. the desired results of this set of analyses are illustrated in figure 1. 

figure 1 region plan from original segmentation with labels for regions whose area is greater than 1 pixels. 

