the flow tutor: a schema-based tutorial system 
donald r. gentner 
center for human information processing 
university of california  san diego la jolla  california 	1 
the flow tutor system is a simulation of a human tutor which gives advice to a student learning flow  a simple computer language. the tutor has a schema-based knowledge structure containing information about the programming language  the student's instruction booklet  and the student's developing knowledge. these schemas form the basis of a distributed intelligence system which uses conceptually guided and data-driven processing to interpret the student's behavior  update the model of the student  and give advice to the student. 
	the 	tutor's 	task 
the student uses an instruction booklet  containing text  examples and problems  and works at a computer terminal. the automated tutor interprets the student's keypresses and pauses in terms of a student progressing through the flow instruction bookl e t . all schemas which the flow tutor creates and works with are part of a multi-level structure  ranging from the instruction booklet and the function of programs to the individual flow statements and keypresses. 
conceptually guided prediction provides a context to disambiguate student keypresses. the automated tutor simulates the student's progress through the instruction booklet  allowing pauses for reading  doing the examples  and solving problems  and predicts that the actual student w i l l follow a similar course. the tutor  solves  these simple programming problems by expanding the functional description of the problem into simpler functions  flow statements  and f i n a l l y keypresses. although this can lead to severe trouble when the predictions are wrong  it normally leads to an easy and efficient interpretation of otherwise ambiguous i n formation. 
data-driven processing  in which the keypresses and simple statements try to assemble themselves into higher level schemas  is used when student behavior does not match the predictions. the identity of two functionally equivalent programs at a higher level of schemas  allows the tutor to interpret a l ternative correct solutions. 
the automated flow tutor is intended to simulate an experienced human tutor familiar with flow and common student problems  and thus has schemas which represent typical student errors. when unexpected student inputs incorporate themselves into these error schemas  the tutor has effectively recognized a student error. if the student pauses after making an error  the allowed pause length depends on the type of error and the tutor's model of the student   the tutor sends advioe to the student based on i t s interpretation of the error. 
schemas 
an instantiation of a schema corresponding to the flow statement 1 display  jean  is shown below: 
 display-qu1ted-string-1 schema display-qu1ted-string statement-number 1 value jean status satisfied host *display-1 element *d-1 element *quoted-string-wl 
the instance consists of a name followed by a series of slots. the f i r s t slot points back to the prototype schema. the next two slots are  argument  slots  used to distinguish individual i n stances of the schema. the  status  slot indicates that a l l components of this instance have been found. schemas and instances are composed of other schemas and instances. the  host  and  element  slots point respectively to the higher and lower level instances. this hierarchical structure of instances plays a major role in the operation of the flow tutor. extension of the hierarchy to higher and lower levels forms the basis for predicting and interpreting student behavior  giving the tutor descriptions of the same information at different conceptual levels. 
how schemas function  
as a schema-based system  the flow tutor has an i n herently distributed intelligence. the only cent r a l coordination is furnished by an agenda. a simple l i s t of instances waiting to be active. 
each schema has an associated process  called the specialist. when an instance becomes active in the flow tutor system  the corresponding specialist is invoked. the specialist may modify an instance  predict new instances of schemas  incorporate the instance into a higher level schema  change the tutor's model of the world  look for input from the student  put instances on the agenda  or send messages to the student. in a typical case  an i n stance on the agenda might have been predicted by some other instance. when the instance becomes act i v e   i t s specialist would check to see if a l l of i t s elements had been observed. if not  the spec i a l i s t would predict the next element and put it on the agenda. if a l l the elements of the instance had been observed  the specialist would place i t s host on the agenda  or if the instance had no host  the specialist might search for a host and try to incorporate the instance into a suitable higher level instance. 
this 	research 	was 	supported 	by 	the 	advanced 
research projects agency and the office of naval research of the department of defense and was monitored by onr under contract no.: n1-c-1. donald norman and mark viallen made significant contributions to the research. 
for further details see: 
gentner  d. r.  & norman  d. a. the flow tutor: schemas for tutoring  tech. rep. 1 . la joll a   ca.: university of california  san diego  center for human information processing  1. 

specialized 	systems-1: centner 
1 
