 horn the experience of the speech understanding   yogi am that can have general applicability or at least suggestive directions of approach for other artificial intelligence problems --- specifically other high-level perceptual tasks such as visual scene interpretation and the analysis of dialog and discourse structures in natural language  logelher with the early robot vision projects  the sur project ranks as one of the few instances where a total system has been constituted and faced with real wot id data that has not been alv.lt acted and simplified to eliminate noise and make the problem easiei. although a great many things were learned dui ing the. project about the low level signal characteristics of speech sounds  i do not expect these to have great carryover into other areas. however  in the techniques for interfacing high level hypothesis formation and evaluation to such low-level sources  i believe the speech understanding work has made some generalizable contributions. 
　　the major two such contributions  in my opinion  are the explicit exploration of control struc tines and shategies  and the. demonstration of the power of what 1 will call factored knowledge stiuc lures in the former area  1 think that the* discoveiy of the density scoring sti ategies has interesting consequences in the aiea of search and optimization  since it represents a new technique not subsumed by the a* algorithm/ in the latter area  the pervasive use of various factored knowledge 1 presentation structures  in which the common parts of many different patterns or schemata are merged  has significant import for the problem ; of generalized perception and knowledge representation. 
　　by factored struc tines  i refer to such structures as the phonetic segment latliee and the tree structured dictionary representations that are used in the bun uwim system  the tree structuied grammar used in cmlfs harpy system  and the ain grammar formalism used in many systems by now  in general  a factoi od repi esentation is any knowledge structure in which common parts of different knowledge elements are merged in such a way that retrieval processes can access them incrementally to create more and more specific hypotheses as additional data or measurements on those data are obtained. the simplest examples of such structures are decision trees or discrimination nets. 
　　such representations are used many places in the bbn speech system to organize its internal information about alternative theories  and is of course the major organizing principle of the harpy system at cmu. if one shifts to the context of frame-based language understanding systems and considers the problem of determining the frame that one 
1 see my paper   shortfall and density scoring strategies for speech understanding control  in this conference proceedings. 
should be in at any given point  in a system that contains thousands of such frames  any number of which might match some initial poilion of a dialog   then it seems clear that similar such factored stiuclures can he useful. that is  one would like to have internal states corresponding to the results of sequences of measurements on the input stimuli that constrain the possible' interpretations; of the input  without enumerating all of the possibilities explicitly. these states can then indicate further measurements to be made on the input  and transitions to new internal states corresponding to more specific hypotheses that can be made as a result of such measurements. i expect this kind of factored structure to have more and more application in artificial intelligence - -- especiajly in vision and natural language undeistanding. 
　　other aspects of the speech understanding systems that i think will have wider applicability include the use of bayesian probability estimates to combine information from different knowledge sources  the use of analysis by-synthesis verification as a source of information in perception systems  and the development of middle out parsing algorithms for atn and other phrase-structure grammars. 
experimlni at ion in aim incial intill1glnc.e 
william m. paxton  shi international1 
　　my presentation will focus on the contributions of the sur program to al methodology  in particular on the value of experiments to aid in understanding the effects and interactions of system design features. the various speech systems are large and complex. it is often difficult for the designers themselves to understand the operation of the systems  and traditional techniques such as traces of sample runs arc of little use because of the complexity  of the control strategies and the vai iatinn among utterances. a particular system feature may improve performance in one case but make it worse in another  so judgments about the value of a feature must not be based on intuition or casual tests of a. few sentences. moreover  the complexity and size of the systems make analytic methods of little use. 
　　these considerations lead us to adopt an experimental approach  hut what kind of experiments should we perform  how should we cany out an experimental study so that it will help us to understand how the system works -- help us to sec which design featuics are important and why they have the effects they do  the system designers will of course have ideas about which are the important features  and  if they have clone their job well  they will also know what the main alternatives are. for example  in most of the speech systems the designers felt that it was important for the systems to be able to island-dtirie that is  to construct interpretations starting with words found anywhere in the input. the alternative to island driving is a more constrained control strategy such as strict left-to-right processing of the input. in this instance  a simple method to determine the effect of island-driving is to look at the difference in performance with island-driving versus with left-to-right processing. 
such comparative tests are often possible for the major 
1 now at xerox palo alto research center. 
　　
invited panel-1: walker 1 
　　
design features  particularly if the system is constructed with testing in mind. as an experimental approach  comparative tests have several attractive attributes  including independence of absolute performance levels and compatibility with powerful statistical methods. consequently  we suggest that such trsts should be a standard technique to aid in understanding complex systems. 
　　since the aim of the tests is to understand how the system works  and not jusl to optimise performance  auxiliary measurements of system operation must he made in addition to measurements of primary criteiia such as speed and 
accuracy. again  we rely on the designer's knowledge of the system to decide what' to measure so that we will have the necessary information available to explain the observed results. in a speech understanding system  auxiliary measures would include a variety of things such as number of correct and incorrect words accepted and storage usage. these auxiliary measures provide the intermediate steps in explanations of the effects of the system features. thus  for example  the effect of island-driving on system accuracy might be explained by reference to its effect on storage usage in conjunction with information about the relation between storage usage and accuracy.' 
　　typically  there will be several design features that are believed to be important  and it will be desirable t.o test the features simultaneously to see how they interact: moreover  the features will usually have good effects in some cases and bad effects in otheis. the statistic al method for dealing with such a situation is called analysis of variance. this-technique makes it possible to compute the probability that observed effects and interactions are really caused by the experimental variable*- rather than by chance. we will briefly illustrate the use of this technique by sketching some oi our experiments on control strategy design choices.1 
in conclusion  if it is worth building a system as part of an 
ai reseatch project  it is certainly wotth making an effort to understand how the system actually works  and experimentation is an important technique for doing this. simply demonstrating a working system should no longer be enough; let us begin to demand that the ai system designer specify the supposedly important system features and their alternatives  do the experiments to show the features' effects  and provide explanations of why the features have those effects. 
language 
terry wmograd  stanford university 
　　although i have not been directly involved in research on speech understanding  1 have followed the work closely  since i believe that it is a harbinger of things to come in ai research in general. the speech projects are the first major ai efforts which have placed primary emphasis on the system organization required for making use of diverse sources of 
1 further details are given in walker and paxton  et al.  
 procedures for integrating knowledge in a speech understanding system  in the proceedings of this conference; a full description of the experiments appears in paxton  a framework for speech understanding  ph.d. 
dissertation  stanford university  1. 
knowledge in a task whose structure defies simply structured programs. over the next few years  othei ai researchers will begin to attack problems which demand this kind of robustness -- the ability to tome up with an answer when the input data are messy  the combinatorial possibilities are explosive  and high level knowledge can be of great influence in determining the answer. in programs for vision  scientific analysis  a la dondral   and language  i foresee a shift in this 
direction. 
　　in programs for comprehending language - even those that deal with text we need to move toward handling more natural inputs  with all of the inaccuracy  incompleteness  and ill-formedness we have long ignored. this will demand program and knowledge organizations that are based on ideas that the speech work has begun to expfore: multi-process communication; hypothesis formation and verification; the intermixture of goal-driven and event-driven processing; careful attention lo the interface languages that make it possible to give meaningful structure to the communication between components; and the importance of performance evaluation tools that help us make sense of what is happening in a complex multi- process environment. 
　　in the panel  i would like to see a discussion along two lines: what are the major insights to be gained from the speech project experience that can be of use in organizing other ai programs  and what are the obvious gaps to be filled in the next round of experimentation  since my major current concern is with representation languages  i would like to take part in a discussion concerning the problems that were encountered with the representational systems available for speech work  and the features that will be important for systems of the same degree of complexity in the future. 
understanding research 
nils j. nilsson  sri international 
　　artificial intelligence has recently completed an extensive and coordinated exploration into the terra incognita of large scale  knowledge-based systems. to the brave and resourceful explorers  we stay at homes must say   congratulations and well-done! we enjoyed your slide shows and marveled at your specimens . but when the celebrations are over it will be important for us all to digest the new knowledge uncovered by these explorations. 
　　we need to ask more than  what have we learned   it is too tempting to answer that question using our current vocabulary. we might for example fall into adopting the rough and ready frontier parlance and metaphors of the explorers themselves and start speaking about  multiple cooperating sources of knowledge    blackboards   and  island growing . or we might attempt to describe the new' vistas with older and perhaps inadequate phrases such as  rulebased systems    left-to-right parsing   and  heuristic search . 
　　the question before us  i think  is harder than  what have we learned   it is  how are we going to express what we have learned   a major expedition just completed is too precious an occasion to let pass heralded only by accounts from the explorers. it is an opportunity for attempts at 
　　
invited panel-1: walker 1 
　　
synthesis and for inventing new concepts and new paradigms. we should not be discouraged meiely because there is no guarantee that these attempts will ho successful or because the odds against useful new paradigms are always high. we have just spent about 1 man-years on exploring. we can affoid to follow this up with a few man-years of thinking about how to say whal we have learned. 
　　as good as they are at speech understanding  it is unfortunately true that harpy and hearsay and friends cannot speak for themselves. the major product of the 1 man-years is not the total body of code that was produced nor is it what that code accomplished in the demonstrations. the memorable output  what can be taught to future generations of students  will be a description of that code. it is not even necessary that the descriptions be completely accurate. simplifications and even fabrications are justified if they have pedagogic value and do not overly mislead posterity. my ma|or point is that it is important that these descriptions be elegant and that they have a certain   hard-todefine  esthetic appcal so that they will be memorable  easy to use for teaching purposes  and provocative for the design of new systems. 
　　in creating the kinds of descriptions that i think will be important  inventive latent will be more important than reportorial skill. suppose  for example  that one could invent some imaginary system that was something like one of the actual speech understanding systems but different in many details. since our imaginary system doesn't really have to run on a computer we can strip it of the various ad hoc features of real systems so necessary for efficiency. now maybe .we can reorganize it a bit to give it a more coherent internal organization and to relate it more closely to existing well-understood ai mechanisms. there may he some tension in trying to do this. maybe the existing ai mechanisms aren't so well-understood or as general as we thought. perhaps the effort of trying to build our imaginary system out of these mechanisms stretches then  a hit. maybe we'll be fortunate enough to think of a major generalization of some of these mechanisms to make them more useful for our fictional system. now  maybe we'll reorganize the fictional system some more and go through the loop again. once in a decade or so  and if our interests are broad  we might notice that the new ai concepts just invented could also be profitably used to describe the results of other explorations. at the very least our new synthesis will geatly simplify the process of designing new systems of a similar kind. 
　　these steps are important if a field is to grow into a mature scientific or engineering discipline. artificial intelligence has to take several such steps before it can be as productive as we all would like it to be. ai has not yet really developed what could be called a set of universally adopted methodologies that can be followed in the design of new systems. if six different ai laboratories were given the task of building a rule-based system for some well-understood application  1 would not be surprised to see several quite different designs. much of the terminology used by ai people is still pre-technical at best and meaningless jargon at worst. let's try to use the plentiful and excellent experiences of the speech understanding projects to climb a rung or two in the conceptual understanding of our field. 
invited panel-1: walker 
1 
