a simple model for h a n d w r i t i n g 
by john m. hollerbach 
artificial intelligence laboratory 
massachusetts institute of technology cambridge  massachusetts 1 
　　　　　an understanding of the human motor system  though interesting as a facet of intelligence  would also have application for computer controlled manipulation. to enhance this understanding  handwriting is appropriate for study because of its commonality  its susceptibility to measurement  and the possibility of its simulation with a manipulator. 
　　　　　a theory of handwriting has been developed and implemented on a 1-joint manipulator  the mit vic arm the theory views handwriting as a constrained modulation of an underlying oscillation pattern. this pattern  chosen from a repertoire of carrier waves such as sawteeth or garland chains  is established by programming of horizontal and vertical actuators. the two actuators assume different roles: the vertical actuator drives the movement with rhythmic down-up movements. the horizontal actuator  acting within time constraints imposed by the vertical rhythm  produces letter shapes. the choice of underlying oscillation pattern restricts the shapes the horizontal actuator can produce  and is the primary factor influencing writing style. 
　　　　　a simple set of constraints on actuator force patterns  derived in part from an analysis of some handwriting measurements  imposes a certain structure on the handwriting programs: 
　　　　　1. a basic time quantum in which force is constant 
　　　　　1. synchronous joint activation 
　　　　　1. force magnitude restriced to a few levels the basic time quantum for the vicarm  representing a compromise among such factors as speed of response and jerkiness  was chosen as 1 msec. 
　　　　　a cycle of the carrier is a down-up movement comprised of several time quanta. the fastest cycle consists of one quantum acceleration-deceleration bursts by the vertical actuator  resulting in a four quantum down-up cycle of 1 msec. when coupled with a horizontal pattern that rounds the bottoms of the oscillation  a smoothed sawtooth results  la below . horizontal  h  and vertical  v  

acceleration profiles corresponding to two cycles of la are indicated in lb. the abscissa is marked off in single time quantum units. simple amplitude modulation of the bursts in this pattern and a slight alteration to incorporate a left movement in the / produces the cursive rendering of via/  1a ; the acceleration profiles for the two cycles forming the / are shown in 1b. these accelerations are actually modified to take into account the frictional characteristics of the vicarm before they are applied to the arm in a sense they may be viewed as idealized force patterns; as such they are more readily synthesized than forces incorporating system idiosyncracies. 
　　　　　slower oscillation patterns allow the horizontal actuator more time to shape tetters  in particular more time to incorporate leftward movements. with an 1-quantum cycle  a garland chain with leftward movement and more rounded bottoms can be set up  1a . when modified  the garland chain becomes the vial in 1b. a feature of this modification is hesitation at sharp corners such as the i  where the top loop of the garland is aborted. the hesitation is required to keep the writing in phase with the oscillation. 

　　　　　the constraints on force patterns lead to a small set of allowable horizontal rounding patterns coupled with restrictions on how these rounding patterns overlap with the down-up motion  there arises a vocabulary of corner shapes that range from rounded to sharp  symmetric to asymmetric. with this vocabulary an oscillation train is readily shaped  subject of course to time and stylistic limitations imposed by the choice of oscillation. as an illustration of the ability to manufacture different letter shapes  four a's drawn by different human subjects  taken from  koster and vredenbregt   appear below paired with their vicarm facsimiles  the former on the left and the vicarm writing on the right. the first two a's are derived from an 1quantum cycle  the last two a's from a 1-quantum cycle. 

　　　　　an experimental apparatus has been built to make accurate acceleration measurements during handwriting  providing a test of this theory. results from this apparatus are not available as of this writing. potential applications of this work include signature verification  a cursive script more suited to speed  and new ideas for machine reading of handwriting. 
