 
　　　　this paper gives a generalized overview of reseda  an interactive question answering system designed primarily for use by historians. its data base consists of historical information  which attemps to describe the attitudes  p o l i t i c a l   r e l i -
gious and interpersonal  of the chief characters of the period. question answering is done by search of the data base and by inference on the information therein. the d i f f i c u l t i e s of representing this type of data and of formulating inference rules dealing with human motivations and attitudes is also discussed. 
descriptive terms 
　　　question answering  data base  representation  inference  biographical data  mediaeval history. 
introduction 
　　　the ghosts of the t i t l e are characters of frenchmediaeval history.the project described here  the reseda* project  is an attempt to design a question answering system where the data base which is to provide the raw material for the answers consists of biographical data  culled from a variety of contemporary and modern sources  concerning the humanist literary movement in france. questions to the system are input in a s t r i c t formalization. answers  which appear in the same format  are found by interrogation of the data base or by inference making on the contents of the data base. the pecul i a r d i f f i c u l t i e s presented by the type of data dealt 
with and by the methods of inference needed are great enough to j u s t i f y neglecting  or at least  postponing  the problem of natural language input. 
　　　section 1 of this paper f i l l s in the background by trying to explain some of the peculiarities of the data  section 1 to shew how these ha-
ve been dealt with at the representation level by taking an example text and shewing how it has been coded. section 1 demonstrates some of the inference techniques used by following in detail the process of finding an answer to a question about a piece of text presented in section 1  and the conclusion sketches further planes. 
section 1 : problems presented by the data 
　　　the d i f f i c u l t i e s presented by the data break down into two main classes. first there are those which are a direct consequence of dealing with historical data. secondly there are problems inherent in any attempt to deal with data which expres-
* the reseda project is supported by the centre 
national de la recherche scientifique and by the delegation generale a la recherche scientifique et technique   contract 1.1   
ses not only facts but beliefs  attitudes and complex relationships. 
       let us f i r s t consider the problems of historical data. most obviously  such information is incomplete. it is in the nature of things impossi-
ble to know every relevant fact about an historical period.thus it is often necessary to infer possible or probable facts from what we do know. this is a general characteristic of the system. in a much stronger sense than that normal in natural language processing  its inferences are only probable inferences and its answers to questions  except in cases where some well-attested piece of information is asked for  are only probable answers. 
　　　secondly the data is subjective. an authority reports what he believes to be the case  not what necessarily is the case. sometimes this may lead him to report as fact something which is known  from other sources  to be actually false. and yet  since that false statement may affect other evidence  it must be represented in the data base. when this happens the false assertion is e x p l i c i t l y 
marked as such. a related problem arises wi th counter-factual conditionals. many pieces of evidence take the form ' if such-and-such had happened   a l though it did not   the consequences would have 
been thus '. evidence like this clearly gives important information and must be represented. 
　　　the subjectivity of the data gives rise to the further problem of contradictory data. it is quite possible to find one authority directly contradicting another. when this happens  each of the contradictory versions must be separately represented  and a special l i s t kept of such contradictions. then  when finding an answer to a question involves using a contradicted piece of evidence  the strategy which allowed the answer to be found must be repeated with each and a l l of the contradictory versions of the same evidence. 
　　　a l l this can be summarized by saying that the data i s   in its very essence  uncertain  a fact which reinforces the aspect of question answering touched on earlier. the answers found are  often  plausible answers based on plausible inferences using uncertain data. this should not be interpreted as an excuse for producing random rubbish. the system is intended to provide specialists in the period with an interactive aid in their research. it must therefore perform at least as well as such a specialist working by hand in a mechanical fashion. this means that  whilst the system cannot be expected to have the intuition and general background of the historian  it must not give impossible or s i l l y information. 

applications-1: king 
1 

　　　the other difference between our basic mater i a l and that of more normal ai systems is that  being biographical  it deals primarily with the attitudes  beliefs and ideology in p o l i t i c a l and religious matters of the characters who are our concern. this means that the representation of the data base must be adequate to express abstract ideas and processes and that the inference algorithms also must take into account propositional attitudes. thus they cannot depend on a tidy logic like that of the f i r s t order calculus. to i l l u s trate this consider the following example : 'john dislikes apartheid and hence does not want south african rugby teams to play in england'. most people would agree that there is some f a i r l y s t r i c t causal relation between the two halves of this sentence  marked by 'and hence'. but whatever this relation is  it cannot be interpreted as mate r i a l implication  since the converse 
'john wants south african rugby teams to play in 
 england and hence does not dislike apartheid' does not necessarily hold. 
　　　the issue becomes even more complex when it is considered that we are interested not only in finding relationships between people and the ideas they 
hold  but also in relationships between people. new relationships are established i n i t i a l l y because a question has been asked the answer to which depends on inferring the new relationship. but when a new relationship has been found  it may be added to the data base by asking a 'system' question  provi-
ding that its v a l i d i t y has f i r s t been checked by an historian. thus reseda is envisioned as a continually growing data base which itself proposes possible additions to its knowledge. 
it is worth noticing that the sort of problems 
just discussed are not the result of using histor i c a l data. anyone who tried to design a system dealing with modern american politics would be faced with exactly similar problems. thus  if our examples with names like 'pope benoit x i i i ' and controversial topics like 'schism in the church' strike the modern ear oddly  it is worth remembering that 'benoit x i i i ' could be replaced by 'jimmy carter' and 'schism' by 'the middle-east question' without essentially altering the basic problems discussed here. 
section 1 : representation of data 
　　　it should be said immediately that the level of 'understanding' aimed at here is not the 'deep' understanding of charniak  charniak 1  and otheis  if someone takes a t r i p on a boat we are content to say simply that  without worrying about the exact description of the boat. this is not to denigrate systems using such very detailed knowledge. simply their purpose is different. 
　　　on the other hand  some detailed knowledge which we do have is very specific to our data base. for example  ' c i v i l war' refers only to the war between the armagnacs and the bourguignons  fought between 1 and 1 with the intention of gaining central power in france. 
　　　with this in mind  we can now take an example piece of text and see how it would be represented. 
　　　figure la gives the french text. figure lb g i ves a somewhat free translation of the same text; the numbers in square brackets mark a rough corres-
pondance between parts of the text and the formal representation which follows later in figure 1  
   'les ambassadeurs de l'universite etaient porteurs d'une l e t t r e pour benoit x i i i   redigee precipitamment par clamanges  redacteur habituel des lettres de l'universite depuis 1  le jour meme du depart  1 a v r i l 1 . cette l e t t r e contenait presque une approbation des voies de concile et de convention. ii n'est pas etonnant qu' une lettre redigee en toute hate a i t reflete les positions personnelles de son auteur plutot que celles preconisees par l'universite. ils avaient cru devoir la garder par devers eux. quand i l s furent de retour  l'universite elle-meme p r i t soin de corriger cette epitre en en retranchant tout ce qui ne tendait pas a l'eloge exclusif de la voie de cession -1 aout 1  d'apres valois 
1  i i i pp. 1  ornato 1  pp. 1  figure la 
     the university's ambassadors   l   1   carried a letter for benoit x i i i  1 which had been hastily drafted by clamanges   1     the regular drafter of university letters after june 1 
 on the same day as their departure  1 avril 1    1   . the contents of this letter  almost constituted approval of the way of general counc i l  to resolve the schism  and arbitration  between the popes . it is not surprising that a letter drafted in great haste reflected its author's personal position rather than that advocated by the university   1   . they  the ambassadors  believed they should keep the letter to themselves . when they returned the university took care to correct the letter  1   cutting out anything which did not lean towards approbation of abdication  by both popes    l 1    1 august 1    l l   . 
figure lb | 
general discussion of the representation 
　　　it is impossible to describe our representation f u l l y in a paper of this lenftht  even if we 
r e s t r i c t ourselves to features exemplified in the representation of the text given in figure 1. however  some idea of i t s basic characteristics can be given f a i r l y b r i e f l y . figure 1 shews our representation of the text given in figure 1. the reader is not expected to be able to follow the representation at f i r s t glance; the rest of this section 
w i l l be devoted to explanation. it should be noted too  that for reasons of c l a r i t y   the syntax of the representation used here differs from that used in practice  for a f u l l description of the l a t t e r   see bozzolo et al 1 . there is  of course  a s t r i c t correspondance between the two. 
　　　the passage is represented by a set of 'planes' one for each episode of the text.  for 'planes' in this sense  see quillian 1 and scragg 1 . a brief english description of the contents of each episode precedes the plane representing i t . 

a p p l i c a t j o n s - 1 : 	king 
1 

　　　the predicate is the f i r s t element of the plane  followed by a l i s t of its arguments  enclosed in the f i r s t set of braces   dating information  in the second set of braces  and f i n a l l y the bibliographic source of the data. 

1. on the 1th a p r i l   1  an anonymous group of people  in paris  held an o f f i c i a l position in the university  at paris. 
 soc+cons+etre-affecte { suj=vedettes-l paris  
 obj=universite paris } 
	{ 1-avril-1  	  } 
 valois   
|1. this same group were members of a deputation.  rel1 vedettes-1 ambassade+membre  
 the relationship  being members of a deputation  
'specified in 1 is brought about by the episode |reported in 1  correlator-pointer  : 
 confer 1  
|1. the university of paris sent a deputation to benoit x i i i at avignon which l e f t paris on 1th april 1 and returned sometime before 1 august 1. 
 deplacer { suj=ambassade paris  
 obj-ambassade paris  
 source universite-de-paris paris  
 dest=benoit-xiii avignon } 
{ 1-avr i1  avant-1-aout-1 
 valois   
1. the deputation took an o f f i c i a l letter from the university of paris to benoit x i i i . 
 deplacer { suj=arabassade paris  
 obj=lettre-officielle-l  
 source=universite-de-paris pari s  
 dest=benoit-xiii avignon } 
	{ 1-avril-1  	  } 
 valois   
|1. shortly before 1 a p r i l   1 clamanges  in paris  wrote this o f f i c i a l letter from the university of paris to benoit x i i i at avignon. 
 soc+ment+produire { suj=clamanges paris  
 obj-lettre-officielle-l  
 source=universite-de-paris paris  
 dest=benoit-xiii avignon   
{ peu-avant-1-avril-1  
 1-avril-1 } 
 ornato   
1. from june 1 onwards clamanges  as part of his off-icial duties  drafted many letters on behalf of the university of paris. 
 soc+mult+ment+produlre { suj=clamanges paris  
 obj*lettre-officielle  
  source=univer s i te-deparis paris } 
	{ juin-1  	  } 
 ornato   
|1. on the 1th a p r i l   1  clamanges  in paris  expressed the idea specified in plane 1  in the o f f i c i a l letter already mentioned  to benoit x i i i as being  the idea of the university.  soc+ment+deplacer { suj=clamanges paris   modal=lettre-officielle-l  
 source-universite-de-paris paris  
 dest=benoit-xiii } 
	{ 1-avril-1  	  } 
 ornato   
*1.  false . that the university of paris supported benoit x i i i in his policy of arbitration. 
 pour+avoir-attitude 	{ suj-universite-de-paris paris  
 obj-benoit-xiii avignon  
 arg=voie-de-convention   
	{ 1-avril-1  	  } 
 valois   
1. benoit x i i i was not given the o f f i c i a l letter by the ambassadors. 
 neg+etre-affecte { suj=benott-xiii avignon  
 obj=lettre-officielle-l  
 source=vedettes-l } 
{ 1-avril-1  avant-1aout-1 } 
 valois   
1-benoit's not being given the l e t t e r - was the result of clamanges having falsely represented  in 1  the policy of the university  given in 1   correlator-pointer  : 
 cause1  c1rd1 1   
1. on the 1th august 1  the university re-wrote the o f f i c i a l letter to benoit x i i i . 
 rep+produire { suj=universite-de-paris paris  
 obj=lettre-officielle-l  
 dest=benoit-xiii avignon   
	{ 1-aout-1  	  } 
 valois   
the re-writing  1  was the result of clamanges having falsely represented  in 1  the views of the university  1   correlator-pointer  : 
 cause1  c1rd1 1  
1. on the 1th august  1  the university of par i s wanted to inform benoit x i i i   in avignon  of their position as expressed in 1. 
 int+ment+deplacer { suj=universite-de-paris paris  
 1bj=i1  
 dest=benoit-xiii avignon } 
	{ 1-aout-1  	  } 
 valois   
1. between 1 and the beginning of 1 the university of paris opposed the avignon popes on the subject of their policy of arbitration. 
 contre+avoir-attitude { suj=universite-de-parisj paris  
 obj=papes-d ' avignon avignon  
 arg=voie-de-convention }| 
	{ 1  	 debut-1 } 
 consensus   

 1bj=1  	figur e 1 
	a p p l i c a t i o n s - 1 : 	king 
1 

　　　the planes of figure 1 make up the data base for the system. the data base is organised logically into 'volumes*  with each volume containing references to a l l the planes representing episodes concerning one particular character  a ' s t a r '   . since any particular episode may concern more than one star  a reference to the same plane may appear in several different volumes  cf. scragg 1 . 
　　　the stars are the more important characters of the period  but are not necessarily individuals. for example  in the text given above  the following stars appear : 
1. benoit x i i i and clamanges  who are both i n d i v i duals and therefore 'normal' stars. 
1. the university of paris  which is considered to be a 'moral' person. that is  it may take decisions  take part in juridical actions  own property etc  just like an individual person. 
1. the popes of avignon. these are a 'collection' of characters  defined extensionally. 
1. the delegates from the university to benoit xiil the rel1  in plane 1  specifies that this group of people were a l l members of the same deputation to benoit x i i i . by its nature the group is temporary. how long such a group lasts and the events in which the group is involved is shewn by attaching the rel1 plane to the plane reporting the episode which brings the group into exis tence  done by the confer correlator-pointer . in the case of rel1  any relevant plane which has 'deputation' as its suj  gives further i n formation about this particular group  for example  plane 1 . 
1. vedettes-1  stars-1 . there are several anonymous groups like this. one volume serves for a l l such groups  who are distinguished one from another by the index number after vedettes. 
　　　each plane  apart from the relation plane a l ready mentioned  also contains dating information. the two-element l i s t towards the end of the plane gives the date at which the episode starts followed by the date when it finishes. thus  if we take plane 1 as an example : 
　　{ 1-avril-1  avant-1-aout-1 } tells us that the deputation l e f t paris on the 1th april and returned before the 1th august  1. dating is not always as simple as this. if the action of the predicate continues over a period of time  more than one date may be given. for example  in ' i t is known that he was canon at l i l l e in 1  
and he is addressed by the same t i t l e both in 1 and in 1' it is important to record all three dates. 
　　　the last item in each plane is the bibliographic source from which the episode is taken. in plane 1  our authority is valois'treatise cited in figure 1. 
　　　place information is very important  and is treated by attaching to each of the chief arguments 
of the predicate a location slot  which is f i l l e d 
when the physical location of the instantiation of that argument is known. thus  to use plane 1 as an example again   suj=arabassade paris  tells us that the deputation was in paris at the beginning of the episode  obj=ambassade paris  that it was also in paris at the end of the episode.  this interpretation is partially determined by the predicate used  as w i l l be discussed l a t e r   . the source of the episode  university-of-paris  is also in paris  and the destination  benoit-xiii in avignon. not a l l arguments to the predicate may have their location specified : only suj  obj  source  destination and argument. as with dating  it may be sometimes neces sary to specify more than one location for a given 
argument. 
　　　when the description proper of an episode is considered  the most characteristic is that it consists of a predicate with arguments. of the argu-
ments  called by us correlator   six correspond more or less to conventional cases : subject object  destination  modality and argument. others  like cause1  coord1 and confer in the example text  are peculiar to this representation. in general  it would be a mistake to identify any of the correlators too strongly with conventional cases:the 'mean ing' of a correlator is given in the specialist pro 
gram attached to the predicate governing the correlators and which makes use of the correlators when 
doing inferences. their names can give only a very rough intuitive feel for what they mean. 
　　　not a l l correlators are obligatorily present  even for the same predicate  cf. planes 1 and 1  where the predicate is in both cases deplacer  to move  modified essentially in the same way  but where the correlators are different . thus  when a particular correlator is used  i t s name must appear. rigid rules specify the argument frames for each predicate  determining not only what correlators must appear in a particular argument frame for that predicate or i t s modifications  but also what sort of entities can f i l l any particular argument. the argument frame for 'rep+produire' is a f a i r l y 
simple example : 
　　 rep+produire { suj=vedette   obj=lexical item }  specifies that 'rep+produire'  which can be roughly translated as 'to re-do' or 'to correct'  must have at least two correlators suj and obj and that the suj slot must be f i l l e d with a star  the obj slot by a lexical item. 
　　　the predicates themselves should now be considered. there are at the moment only f i v e   although nothing is fixed or magical about the number. although we intend to keep the number of predicates as small as possible  more may well prove necessary. deplacer  to move   avoir-attitude  to have an attitude   produire  to produce   etre-affecte  to be 
affected by  and etre-present  to be present  are chosen to be mnemonic. nonetheless they correspond only minimally to the normal use in natural language of the same verb. once again  the real meaning of the predicates is given by the specialist attached to each predicate. a better idea of what the predicates represent w i l l be gained when we do  finally  take a closer look at the example planes. 
　　　i n t u i t i v e l y   five predicates alone are not ade quate to represent the sort of complex data with which we want to deal  and a few minutes experimentation with the example text w i l l soundly reinforce i n t u i t i o n . a set of 'modulators' are therefore used to modify the sense of the predicate   cf. mel'chuk 
a p p l i c a t o o n s - l : 	king 
1 zholkovskij 1 . these modulators  in the graphic representation used in this paper  appear in small letters to the l e f t of the predicate  attached to it by a + sign. the 'rep' in the argument frame a-
bove i s   in fact  a modulator  and adds a sense of 'doing over again' to the basic 'produce' sense of produire. another example can be found in plane 1  where 'ment' adds a sense of 'intellectual activity' to the same predicate. modulators may be combined  as in plane 1  where 'soc+mult+ment' attached to produire add  respectively  the notion that the action of the predicate is part of the career of the suj  soc    i . e . the sort of thing he might put in his curriculum vitae   that the action is an action done before  may be several times  mult   and the same notion of intellectual a c t i v i t y just discussed  ment . 
discussion of the planes 
　　　after this rather lengthy general discussion  we now have sufficient background to look at the representation of the example text in some detail. 
　　　plane 1 needs very l i t t l e comment. vedettes-1 has already been explained. the predicate 'soc+const +etre-affecte' with an object attached does  however  deserve some explanation. the 'soc' simply says that the being-affected was  in some way  part of the off i c i a l career of the ambassadors  'const' is a l i t t l e 
more complicated. the predicates are essentially static in their nature  so there has to be some way of representing changes of state  cf. abelson 1 . this is done by three modulators : incep  f i n and const  'incep' marks the creation of a new state  ' f i n ' the end of the state  'const' that the state is  at the time specified  in f u l l force. all three relate to the f i r s t time slot in the plane. when any one of the three is present in the descriptive part of the plane  the second time slot remains empty. thus plane 1 does not t e l l us that a group of persons were given a position on april 1th  but that by that date they already had the position. 
　　　the use of obj in plane 1 illustrates one s i tuation where a correlator does not map in a obvious 
way onto a conventional case with the same name  and of how the meaning of any particular correlator is in part determined by the predicate with which it is associated. etre-affecte is used when the obj can be conceived of as being  at least temporarily or provisionally  a characteristic of the suj. 
　　　'universite'  unlike the 'moral' person universite-de-paris  is a lexical item  which means that its meaning is defined not by a program  as is the case with predicates  correlators and modulators  but by relationship with other lexical items  ornato  zarri 1 . 
　　　plane 1 is f a i r l y clear. deplacer  to move  is always transitive  and always involves a sense of actual distance covered. the modulator 'ment' is used when it is something expressed  by means of a letter or whatever  which is 'moved' from the sujject to the destination  cf. plane 1 . if a source correlator is used with deplacer unmodified  it is interpreted as 'at the instigation o f . similarly  in plane 1  the source with 'ment+produirb' can be interpreted as 'on the orders of or 'on behalf o f . 
　　　plane 1 offers an example of the use of a 'completive' plane. the object is i t s e l f described by an independant plane  whose number f i l l s the object slot. the completive plane i t s e l f   plane 1  is marked with an asterisk to shew that the assertion it represents is false. as was said in the introduction  this is a situation common in dealing with our type of data. the inference routines too must take account of false assertions. 
　　　the  cause1  c1rd1 1   appearing after plane 1 is  like the confer line after plane 1  an indication of relationships between planes. c1rd1 associates two planes of the same overall type which are both governed by the same correlator-pointer. in fact  c1rd1  and its parallel cor-
relator c1rd1 which functions inside planes  are equivalent to f i r s t order predicate calculus 'and'  with the restriction that only similar things may be conjoined. another pair of correlators  altern1 and altern1  are equivalent to exclusive ' o r ' . 
　　　cause1 specifies that its f i r s t argument is the result of its second argument. a parallel cor-
relator-pointer final is used when the result of an episode seems probable but is not yet confirmed by the evidence so far available. for example  
'charles vi sent the comte de st. pol to arrest pierre d ' a i l l y at cambrai' would give rise to three planes  one reporting that charles vi sent the count to cambrai  another that the count arrested pierre d ' a i l l y   and the third that pierre 
d ' a i l l y was  at some time later  in prison. but the latter two planes would be marked as only probable by the use of final instead of cause1 to link these three planes together. reseda is a very cautious inference maker. it w i l l not make inferences based 
on probable information. on the other hand  if a plane marked as probable is later confirmed  it w i l l be up-graded to certain by changing the pointer and the order of the arguments. 
　　　the remainder of the coding contains very l i t tle that has not been already commented on. plane 1 introduces a new modulator ' i n f which gives a sense of intention or of 'wanting that' to the predicate to which it is attached. 
avoir-attitude in plane 1 means  roughly  
'feels about' or 'has an attitude towards'  and the modulator 'contre'  used only with this predicate  makes it into 'opposes'. avoir-attitude gives us a good example of how one predicate can be used  with appropriate modification  to represent quite subtle notions. as one might expect  it bears most of the burden of representing relationships between people. with appropriate modulators and argument frames it has been used to express a l l of the f o l lowing : 
someone supports  opposes  someone  optionally  abou t some th ing . 
someone promises  threatens  someone with something 
two  or more  persons are involved in l i t i g a t i o n  in opposition or on the same side  concerning some matter. 
two  or more  persons oppose each other by violent means. 
someone  not immediately involved   supports or op poses someone in a legal matter. 
someone wants something to come about. 

a p p l i c a t i o n s - 1 : king 1 

section 1 : using the data base to answer questions 
　　　as was said earlier  the sort of understanding we are aiming at is not the very deep detailed understanding of some other systems. nonetheless we hope to be able to answer most of the type of questions a historian would be likely to ask about the people mentioned in our data base. this involves an attempt to write deduction programs based on human attitudes and motives  and i s   we think  sufficient l y d i f f i c u l t and of sufficient intrinsic interest to warrant the degree of effort involving in constructing reseda. 
　　　the main burden of the inferencing is carried by the specialists attached to each predicate. even if it were worked out in f u l l detail for a l l five 
predicates  it would be clearly impossible to give a f u l l description here. but it seems worthwhile to take one single question  imagining that the data base is as given earlier   i . e . just the representation of our example text  with some more detail attached to the lexical items involved  and shewing how the inference routines would find the answer to 
that question. 
let us imagine that a user asks 
'why did clamanges  after august 1 completely give up his activity as o f f i c i a l secretary to the university of paris  ' 
this would have to be coded  since natural language input is not allowed  in the same formalization as that used for the data base : 
　　　therefore the specialist attached to produire is called upon.   i t is always the predicate contai-
ned in the question which determines the specialist to be tried . the modulator ' f i n ' and the empty causel correlator attached to produire together t e l l us that we are seeking the cause of an interruption in the predicate a c t i v i t y . the modulator 'maent' adds the additional information that what is involved is 
an intellectual a c t i v i t y . this points us to a subpart of produire which gives information about produire as an intellectual a c t i v i t y   including aspects like possible reasons for terminating the a c t i v i t y . there we find that if 'soc' is also attached to the predicate and if source is present in the question  then we are j u s t i f i e d in assuming that the source delegates power to the suj. a l l this leads to the formation of an hypothesis 'someone stopping working for someone else - i n a situation involving the delegation of intellectual power- may be the result of the employee  who represents the employer  acting  in the course of his o f f i c i a l duties  in a way not consonant with the o f f i c i a l views of his employer1.  employee and employer are here used only as shorthand for 'someone representing an o f f i c i a l body' and 'the o f f i cial body represented' : no money need change hands . 
       this hypothesis is tested by searching in the data base for episodes which f i t the suggestion that clamanges may have acted in such a way with regard to the university of paris. 
       the search is done by trying to find in the data base planes which match the schemata given in figure 1  which represent a formalization within reseda of the hypothesis given above. after the formal representation  an english transcription of the schema is given. 
applications-1: king 1        vi and v1 are  respectively  the suj and the source of the original question  v1 and v1 are other  unspecified characters who may turn out to be the same person  q and r refer to instantiated versions of the schemata with the same name and a is a variable. the exclamation marks before q and r shew that they are contradictory   i . e . if 'pour' appears in one 'contre' must appear in the other . obviously the dating of any planes found must f i t with the question and with the other planes. 
　　　in our present case  where the data base is as shewn earlier  p and q are satisfied by planes 1 and 1. plane 1  it w i l l be remembered  was marked as false by the use of an asterisk  and indeed plane 1  which f l a t l y contradicts 1  also satisfies r above. the particular form of the contradiction -plain f a l s i t y vs. established truth- allows us to conclude that it is unnecessary to search for a plane to satisfy s. s is there to cater for the most 
general case  where the two planes satisfying p and q are simply contradictory but neither is known 
to be downright false. in that case  one must find some evidence  plane s  that v1  the original source  has informed some other person of whatever is reported in r. but i f   as in this case  t h e a t t i tude of the employer is well known  there is no need to search for other evidence. 
　　　even after episodes have been found which support the hypothesis  it is not given to the user as a definite answer before an attempt has been made to verify it by finding some concrete action done by the employer against the employee to shew that what clamanges did  was in fact sufficient to account for a break in the relationships between him and the university. in other words  we search for immediate reactions of the university against cla-
manges* action. the inference rules give a number of conditions which are grounds for assuming a concrete manifestation of disagreement with someone. to remove a living from someone  to forbid the publication of someone's book  to contest someone's authority  for example  are a l l possible grounds. amongst these conditions 'rep+produire'  re-doing something  appears as one possible equivalent to 'real+contre+avoir-attitude'  the concrete manifestation of disagreement   providing that the suj of 'rep+produire' was the source in a plane where the obj was the same as that of the 'rep+produire' plane. the suj of the plane containing the source is 
the obj of the avoir-attitude plane. 
　　　in order to make use of this rule  we f i r s t look for any cause1 pointer which contains p  i.e. 1  as i t s second argument. this gives us two planes  both 1 and 1 are said to be caused by 1  and by 
 1  but we are only interested now in 1 . 1 has universite-de-paris as suj and t e l l s us that the university corrected the c r i t i c a l letter. this g i ves us the verification we need. if even more confirmation had been required  1 would have provided i t . 
　　　in the present version of reseda  the special i s t programs for the predicates use a collection of f a i r l y ad-hoc rules. although this preliminary model despite i t s limited number of rules allows us to make a many useful inferences within predefined contexts  we hope to develop a more flexible and more unified version. but it is clear that any further development w i l l depend heavily on the emp i r i c a l work done in the f i r s t stage described here  conclusion 
　　　reseda  the system described informally here  is an attempt to apply well-established techniques from the domain of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence within a useful application  whilst at the same time developing new inferences rules to account for the peculiarity of the data. it is hoped that the representation and inference methods developed in the design and implementation of this system w i l l prove sufficiently supple to deal with any kind of biographical data. ghosts are not necessarily oldfashioned. 
