 
　　　in visions the segmentation algorithms receive input from a digitized color image as an array of pixel values  and generate output as a layered graph of symbolically named regions  boundaries  and endpoints - each with their descriptive attributes. this processed sensory data provides the i n i t i a l input to the model-building system of visions. 
introduction 
　　　this set of three short papers is a description of the f i r s t pass at implementing visions  a computer system designed to understand digitized images of natural outdoor scenes  e.g.  figure 1 . visions  hanson and riseman  1  is divided into two major subsystems: the low-level system is responsible for segmenting the image; the high-level system is responsible for interpreting the image. this paper discusses segmentation; the second paper outlines the multi-level representations  the cont r o l structure  and the search space for modelbuilding; and the third paper discusses shape and the linkages between regions  surfaces  volumes  
and objects. 
　　　two approaches to image segmentation are presented here: an edge/line segment process  prager  hanson and riseman  1  and a region analysis process  nagin  hanson and riseman  1 . 
boundary analysis 
　　　the line/boundary analysis process is based on an interpixel representation of only horizontal and vertical edges. 	an advantage of this approach is that decisions concerning orientations of boundary segments   i . e .   groups of connected edges  are delayed u n t i l the local information has aggregated and global information from the whole segment is available. 	the algorithm involves two preprocessing operations  a simple differentiation pass using a 1 edge mask and suppression of non-maxima 
 parallel  edges which have the same direction  sign  of contrast. 	next relaxation processes  rosenfeld  hummel and zucker  1  are used to organize information. 	these processes  based on a paradigm of local cooperation and competition  update the strength of edges as a function of local context. 	they employ a probabilistic case analysis of line continuations  line endings  and vertices; sample results are shown in figure 1. 
　　　since  the properties of a boundary can be expected to remain invariant only for segments which l i e between at most two regions  the goal is 
this work was supported by onr grant n1-c-1. 
1 
a. hanson is a f f i l i a t e d with hampshire college  amherst  massachusetts 1. 
to extract and symbolically label them. therefore  the next step of the algorithm uses the similarity of properties to either side of a pair of edges to bind them into segments  thus integrating both edge and region information at a local level. in order to form these segments  binding must not take place across vertices where more than 1 line segments meet. after extracting boundary segments  properties such as confidence  straightness or curvature  contrast  etc. are computed. elimination of low confidence lines can take place during a postprocessing stage  if desired. 
region analysis 
　　　we have chosen to develop a region formation process using global information as a complementary approach to the locally-directed line analysis. here the properties of points and small areas are analyzed via global histograms  one- and two-dimensional  to focus on the internal structure of regions  hanson  riseman and nagin  1; ohlander  1; price  1 . the features selected to provide the basis for the segmentation are f i r s t used to form plans  nagin  hanson and riseman  1; price  1; kelly  1 . the plans drastically reduce the data while organizing a gross decomposition of the image into several large areas. each of these areas can then be further refined without interference in the histogram analysis from other areas in the image. plans are formed using two techniques: 
a  quantization compression  and b  spatial compression. compressing the quantization scale of a given feature to one or two bits produces a plan which emphasizes only the strongest differences in global feature activity. this technique can be generalized by intersecting the results obtained from a small set of features  figure 1 . the second stage of planning involves reducing the spatial resolution of the plan data by replacing non-overlapping local windows of pixel values with scalar features extracted from the local window. the plans can now be more carefully refined by s p l i t t i n g each overmerged area into regions using similar techniques. the goal of the refinement process is to eventually provide a region segmentation of the image together with associated descriptive region properties. 
merging representations 
　　　techniques for merging these two segmentations to form more reliable output are currently under examination. 	by converting the region plans to boundaries  the line and region information can 
be intersected and confidences of regions and boundaries can be improved. 	in figure 1  the boundary segmentation of figure 1 has been improved using region plans. 

v i s i o n - 1 : prager 
1 

　　　the resulting segmentation is passed to the high-level system via the rse data structure. the rse is a three-level directed graph of regions  boundary segments  and endpoints. each node in the graph has a symbolic name and an associated l i s t of properties  while arcs encode the relationship between nodes. 