a set of apl functions to play new eleusu 
michael j. a. berry 
t. p. sharp  associates 
	1 state street  boston  ma 	1 
t 	the 	game 	iii 	the 	methodology 
   
   new eleusls is a game  invented by robert abbott  which has been used to simulate hypothetico-deductive reasoning .  
   players of new eleusls attempt to find the  secret rule  which governs the play of cards. 
this rule  which is made up by a player refered to as  god   may be anything at a l l so long as it depends only on attributes of the cards themselves. the scoring of the game punishes a god who makes up rules which are too difficult for any of the players to discover. players experiment by playing cards which are then either accepted or rejected by god. 
	il 	the 1rganizat1n of information 
   one of apl's greatest strengths is its ability to deal with rectangular arrays as easily as scalars. with the introduction of nested arrays  this power is enhanced by the ability to enclose or  scalarize  any apl array so that it may itself be an element of a larger array. the eleusls workspace uses these new nested arrays to great advantage. 
   one example is the prediction matrix. this matrix contains a row for each rule under consideration  and a column for each position on the mainline including 1 or 1 columns representing positions at which no cards have yet been played. each element of the array is an enclosed vector of a l l cards which would be permissible at that position according to a particular rule. any card in the intersection of a column of the matrix is allowed by a l l the rules. when the rule l i s t has reached its final state  these are the cards which the program acting as prophet would approve. by comparing rows and columns of the prediction matrix with the vectors representing the cards accepted and rejected at a position  the program can determine whether an individual rule is consistent with the results of past experiments. 
   the rules themselves are numerically encoded a translation program renders these rules into grammatical english for communication with the human players. 
   the eleusls workspace contains 1 or 1 apl functions. 	each of these is a single purpose module which can be fitted together with other modules to build a complex system. 
   the program works by applying a collection of  screen functions  each of which is blind to a l l hut one aspect of the cards  and then looking for natterns in the results. the part of the problem requiring the most intelligence is recognzing 
which rules are not likely to be correct because they do not correspond to human styles of thinking. tills is done by employing a number of functions which wieght the rules by  common sense.  	for instance  it was pointed out by dietterlch that 
most rules invented by human gods have symmetry. once the program has a set of possible rules it tests than by playing cards which seem likely to eliminate the largest number of unlikely rules. when all the remaining rules meet the  reasonability  criteria and even long strings of cards can be played successfully by following them  the program declares itself to be a prophet. 	the nrogram can play against itself  or against one or more other players. 
   complete program listings are available from the author. 

   
1 
