 
     a concise derivation is given for a compact nonlinear equation which specifies possible 1d rotations of r i g i d objects  compatible with measurements of five object points in two views. the insight provided by direct geometrical interpretation of this equation = which contains ullman's polar equation as a special case - may be exploited for attempts to categorize the set of possible solutions. 
	1 	introduction 
     efforts towards an improved interpretation of image sequences from scenes with moving objects recently concentrated on approaches to derive a 1d description of r i g i d moving objects and their space trajectory. in the case of orthographic projection  the mathematical problems have been solved through the  structure-from-motion  theorem of ullman   1   . in the case of perspective projection  various approaches have been used to derive equations for the unknown 1d point coordinates and motion parameters - see   1   1   1   1   1   . usually minimization approaches are employed in order to obtain solutions. in special situations  some of the unknowns can be eliminated  yielding for example the  polar equation  in lb . it can be shown that the image measurements of at least five points in at least two views are required in order to determine the remaining unknowns - see the references quoted above and   1   . for this basic situation  nagel  derived a compact equation for the unknown parameters specifying the rotation of the r i g i d object relative to the sensor between the f i r s t and second image frame. this equation can be written down in two lines rather than two pages required for a f u l l specification of ullman's  polar equation  which turns out to be a special case of i t . 
     one of us  b.n.  found a very concise derivation of this equation and the ensueing discussion uncovered an immediate geometrical interpretation for it and - a f o r t i o r i - for ullman's  polar equation . based on these insights into the problem  it appears promising to investigate multiple interpretations which might satisfy the measurements in two views  especially degenerate ones which might upset minimization approaches. 
ii 	a compact formula for 1d reconstruction 
     let us assume that a certain number of perspective views of a r i g i d object can be obtained. either object or observer or both may be in motion  so that in general each view w i l l show a different aspect of the object. we shall further assume that a certain number of points r i g i d l y fixed to the object can be traced through each view. both  1d-structure and motion of these points are unknown and unrestricted except of the r i g i d i t y constraint. in the following a vector equation w i l l be derived relating the unknown rotation parameters to the observed object point coordinates. 
     the 1d-coordinates of the m-th object point am  m = 1 . . . m  are given with respect to an object coordinate system. for each frame time n = 1 . . . n a translation vector tn and a rotation matrix dn relate the object coordinate system to a camera coordinate system whose o r i g i n coincides with the projection center of the camera. the image plane is parallel to the xz-plane of the camera system  at a distance f on the positive y-axis which represents the optical axis. 
     let cmn be the position vector of am at time n in the camera system 
cmn =  am + tn  dn 
the projection of cmn onto the image plane 	is given by a three-component image vector 
	bmn =  f cxmn/cymn 	f czmn/cymn  
1 the x- and z-component of bmn are known image coordinates. carrying along the y-component bymn = f permits a convenient vector notation of both image and spatial data  as w i l l become evident soon. similar to roberts  we introduce an unknown scale factor smn = cymn/f 
which lets us write 
	smn bmn 	 am + tn  dn 	 i  
	 m = 1 . . . m; n 	n  
     before combining several of these equations for the elimination of unknowns  two simplifications can be introduced. f i r s t   we are free to choose the object coordinate system to coincide with the camera system for n = 1. for convenience we set tl = 1 and dl = 1  denoting the identity matrix . 
     secondly  note that if smn  am  tn and dn constitute a solution for eqs. 1  so do q.smn  
q.am  q.tn and dn  where q is an arbitrary factor. this  of course  is the well-known fact that the size of an object cannot be determined from any number of perspective views unless at least one absolute distance is known. while this prohibits exact 1d reconstruction  shape and apparent motion of a scaled variant can s t i l l be obtained. the scaling may be chosen by setting one of the factors smn to an arbitrary value  e.g. s l l = 
1. 
     for a sequence of n frames at least 1 + 1/ 1n - 1  points must be observed if the number of equations is to match or exceed the number of unknowns  see nagel 1. the following derivation w i l l deal with two views of five points. since due to the i n i t i a l choice there is only one translation vector and one rotation matrix remaining  namely t1 and d1  resp.   the index w i l l be dropped  and we have the following equations 
sml bml = am 	 1  sm1 bm1 =  am + t  d  1  
substituting  1  into  1  we get 
	sm1 bm1 =  sml bml + t  d 	 1  
and for a particular point  say m = 1  
	sl1 b1 =   s l l bll + t  d 	 1  
subtracting  1  from  1  we get for m   1 sm1 bm1 - sl1 b1 = sml bmld - s l l b1d  1  
to eliminate sm1 we take the vector product of both sides with bm1 and get 
-sl1 b1 x bm1  = sml  bmld x bm1  - s l l  b1d x bm1   1  
next  we eliminate sml by taking the scalar product with d'bml*  the apostroph denotes transpose . 
-sl1 b1 x bm1 d'bml 	- s l l   b l l d x bm1 d'bml' 
a product  axb c* can be interpreted as the volume of the parallelepiped formed by the 1 vectors a  b and c. thus simultaneous rotation does not affect the product value and interchanging the order of the three vectors may only introduce a sign change. this allows us to write sl1 bml x bm1d' db1' = sll bml x bm1d    bll' 
 1  
and in particular for m = 1 sl1 b1 x b1d' db1' = sll b1 x b1d' b1' 
 1  
combining  1  and  1  we get 
 b1 x b1d' b1'  bml x bm1d  db1l = 
    b1 x b1d' db1'  bml x bm1d    bll'  1  for m = 1 1 this is a set of three equations for the three free parameters of the rotation 
matrix d. it contains the polar equation of ullman  as a special case  see   1     . this rather compact equation w i l l be the starting 
point for some interesting insights. 
	1ll 	geometrical interpretation 
     before entering a discussion concerning properties and a p p l i c a b i l i t y of eq. 1 it may be helpful to gain some understanding of i t s meaning. f i r s t   it can be seen that the equation deals solely with vector directions. the magnitudes cancel out since each vector occurs in a product exactly once on each side. this is quite sensible since the directions of the projecting rays constitute the only information which can be exploited. 
     note also that each image vector at time 1 is associated with the inverse rotation 
matrix  undoing the effect of rotation. whatever difference remains between the directions of bml and bm1d' is caused by the translation vector t which must be coplanar with a l l such vector pairs. two pairs give a solution for the direction of t in terms of the intersecting line of their planes for any choice of d. the planes of three pairs  
however  w i l l only intersect in a line if d is chosen properly. it w i l l be shown now that this constraint is indeed expressed through eq. 1 by rederiving it with geometrical arguments. 
     t must be coplanar with bml and bm1d' for a l l points m. hence each vector product 
	 bml x bm1d*  	m = 1  1  . 	 1  
defines a vector normal to a plane containing t. the planes for m=l and m=1 intersect in a line whose direction is given by 
	 bll x b1d'  x  b1 x b1d'  	 1  
1 
this line must be oriented in the same direction as t. the plane defined by bml and bm1d' for any other object point must be compatible with this direction  i.e. i t s normal vector on t must be normal to the direction of t defined by the two other points. this can be expressed using the cartesian product. 
c  bl 1 x b1d'  x  b1 x b1d'   
 bml x bm1d' ' = 1 
     the multiple vector product in brackets can be rewritten using  axb xc = b ca -a cb . rearranging terms gives eq. 1. in summary  we have shown that this equation expresses a constraint on d arising from the condition that the translation vector must be coplanar 
with each vector pair bml and bm1d'. 
	iv 	discussion 
     the nonlinear system of eqs. 1 for m = 1 1 can be transformed into a set of fourth order polynomials in three unknowns. as one possible solution approach i t e r a t i v e procedures may be employed. a linearized version of ' eq. 1 has been proposed in  and has been used successfully to solve for the unknowns based on simulated image vectors. 
     let us assume that a rotation matrix d satisfying eq. 1 has been found. how can one obtain a 1d reconstruction  from the preceding section we know that a solution indicates: there exists a translation t compatible with the observations and this particular d. the translation vector can be determined by f i r s t solving eq. 1 for s1  using an arbitrary choice of s1 and the solution for d  and then solving eq. 1 for t. eq. 1 w i l l give sml and sm1 for a l l other points. the 1d coordinates  f i n a l l y   follow from eq . 1 . 
     note that eq. 1 leaves s1 and hence t undefined if the t r i p l e product on both sides is zero. this can happen in two cases   l  
when the translation vector t is coplanar with b l l and b1 and hence a l l vectors in eq. 1 are coplanar or   i i   when b1 and b1d' are collinear. the f i r s t case can be remedied by choosing another pair of points i and j such that b i l   b j l   and t are not coplanar. if a l l bml are coplanar with t  none of them can be reconstructed from two views. the second case implies that the translation vector is zero or collinear with b1. choosing another point w i l l reveal whether t is zero since it cannot be simultaneously collinear with two image vectors in different directions. for zero translat ion   i . e . pure rotation about the origin  none of the scaling factors smn can be determined  hence no reconstruction is possible. if t is nonzero and collinear with some bml then only this point cannot be reconstructed. hence tor a l l but certain exceptional situations a unique 1d reconstruction can be obtained for any d satisfying eq. 1. 
	v 	conclusion 
     the interpretation of image sequences recorded from real-world scenes with moving objects would be incomplete without a description of the 1d configuration of points on a r i g i d moving object and i t s space trajectory. to solve such a problem requires the image measurements from at least five object points in at least two views. solutions could be used as s t a r t values for a minimization approach in the case where more than five points in more than two views are available and have to be explained as a single r i g i d object. using appropriate choices for the available degrees of freedom  a compact equation for the unknowns remaining in this basic situation has been derived in   1   . our current contribution has presented a much more direct derivation and an immediate geometrical interpretation of t h i s equation  also some results concerning degenerate situations. 
