 relationships in these explicit label sets leads to an unavoidable combinatorial explosion of possible final interpretations. 
　　　in order to avoid this problem  we have developed an intensional labelling method for schemata representations called specialization labelling. the set of possible final interpretations  labels    for a schema are represented as a tree. each node of the tree represents an implicit number of final interpretations. each descendant node represents a further specialization of the possible final labels implied by its parent. the root node of the tree is the undifferentiated schema instance. at any time in the recognition of the schema instance  the set of a l l possible final interpretations for the schema is represented by the union of a l l the labels implied by the current fringe of the tree. 
     figure 1 shows the complete specialization tree for the geo-system schema. i n i t i a l l y a geo-system is f u l l y undifferentiated  i t s labelling represented only by the schema instance i t s e l f . the recognition of the geo-system involves constructing this tree as new components are added to its description  generally increases ambiguity of labelling  and pruning the tree as constraints are applied amonq related schemata  decreases 
ambiguity of labelling . 
     specialization labelling avoids the problem of representing exponentially large numbers of labels for abstract high-level objects. as well  it provides a representation for manipulating semantically related labels as a single group. 
v. the recognition process 
     the recognition process is a search of the composition hierarchy for a complete and mutually consistent set of schemata instances. the search is guided by the procedural methods embedded in each schema. as each schema instance satisfies i t s own internal criteria for completed recognition  it is used as a cue for the hypothesis of higher schemata in the composition hierarchv. for example  when a town instance has been found it in used as a cue for invoking the procedural methods of both the road-system and geo-system schemata above it in the hierarchy. in this way  appropriate high-level schemata can be hypothesized by the discovery of appropriate high-level cues   thus realizing a recursive cue/mode1 hierarchy. 
     the invoked higher schemata must find or make instances of themselves that can incorporate the lower instance or return failure if none can. spatial adjacency is the usual constraint used to find an existing instance. mutual consistency is then enforced between the higher and lower instances. model-consistency modifies the description of the higher instance1 to conform to the lower. the modification includes possible further differentiation of the schema instance down its specialization tree or failure.  model 
consistency is a generalization of waltz-like pruning of the corner label lists.  
object-consistency modifies the lower instance to conform to the upper.  this is a generalization of mapseel-like pruning of the component object chain and region label l i s t s   . this consistency process may then be propagated to other schema instances related to these under the control of the relevant schema methods. 
　　　for example  suppose a shoreline si has been recognized as an interpretation of a chain closinq on i t s e l f . si requires two geo-system instances tc be part of  g-sl  the inside one  and g-s1  the outside one. suppose g-sl already exists and is already known to be a landmass  because it contains a road-system. model consistency of g-sl with respect to si requires that g-sl be further specialized to island. object consistency of si 
w . r . t . g-sl specializes si to be island-shore  as opposed to lakeshore . suppose the outside geo-system for si  g-s1  has to be created as a new undifferentiated geo-system. model-consistency of g-s1 w . r . t . the island-shore si specializes g-s1 to be a waterbody. object consistency of si w . r . t . g-s1 succeeds. all of these specialization constraints may propagate to other related schema instances which may in turn continue to propagate them. 
	vi. 	conclusion 
　　　this model of perception is embodied in the program mapsee 1. mapsee1 is written in maya  a multiprocess lisp dialect supporting schemata data and control structures   l   1   . our experience with it so far has been limited so this communication should be viewed merely as a brief progress report with tentative summary conclusions. in the meantime it should be clear that each of the inadequacies in mapseel has been rectified in mapsee 1. our model is intended to provide a coherent framework for the desiqn and implementation of high-level  schema-based perceptual systems. 
1 
