 
     non-von is a highly parallel machine designed to support the efficient implementation of very large scale knowledge-based systems. the utility of such a machine has been demonstrated analytically  i  1  and through implementation of a working knowledge-based information retrieval system in which the non-von machine instructions were emulated in software . in cooperation with the stanford computer science department  we have recently begun to implement the most important components of the machine as custom vlsi circuits. 
	i 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
     the central focus of our recent research has been the investigation of highly parallel non-von neumann machine architectures adapted to the kinds of operations that appear central to the operation of a broad class of large-scale knowledge-based systems. our approach is based on an architecture  that supports the highly efficient evaluation of the most  difficult  set theoretic and relational algebraic operators. this research spans an unusual  vertical distance -extending from the level of ai description languages  through the arena of logical formula manipulation  and down to the domain of hardware parallelism. our initial efforts  reported in a recent stanford doctoral dissertation   yielded: 
1. the  top-level  architectural specification of a highly parallel machine-portions of which are to be implemented using custom nmos vlsi circuits- which we have since come to call nonvon. 
1. an analysis of the time complexity of the essential parallel hardware algorithms to be executed on the proposed machine in the course of large-scale  meaning-based data manipulation. 
1. the implementation of an operational knowledgebased information retrieval system  demonstrat-
ing the use of non-von  emulated in software  in support of a very high level descriptive formalism based on the language k r l . 
our recent work at columbia and stanford has focused on: 
1. progressive refinement and elaboration of the non-von architecture  including a preliminary functional design and high-level layout for two of the most important vlsi chips. 
1. the exploration of applications of the nonvon class of architectures to practical problems in such areas as artificial intelligence  database management  and  very-high-level  programming languages. 
     in this short communication  we will briefly sketch our progress to date. 
ii a knowledge-based retrieval system 
     a surprisingly large share of the kinds of information processing activities with which both human and automated data processors are charged may be viewed as involving various kinds of knowledge-based matching or retrieval problems. for our dissertation research  we chose a concrete task of manageable scope that captured many of the most important characteristics of the general  conceptual matching  problem: the knowledge-based document retrieval application. 
     the user of a knowledge-based document retrieval system formulates a high-level pattern description which is then matched against all descriptions contained in a large target collection  the set of books in a computer science library  for example . in general  the success of a match may depend on domain-specific entities and relationships. in the case of the computer science library  for example  the system might  know about  such entities as computers  algorithms  programmers and storage devices. certain characteristic attributes of these entities  the storage medium at-
tribute  for example  whose values differ for different kinds 
1 
of storage devices  might also be included in this domainspecific knowledge. 
     typical of the kinds of relationships which might be embodied in the knowledge base of such a system is the fact that a tape drive is a particular kind of storage device whose storage medium is always magnetic tape. a simple deductive inference based on this relationship might establish that a pattern description in which the subject is described as a storage device with magnetic tape as its medium would be satisfied by a target description with subject described as a tape drive. the description language used in our experimental system is based closely on k r l ; the document description shown below may suggest some of its most important features: 
a document 
authors 
set-with-all-of 
thompson 
   walters set-of 
	an 	engineer 
	coun 	tries-of- publication 
set-with-any-of usa 
       great-britain subject 
involves an invention 	with 
purpose or 
power-generation 
	power- 	transmission 
printing-dates set-with-exactly 
1 
         1 a 	textbook 
iii predicate 	logic for specification a n d execution 
     the rules defining the semantics of matching within our knowledge-based description language were not embedded inextricably within the code of the retrieval system  but were instead formulated as an independent  separable set of twenty-two axioms expressed in a restricted firstorder predicate calculus. one of these axioms  which embodies the basis on which a target description of the form  a storage-device with medium = magnetic-tape  would successfully match a less restrictive description of the form  a storage-device'' is presented below: 
per-imp-per  tar-per  pat-per  = 1 proto . 
	 per-proto 	 pat-per  	proto  	a 
   per-proto  tar-per  proto   a v siot . 
  1 pat-gil . 
　obj-slot-fill  pat-per  slot  pat-fill   1 pat-fill  tar-fill . 
 obj-slot-fill 	 pat-per  	slot  	pat-fill  	a obj-slot-fill 	 tar-per  	slot  	tar-fill  	a 
	dtion-imp-dtion 	 tar-fill  	pat-fill    
     the set of matching axioms serves not only as a modular  perspicuous and easily formulated specification of the semantics of the knowledgc-bascd description language  but as an executable  program  for actually carrying out the matching process which it describes. more precisely  the matching process is carried out by a procedure called lsec  for logical satisfaction by extensional constraint   which interprets the set of axioms to identify all target descriptions that match the user-specified pattern description according to the matching rules for the description language  making reference to the domain-specific knowledge base.  details of the lsec algorithm are presented in  1 .  
iv n o n - v o n as a logic engine 
     unfortunately  the lsec algorithm relies very heavily on the execution of several operations which  on a von neumann machine  are quite expensive when their operands comprise a large amount of data  as is the case in the sort of application with which we are concerned . specifically  the algorithm repeatedly evaluates the most expensive operators of a relational algebra  - in particular  the equi-join operation. non-von evaluates the most time-consuming relational algebraic operators in a highly efficient manner  particularly when the argument relations are large. the architecture in fact achieves an asymptotic improvement of o logn   with very favorable constant factors  over the best evaluation methods known for these operators on a conventional system  without the use of redundant storage  and. using currently available and potentially competitive technology. 
v t h e n o n - v o n a r c h i t e c t u r e 
     at the top level  the non-von machine architecture comprises a secondary processing subsystem  sps   based on a bank of  intelligent  rotating storage devices and designed to provide very high accessing and processing bandwidth  along with a smaller  but faster primary processing subsystem  pps   again utilizing a high degree 
1 
of parallelism  in which the relational algebraic operators may be very quickly evaluated. transfer between the two devices is based on a process of hash partitioning  which is performed entirely in hardware by logic associated with the individual disk heads  and which divides the argument relations into key-disjoint buckets suitable for  internal  evaluation. 
　　in our demonstration system  the operation of nonvon was emulated sequentially  in maclisp on the dec 
kl-1 at the stanford artificial intelligence laboratory   and hence  so inefficiently that testing using a large sample document collection would have been impractical. on a physical implementation of non-von  though  our knowledge-based retrieval system would in a sense be able to look at all documents in the library  at once   applying a considerable amount of physical hardware concurrency to a much more complex  inferential  matching task than has previously been attacked using parallel hardware. 
acknowledgements 
　　the author gratefully acknowledges the substantial contributions of bob floyd  hussein ibrahim  don knuth  gio wiederhold and terry winograd to the work reported in this communication. this research was supported in part by the defense advanced research projects agency under contract mda1-c-1. 
