 
lateral inhibition processing of an image yields subpixel precision in the location of intensity discontinuity edges in a digitized image. the method is illustrated using a 1 x 1 x 1 bit image. 
introduction 
   as has recently been pointed out in the literature  nevatia & babu 1   the effectiveness of many machine vision systems is often limited by the low level processing that constitutes the first stage of the system. typically  this stage consists of operations such as edge detection  thinning  thresholding  & linking - in other words - line finding. 
   given this current state of the art and the inspiration of earlier mit work  binford 1  herskovitz & binford 1   we have implemented an intermediate level vision system that is a marked improvement to this stage of vision systems. an earlier report on this system has been presented elsewhere  macvicar-whelan & binford 1  where further details may be found. we present here improvements in the structure  noise  filter  results for 1 x 1 and 1 x 1 inhibition masks and the hardcopy output was also improved. 
   most edge operators use the maximum gradient which requires a thinning operation. both processes can introduce uncertainties in the resulting edge. the laterally inhibited image  also used in the m i t systems  e.g. grimson 1 and references therein   is equivalent to a second derivative operation and provides a more precise result due to effective use of more of the information in the grey level image. we have chosen to illustrate our technique with an image that has already been discussed in the literature. 
¡¡this work waa performed while p.j. mac vicar-whelan was on a l ave of abwnre from grand valley state college*  michigan. additional funding 
lateral inhibition 
   unlike the mit approach  difference of gaussians   we convolve the image with a square mask of side 1 n + l to yield the local average intensity  over the 1 n + 1 x 1n + 1 area  and subtract this average from the intensity of the pixel at the centre of the square. the resulting intensity is the laterally inhibited value of the image at the central pixel. results for n = 1  and 1 are presented in the figure. it is this value that is used to locate the zero crossings. in the process of calculating the laterally inhibited image  linear intensity functions  including the special case of the constant function  arc mapped into the zero value. an intensity discontinuity is characterised by values that rise/fall to a maximum over n pixels  a switch to a maximum of the opposite sign  and a fall/rise to zero again over n pixels. 
   as is to be expected  when two discontinuities are separated by less than the mask dimension there will be interference which will result in locational errors. while a small mask will minimize this effect  it will be more sensitive to noise and the errors induced by it. examples of this effect are to be found in the figure where line separation  of only 1 pixels are common. 
discontinuity point detection 
   it is the zero crossing that occurs during the switch from one maxima to the other that is the zero crossing of interest since this zero corresponds to the location of the discontinuity. 
   for the case of subtracting the value of the single central pixel from the local average  this switch from peak to peak occurs over a 1 pixel interval. it is the location of the zero of this switch that is the zero crossing of interest. 
   the exact position of the crossing was taken to be the linearly interpolated position between the pixels obtained using the values of intensity on either side of the crossing. 
   zero point crossings were calculated in both the horizontal and vertical directions for the processed image. 
   
was provided by arpa under contract no. mda1-c-1. 
1 
   
discontinuity point linking 
   the zero points or zero crossings of the laterally inhibited image were linked together over a mesh of dimensions equal to a single pixel separation. decisions on the linking were based upon the intensity values of the corners of a mesh which were four pixel values and a central value equal to the average of the four corner values. 
   a zero crossing was deemed to occur along the edge of a mesh if one corner of the mesh edge was above zero and the other corner was either equal to or below the zero value. linear interpolation of these 1 corner values was taken as the subpixel location of the zero crossing. intramesh points were established using the corner values and the value at the center of the mesh. 
   furthermore the central value can be used to disambiguate two trajectories that pass through a single mesh if it is assumed that the calculated value for the center of the mesh is accurate at least in so far as to whether or not it is above or below the zero value. this information can be used to separate two trajectories that pass through a single pixel. 
results 
   the results of locating intensity discontinuities using our method is illustrated in the figure for the image of a lockheed l l o l l on a runway - an image that has been used by our group in diverse contexts and reported upon elsewhere in the literature. all results using our method were obtained using a threshold of 1 intensity units. measured noise was 1 units. 
   the top row of the figure  left to right  illustrates the result of applying the the nevatia-babu line finder  acronym's current linefinder  to the entire image  a 1 x 1 window centred about the plane's nose  and the result of applying 1 x 1 lateral inhibition operator to the digitized image. 
   the second row illustrates similar results found using a 1 x 1 mask. in addition a second window  1 x 1  about the nose presents details of the high precision obtaainable. individual pixel structure is represented by the square grid. 
   an identical sequence of illustrations is presented in the next two rows for 1 x 1 and 1 x 1 masks respectively. 
   in addition to greater precision our new discontinuity locator  as demonstrated in the figure  does not need to be followed by the customary thinning stage. it is also very accurate since different models of the l l o l l can be distinguished on the the basis of the ratio of wing to tail span. 
   increasing the size of the inhibition mask provides a cleaner  less small structure  but is accompanied by the undersirable result of broadening fine structure  eg the 1 pixel wide lines in the 1 x 1 windows . 
   brooks  1  presents further results using the nevatiababu technique in the context of a c r o n y m . arnold 
 1  presents the edges obtained using a heuckel operator on this image. 
   as these results show  our processing produces rather improved results over those that are currently obtainable using other techniques. 
   we are currently extending this work to provide improved 'real picture' data for some of the other image processing projects being studied in our laboratory. 
