 
         the problem of recognition of time-varying events  particularly motion concepts  is discussed and a framework for the abstraction of such concepts is briefly presented. we have designed and implemented a knowledge-based expert system for motion understanding that incorporates several novel features. a frame-based representation  which includes exception handling via similarity links and the organizational primitives is-a and part-of is used to construct a knowledge base of temporal concepts. this knowledge base drives the recognition process that integrates the paradigms of hypothesize-andtr st and competition and co-operation among conceptually adjacent hypotheses. the recognition stra tegy also includes a hypothesis rating scheme that is amenable to empirical performance analysis. this framework has been applied to the problem of human left ventricular performance evaluation from image sequences  and thus the knowledge base also contains much of the current understanding of left ventricular dynamics. this paper describes some aspects of this application in detail and presents a complete analytic of a typical image sequence  emphasizing comparisons between human and computer analysis. additional justification of the adequacy of the framework has been obtained using empirical studies of the hypothesis rating scheme. 
introduction 
         the problems of recovering three dimensional structure of moving objects from an image sequence along with the coi responding translational and rotational parameters  and of interpreting  apparent  motions  have received a substantial amount of attention in the recent past     and . uur approach is complementary to these in that we address the questions of 'in what context is this motion information useful and in what form  is it useful  and how can a computer system abstract the motion summary from the large amount of quantitative data  . many applications for motion analysis are described in   and include outdoor scenes  clinical imagery  and satellite and air born imagery. in particular  two and three-dimensional imagery of the dynamic left ventricle  lv  are becoming increasing popular and useful as clinical aidb to diagnosis of disorders of the heart. the left ventricle is perhaps the most important component of our heart since it supplies blood to the body. yet  its analysis is performed mostly by human observation of its imagery with little or no computer assistance  even though the motions exhibited by the lv are more complex than the human visual system can objectively and consistently analyse. 
         this  real world  application u rich with temporal concepts and relationships and motivated our research into time-varying event understanding. 
         our system  called alvkn  is a knowledgebased expert system for human left ventricular performance assessment. input is an image sequence obtained by cineradiography of the human left ventricle however  the methodology is applicable to other forms of dynamic cardiac imagery as well. the goal of the alven system is two-fold: to experiment with and study motion understanding methodologies in the context of a rich temporal domain; and  to consistently and objectively evaluate the performance of the left ventricle and in doing so. compile and refine the relevant cardiology knowledge  with the intent of providing both a clinical and research tool for cardiologists. 
         we will briefly describe the interesting features of our representation formalism and recognition control structure  and then give details about a particular analysis of a lfft ventricular film. 
a 	formalism 	for 	representing 	timevarying 	events 
         in two quite comprehensive collections of current time-varying imagery research.     the issue of representation of t.prnpor l information  particularly for motion  seems quite neglected. yet. it is clearly an important issue  especially for a motion understanding framework such as ours. 
         the main concern of our representational formalism is how temporal concepts are to be represented and organized into a knowledge base  kr  the intent is to provide a formalism for representing general temporal concepts* such that problem-specific ones  in our case  left ventricular motions  can be represented in terms of the; general concepts-. furthermore  the form of the kb must be such that it can be used by an appropriate control structure to guide recognition of the problemspecific concepts stored in it. there are several types of temporal concepts that we are concerned with: 
a  event start and end states; 
b  rates of change during an event; 
c  form of the changes during the event: 
d  changes of relationships of the subject of the 
event with respect to other events or objects; 
c  temporal constraints between events 
         in addition to providing a coherent scheme for representing such concepts  the formalism must take several other constraints into account: 
　　　a  the data involved often have a  fuzzy  quali-ty. in real world domains  there are ranges of acceptable values to contend with  as opposed to single correct values  as well as overlapping ranges of acceptable values between conflicting concepts. this is particularly important for events whose normal time intervals may be overlapping and which exhibit a temporal precedence relationship  event a must precede event b  but their temporal boundary is fuzzy . 
　　　b  the representation must have a strong descriptive basis with qualitative concepts related to quantitative ones  that is  there must be a  bridge  between descriptive and numerical concepts. 
　　　c  the formalism must be capable of represent-
ing concepts at different levels of abstraction  depending on the level of expertise of the person who enters the knowledge. both types of descriptions must be handled because there are cases where only coarse descriptions are available that must be integrated with more detailed descriptions. 
           finally  an investigation into appropriate reognition-biased knowledge structuring primitives is required for the construction of the knowledge base. 
entities 	of 	the 	representation 
           the basic entities of the representation are packages of information called frames and are used to model abstract temporal concepts such as contract or expand  and abstract object concepts such as heart or lv. each frame may have an associated description of its internal structure that defines the semantic components of the concept that the frame represents. for temporal concepts  the internal structure of a frame defines the semantic components of the event  such as rate or duration. on the other band  object concept frames have an internal structure that defines their physical parts and the properties possessed by them. the internal structure of a frame is defined by slots  each of which has a name and an associated type. the type relates the slot to other frames that specify the kind of tokens that can fill  be bound to  it. 
           slots may have associated information that specifies a default value  constraints that have to be satisfied by its values  and exceptions that are to be raised when these constraints are not satisfied  thus driving the recognition process. exceptions are instances of the exception type frame and contain all relevant information required by the recognition mechanism to characterize the matching failure  and to assist in determining which alternate hypotheses may be appropriate. 
           our representation is closely linked with the psn formalism  and the concepts of frames and organizational primitives are borrowed from there. two primitive relationships are used to organize frames into a knowledge base with different levels of abstraction the part-of relationship relates a frame to its parts  which are the types of its slots. clearly  recognition of an instance of a frame makes heavy use of the part-of hierarchy in the recognition of its parts. this relationship is a tool useful for controlling the level of detail in a frame  and for providing a bridge between quantitative and qualitative descriptions. for example  at a coarse level of detail  a concept such as contract is appropriate while at a much finer level  the motions of the individual components that taken together make up the contraction could be found. 
           the other primitive relationship used to organize frames is called the is-a relationship. it is intended to capture the notion of generalization or classes and sub-classes. the use of is-a economizes on frame size  through inheritance of properties   and provides a mechanism for imposing more global constraints on specific concepts. 
           our representation scheme is clearly biased towards recognition. perhaps the most important representational feature for the purposes of recognition is the similarity link . these links relate frames that  are  in some sense  similar  and are used to handle situations where one or more matching exceptions have been raised. frames that have an active similarity link between them are assumed to be mutually exclusive. the information associated with a similarity link is stored inside a generic frame. the link remains dormant  i.e.  the source frame and the specified destination frame are not connected in any way  until the recognition process deems the connection necessary. 
           each similarity link carries two types of information  in addition to its source frame and destination frame s  : 
　　　a  a condition which determines whether the raised exceptions can indeed be handled by the link; and 
　　　b  binding 	information 	that 	indicates 	how 
the values of the slots in the source frame are related to those in the destination frame. 
           the condition is made up of two components  a similarity expression and a difference expression. the similarity expression contains the necessary conditions which the two linked frames must share in order for the similarity link to be activated  i.e.  the  similarities  . since only one of the frames  the source frame  is active when this condition is evaluated  the predicates describe prerequisite components of the destination frame that must also be possessed by the source frame. the difference expression is a list of exceptions which may be raised during matching of the source frame. each of the list's elements has an associated time interval that specifies when each exception should occur if all of them are observed in the image sequence. in effect  such an expression indicates the time course of the matching failures in the source frame context  that indicate that the destination frame's context would be more relevant  i.e.  the  time sequence of differences  . thus  the similarity links point to alternate frames potentially viable when exceptions are raised. 
temporal 	concepts 
           the temporal concepts of interest for our purposes are those describing two-dimensional spatial changes. however  the representation formalism is not restricted to only these and  we believe  is extendable to the three-dimensional case as well. in order to adequately represent motion concepts  certain semantic components must be included. miller  has done a very good analysis of the semantic components for a large class of english motion verbs. using miller's work as a foundation  badler  refined these concepts  gave detailed definitions of the directionals  and outlined a framework within which recognition can be done. the work presented here is strongly based on these research efforts. miller's semantic components include changes of location  the reflexive-objective distinction  direction of motion  changes of physicai properties of an object  changes of motion  rate of motion and others. our representation can handle these  but currently does not deal with causality. 
           motion frames  once defined  are organized into a kb using the is-a. part-of and similarity relationships. motions are divided into two main subclasses - simple and aggregate motions. the simple ones are  pure  motions - strict contraction  strict upwards motion  strict lengthening  etc. motions which are combinations of these simple motions  are classified under the class of aggregate motions. this specialization uses the is-a relationship. the aggregation of several simple and/or other aggregate motions into an aggregate sub-class is accomplished via the part-of relationship. motions which cannot coexist for the same object during the same time interval are represented by including similarity links in their definitional frames. the activation or use of any of these three relationships is determined during processing by the control structure. details of the frame definitions for motion classes as well as the organization of motion classes can be found in . 
the 	recognition 	scheme 
overview 
           the paradigms of competition and cooperation among hypotheses and hypothesize-andtest form the basis of our recognition control structure. the key feature of the control structure is that it is driven by the organization of the knowledge base  that is  by the primitive relations between knowledge units. activation of hypotheses proceeds along the is-a  part-of and similarity relationships in a constrained manner. 
           hypotheses are ranked on the basis of certainty factors. each hypothesis  when activated  receives an initial certainty factor equal to that of the hypothesis that activates it. a modified relaxation labelling process  rlp   is then used to update the certainty factors. the relaxation process is based on conceptual adjacency that specifies which hypotheses are competitors and which ones are complementary and in what respect. the compatibilities between hypotheses that are necessary for the rlp are derived in a dynamic fashion  depending on which conceptual adjacencies are present between hypotheses that are active during the course of the input image sequence. the best hypotheses  highest ranked  are used to derive the expectations for the next image. 
           a scheme similar to  but not as sophisticated as   is proposed for the vision aspects of processing  that is  the use of expectations to guide the search for objects in the image and determine their correspondencies to the previous image. note that medical researchers have already proposed successful solutions for locating the features in our particular type of imagery . changes are described in terms of location changes of points  length changes of axes and perimeters  area changes and shape changes. these four primitive kineses provide an intermediate representation for relating quantitative changes to qualitative ones. 
           this low level data drives the activation of hypotheses that attempt to describe the exhibited motions. the starting set of hypotheses for each object in the first image contains only one hypothesis the no motion hypothesis. the kineses for a particular object are matched against the hypothesized motions  and matching failures between expected and actual kineses are recorded. these failures are represented in terms of exception frames which contain any information necessary so that proper selection can be made of alternate hypotheses. this selection is made via the similarity links which are present in the frame of which an active hypothesis may be an instance. the activation of more specialized hypotheses proceeds along the is-a axes in the kb. selection of an appropriate is-a child frame depends on the matching success of a frame which airframes have as one of their specializations - the no specialization frame. this frame inherits all the properties of its is-a father and adds new constraints to its definition  so that if it succeeds in matching  it excludes all other specializations of its is-a father. it also contains a set. of similarity links relating it via possible exceptions to the other specializations of its is-a father. in this way  if it fails the matching process  other specializations are activated. it also allows the system to identify when there are no frames in the kb that are appropriate for describing the exhibited motion. finally  aggregate hypothesis frames are activated on the success of a component vin the corresponding part-of link. in other words  the is-a relationship is a mechanism by which the frames along o particular  path  in the network are activated  each one being a specialization  generalization  of another frame on the path  the part-of relationship allows a breadth-first search for frames corresponding to aggregations of frames perhaps on several different is-a paths  and similarity links provide a mechanism for selectively adding the frames of other is-a paths into the active hypothesis net. 
           let us  for a moment  compare this with the change of attention mechanisms in two other large application systems hearsay-i1  and internist-ii . in hearsay-ii. knowledge sources are activated whenever they see their prerequisite data on the blackboard  i.e.  the activation of knowledge sources is data-driven. in internist-ii. hypotheses are also generated from the data. signs and symptoms are input to the system and the appropriate hypotheses are activated. therefore  data is continually being added as a result of questions asked by the system  so that new hypotheses are introduced throughout the diagnostic process. our scheme tor adding hypotheses differs in that it takes advantage of both successes and failures in order to determine which alternates are viable. the remainder of this section will concentrate on some of the more interesting features of the control structure. a complete description of the control structure can be found in 
. 
           our system maintains a set of active hypotheses throughout the recognition process. activation of a hypothesis involves activation of its is-a ancestors  via the is-a hierarchy  and of its components  via the part-of hierarchy . active hypotheses are organized by their  conceptual adjacency : the semantic inter-hypothesis relationships that are active at any time instant  thus conceptual adjacencies are dynamic. this may he likened to the  structural adjacency  of hearsay-1  which is based on immediate adjacency in the and/or tree of hypotheses. these relationships correspond to the features of the representation - is-a  part-of  simi-

larity  and temporal precedence. 
         an object's set of possible hypotheses consists of active hypotheses which define motion classes for that object during a common time interval. hypotheses for an object's parts are considered as part of the set for that particular part. in this way  since hypotheses are organized by object  there can be no overlapping sets of hypotheses - no one hypothesis can be a member of more than one set. there is no restriction  however  on the part-of relations between sets of hypotheses. 
         the mechanism for the addition of a hypothesis via an activated similarity link requires elaboration. a similarity link in hypothesis h is activated between hypotheses h and h  when: 
       the similarity expression is satisfied  i.e.  all properties of h' which must be true before h* can be activated must have been instantiated; and  
       at least one of the exceptions in the difference expression has been instantiated. it is not necessnry that this be the first one in the time course expression. noise effects may mask it. one must realize  however  that noise or extraneous information may also erroneously trigger the similarity. 
         when frame h* is activated by h as its competitor  the slots of h' must be filled up to the time instant of activation. it will be true  in many cases  that some of the slots of h will be identical in content to those of h' these are transferred through the binding expression in the similarity link. those that are not must be computed. 
         there are several additional considerations that arise when determining similarities between hypotheses: 
       when a particular exception cannot be handled by the local similarity links  the links of its is-a ancestors are checked. 
       since activation of a frame automatically ac-tivates its is-a ancestors  transfer of parts between the two frames* is-a ancestors may be accomplished by the binding expressions of the similarity links  if present  between those frames. 
       there is also a need to propagate similarities upwards along the part-of hierarchy  berause possible mis-matches of a motion component may require completely new contexts for the newly activated parts. this is done by automatically raising an exception in the parent hypothesis. when an exception is detected in n part a of frame b  this automatically generates an additional exception for frame b stating that frame b has failed. in this way exceptions are propagated up the part-of hierarchy. the exception carries with it a special slot  prereq part  which specifies the newly activated frame name c. the parent frame of b  that is d  can use its similarity links with the added constraint that c must be partof any newly activated destination frame of d. 
hypothesis 	rating 
         the hypotheses will be ordered by means of the certainty that the system has in them. the best candidates are determined for each object; that is  hypothesis certainty values are not compared unless the hypotheses define motions for the same object and for the same time interval. thus  each object would have a leading hypothesis set  and each part of each object would have a leading hypothesis set. it is not necessarily true that the best hypothesis for an object's part is part-of related to the best hypothesis for the object as a whole. 
　　　　　each hypothesis has a certainty factor associated with it - a number between 1  completely uncertain  and 1  completely certain . initial values are set through the conceptual adjacencies of each hypothesis when it is activated. if a hypothesis h  has n competitors  either mutually exclusive ones  through similarity links  or through the temporal precedence constraint   then each hypothesis of the competing set has an initial certainty of 1/n   cert h . if a hypothesis has no competitors  then as far as the system is concerned  it is certain that the hypothesis will be instantiated - because there is no other possibility. this is why similarity links are so crucial - matching failures would not be recorded in a hypothesis' certainty factor through the relaxation process unless they also activate a similarity link to a competing frame. the reason for this is that certainty factors are normalized over the set of competing hypotheses. this has necessitated the inclusion of control hypotheses: hypotheses that monitor each sot of competing hypotheses. they are frames in the same sense as described above  but their matching constraints succeed if no hypothesis in the competing set succeeds matching and fail otherwise. they may be likened to the  no-edge  label in edge finding applications of rlp's. and  in direct analogy  are frames of type no aggregate or no specialization for the relevant motion concept. hypotheses are instantiated when their certainty reaches a particular value  determined by the size of the competing set  the duration of the shortest motion to be recognized and the image sampling rate  see    . the instances are related to their definitional frames via the instance of relationship and must conform to the internal structure of the frame. hypotheses are deleted when their certainty falls to below a minimum value that is related to the instantiating certainty threshold. 
         the driving concept used for the updating of certainty factors in our system is generic good temporal continuation of hypotheses. this is direct analogy to good edge continuation for edge labels in images. global constraints extracted from the knowledge organization and local constraints embodied in the hypotheses themselves provide the basis for the determination of good temporal continuation. 
         once the initial certainties are set for a hypothesis  the certainty is updated for each subsequent image. the updating rule that we use is taken from relaxation labelling   l l   and has exactly the same form as presented in that paper. the compatibilities between hypotheses depend directly on the types of conceptual adjacencies that hypotheses exhibit. the weighting factor assigned to each contributing hypothesis depends on the number of active adjacent hypotheses and their types. 
         the major change from the standard rlp described by zucker is that we do not iterate until certainty factors converge to stable values. rather  certainties are updated using only one application of the rule. in this way  each update corresponds to an analyzed image in the sequence. the reason for this change requires a clear understanding of what the rlp does. 
         for the purposes of this argument  let us assume that there are three competing hypotheses. the initial assignment of certainty factors place the starting point of the rlp at some point  say a  on the 
1 

plane formed by the certainty factor vectors fl.o.oj  those that have had corrective surgery  coronary by 1 1   }1  lj. the plane is as it is because the sum pass or valve prosthesis . the goal is to determine of the certainty factors must remain at one; other- how normal their post-operative function is in order wise  the process is not guaranteed to converge. now to appraise the effectiveness of surgery. for each lv  suppose that after the first inter-image description is during corrective surgery  1 tiny tantalum helixes obtained  from point a. the rlp. using good temporal  markers  are implanted into the left ventricular continuity criteria takes the certainty factor vector wall  all roughly in the same plane. in addition  two through some path to a final convergent labelling clips are attached to the aorta as points of reference. after several iterations of the updating rule. why is after surgery  follow-up examination involves relativethis undesirable  because of the nature of the rlp  ly simple cineradiography figure 1 displays the mothe system could never move away from this final tion patterns for one such lv  both the inward  la  stable state  and therefore after the first pair of im- and the outward  lb  motions  with all features of inages  the certainty factors could not change. terest labelled. the marker positions appear as dots. 
         if only one application of the updating rule the left ventricle is standardly divided into three segis used between images  the effect is that the system ments  the anterior segment is made up of markers moves along a short vector tangent to the path that it 1. 1  1. and 1; the apical segment is made up of markwould have taken if many iterations were done. two ers 1. 1  and 1: and. the posterior segment is made up images are enough to determine this vector. the of markers 1. 1. 1. and 1. the aortic clips are system's focus thus has inertia during the integra- markers 1- and 1. these figure*  show the supertion of many image pairs of data from the image se- imposed marker positions for a number of consecuquence. it has inertia of location because it does not tive images  separated into the contraction and exmove very far away from its current location. this is pansion phases so that the motion paths arc more apdesirable because hypotheses and their compatibility parent even still  some marker positions are occludvalues are uncertain. the length of the vector is ed in these pictures whenever no motion was exhibitdetermined by how consistent the matchings of hy- ed. this particular case was filmed at 1 potheses and the kineses are with the constraints im- images/sec; however  more recently. 1 images/sec posed by the organizational axes of the kb. the sys- has become the norm and alven has also been tested tem also has inertia of direction because it moves on those sequences. 
along a tangent to its current path in the plane the left ventricular cycle has two main formed by the hypothesis space. the problem of ra- phases - systole  ejection  or  contraction  and diaspidly shifting foci of attention  present in other large tole  filling  or  expansion . the systolic phase is diapplication systems    1|  is therefore greatly re- vided into three parts: the isovolumic contraction duced. however  other considerations arise. what phase  the maximum ejection phase and the reduced arc the limitations of such a process in terms of how ejection phase  while diastole is divided into four many iterations  in other words  images  are needed phases: isovolumic relaxation  rapid filling  diastasis in order to determine a consistent labelling  and how and filling by atrial contraction. good data is availis such a process affected by extraneous stimuli  we able on the standard normal characteristics of tnese have conducted several experiments on the hy- events. using the textbook definitions of each of pothesis rating scheme in order to study these ques- these phases in terms of minimum start time  maxtions   . the result ; of these experiments imum end time  minimum duration  maximum durahave lead to several empirical relationships relating tion  minimum and maximum rates of contraction 
compatibility values for the conceptual adjacency 
 expansion   frames were defined for each normal 
types  maximum number of hypotheses in a single phase. each constraint of the slots in these frames 
competing set  decision certainty thresholds  signal has its associated exception: too short. too fast noise content  scene sampling rate  and shortest 
                                                               contraction. too late. too early  etc. too event in the domain to be recognized. in addition  
                                                               short/long refers to the duration of an event. too the results of one particular experiment demonstrate 
                                                               late/early refers to the time slot in which the mothat inclusion of the 1s-a hierarchy and its inherent tion was recognized with respect to the lv cycle. too generali1ation of conslraints  leads to faster event 
                                                               fast/b'low refers to the rate of area change. in adrecognition in terms of the number of image samples 
that must be analyzed. 	dition  several other abnormalites are defined. asyn-
cr1ny is the term used to denote that the onset of contraction  expansion  is not uniform for all por-
the application 	to lv dynamics 	tions of the lv. in our case  the lv is made up of 
         in surveying the rapidly growing literature three segments: anterior  apical and posterior. each on quantitative left ventricular dynamics  the prob- segment in turn is made up of several markers as in lem of consistency in terminology has become ap- figure l. asynchrony  then  applies to each segment  
parent to us as well as to other researchers . for its markers  and for the lv with respect to its seghow can we compare and evaluate the varying and ments  reflecting the part-1f hierarchy. hyp1ksometimes conflicting results of studies of ventricu- inesis is the term used to describe a significantly lar wall motion  we have attempted to define the usu- smaller extent of motion in comparison with the al terms used by cardiologists in describing lv per- object's neighbours and again is defined relative to formance  in terms of the motion semantics outlined the part-1f hierarchy. finally  abnormal directions above and using our representation formalism. a of motion with respect to the contraction  expansion  brief diversion is appropriate here in order to of the lv are described by the term dyskinesis. describe the problem domain so that the example other motion terms used in the description aro: unipresented will be easier to digest. form contraction  expansion  * ail parts are moving the image sequences that are being studied inwards  outwards  synchronously  and the superarc obtained by cineradiography of the left ventricle. part is contracting  expanding   these are examples however  the particular lvs that we are studying are of aggregation of simultaneous motions ; inwards 
1 

 uutwards  motion with respect to the dynamic centroid of an object's super-part; length changes  both shortening and lengthening  normal i.vs' perminter shortens only during contraction and lengthens only during expansion ; and. other  that have a more intuitive meaning. a beat is defined as a strict contraction immediately followed by a strict expansion  while an inverse beat is the exact opposite  these are examples of an aggregation of a sequence of motions . finally  the terms moving  translate  objective. physical-change. akea-chamge. lengthchange reflect the 1s-a hierarchy for each of their more specialized motions* also note that terms such as no motion  no translation. no length change  etc. are also recognized. reflexive verbs  although defined in alven. such as upwards. leftwards  etc. were not included in this desciption. they are not very useful for lv motion since an orientation-free description is required. the term r-ts refers to an instance of a normal rate and time slot for a particular area change. the set of such normal instances is then put together in determining whether or not the duration is proper. 
         an area for the lv is defined as the area enclosed by the outline formed by joining the markers  and an area for a segment is defined as the area enclosed by the outline formed by the markers of the segment and thu dynamic ccntroid of the lv. a length is simply the arclength of the line formed by joining the markers of the lv as a whole or of each segment. 
         alven's classification of the motions of each segment  for the lv as a whole  as well as all exceptions to normal motion generated for all markers and the complete descriptions of markers 1 and 1. makes up figure 1. the goal is to provide a summary description of the dynamics of the lv as a whole  and then  if the clinician is interested  the segments' dynamics  marker dynamics and their associated numericn  quantities may be selectively examined for the purpose of either verification of the summary description or for precisely locating reasons for an abnormal summary description. this particular example required 1 images for a single lv cycle at 1 images/sec. the radiologist reported that the marker motions indicated a hypokinetic anterior segment and normal motions otherwise. 
         the description in figure 1 uses the time units of images. wc see by the description  that alven agrees with the radiologist in that hypokinesis is reported for the contraction phase of each anterior marker for at least one time instant during the phase  as well as for the anterior segment as a whole. however  hypokinesis is just a sign of more severe problems. obviously  if a part of the lv does not contract properly  the rate of expulsion of blood is impaired. this is apparent by the exceptions too slow contraction  too short reduced ejection 
phase  the lack of an instance of the maximum ejection phase  etc. these are consistent with hypokinesis  but are more serious problems with the left 
ventricle. also  since the system has objective criteria for judging the motions  several instances of agynchrony and dyskinesis were found both at the segment and at the lv level this is rather difficult if not impossible to do by observation only. the remainder of the description gives the complete set of terms used by alven to describe the motions. 
         we conclude that alven's evaluation is consistent with that of a radiologist  but is more complete and objective. other examples that have been analyzed also support this conclusion. 
conclusions 
         we have briefly described an approach to the abstraction of time-varying concepts from a sequence of images. the system embodying this approach  called alven  has been implemented and an example of one of the left ventricular motion sequences was presented. testing thus far has shown that alven's evaluation of lv performance is consistent with the radiology reports  but is more objective and complete. alven has also been tested on arbitrary motions of moving dots and produces quite acceptable  although limited in vocabulary  descriptions of their motions in the plane of the image. we believe that the recognition strategy is unique in that the semantic relationships of the kb and time itself are integral components of the recogntion process. moreover  our recognition control structure provides an approach for reducing the effects of shifting foci during recognition and for dealing with exceptions and temporal constraints. there are several ongoing research topics being pursued using this general framework: interpretation of arrhythmias from electrocardiograms  interpretation of aortic valve function in the fetus using ultrasound signals  and the representation of causality and its recognition from image sequences. in addition  alven's knowledge is being refined and tested in order to achieve clinical acceptance for its results. 
