 
　　this paper describes the methodology to deal with the behavior of a dynamical system such as plant controllers in the framework of temporal logic. many important concepts of the dynamical system like stability or observability are represented in this framework. as a reasoning method  we present an w -graph approach which enables us to represent the dynamical behavior of a given system  and an automatic synthesis of control rules can be reduced to a simple decision procedure on the w -graph. moreover  the typical reasoning about the timedependent system such as a causal argument or a qualitative simulation can be also treated on the w -graph in the same way. 
i. introduction 
　　this paper describes a system and methodology to deal with a dynamical system in the framework of temporal logic. especially  the temporal reasoning is examined in the analysis and the synthesis of the behavior of plant controllers. 
　　there have been a lot of methods for plant system description which are widely used  such as a ladder diagram and the special programming language. however  these classical methods often seem to be insufficient to deal with the complicated plant system because they lack the means for logical reasoning. a system designer and a system analyst must fully understand the dynamical behavior of the complicated system and compare the specification with the actual design. so they require a sophisticated formal system in which a logical model of a plant controller can be constructed and the properties of the controller can be extracted from that model by logical deduction. 
　　in this paper  we pay special attention to the logical treatment for behavior of plant controllers and we choose the temporal logic as the logical basis of the methodology. because many problems of a plant controller are related to its dynamics so that they contain the time factor by nature. for instance  a system operator may require a consultation about how a system should be operated to attain some state. this problem  an automatic synthesis of controls  means the mechanical construction of the desirable sequence of actions from the system dynamics. another example is the causal argument  that is  a reasoning about how the current state has been reached. a qualitative simulation is a similar problem of the causality which is a question about how the system is going to be. these problems require to repeat the logical deduction of forward and backward chaining of the causa  relations which are extracted from the system dynamics. in order to treat these problems  we use a simple model of the temporal formula called an w -graph. a system dynamics which is represented by the temporal formula is transformed to an w -graph. the above problems are reduced into a simple decision procedure on the w -graph. 

　　
1 a. fusaoka et al. 
　　the boiler has five states e1  e1  e1  e1 and e1 which indicate the situation of the temperature $ of water as follows. 
where a and b are constants of the temperature  a   p . the boiler has an additional state h which corresponds to the state 
of fire. if h is on  then the state will transfer to the higher temperature state sometime. the boiler sets a fire if and only if it accepts a message  on  and also puts off a fire if and 
only if it accepts a message  off  from the controller. when the boiler changes its temperature state from e to e'  it sends e1 as a message to the flag of the controller. the controller changes the state of f if and only if it accepts a message from the boiler  and sends a message to the boiler. 
note that the above rule for of contains a term {of f . we call such terms  marked formulas  and we put this mark in order to express the eventuality property that f will be fulfilled in future. 
　　an w -graph is a graphical representation of the model of a temporal formula whose nodes are corresponding to formulas 
and whose edges are labeled literals  we call  handles of those edges  . in an w -graph  nodes which correspond to marked formulae are called  transitive nodes  and the other nodes ''w -nodes . we call a path of the w -graph of f  a behavior of f1 and especially the behavior passing cycles at most one time is called  a skeleton behavior of f . note that if an a;-node has a cycle  then the infinite sequence of handles on its edges can be a model of the temporal formula. an w -graph can be regarded as a finite state automaton for w -language. therefore  let f and g1 be a temporal formula and its w -graph and l f  the language accepted by the automaton corresponding to g/  then the following relations clearly hold : 
　　
a. fusaoka et al. 1 

　　
1 a. fusaoka et al. 
as for the stability and observability  we can build the w 
-graph  and controls synthesis can be done similarly. in this way  we get the following desired control rules by combining with the above control rules altogether. 

v. concluding remarks 
　　a method for description and reasoning of plant controllers is discussed in the framework of temporal logic. as a method of reasoning about a dynamical system  we present an w -graph approach. since the w -graph representation gives the inner model of the dynamical system and we can perform various kinds of reasoning on it  it appears to be more effective than usual theorem proving methods such as natural deduction or tableau method. a system which manipulates an w -graph is currently under development for practical applications. 
　　although the major concern of this paper is in the complicated plant system  the temporal framework which is developed here can be extended to the other species of dynamical systems. 

