integrating multiple knowledge representations and learning 
capabilities in an expert system: the advise system 
r. s. michalski a. b. baskin 
department of computer science 
university of illinois 
urbana  illinois 1 

a b s t r a c t 
     the advise system is an integrated set of tools for the development of and experimentation with expert systems in various specific application domains. it functions as a multi-purpose inference system that employs three knowledge representations: a rule-base  a conceptual network and a relational data base. in addition  it includes learning capabilities by incorporating the inductive learning programs gem  for learning from examples  and cluster  for constructing classifications . 
     three expert systems have been developed using advise: plant/ds  version 1 --for diagnosing soybean diseases  plant/cd-for predicting cutworm damage to corn  and baby-a consultant for the neo-natal intensive care unit. 
i i n t r o d u c t i o n 
     at present  the technology of expert systems is undergoing very rapid growth and is being applied to a wide spectrum of practical problems. current systems  however  suffer from a number of limitations that restrict their usefulness. they typically employ only one form of knowledge representation  usually a rule-base representation  davis & king  1; buchanan & duda  1 . they have no learning abilities  use only one type of inference procedure  and use only a single control strategy. our research on the advise  meta-expert  system has the goal of overcoming these limitations. some of the relevant papers to our research are by duda  hart &. sutherland  1   van melle  1  and feigenbaum  1 . 
ii major features of advise 
	the 	tools 	which 	comprise 	advise 	form 	a 
 knowledge engineer's workbench'' for developing expertsystems in particular domains  specifically  for building knowledge bases and implementing appropriate inference procedures on them. main features of advise are: 
  allows use of three different forms of knowledge/data representation  a rule-base  a conceptual network  and a relational database   
  supports different schemes for uncertainty propagation in a knowledge base  probabilistic  approximate bayesian  min/max logic  weighting evidence   
  separates control and planning during a consultation  strategic information  from more procedural information such as specific action rules  tactical information   
  supports different control strategies chosen when the knowledge base is built  utility optimization  probabilistic network traversal  forward rule chaining  backward rule chaining . 
  incorporates a number of existing tools for inductively deriving decision rules and control information from examples  and 
  is implemented in pascal and operates in a standard unix environment. 
     advise supports multiple knowledge representations because different types of information about a problem 
domain can best be expressed using different formal structures. for instance  situation-action pairs can be efficiently represented as rules; interrelationships between concepts  constraints  or clues used in planning can be more suitably described in a network; a large collection of facts  e.g. patient records  can be stored and manipulated as a relational database. for similar reasons  advise supports a number of different schemes for defining aspects of the consultation process on a problem specific basis. even within a single knowledge base  it is frequently useful to mix strategies. 
     another major feature of the system is that knowledge is acquired not only through the standard technique of  learning by instruction   but also through 
 learning from examples  and  learning from observation.  
     the latter two modes of learning have been implemented by modifying and adapting the inductive learning 
programs gem and cluster. the gem program generalizes examples of different concepts and creates formal logic rules for recognizing these concepts. the program is a modified version of the inductive program aqll  michalski & larson  1 . the feasibility of using this program for inductive knowledge acquisition for an expert system has been proven by its successful application in the development of an expert system for soybean pathology  michalski and chilausky  1; michalski  et al.  1 . 
     the second program  cluster  automatically constructs a classification of given entities using an approach called  conceptual clustering.  each grouping in the obtained classification corresponds to a class of entities  objects  situations  etc.  closely described by a single conjunctive concept representing a logical product of relations on selected object attributes. nodes with the same parent in the hierarchy are optimized according to some global 
 quality  criterion of classification  michalski & stepp  1 . 
     the system also includes several inferential programs that support inductive learning and deal with the selection of most relevant attributes   selection of most representative learning examples  etc.  spackman  1 . 

i i i c o m p o n e n t s o f a d v i s e 
     a functional diagram of the advise system is shown in figure 1. the system consists of four major components: a  control block and user interface  b  knowledge base  c  query block and d  knowledge acquisition block. 
r. michalski and a. baskin 1 
1. knowledge acquisition mode  k-mode  
     the knowledge acquisition mode coordinates both the encoding of expert derived rules in a knowledge base and the interactive invocation of the separate induction programs. this mode includes modules for defining expert rules  manual refinement of rules  induction of rules from examples  and automated correction and improvement of the rules. the system also provides facilities for testing rules in interactive mode on individual cases  as well as in batch mode on a collection of cases. 
1. explanation mode  lvmode  
     the explanation mode paraphrases decision rules  enables a user to understand the organization and functioning of the system in query and knowledge acquisition modes  allows simple interrogation of the contents of the knowledge base  and displays the steps in the process which led to a given advice. 
b. knowledge base 
     the knowledge base integrates three types of representation through a unified ''access protocol:  
  a network base  e.g.  conceptual network   
  a rule base  and 
  a relational data base. 
     the network base contains structures for representing domain knowledge about relationships among various conceptual units. the network organization is a form of the  logic net  formalism described in  baskin 1 . 
the rule base consists of inference rules in the form: 
	ctx 	condition 	=  	conclusion: 	a b 
where 
ctx is a logical expression defining the context in which the rule is applicable  
condition is a logical expression defining the conditions that have to be satisfied to assert the 
conclusion  
α - the strength of forward implication  from condition to conclusion   
b - the strength of backward implication  from conclusion to condition . 
     the relational data base consists of a collection of relational tables. the tables can be created  modified and retrieved through ordinary relational database operators. in addition  a variety of inferential operators can be applied to the database through the facilities of quin  query & inference  subsystem  spackman  1 . 
c. query block 
     the query block contains the programs supporting retrieval from the knowledge base. direct retrieval is supported as a relational algebra for tables and a simple infix display of rules. retrieval with inference will deductively and inductively extend the knowledge base in response to a user query' 

1 r. michalski and a. baskin 
d. 	knowledge acquisition block 
　　　the system supports knowledge acquisition for networks  tables  and rules. direct encoding is supported by input of tables or rules  ''learning by being told   and knowledge acquisition through induction is supported by linkage to learning programs. additional details about the query and knowledge acquisition blocks can be found in  michalski  et. al.  1 . 
	iv 	summary 
     the major modules of the advise system have been implemented in the pascal language  approximately 
1 lines of code  for the vax 1 computer under berkeley-unix operating system. the knowledge base management component of the system is well developed and has been used extensively. the query block is partially complete and is best developed for the relational database. knowledge acquisition currently supports direct representation of information supplied by a human expert as well as induction of classifications and rules. the explanation mode is least developed and currently provides little more than an english paraphrase of rules and links within the network. 
　　　the system has already been applied for the development of three expert systems: plant/ds  v.1   plant/dc  and baby. plant/ds  v.1  provides advice on the diagnosis of common soybean diseases in illinois. plant/dc predicts damage to corn due to black cutworms. its operation is based on a close cooperation  surface  model utilizing a rule base  and a  deep  model simulating the black cutworm corn development  boulanger  1 . the system called baby provides expert advice on monitor and laboratory data for the neonatal intensive care unit. the system reasons from the available data toward speci1c pathologic states using a bayesian update scheme  rodewald  1 . 
acknowledgements 
　　　the research described here has been supported in part by the office of naval research  grant no. n1-k-1 and in part by the national science foundation  grant no. mcs 1. the authors thank a. boulanger  m. seyler  l. rodewald  k. spackman  c. uhrik and r. reinke for their contribution to the development of advise  its first experimental applications and comments on this paper. 
