 
     the formal expression of pro positional attitudes  especially when nested  iterated   is an important problem for ai. an interesting first-order extensional logical system for such expression has been proposed by creary. in this system concepts  and concepts of concepts  etc.  are made explicit. the system includes  concept functions   which are special functions which act on and deliver concepts. we point out a difficulty with these functions. a alternative system is proposed  in which there is a conceptforming function corresponding roughly to complexconcept formers  especially the phrase  the proposition that   implicit in english sentences. the resulting system has a more primitive and natural notional base than creary's has. we avoid problems with quantification inside propositions which are the objects of propositional attitudes by recasting quantified expressions into variable-free form by means of certain functions   combinators  . 
	i 	introduction 
     in the past few years ai research has included some attacks on the important problem of representing beliefs  concepts  intensions  referential opacity  and the like  see e.g.  brachman  1    hofstadter et al  1    konolige  
1    maida and shapiro  1    mccarthy  1    moore  1    shapiro  1    weyrauch  1  1  . we propose an alternative to creary's system as described in  creary  1   which we shall call  system c  ; that system is an extension of a system of  mccarthy  1  and is loosely based on the work of frege  geach and black  1 . like system c  our own system keeps to first-order extensional logic  makes concepts explicit  has an infinite hierarchy of orders of concepts  concepts of concepts  concepts of concepts of concepts  etc. *  and takes propositions to be a sort of concept. with creary  we regard concepts as abstractions from mental entities. we claim  however  that a basic feature in system c - concept functions - is not well conceived. an example of a concept function is a function which takes a concept of a man and delivers a concept of the man's wife; another concept function might deliver the proposition that the man's wife is french. concept functions in  creary  1  are based on similar functions in mccarthy's system  mccarthy  1   and are akin to the  characterizing functions  in  church  1  1  1 . we shall claim that the use of concept functions does not allow satisfactory formalisation of nested propositional attitudes  beliefs about beliefs  beliefs about beliefs about beliefs  etc. . our system avoids concept functions by introducing a special function which takes some concepts and delivers a complex concept similar to a definite description. such definite-descriptional concepts include propositions  which are regarded as concepts whose extensions are truth-values 
 cf. 	the view of propositions in  church  1  1  1  . 
     we shall use the term  denotation  exclusively for the relationship between expressions in english or in a logical formalism and entities in an interpretation of the system of expressions. this relationship is to be carefully distinguished from the relationship which holds between a concept and its extension  which is often also called denotation . we shall say that a concept extends to its extension. thus the phrase  the concept of mary  denotes a 
     concept which extends to the person mary. 
     we do not attempt to specify how to deduce extra beliefs that a cognitive agent holds on the basis of beliefs already ascribed to it. such deductions are left to arise from particular axioms that some user of our formalism may choose to include in a theory. similarly  we do not legislate about the connections between knowledge and belief - such matters are again left to the whim of the user. 
     our work differs from that of  konolige 1  in that we avoid the casting of beliefs as expressions in some language so that statements about agents' beliefs are formalised in a metalanguage which talks about that language. the work differs from that of  konolige 1  and that of  maida and shapiro  1  by the inclusion of the abovementioned concept-constructing function and concepts of it. it differs also from  maida and shapiro  1  in not 

　　this paper describes work done in the department of computer science at indiana university. the research was supported by the national science foundation under grant mcs-1. 
although there have been objections to such hierarchies  
e.g. carnap  1|. 
insisting that items in the formalism cannot denote  extensions . the work differs from that of  moore  1  in avoiding a possible-world approach to propositional attitudes. 

	i i 	i n f o r m a l 	c o n s i d e r a t i o n s 
a. 	a problem with 	concept functions 
     consider the sentences   la   mary is french and 
  lb   	m i k e believes that mary is french. 
in system c these could be formalised as french mary  and believe mike  french  mary  . here mary and french have as their intended interpretations a particular person mary and the predicate of being french  whereas mary and french have as their intended interpretations a certain concept of mary and a  whether-french-conceptrof  function whose value on a concept of a person is the propositional concept of that person being french.* we call such a function a concept function. the term french mary  denotes the proposition  a type of concept  that mary is french. let us paraphrase sentence     l b     as 
  1   	m i k e believes the proposition that mary is french. 
we can view the conceptrfunction technique in system c as taking the phrase  the proposition that mary is french  as denoting the same proposition that  the whether-frenchconceptrof the concept of mary  denotes. thus 
  lb  /  1   is equivalent  	to 
  1   m i k e believes the whether-french-concept-of the concept of mary. 
we have no objection to the equivalence of   1   and   1  . the trouble arises when we go to second-order propositional attitudes  such as in the sentence 
  1   	pat believes that 
m i k e believes that mary is french. 
we take this to be merely an abbreviation for 
  1   pat believes  the proposition  that 
m i k e believes the proposition that mary is french. 
the point is that the equivalence of   1   and   1   does not sanction an equivalence of   1   with 
  1   pat believes  the proposition  that m i k e believes the whether-french-concept-of the concept of mary because the outer  the proposition that  sets up an opaque 
     * it appears that the symbol mary is to be interpreted as some sort of special   standard  concept of the person mary  but the correctness of this appearance is not crucial to the discussion. 
     '' this equivalence results from ordinary substitution of codenoting expressions in a transparent context: noting that the  believe  in both   1   and   1   is extensional with respect to its object ~ it is the phrase  the proposition that  which creates an opaque context. 
j. barnden 1 
context. deducing   1   from   1   is precisely the same mistake as deducing  pat believes  the proposition  that mike is married to the mother of mary  from  pat believes  the proposition  that mike is married to the eldest sister of jim  on the basis of an equivalence between  mike is married to the mother of mary  and  mike is married to the eldest sister of j i m    this equivalence iteslf resulting validly from an identification of mary's mother and jim's eldest sister . now system c provides a formula which formalises   1    namely 
  1   	believe pat  believe mike  french$ mary$    
where mary$ and french$ are respectively an individual constant and a concept-function symbol bearing much the same relationship to mary and french as these do to mary and french. the machinery of system c does not allow formulae which are any closer to   1   than   1   is. unfortunately    1  /  1   is precisely the sort of sentence we would like to be able to formalise  and which system c was set up to formalise. 
b. 	m a k i n g proposition- construction explicit 
     our main claim is that the satisfactory formalisation of  1   /  1   requires explicit symbols to play the proposition-constructing role of the phrase   the proposition  that . our first step is to impose a further step of paraphrase:   1   is now regarded as a paraphrase of 
  1   m i k e believes the proposition-constructed-from: 
the concept of being french  and the concept of mary. 
here  the proposition-constructed-from  is like a twoplace function. we then partially paraphrase   1   as 
  1   	pat believes the proposition that: 
m i k e believes the proposition-constructed-from: 
the concept of being french  and the concept of mary. 
the point is that the function  the proposition constructed f r o m   itself now enters explicitly into pat's belief  in just the way that the two-place function  the children o f   enters explicitly into pat's belief in 
  1   	pat believes that 
m i k e is a member of the children of jack and jill. 
note that the phrase  the proposition-constructed-from  is extensional  transparent  in both its arguments. 
c. 	definite-descriptional concepts 
consider now 
    h     m i k e believes that the wife of j i m is french. 
using our paraphrases  one subsidiary meaning of this is 

1 j. barnden 
rendered as 
  1   mike believes the proposition-constructed-from: the concept of being french  and the concept of x 
where x stands for the person who happens to be jim's wife.   1   is a reading of   h   in which the characterization of that person as jim's wife does not enter into mike's belief; if jim's wife is mary then   1   is equivalent to  mike believes that mary is french . to capture the more direct meaning of   1    in which the wife characterization does enter into mike's belief  we propose 
  1   mike believes the proposition-constructed-from: 
the concept of being french  and  the concept-constructed-from: the concept of the wife function  and the concept of jim  
where the parentheses are used to effect correct grouping. we have no general right to deduce from   1   that mike believes the proposition constructed from the concept of being french and the concept of mary. the concept c referred to by the parenthesized expression in   1   is  in general  a different one from the standard concept of mary. we call c a  definite-descriptional concept . the observation now is that the concept  i.e. the proposition  that mike believes in   1   is also a definite-descriptional concept. we may regard  the proposition-constructed-from  as just a convenient rewriting of  the concept-constructed-from  in certain contexts. 
d. 	standard concepts and absoluteness 
     for simplicity  we have been assuming and shall continue to assume that for every individual  such as mary  there is a special concept extending to that individual and which is deemed to be the  standard  concept of the individual. a further simplifying assumption is that concepts are absolute  i.e. not relative to the cognitive agents which entertain them. thus  for a given individual x  each cognitive agent has the same standard concept of x  and the function  the concept constructed from  is not parametrized by a particular cognitive agent. it is emphasized that both absoluteness and the postulation of standard concepts could be abandoned from our considerations  at the price of making the presentation of the formalism in section iii more difficult. 
     a most important point is that it is possible for a standard concept to be a definite-descriptional concept. for instance  the  standard  concept of mary might actually be the definite-descriptional concept constructed from the concept of the wife function and the concept of jim. in that case    1   would be equivalent to   1   with 'x' replaced by 'mary'. we do not develop such possibilities in this paper. they are not a result of our particular approach - similar things could be done in system c. 
consider now 
  1   mike holds-in-mind the concept of mary 
 as a paraphrase of  mike thinks about mary  . we wonder how we would approach the formalisation of  the most direct meaning of  
  1   pat believes that 
mike holds-in-mind the concept of mary. 
we propose that this should be paraphrased as 
  1   pat believes the-concept-constructed-from: 
the concept of holds-in-mind  the concept of mike  and 
 the concept constructed from: the concept of the-concept-of  and the concept of mary  
 where  the concept of  is short for  the standard concept of  . this is exactly parallel to paraphrasing 
  1a   pat believes that 
mike is-married-to the mother of mary 
as 
  1a   pat believes the-concept-constructed-from: 
the concept of is-married-to  the concept of mike  and 
 the concept constructed from: the concept of the-mother-of  and the concept of mary . 
	i l l 	f o r m a l i s a t i o n 
a. preliminaries 
　　　we replace all functions and predicates by individual constants wife  french  $  etc. which we call  functions  or  functional individuals  for convenience. we introduce the genuine function α  read  apply    so that α  wife  jim  and α plus  1  1  replace wife jim  and plus l  1  respectively. the atomic formulae french  john  and meet mike  pat  are replaced by the terms α  french  john and α  meet  mike  pat . such terms denote truth values  and the truth values true and false are required to be in any interpretation of a theory in our logic. 
i 
b. construction of complex concepts 
　　　in any intended interpretation of a theory in our formalism we assume there exists the concept-forming functional individuals 'the-  standard-  -concept-of and 'theconcept-constructed-from'. these are denoted by the indi-
     * technically  we need different functions a of different arities n. also  our logic should be sorted  but for brevity we do not discuss this matter. 

vidual constants $ and $ respectively. we shall often abbreviate $ x   which is already an abbreviation  to $x when x is a single symbol. thus a $  wife and α $  $  can be abbreviated to $wife and $$.  the $ is inspired by creary's notation. the ability to  apply   functions  to themselves is commented on later.  
     let us look at some examples. we take hold-inmind mike  $ mary   to denote true iff mike thinks about mary  using the standard concept of her . if this term and the term equal  mary  wife jim   denote true then we can deduce that hold-in-mind mike  $ wife jim    denotes true. on the other hand 

denotes true iff mike thinks about {the wife of jim} . here we use the as subscript  meaning  as such'1  to indicate that the woman concerned is conceived of as the wife of jim by mike. this term replaces system c's hold-inmind mike  wife jim   where wife denotes a concept function and jim denotes a  standard  concept of jim. the term 

denotes true iff mike thinks about {the wife of the father of jim} 	.  note here that we are using the $x abbreviation for $ x .  the term hold-in-mind mike  
denotes true iff mike thinks about {the wife of u}as  where u is the father of jim. the formula is equivalent to the one derived by replacing father jim  by bill  if indeed we have that equal  bill  father jim   denotes true. 
     we have been using hold-in-mind for illustrative purposes. to get back to the question of belief  the term believe pat  
denotes true iff pat believes that mike is married to jane  where the standard concepts of being married to  mike and jane are used in that belief . the term believe pat  
denotes true iff pat believes that mike is married to the mother of jim  where now that lady is characterized in pat's belief as the mother of jim. 
     the term believe mike  
denotes true iff mike believes that jim's telephone number is 1. the denotation of this term is independent of that of believe mike  
j. barnden 1 
c. 	iterated propositional attitudes 
     notice the  lifting  transformation applied to is-married-to mike  mother jim   to get the outer  term in believe  pat  
this transformation proceeds as follows:  i  remove all square-bracket abbreviation  by replacing every expression of form f ...  by α f ... ;  ii  replace each individual constant x by $x; and  iii  replace each expression of form α ...  by  it is therefore in accord with previous examples to lift       to form   1   in: 
  1   hold-in-mind mike  $ mary l 
  1   believe pat  
  1   denotes true iff pat believes the proposition that mike thinks about mary  where mike is supposed by pat to use her standard concept. similarly  the term 
  1   believe pat  

denotes true iff pat believes that mike thinks about the wife of jim  where mike is supposed by pat to use the 
characterization of her as the wife of jim.   1   is derived from hold-in-mind mike   by  lifting .   1   can be read as  pat believes that: {mike holds-min nd the-conceptrconstructed-from the concept of wife-of and the concept of jim}as . 
　　the reader is invited to try writing a formula for a third-order propositional attitude   george believes that pat believes that mike believes that ....  . we get terms whose length increases exponentially with number of lifting steps. however  if we introduce for each constant symbol x the abbreviations 	etc.  where: stands for the lifted version of $ x   i.e. stands 	for 	the 	lifted 	version 	of 	 i.e. 
; and so on  then we get a 
approximately linear increase in the size of terms. 
     we introduce a special functional individual  ext-of  which delivers the extension of a concept. so  for instance  denotes mary  and ext-of $ wife jim    and 
$jim   both denote jim's wife. the term french  smary   denotes whatever truth-value french mary  denotes. we assume that there are axiom schemata* 

and 
       to say that these terms are axiom schemata is to say that for an interpretation of a theory in our logical system to be a model it must make these terms denote true. also  we assume that equal is always interpreted in a special way and that suitable axioms for it are provided. 

1 j. barnden 

	j. barnden 	1 


1 j. barnden 
mulae of system c do  in that * often corresponds to the phrase  the proposition that'1 and therefore allows that phrase itself to be an explicit component of a conceptual 
characterization at a higher intensional level. 
	a 	number 	of 	semantic-network 	researchers 	 e.g. 
 brachman  1    shapiro  1    maida and shapiro  1   have realized the importance of basing their formalisms on intensions  concepts  descriptions  propositions  ...  rather than on  extensions . now  semantic network formalisms are very similar to  and often just reexpressions of  logical systems. if our analyses in this paper are correct  therefore  we must suspect that existing semantic network formalisms need some modification  in order to bring in entities corresponding to $ and $. 
　　　it is important to note that  although we have called $ a concept constructor  the concepts which are constructed are not necessarily to be regarded as expressions or something similar to expressions.  in fact  we make no claim about the particular psychological nature of constructed concepts. all we say is that constructed concepts are transparently determined by the concepts they are constructed from.  it would be possible in a theory in our formalism to have two $ ...  terms denoting the same concept even though the arguments in the terms denote different concepts. for instance  it would be possible to have 
$$odd  $x  	denoting 	the 	same 	concept 	as 
$ $not  $ $even  $x   for every numerical term x. it is up to individual users of the formalism to decide whether such identities are appropriate. similar points apply to creary's formalism  but it is not clear whether he intends to allow such identities. 
　　　there is no claim that the system as sketched here is the last word on the issues dealt with. for instance  there is the question of whether it is plausible that beliefs should be couched in terms of the concepts denoted by the $w* symbols  though we feel that our treatment of quantification is at least as plausible as those of creary and mccarthy . note that a person's entertaining the concept denoted by a * $w*  ...  term does not imply that the person actually entertains the concepts denoted by the arguments to the * ...  term  in particular the $b term. 
　　　a fuller paper which discusses in more detail the general and technical issues raised by our considerations in this report is in preparation. 
a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s 
　　　1 should like to thank mitchell wand for useful comments on an initial draft of the paper. i am indebted to robert film an  who was the original director of the grant which supported this research. 
