 procedure  not necessarily executable  linking the symbolic expression to the physical world through the  computational / inferential  operations of a physical interpreter operating on a combination of internal representations and sensory/motor connections to the world. moreover  i argued that this meaning specification  the meaning function  is distinct from the procedures that one ordinarily uses to conclude the truth of a description in everyday situations  the recognition functions . 
　　i w i l l assume here that both meaning and recognition functions can be represented by collections of rules of the form  p implies q''  provided that a distinction is maintained by the system between those rules that it applies as part of the meaning   i . e .    meaning postulates   and other implications between symbols  which i w i l l refer to as hypotheses . 
　　if a system is to try to develop a model of the world in which it operates  then it needs to record rules of the form  p implies qn where  in the simplest case  p denotes some observable attribute of the world and q denotes some other observable attribute. the u t i l i t y of such a rule lies in the 
　　i w i l l use the word  symbol  here as a generic for the entire class of symbolic expressions used by the system  including designating expressions  predicates  propositions  etc. 
ability to conclude q without actually perceiving i t . let us call p a sensory symbol  for a system  if there are processes in the world that  physically  cause the system to conclude p or to conclude not p. i w i l l take the physical processes which operate in this way as determining the meanings of such sensory symbols. 
　　a system with no sensory symbols could not be expected to acquire a model of the world except through the intervention of an external agent   i . e .   a programmer . in this case the meanings of its symbols would reside solely in the head of the programmer  and the system would be open to different interpretations by different external observers  however consistent i t s internal operations were with some particular interpretation. 
　　consider a system that has both sensory and nonsensory symbols and that hypothesizes rules of the form  p implies q  under some circumstances. a validated hypothesis  p implies q  is useful to the extent that one knows under what conditions to invoke the hypothesis   i . e .   one knows the meaning of p  and one knows what claims are being made thereby   i . e .   one knows the meaning of q . moreover  in order to determine the validity of the hypothesis  one needs to be able to determine the truth and f a l s i t y of p and q in most circumstances. 
　　suppose that this system encounters a violation to a pair of rules  p implies q  and  q implies r  by perceiving that p is true and r is not. if q is a sensory symbol and i t s truth can be determined by perception in the situation in question  then the appropriate response is simple - either the  p implies q  rule or the  q implies r  rule should be modified  depending on whether q is false or true. if q is not a sensory symbol  the system needs some criterion to decide which of the two rules to modify. since one rule implies q is true  while the other implies it is false  what the symbol q means  either to the system or to an external agent  becomes important at this point in deciding what to give up. 
　　to claim that the symbols in a machine have meaning is to claim that above and beyond the rules and procedures that lead them to be deduced by the system  there is some further claim about the state of the world that is being made by virtue of such a deduction. that i s   regardless of one's reasons for believing p  there is some claim about the world that p makes  which may be either true or 
1 	a. sloman et al. 
false. without such a distinction  a system would be unable to formulate a predictive model of i t s world  and could at best keep a record of i t s experiences; no deduction that it made could ever claim anything more than that it had made the deduction. 
　　one of the main benefits from having a notion of the claim made about the world by a symbol   i . e .   i t s meaning  is that if one encounters a sequence of deductions from some sensory symbol p to some sensory symbol q  while perceiving that p is true and q is false  then one can attempt to localize the erroneous rule by examining the truth of the intermediate symbols involved in the deduction. in particular if some intermediate symbol s is determined to be true  by virtue of i t s meaning  then the deduction leading from p to s may be l e f t intact and attention directed to finding the error in the deduction from s to q  and conversely if s is determined to be false . 
　　without some such criterion for localizing the error  any one of the intermediate rules could be changed to eliminate the inconsistency in the momentary situation  but with l i t t l e confidence of the effect on other hypotheses  perhaps already strongly verified . that i s   it would be inappropriate to change the meaning rules  and thereby the meaning  of any of the symbols already involved in partially verified hypotheses  thereby changing the claim made by those hypotheses and either invalidating them or weakening their previous validation. 
　　one can imagine situations in which the minimal change to an entire belief system in order to bring it into line with some body of observations is to make a change in the meaning of some symbol  thereby eliminating inaccuracies i n   or increasing the coverage of  existing hypotheses. however  such a change would have to come from a complex analysis of a large portion of the system's knowledge base. this would be a revolutionary rather than evolutionary modification and would not be an appropriate mechanism for performing routine  incremental modifications to knowledge. 
　　if one considers such modifications in an internal language of thought  coupled to symbols in the external vocabulary by connections that can themselves be learned and modified  then any such revolutionary change could also be effected with no changes in the meanings of internal symbols by merely moving the affected hypotheses  and appropriate external symbols  to new  internal  symbols with the desired meanings rather than changing the meanings of the old ones. thus  in the internal language there appears to be no need to ever change the meaning of a symbol. 
　　an obvious question  at this point  is whether an analysis along the above lines can apply to natural kind terms as well as to terms with obvious necessary and sufficient conditions. i believe that this is the case  although the story now becomes a l i t t l e more complex. in this case  the question of interest about the meaning of a symbol has to do with what natural kind the system has got hold of when it forms a hypothesis.  in general a satisfactory account of natural kinds must allow the meaning rules to leave  gaps  in which the system has no intentions as to whether some hypothetical situation embodies an instance of a symbol or not  and must permit meanings to be extended in certain circumstances by narrowing the gap - see  for further discussion.  
　　consider the hypothesis  snakes are harmless  expressed in new england  where there are virtually no poisonous snakes. one may ask whether the meaning of the internal symbol for snakes in this case refers to only  nonpoisonous  snakes of the kind that live in new england  or to a l l kinds of snakes.  i assume that both these classes are natural kinds . the answer  i would argue  depends on the intentions of the person when the concept snake was formulated and the preservation of those intentions in the meaning rules for the symbol   i . e .   whether the scope of the meaning rules was sufficiently broad to cover a l l snakes or included enough specific characterization of the range of snakes experienced to rule out the poisonous kinds that exist elsewhere . 
　　once again  the meaning intended and encoded in the meaning rules w i l l determine the reaction to encountering an anomalous situation - in this case  whether to attach the external word ''snake'' to a new internal concept which includes poisonous snakes  or to subclassify the the internal concept and move the  snakes are harmless  hypothesis to a more specific subclass. 
　　if we take the above simplified story as the reason for maintaining a distinction between the meaning of a symbol and a mere collection of conditions that imply it or that it implies  then it follows that for symbols to have meaning to a 
　　system  there must be sensory symbols to which the nonsensory symbols are related by a distinguished set of meaning rules or some equivalent mechanism. these rules together with their interpreter and the physical processes that govern the senses determine the meanings of the system's symbols. 
　　by this account  a system that read stories and answered questions about them  based solely on the manipulation of internal representations with no experiential base  would  from i t s own perspective  be manipulating meaningless symbols. similarly a pocket calculator would be a manipulator of symbols whose meanings were externally attributed  even though i t s internal structure does f a i t h f u l l y model the intended interpretation . on the other hand  a simple robot creature with primitive perceptions can be said to have meanings for i t s symbols that are not externally imposed if i t s symbols are tied to those perceptions by some distinguished mechanism equivalent to meaning rules. 
reference 
 woods  w.a.   procedural semantics as a theory of meaning   in a. joshl  i. sag  and b. webber  eds.   elements of discourse 
understanding. cambridge university press  1  pp 1. 
