 
　　there are several approaches to formalizing knowledge. the concept of knowledge is often introduced by a special operator whose properties are defined by a number of axioms. a situation is then modelled by using this operator in problem-specific axioms. this article presents a different approach - a first-order logical model which does not use any new operators. the properties of knowledge should follow from the problem-specific axioms only. the advantages are that the model is simpler and requires fewer axioms. the formalization of a problem can almost directly be used as a computer program which produces the solutions. 
　　keywords: epistemology  knowledge  firstrorder logic  false knowledge  problem solving  logic programming. 
1. introduction 
　　the classical work in the field of formalizing knowledge is by hintikka . mccarthy and hayes  point to the importance of epistemology for artificial intelligence. several different epistemological theories with connections to computer science have followed  e.g. by mccarthy   moore   konolige   and levesque  1 . 
　　all of the authors  1 1 1  model knowledge by introducing a truth-valued operator k. this operator is described by a number of axioms. the knowledge that a formula holds is formalized by saying that k holds for an argument that is a term which represents that formula. a drawback of this method is that a large number of axioms are required to describe k  and to define the mapping between terms and formulas. another hard problem is the problem of substituting equals for equals in the arguments of a referentially opaque operator like k. following an example by aristotle: the man approaching 
you is coriscus. you know that coriscus is musical  but that does not imply that you know that the approaching man is musical  even though the men are identical. you have to know that they are identical. there are plenty of other problems with models of knowledge  and they are carefully studied in the impressively thorough work . 
　　we argue that too many axioms will make the computational treatment of knowledge more complicated than necessary. they force the user to have a general theorem prover  they increase the indeterminacy of the computation  etc. the main difference between the above models and our model is that it does not have the intermediate step of a knowledge operator. the formalization of a problem is selfcontained  except for the logical axioms of first-order logic . it has a form which greatly simplifies use of the formalization as a computer program. 
　　the research reported herein was supported by the swedish board for technical development  stu . 
1. philosophical mews on knowledge 
　　we consider the sources of knowledge to be the following: perceived information  information inferred from other knowledge  and previous knowledge. the procedures for inferring knowledge are unspecified. as an idealization we shall assume that they are logical deductions. obviously  a person cannot know all the logical implications of everything he knows  but for solving most problems he will not really need to. 
　　it should be noted that we use the ai view of knowledge  which in terms of classical philosophy is closer to belief. this is because false knowledge might exist in the system: for instance  an agent might perceive false information. applications of our model to false knowledge is further treated in nilsson  1|. 
1. notation 
　　variables are in lower case  and constants have an initial upper case letter. universal quantifiers are often omitted at the top level of formulas. our standard formalism is first-order logic  but we will often use set notation to make our formulas easier to read. however  this is only a kind of syntactic sugar  and it should always be clear how to translate back to logic. for a predicate w  we imagine a set w such that x is a member of w iff w x . for instance  the following formulas say - in logic and in set notation - that there is more than one x such that w x   that there is exactly one x such that w x   and that there is no x such that w x   respectively: 

type of logic  or properties of such a logic  which are often associated with possible worlds. 
     for every problem we have a domain w1  which is the set of possible worlds or descriptions of states. one of these is the actual world  or a description of the current state. the set of all possible solutions w1 is the set of all members x of w1 such that some problemspecific constraint p x  holds. sometimes we might need to generalize this idea a bit: the set of solutions is instead the set of function values / : wl where w1 is the set of all states in w1 satisfying p x . the function / extracts the interesting information from the state description. 
　　traditional philosophy classifies questions as  whether  questions and  what  questions. the former kind asks for a truth value   does p hold   the latter kind asks for a value   for which x does p x  hold   if predicates are regarded as truth valued functions  we can cover both of these cases by a more general question:  what is the value of f x  when p x    in the first case  the function / is equivalent to p  and in the second  it is the identity function. let x be the actual world  i.e. a description of the current state. then the actual answer to the question above will be / x . it is important to note here that the actual answer is supposed to be unique. the question  what is a square root of 1   should therefore be reformulated as  what are the square roots of 1   the domain could then be the set of sets of numbers  and the solution is the set {-1}. we cannot choose the set of numbers as the domain  since that does not give us a sufficient state representation. 
1. a model of knowledge 
　　we shall now model knowledge in terms of the number of possible solutions to a question. 
　　if we describe knowledge by  having the answer to a question   we can formalize it by saying that the set of possible solutions contains exactly one element  namely the actual world. if the set of possible solutions contains more than one element  we can't know which one corresponds to the actual world  and therefore we don't know the solution. thus our basic models of knowledge are 

where w is the set of possible worlds. 
　　conditions such as ''a knows that b knows /   where a and b are two different agents  can now easily be formulated: let w{a  be a's set of possible worlds  and let w b x  be b's set of possible worlds seen from a's viewpoint. this set depends on the actual world z. since a does not necessarily know what the actual world is  he has to try out all his possible worlds for x. 

 the first formula here says that p holds for all elements of w a   i.e. a knows that p. the second defines p x  to hold iff a computes / : w b  x  to contain exactly one element  i.e. if a can deduce that b must know /  assuming that the actual world is x. for comparison  using logic notation  equivalent formulas are: 

the different sets of possible worlds usually depend on two arguments 
- the agent and the actual world  or what is assumed to be the actual world for the moment  - and the corresponding predicates depend on the same two and also the possible world to be tested. the predicate w here is in fact very similar to the accessibility relation k of . here  however  no special axiom is supposed to bold for w. 
	m. nilsson 	1 
     ''i know  is represented with a singleton  and '' i don't know  with a set of more than one element. it is natural to ask if the empty set equation / : w = {} has any meaning. / : w is empty iff w is empty. erroneous information or an incorrect assumption has made the agent rule out the actual world from his set of possible worlds.    prohibits this exclusion by a reflexivity axiom which in our formalism would be vavx w a  1  x .  this corresponds to false questions in the theory of questions. a classical example is  have you stopped beating 
your wife yet   this question contains false premises  hopefully   and has no answer. here  neither of ''i know that you have stopped  nor ''i don't know if you have stopped  is adequate. a third case  which can be interpreted as a detection of a false premise  must be included. this view seems to be adequate particularly for problems about false knowledge |1|. 
1. examples of properties of knowledge 
　　the deductions in this section are somewhat informal for the sake of space. an intuitive property of knowledge is that  i know f  implies that  i know that i know /.  in our model the first statement 
is 

 if we define p x   -  / : w = {.}  where w is independent of x  we can express the statement by vzp z . but since w is non-empty  we must have 

which simply says that  i know that i know f  
　　another example is aristotle's coriscus-problem. one possible world representation here is a tuple of boolean values   musicalityof-cori$cu$  muricality-of~man . if we define 

the fact that it is known that coriscus is musical becomes 
 a  	
the knowledge that the man is musical becomes 
 b  	
p1  restricts w to 	now   b  
holds only if w is further restricted by a constraint that implies that the two components are equal  or  in other words  that it is known that they are equal. 
　　suppose that it is known that p holds  and that it is known that p -  q holds. we should then be able to deduce that it is known that q holds. but for all x  p x  and p x  -  q x  imply that q x . in particular  the antecedents hold for all z in w  and so q x  holds for all x in w. since w is non-empty  q : w = {-}. 
1. some results from applying the model to problem solving 
　　mccarthy  has suggested a certain kind of problem as a test of the adequacy of models of knowledge. these problems deal with knowledge about knowledge and are often hard to solve because of their complicated structure. we have applied oar model to several 
such non-toy problems  among others the well-known  mr. s. and mr. p.  problem  freudenthal  1 . it has turned out that with our model we can solve these problems by computer in a simple way. the modelling and solving methods are described in detail in  1|. many problems dealing with false knowledge can be handled within firstorder logic without risking non-monotonicity. for a large class of 

1 	m. nilsson 

