 
　　the knoesphere project is an attempt to build an expert system that is encyclopedic  in the breadth of coverage of its knowledge base  and in the degree of integration of that knowledge. the primary issue is how to aid users in searching complex bodies of knowledge. our approach is to frame the system more as a museum than a set of tomes  and to have the user take more or less guided tours of the exhibits therein. the impact of such a system on everyday life ~ entertainment and  eventually  education -- is clear. we discuss its potential for progress in al as well: a testbed for representation  speech understanding  natural language understanding and generation  automatic story generation and animation  learning  user modelling  and planning. having an immensely broad and moderately deep knowledge base  the system may also serve as a useful testbed for exploiting analogy and metaphor as a source of power. the work is in its early stages  hence much of what we present is the design for this system  not finished results. we do calculate the magnitude of the tasks involved in such an ambitious endeavor  and give scenarios of its use. 
1. introduction to the knoesphere 
　　this paper describes an ongoing research project whose goal is to represent a comprehensive corpus of real world knowledge  both the size and scope of the 
encyclopedia britannical  in a knowledge base; i.e.  as a structured network of concepts  rather than as pieces of text. the purpose is to enable a user to browse through that knowledge in as effective and flexible a manner as possible. the project can be conceived as the combination of three methodologies: expert systems   hitherto narrow in scope   encyclopedias and online data bases  1   hitherto only lightly cross-indexed assemblages of prose   and videogames  hitherto rarely educational . we now present a scenario of a session with knoesphere. 
we include it for motivation of the project  and to illustrate how the various levels of modelling and tailoring and filtering can affect what the user experiences. 
　　it is autumn  1. sitting in our living room  we connect our home computer to the relevant encyclopedic service  and don a helmet and gloves. the helmet is a lighter  faster version of   with separate images for each eye  speakers for each ear  and sensors to track eye and head movements. the gloves enable our hand positions to be monitored  and provide pressure feedback. 
　　displayed before our eyes is a trio of threedimensional arrays  labelled axes  guides  and filters. each array is filled with icons. we point at the axes array  and it grows larger  as though we were approaching it. we now see that its icons symbolize various sorts of dimensions: ways of organizing knowledge: by location  by time  by degree of certainty  by principal objects involved  by philosophical orientation  by academic discipline  etc. in this context  icons have threedimensional shapes and textures. we reach out and touch three of the icons  academic discipline  certainty  philosophic orientation   and off in a small corner we see them now labelling three orthogonal axes of a coordinate system labelled knowledge  with tiny  illegible icons dotting that space. the axes array has shrunk back down in size  and we now enter the guides space. it grows  to become an array of pictures of people  arranged by their personality  profession  and teaching style. we select jean  a blustery physicist who makes us draw our own conclusions. we notice that jean is now standing off to one side of us  occasionally reaching over and peering at entries in the final  fillers array. it is filled with simulated clip-on sunglasses  with labels like noanalogies  emphasizetheory  and emphasize names. these sunglasses filter out - or stress - various features of the tour we're about to take. we select nomath and noconnections  and put them on; jean winces. 
　　we tell jean we're ready  and the new knowledge array  with its axes labelled held  certainty  and philos  grows to fill our entire field of vision. in front of us  all around us  are all the entries in the knowledge base  organized by these three attributes. we notice that we're positioned near physics on one axis  jean's specialty   at nearcertainty on another axis  jean knows i wouldn't have selected her to guide me around speculative fiction   and at ontology along the third axis  jean prefers teleology  or even phylogeny  but knows i'm more interested in the current state of things . moving around in this space for a couple minutes  with a running commentary from jean  the image of jupiter catches our eye  and we ask to spend some time finding out more about it. 
　　the jovian sphere opens up  and inside is what appears to be miniature amusement park. it grows larger  until it appears almost life-sized and fills our field of vision. there's an arcade with pictures of the planet  a small library  presumably of books and articles on jupiter   a scale model of the solar system in motion  with 
jupiter highlighted   and a spaceship. jean glances wistfully-at the scale model; if we hadn't put on the nomath filter  she'd have shown us a simulation that demonstrates how the areas swept out by jupiter in equal time periods are equal. 
　　we browse through the textual material for a few minutes  occasionally pointing and asking jean a question about what we've just read. some of the books are labelled as original sources  but each one has a duplicate that's specially tailored and filtered for us  using a model of us  the clip-ons we're wearing  and even some more 

1 d. lenat et al. 
subtle and dynamic cues  such as our fidgeting  what specifically we've just read or skipped  etc. since we chose to be on the ontological plane  there is scarcely any material about what jupiter was thought to be by the ancients  how it formed during the creation of the solar system  etc. jean notices we're getting bored  and suggests we go in for a first-hand look. we board the rocketship  and after a visually and aurally believable liftoff find ourselves moving quickly into jovian space. jean knows that we prefer to control the ship ourselves  so conveniently sits in the co-pilot's seat 
　　one of our instruments  labelled source  tells us that the images being generated out our viewscreen are taken from early nasa flyby mission photos. jean answers our questions  and occasionally directs us to some interesting spots to fly over. when we insist on going down into the atmosphere  jean scowls at a dial on the instrument panel  whose needle is dropping fast. curious  we see the altimeter is elsewhere   we lean over and notice that dial is labelled certainty  and the needle is moving from fact to fiction. various other instruments report the chemical composition  pressure  temperature  etc. of the gases we are flying through. suddenly  large whale-like creatures now begin to hurtle past us  and we pull a lever which returns us instandy to the field/certainty/philos space. we note that we are indeed at the same field/philos point  but our certainty has slipped to an extreme  namely fiction. in particular  we have emerged from a book-shaped icon labelled 1. our original point of entry -- indeed  the entire encyclopedia of relatively certain knowledge - is now far overhead along the certainty axis. pushing what appears to be a button on our watch  the session ends. 
it. architecture of the system 
it is tempting to represent the architecture of knoesphere as a single box containing the letters kb  for knowledge base  as even the inference procedures are represented within the same formalism and hence are a real  inspectable  modifiable part of the kb. thus  this section is really about the architecture of the kb: the sorts of knowledge it will contain  how those are organized and used. 
　　of course a large part of the kb represents the encyclopedic knowledge: famous battles  buildings  biographies  birds  books  etc. the original text will be completely re-represented in a structured language  from which the program can generate text  or animation  or narration  or tactile sensations. but the decision as to modality is not made in advance. regardless of output modality  the material being presented might range from a straight-forward re-representation of entries in the kb  to a dynamically-plotted story based on such data. 
　　the knowledge base contains frames that represent heuristic rules. these deal with building and checking user models  appropriateness of various modalities and representations  including rules for when and how to cache  or pipeline  or expectation-filter . some heuristics are domain-independent  learning strategies   but many are domain-specific; some heuristics generate plausible suggestions  some analyze and evaluate and critique  1 . 
　　something which is absent from a typical encyclopedia but must be present in the knoesphere kb is commonsense knowledge. this includes everyday physics  1  models of human interactions  including conversation    models of human/machine dialogues  as well as facts and heuristics about teaching  questionanswering  imagery  analogy  etc. 
　　much of that knowledge is usable for an intelligent interface to users  though additional details about people  are required: types of people  models of mathematicians  mailmen  and mechanical engineers  and individual people  celebrities  specific users  arch typical group representatives . each such model includes physical appearance  goals  state of knowledge  including notations  vocabulary   memory capabilities  information processing model of human cognition   inferencing capabilities  interests and biases  how well they learn via various sorts of teaching methods  and miscellaneous attributes  strength  intelligence  etc.  note that for each attribute  we must record several values: the true value  the value the individual believes the true value to be  the value the individual believes s/he is projecting to others  
the value they are projecting to others in truth  what they would like the true value to be  what they would like to project to others  how strongly they want those last two values to become true  or to stay true . 
　　given that the program has access to a very rich context in which the user expressed something  eye position  previous actions  model of what s/hc is interested in and typically asks about  where his/her finger is pointing   the tasks of understanding speech and language are constrained to the point of feasibility. the final piece of the knowledge base deals with rules and algorithms for performing these tasks. 
as implied above  the control structure is one of condition-action rules  executed in a forward direction  governed by a smaller and more general set of rules  actually a subset of the first set . these rules are represented in the same language as the rest of the knowledge  and are part of the kb  hence can be viewed and tailored  perhaps automatically   to the individual user. 
the user selects axes  a guide  and a set of filters. all three choices serve the same function: cutting down the size of the space of information nodes to display  determining what structure to give them in the display  and deciding where in that space to start the user off initially. often  the same constraint is available to a user in any one of the three choices he makes  e.g.  s/he could enter a space where s/he chooses to be at phylogeny along one axis; or s/he could choose a guide who always includes the origins of the things he's presenting; or s/he could clip on a filter called emphasizeorigins . a common preference may be for three axes that deal with subject matter  relegating all other constraints to the uide's personality and to the clip-on filters selected  
 'liters can be composed. for instance  one could take the noconnections filter  and break knowledge up into separate concepts; putting the emphasizenames filter over that  followed by the emphasizeordering filter  would result in an alphabetized list of concept names  very much like the index of a conventional print encyclopedia. 
there will be some handcrafted tours - authored  iust as any work of art -- on file and accessible to the guide; this is necessary because sometimes a sequence of exhibits is effective without anyone being able to account for why it's 

effective; since it can't be rederived from more elementary planning principles  it must be preserved. 
the user's responses arc checked against the existing model of that individual  and discrepancies are noted  and will eventually be reflected by changes in the model . this sort of learning applies to models of groups of people as well; thus  if mathematicians become less averse to examples over a period of years  the mathematician model would slowly change to reflect that. 
iii. feasibility  current status  future ai issues 
　　the project described in this paper is merely the expert systems  view  of an even larger effort  the design of a large  electronic community  of services and facilities  that is a focus of atari's new sunnyvale research center. ignoring this larger vision  ignoring the unsolved problems with hardware and graphics and simulation-design  how feasible is the goal to represent  l 's knowledge in an expert system  
　　our efforts to date suggest that there will have to be one new frame added for each of the 1 paragraphs of material in  j . since a very similar frame will usually exist  it will take a person familiar with knocsphere's data entry process  and having  say  a b.a. in the same field as the article  about one hour to exploit the analogy and enter the new frame; this works out to three years of work for 1 such people. analysis of  l 's macropaedia reveals 
only 1 distinct types of articles that we  the authors of this article  must represent by our target date of 1. unfortunately  there are approximately 1 everyday concepts for us to represent  double the number in basic english . we intend to spend much of the corning decade in research trying to build such a core. 
　　in short  this  back of the envelope  calculation shows the representation part of the project to be feasible  a decade of research  five years  and 1 man-years  of development . we will not be working on the problems of special hardware such as helmet and gloves; high quality dynamic computer animation; home computers as powerful as current lisp machines; inexpensive yet suitably fast data links to central knowledge repositories; but several others at atari and elsewhere are pursuing such technologies. the calculation  and the existing project to date  span only the task of re-representing the knowledge in   translating it from text into a framebased format that can be processed using existing expert systems techniques. 
　　as mentioned previously  this project is in the initial stages  and most of the activity so far has been planning and design. we have taken some protocols of searching print and current online encyclopedias to investigate strategies people employ  and have constructed some sample simulations of the sort that will be included in the encyclopedia  though none as grandiose as that presented in section 1 . the initial prototype system is being written in lisp  running on symbolics lm-1 lisp machines  soon to be 1's  and xerox d machines  1s   using pieces of representation code from rll 
 and eurisko  1   and simulation facilities from thinglab . 
　　from our viewpoint as ai researchers  the project offers a unique testbed for context-constrained 
	d. lenat et al. 	1 
understanding of speech  natural language  and other modalities which have not been programmable readily before  such as facial expressions and hand movements . it is a world which is almost as deep as most expert systems  and which is 1 times broader. analogy and metaphor play a key role in human cognition  especially learning  but it has been difficult to experiment with those phenomena due to the narrow testbeds we have had available previously. we will exploit analogy as to facilitate data entry  and to explain exhibits to the user; 
other uses may be uncovered. 
	there is one final  crucial point to make. 	in the 
abstract  we mentioned the knoesphere's eventual impact on education  long after its introduction as a form of home entertainment. this delay is necessary because browsing through a  science museum  is not an effective way to learn science. as enjoyable as it might be  the system presents facts  it doesn't teach principles. after it exists  work can begin to add  probably manually  the effective teaching programmes  the critical analogies. eventually  we hope that simulation-building tools will be good enough that  say  a physicist can expect to enter a simulation such as the jovian example. this might well be done within the framework of guides and filters  but it is totally absent from current encyclopedias  and it will be largely absent from our initial system. 
acknowledgements 
　　we thank alan kay - and atari -- for setting up an environment that provides the resources and freedom to undertake a project of this size. we also thank charles van doren and bob stein. 
references 
 1j preece  warren p.  ed.   encyclopaedia britannica  1th edition   chicago  1. 
 llayes-roth  frederick  donald waterman  and douglas lenat   cds.   building expert systems  addison-wesley  1. 
 e.g.  nex1s  the online text retrieval system by mead data central. 
 sutherland  l  sketchpad: a man-machine graphical communication system  mit thesis  	1. 
 lenat  douglas b.   the nature of heuristics   a.i. journal  oct.  1. 
 lenat  douglas b.   the nature of heuristics iii   a.i. journal  march  1. 
 hayes  patrick j.   the naive physics manifesto   in  d. michie  ed.  expert systems in the microelectronic age  edinburgh university press  1. 
 dekleer  johan  and john seely brown   foundations of envisioning   proceedings of the second aaai conference  cmu  1  pp. 1. 
 mcdonald  david   salience as a simplifying metaphor for natural language generation   proc. second aaai conference  cmu  1  pp. 1. 
 rich  	elaine.  	artificial intelligence  	mcgraw-hill  
1; see 