 
　in this paper we describe a production system model of children's development on the balance scale task. starting with a set of rules that makes random predictions  the system iearns from its errors and improves as it gains experience. the transition mechanism is a discrimination process that searches for differences between cases in which correct predictions are made and cases in which errors are made the stages through which the system progresses are very similar to those observed in children  so the model provides an explanation of the observed developmental trends since the system has no notion of torque  it never acquires the ability to completely predict the balance scale's behavior; however  it is able to learn heuristically useful rules despite its incomplete representation of the environment  much as children do. 
introduction 
　one of the most challenging areas facing cognitive science is that of cognitive development. although the child enters the world in a nearly helpless state  within a decade he can manipulate objects  reason abstractly  and communicate with others  and he has acquired a host of other skills too numerous to mention. if we ever hope to understand the nature  and nurture  of the human information processing system  the developmental processes that lead to these diverse abilities must be understood. for a long period  research on cognitive development was almost entirely experimental  but in recent years efforts have been made to explain developmental trends in computational terms. 
　production systems have become a popular framework for modeling behavior at different stages  since their modularity allows the statement of successive models that differ by only one or two condition-action rules. for example  baylor  gascon  lemoyne  and pother  have constructed production system models of children at various stages on piaget's weight seriation task  and young  has devised similar models for the related length seriation task. however  this work has focused on modeling behavior at a given stage  rather than explaining the transition between stages. in this paper we present a process model of development in one domain - the balance scale task. below we describe the task  along with some earlier work in the area. after this  we discuss our model of the transition process and its implications. 
the balance scale task 
　the balance scale task is commonly employed in the study of cognitive development  having first been used by piaget . in this task  the child is presented with a two arm balance  having several pegs spaced evenly along each arm. small disks of equal weight are placed on the pegs  only one peg on each side has weights   and the child is asked to predict the direction in which the scale will move when released. the standard method for correctly making this prediction involves the notion of torque. the number of weights on a peg is multiplied by that peg's distance from the center. if one side has the greater product  that side will go down; if the products are equal  the scale will remain balanced. lacking knowledge of this rule  children and even some adults have difficulty in making the correct predictions however  it is clear that performance improves with age  and this trend requires an explanation. 
　klahr and siegler  a  have studied children's behavior in this domain. they found evidence for the existence of four basic stages  and successfully modeled each stage as a simple production system. for ex-ample  children in stage 1 focused only on weight information in making predictions. the authors explained this behavior with a simple two rule model. the first rule applied if one side had more weights  and predicted that side would go down. the second rule piedicted that the scale would balance if the weights were the same. later stages were modeled by the addition of new rules for making predictions. the second stage model included a rule that focused on distances if the weights were equal; in such cases  it predicted that the side with greater distances would go down the stage 1 model included a rule for selecting a side randomly when weight and distance cues were in conflict  as well a rule for dealing with cases in which the cues agreed. the model of the final stage incorporated rules for computing toique and basing the decision on the result of this calculation. 
　several other studies have examined children's behavior in this domain as well. however  we have chosen to locus on klahr and siegler's work. although their models were very simple  they accounted for much of the variance observed in children's behavior on the balance scale task. moreover  the model of each successive stage differed from the previous one by the inclusion of only one or two new rules. thus  although the authors proposed no theory of the developmental process itself  their model laid the necessary groundwork for an analysis in terms of learning mechanisms. now let us turn to a revised stage model that takes us another step closer to an explanation of the transition process. 
　figure 1 summarizes our revised model of successive stages on the balance scale task. the condition action rules are paraphrased in english for the sake of clarity; the term - side represents a variable that can match against either the left or right side of the scale. in addition to the first three stages modeled by klahr and siegler  we have included an initial random stage. taken together  the first pair of productions  balance-1 and down-1  randomly predict that one of the two sides will go down  or that the sides are balanced. klahr and siegler found no evidence for this stage  presumably because 
　
their subjects had moved beyond the random strategy at an earlier age. when the second pair of rules  balance 1 and down 1  is added to the first pair the resulting system behaves exactly as klahr and siegler's model of stage 1  provided the new rules take precedence over the first pair. upon adding the third pair of productions  balance 1 and down-1   we have a model of stage 1 behavior  provided that both of these rules take precedence over balance-1. finally  when the productions down-1 and downs are inserted  and mask down-1   we have a model of klahr and siegler's third stage. 
　the revised model is in many respects very similar to klahr and siegler's model  but there is one major difference: rules occurring in inter stages arc always discriminant versions of rules that have occurred in an earlier stage. in other words  for every rule s  there exists some rule g in a previous stage with the same actions as s and a subset of s's conditions while this feature was true of some of klahr and siegler's rules  it was by no means true of them all. this characteristic of the revised stage model suggests a mechanism to account for the transition between these stages  which we discuss in the following section. 
a model of the transition process 
　the increasing specificity of the rules in successive stages suggests that they might be learned through a process of discrimination. such a learning mechanism would be called when the performance system made an error  in an attempt to determine the conditions under which a prediction should be made. potentially useful conditions can be found by comparing the situation in which a rule applied incorrectly to the last situation in which that same rule applied correctly. if some difference is found between the good and bad instances of the rule  then a variant of the rule is created that contains that difference as one or more new conditions. because of its new conditions  the variant rule will fail to match against the 
s. sage and p. langley 1 
undesired case  but will still match in the desired situation. similar discrimination learning schemes have been explored by other researchers  b. 1   so our contribution lies not so much in developing this approach to learning  as in showing how this approach can be used to explain developmental trends on the balance scale task. the details of the discrimination method have been described at greater length by langley . 
　we have constructed a discrimination based model of development on the balance scale task that acquires the rules presented in figure 1. the model does not consist of the discrimination mechanism alone. it is also given the rules balance-1 and down 1  which provide the initial behavior upon which learning is based. in addition  the system contains a rule for comparing the sides of the balance scale on dimensions like weight and distance so that discrimination can discover conditions referring to their relative values finally  the model includes one rule for storing credit with the responsible rule when a correct prediction is made  and another similar production for evoking the discrimination process when an incorrect prediction is made. 
　for the system to improve on the balance scale task  the rules acquired in stage 1 must be preferred over the initial random rules  and the stage   and stage 1 rules must he preferred over the stage 1 rules. to achieve this  a rule is weakened whenever it makes an incorrect prediction  and a variant is strengthened whenever it is releamed. when they are first created  variants are weaker than their parent rules  and they must be learned a number of times before they begin to alter behavior. this approach has worked well on the balance scale task  and appears to be a generally useful technique for directing search through the space of possible rules. 
　
1 s. sage and p. langley 
　the program was presented with problems selected randomly from seven basic problem typos. these included problems in which only the weights differed  in which only the distances differed  in which both weights and distances were equal  in which the two cues agreed  and three types of problems in which weight and distance cues conflicted. figure 1 summarizes the model's errors as a function of time  in units of 1 trials . since the system begins with the two random rules balance-1 and down 1 and there are three basic predictions from which to choose  left down  balance  and right down   one would expect  bout 1 percent of the initial predictions to be correct  and this is approximately what we find. by trial 1  the system has learned  and sufficiently strengthened  the stage 1 and stage 1 rules  so that it makes correct predictions on all but the three conflict problems  giving a success rate of approximately 1 percent. in the case of conflict problems  the model's representation of the environment  consisting only of information about relative weights and distances  is incapable of even stating the torque rule that would correctly predict results in a consistent manner. in other words  the programs representation of the problem is inherently incomplete. however  the discrimination process is sufficiently robust to learn useful rules despite this limitation  and the system arrives at a set of rules that make correct predictions much of the time  just as children do before they are taught the torque rule. 
　this brings an important feature of discrimination learning to light it allows one to learn useful rules even if one's representation is ultimately inadequate. since our system has no notion of torque  it can never fully understand the balance scale task  yet it does learn rules that lead to correct predictions in many cases since one can never guarantee that a representation is optimal  this is a powerful feature that would be advaniageous to any learning system. in addition to being interesting from an al perspective  the ability to learn useful rules despite incomplete representations is a prerequisite for modeling human behavior on the current task  since children apparently do just that. 

　although the model can never master the conflict problems  its behavior in these cases is revealing. when an error is made on a conflict problem  the system may construct variant rules  but it will be unable to discover any conditions which will make consistently correct predictions. thus  these rules will continually be weakened and then strengthened  and the system's preference on conflict problems will oscillate between them. this effect is very similar to behavior that klahr and siegler observed in one of their subjects  who seemed to switch back and forth between weight and distance cues whenever the use of one led to an incorrect prediction on a conflict problem. it is noteworthy that this oscillation was not intentionally built into the model  but arises purely as a byproduct of learning through discrimination and strengthening. 
　one detail of klahr and siegler's results which our transition model does not account for is their subjects' tendency to focus more on weights than on distances. in our model  at approximately the same time that down-1 is constructed  a similar rule is created which includes a condition about greater distance instead of greater weight. while klahr and siegler found evidence for down 1  they found none for the second rule. one can imagine introducing preferences into the model to focus attention on some attributes in favor of others  but unless one can explain where these preferences originated  they would provide no more explanation than labeling one dimension as more  salient  than another. thus  our transition model does not account for every detail of klahr and siegler's results  but it does provide a plausible initial explanation of the transition between the observed stages. 
conclusion 
　in this paper we described a model of the developmental process on the balance scale task. although parts of the model are necessarily limited to this domain  the learning mechanisms were implemented in a general way. and we are convinced that they could be used to explain developmental trends on other tasks. one drawback of the model is the speed with which it learns. the trials shown in figure 1 required only 1 cpu seconds on a pop-1 computer  while children take years to move from stage 1 to stage 1 behavior. however  the model was presented only with the relevant features of weight and distance  and if we had instead included other irrelevant information  its learning rate would presumably be reduced to a more reasonable level. clearly  we have taken only a small step towards understanding the complex processes responsible for cognitive development  but we hope to have clarified one approach to studying this area. 
