 
standard knowledge representation languages are seriously lacking an explicit formal semantic specification. this may cause considerable trouble when applied to large amounts of rapidly 
changing data. 
based on an abstract data type view of knowledge representation languages a formal definition of a frame data model is presented in terms of a 
denotational semantics approach using a subset of meta-iv. after introducing some basic concepts of the model several semantic integrity constraints are outlined which ultimately lead to the formulation of a set of operations in the frame data 
model. 
1. introduction 
standard knowledge representation languages such as krl  bobrow/winograd 1  or frl  roberts/ goldstein 1  are almost exclusively characterized by syntactic specifications  but no attention is paid to the formal specification of their semantics. recently  several formalisms have been devised which provide explicit semantic specifications  kl-one  as outlined in brachman 1  being one of the most promising proposals. exhaustive formal conditions on the operations on knowledge representation structures clearly lead to an abstract data type view of knowledge representation languages  weiner/palmer 1 . 
the lack of semantic specifications in knowledge representation languages may cause severe problems  e.g. unpredictable side effects and inconsistent changes in the data base   which obviously become more and more serious when large numbers of knowledge structures are managed. we consider knowledge base systems to be realizations of formally defined data models. by formally specifying the semantics of the operations of an underlying frame data model we attempt to s t r i c t l y constrain the actual behavior of a large knowledge base system which forms an essential part of topic  an automatic text understanding and abstracting system  topic 1   currently under development at the information science department of the university of constance  w. germany. 
the formal specification of our frame data model is based on a denotational semantics approach  applying a subset of the meta-iv-language  e.g. as illustrated in bjorner 1 . after introducing basic concepts of our model  section 1   we shall give some examples of semantic integrity constraints which apply properties of the previously defined concepts  section 1  and f i n a l l y indicate the basic operations on objects of the 
data model  section 1   thus providing a sketch of what the semantics of a frame data model might look like  for an extended version of this paper see  reimer/hahn 1  . 
1. basic concepts of the data model 
the notion of a frame is defined by a mapping 
frames = frame -  slots 
frame denotes 	the set 	of frame 	identifiers 	and 
slots denotes the set 	of slots. 	the 	notion of a slot is given by the mapping 
slots = sname -  sentry 
sname denotes the 	domain of slot 	identifiers and 
sentry denotes the domain of actual and permitted slot entries. the actual and permitted entries for a slot are given by the mapping 
sentry = type -  entries 
the set type consists of act and perm. the element act is mapped to the set of actual entries while perm is mapped to the set of permitted entries  both sets constituting the set entries. 
a network of relationally 	connected frames may be 

this 	work was supported by bundesministerium fuer 
forschung und technologie / gesellschaft fuer information und dokumentation under grant no. pt 1. 

constructed from the relations given in the data model. we now consider single elements of the mapping domains defined above. 

1 u. reimer and u. hahn 
1. semantic integrity constraints 
the properties of the relations defined above not only put severe restrictions on the possible relational connection between two frames  but require the existence of a relational tuple  if two frames share appropriate properties. further restrictions are included in the data model in terms of explicit semantic integrity constraints  viewing the properties of the relations as implicit semantic integrity constraints . 

u. reimer and u. hahn 1 
 roberts  r.b. / goldstein  i.p.: the frl manual. mit ai-lab.  1. 
 topic: a system for automatic text condensation. in: acm sigart newsletter #1  1. pp. 1. 
 weiner  	j.l. / 	palmer  m.: 	the design 	of a system for designing 	knowledge representation systems. 	in: 	proceedings 	ijcai-1  	1  pp.1. 
the existence of a relational edge between two frames depends only on the existence of two frames 
with the properties required by the relation. therefore operations to insert or delete relation tuples need not be defined. applying the definitional properties of the is-a and parts relation and the properties of the equivalence class for each prototype  the semantically correct insertion and deletion of relation tuples and instance frames w i l l be controlled and executed by the knowledge base system which realizes the frame data model. 
1. conclusion 
we have outlined some basic ideas for the formal definition of a frame data model by applying a denotational semantics approach. next  emphasis w i l l be given to an extension of world-dependent and model-dependent integrity constraints. 
subsequently an axiomatic specification of the frame data model w i l l be developed. after a 
comparison of both approaches  further refinement of the frame data model w i l l be based on the most appropriate approach. 
