 
extended story generation  such as the creation of soap opera stories  is a difficult and interesting problem for artificial intelligence. we present here the first phase of the development of a program  universe  to tell such stories. in particular  we introduce a method for creating universes of characters appropriate for extended story generation. this method concentrates on the need to keep story-telling universes consistent and coherent. we describe  the information that must be maintained for characters and interpersonal relations  and the use of stereotypical information about people to help motivate 
trait values. 
1 introduction 
one of the most interesting forms of story telling is extended story generation  the continuing serial. this can occur as short fiction  movies such :is star wars and the empire strikes back  novel series  role-playing games and  in one of its most popular forms  the television soap opera. the writer or writers of such serials face the prodigious task of creating and keeping track of literally dozens of intricately interrelated characters and numerous past and present plots. extended stories of this type may well be forerunners of the kinds of complex  inleractive stories that will ultimately be created as computers are used as more than simple  word processors in the creation of fiction. 
in this paper we will describe the first phase of development or a computer program  universe. the goals of this program are twofold. initially  we expect to develop a program that can serve as a  writer's aid  for extended story production  intimately  we hope to have universe tell  soap opera  type stories. the aspect of univeksk to be discussed here is the creation of storytelling; universes  stus  comprised of characters  their histories  family relations  and interpersonal relationships. 
1 motivation in character creation 
good extended story telling is constrained by the need to maintain consistency and coherence. a story is consistent if properties and events of the story world  including properties of characters  do not contain any internal contradictions. bitter enemies should not become close friends without explanation. 
coherence involves the idea that events should be logically derivable  at least in retrospect  from the information available to the reader. while it is neither necessary nor desirable to provide the reader with enough information to actively predict every event that will occur in a story the events should make sense when they do occur. most notably  actions should be based on the personalities and backgrounds of the characters involved. universe creates a universe of characters before beginning to tell a storv in order to maintain consistency and coherence. it would be possible  and is sometimes necessary  to create characters only on demand in plot generation and fill in details of these characters only when needed. however  in order to keep the qualifies of characters consistent  and to be able to insert information into the story that will lead to later coherence  i.e.  drop hints    it is useful to have a substantial set of characters in place when story telling begins. 
coherence provides benefits beyond merely protecting the reader from untoward surprises. in large part  coherence provides the  flavor  that makes serials so popular. it is difficult to identify with characters whose actions seem inconsistent. part of the fun of soap operas is speculating about what  will happen next  a game that is fun only if plot actions are coherent. 
the major relevant ai programs are mechan's talesi'in  meehan 1b  and dehn's author  dehn 1 . both of these programs focus on the ability to tell planful narratives involving small numbers of characters  and usually focusing on a single character. in contrast we are not concerned with fully representing every last detail of every character and action  but rather with having enough information available to tell consistent  coherent  and hopefully interesting stories over long periods of time. 
1 person frames 
to maintain consistency in stories  we must consider the information to be created and maintained about people. this collection of information will be referred to as a person frame. previous work in this area  particularly  carbonell 1; schank and lebowitz 1   was concerned with complex  plan and goal-based representations that allowed a understander to explain a person's actions. we will use here a somewhat simpler representation that provides enough information to generate believable plots by concentrating on personality traits  interpersonal relations and  to some extent  goals. 
the way to maintain coherence in character description can be seen by considering how wc might answer a question such as   why is aaron so cold-hearted   two possible answers are  'he's a door-to-door salesman  or 
 he got that way after his wife left him . these answers are illustrative of two ways to make characters coherent  stereotypes and past events. 
stereotypes are common descriptions associated with people in various classes such as occupations  social groups or personal backgrounds. a stereotype conveys a large amount of  default  information  and tends to provide enough coherence to satisfactorily motivate an aspect of a character's make-up. further  the fact that the person is a doctor provides an acceptable motivation for any of these characteristics. 
stereotypes therefore comprise an important part of character descriptions. the description of a character in universe contains a list of one or more stereotypes from which the character inherits properties  unless overridden . the stereotypes used here serve much the same role for person descriptions as generalization-based memory organization points  schank 1; lebowitz 1  do for events. figure 1 shows a few of the over 1 stereotypes currently included in universe. 

1 	m. lebowitz 
doctor professor store-owner warden flake nasty-person klutz swineer family-man socialite hari-krishna bowler movie-fiend sports-fan junkie figure 1: some stereotypes used in universe 
past events are used primarily to provide variety and flavor and explain aspects of a character that do not fit stereotypes. by including historical events in an stu  it is possible to nave interesting variations in the various characters  along with adequate justification to assure coherence.  to achieve the coherence  it is  of course  necessary to refer to the various past events so that the reader is aware of them.  in the ultimate version of 'universe  as the program tells stories it will naturally affect the history of the characters involved. figure 1 a few of the plots that can be run historically by universe during stu creation. 
lawsuit divorce illness consultant abuse-charges robbery big-loss threatened rackets famous-rider break takeover 	figure 1: 	sample historical plots 
the final important class of information needed about the characters in an stu involves not individual characters  but interpersonal relationships between characters. crucial to the selection of consistent plots is the need to monitor the way characters relate to each other. to achieve consistency of this sort  we must maintain information about relationships between  potentially  every pair of characters in our universe. 
figure 1 summarizes the information stored in a person frame. traits  goals and the role of marriages will be discussed further in later sections of this paper. 
name  stereotypes  
trait modifications  
individual goals  interpersonal relations  
marriages  history  list of events  figure 1: person frame information 
1 stereotypical frames 
universe stereotypes provide two basic types of information about the characters they describe 
- descriptors of physical and personality traits  which we will concentrate on* here   and typical goals. personality traits are particularly useful in selecting characters for a given plot  or plots tor a character . in a blackmail plot  the blackmailer should not be a nice person  and the person blackmailed  or his family  should have something worth extorting. 
goals tend to be important in a somewhat different context. universe will make use of certain plot schemata  known as meta-plots  that are abstract in terms of the events they describe.  revenge  would be an example. to  execute  such plots  it is often necessary to have information about various characters' goals -- particularly long-term goals - in order to understand what is important to them . 
the selection of traits to be used in stereotypes is certainly not self-evident. we need a selection of traits wide enough to indicate which characters should participate in which plots and how thev should fare in such plots. the traits chosen for universe are shown in figure 1. no claim is made that this listing is exhaustive. 
it allows for a wide range of behaviors to be explained and can be easily extended. 
sex 	t age phys-att moodiness promiscuity niceness wealth competence intelligence religion race nationality social-back time-used 	figure 1: 	person stereotype traits 
1 interpersonal relationships 
while it is important to have individual characters adequately represented  it is also necessary to represent interpersonal relationships  iprs  between characters. we have chosen to do this with a set of numerical scales based on those from the psychological experiments of 
  wish et al. 1   extended for ai use in jschank and abelson 1 . this work posited three scales -- positive-negative  intimate-distant and dominantsubmissive- to describe the way people relate to each other. to these we have added a fourth scale  attractedness  appropriate for soap opera universes. more complete sets of scales are being considered for later versions of universe. our scales can include asymmetric perceptions of each participant in an ipr. 
as with individual character information  values of scales can come either from stereotypes or past events. past events seem to be more important in shaping interpersonal dynamics. while there are a reasonable quantity of stereotypical iprs ~ among family members and people in occupations  for example - events such as shared crises  conflicts at work  marital conflicts  and the like  tend to be more significant in explaining how one person relates to another. 
1 building up an stu 
having specified the kind of information we would like to maintain about the characters in a story-telling universe  we are still left with the problem of how to generate that information. we could specify properties of characters and interpersonal relations randomly or only when needed for a plot  a necessary mechanism in any case . however to see how we might add coherence to our set of characters  consider the universe of characters in a typical television soao opera  days of our lives. figure b lists some of the 1 or so current active characters in this nbc soap opera. 
tom and alice - horton family patriarchs 
mickey and maggie - son and wife 
sarah - their daughter  by artificial insemination  stephano - the bad guy 
tony - his son renee -- tony's half-sister 
liz - tonv's estranged wife 
don - liz s ex-husband  sort of  she was actually still married to tony then  
marlena - another of don's ex-wives roman - marlena's fiancee 
anna - roman's first wife  presumed dead 
	figure 1: 	a sample soap opera universe 
the first thing we see from figure 1 is that the relations among the characters are quite complex  an informal count showed at least 1.  identifiable interpersonal relationships   and that many of the characters are related to each other by past and present marriages of one sort or another. past and present husband-wife and parent-child relationships add coherence to the character set in most soap operas. 
we would like to have this same sort of coherent intricacy among the characters created by universe. the most feasible way to achieve this is to  in effect  do a simple simulation of the past lives of the characters in the stu  creating spouses  children and other assorted characters as necessary. we view marriages as a motivation for characters rather than as arbitrary relationships that should be established after we have created a set of characters. 
the simulation used by universe involves cyclical character creation. a queue is maintained of characters who have been created during the simulation  but have not had the details of their lives filled in. each character is  in turn  removed from the queue  and universe steps through his or her life  creating spouses and children. wnen the present is reached further details of the character  such as occupation and other descriptive stereotypes are filled in. 
the selection of the specific events that occur can be done either by a user  in  writer's aid  mode  or somewhat arbitrarily. the latter is not as unreasonable as it may sound  as' the idea is often to have many interconnections among characters  regardless of what they might be. 
1 adding more background 
although the cyclic character creation process described in the previous section provides the framework for the stus created in universe  it is not quite enough by itself. there are three main problems with the universes created: 1  almost all the characters are related in one way or another; 1  almost all the iprs in the universe have to do with marriages and children. 1  there is no history  other than marriages and offspring  to the characters  which is detrimental to coherence. 
fortunately  we can solve all three of these problems with a single mechanism  one related to the main thrust of the universe program. the answer is to simply add history to the characters' backgrounds by  executing  in the past simplified versions of the plots universe will create for the present. 
it is crucial to note that the past plots run by universe need not be executed in the same detail as during actual story telling. instead  it is enough to merely determine how each plot affects the characters involved and the iprs among them  and modify their histories appropriately. universe can add coherence to its current stones by referring to events in the past. in addition  the mechanism for selecting the plots to be run need not be the same as for real story telling. instead  we can select a given plot in order to obtain a desired  pr  without requiring the same level of motivation as is needed in real story telling. 
1 conclusion 
we have shown here a method for generating extended story-telling universes  consisting of characters  interpersonal relationships and historical events. the method of creating characters focuses on maintaining consistency and coherence. the methods described are flexible enough that they can be extended to address additional problems  such as specific author intent  by 
m. lebowitz 1 
adding constraints in the character generation process. the work described here provides the framework for the extension of universe to actual story telling. 
acknowledgements 
special thanks go to susan rachel burstein who helped develop many of the ideas described here. comments by kathy mckeown on an earlier draft of the paper also were extremely helpful. a more complete description of the work described here is available from the author. 
