 
a set of general knowledge structure manipulation 
primitives is proposed. these processing elements largely eliminate the need for a separate theory of inference. the elements are presented in terms of an abstract characterixation of the understanding task. the processing theory is given as a particular realisation of this characterixation. 
1. introduction 
it has been generally recognized that world knowledge is important for making inferences  and that the structure and organization of knowledge in memory has important consequences in determining what inferences are made. for example  schank and abelson  1   charniak  1   colling ford  1   wilensky  1   lehnert  1   and dyer  1  are all describe systems that use a particular kind of knowledge to make particular classes of inference. 
however  the overall design the inference engine for text understanding remains obscure. most of research has focused on the nature of the knowledge needed. the theory of processing per se has generally been relegated a secondary status  and usually developed only as far as was necessary to demonstrate the efficacy of one's knowledge structures. 
the view taken here is that adequate theories of memory and the structure of knowledge largely eliminates the need for a theory of inference. in this formulation  what gets inferred is a function of what gets accessed in memory. this  in turn  is determined by the structure of knowledge  and by general memory access routines that are sensitive only to the structure and organization of knowledge  not to its content. 
this view is parsimonious to the one espoused by quillian  1 . quillian's notion of representation was primitive by today's standards  however  and he was not concerned with the notion of inference per se. a more sophisticated view of inference is found in charniak  1 . his approach is similar to the one pursued here  in that both theories endorse highly declarative representations and fairly genera  schemes for manipulating them. however  i am concerned less with the details of the implementation  and more with the overall architecture of the understander. 
ls this paper  i first present an abstract characterization of the understanding task. then a particular realization for this characterization is given. 
in this discussion i refer to the representation produced by the story understander as a construst of the input. i call the process of deciding to include a particular fact in a construal determinstion. in addition  i shall use the term assumption to refer to the kinds of infer-
ences used in story understanding  to distinguish these from the more general collection of processes that include logical deduction. 
1. principles of text comprehension 
i first attempt to characterize the text understanding process by characterizing those facts whose determination constitute a satisfactory construal of the input. this characterization is given in terms of a set of principles. these are as follows. 
the principle of consistent construal - view the inputs as instantiating a set of frames that are consistent with one's world knowledge. 
the principle of concretion  overcommitment  - determine as specific a fact as is possible from an input. 
the principle of least energy - make only the minimal assumptions necessary to determine a fact. 
the principle of exhaustion - determine enough facts to account for all of the input. 
the principle of poignancy - determine those frames that are pertinent to the intent of the discourse. 
the principle of consistent construal states that  as elements of a text are viewed as instantiating general frames  one should favor interpreting inputs as instantiating those frames that provide a consistent construal of the input. 
for example  suppose we were given the sentence  the bottle fell off the table and it broke.  one construal of this sentence assumes that  1  the bottle hit the floor   1  it was the bottle  and not the table  thai broke   1  the bottle was somewhat brittle  and  1  the bottle's hitting the floor  together with the bottle's brittleness  was the cause of the breakage. the principle of consistent construal approves of this construal because it relates individuals in the story  i. e.  the falling event  the breaking event  and the bottle  to knowledge in long term memory in a consistent manner. 
however  the principle of consistent construal does not inform us how to decide among alternative construals. for example  another construal of our example sentence assumes someone caught the falling bottle mentioned above and then broke it with a hammer. however  this construal seems more ad hoc. we require a way of distinguishing among such alternatives. 
to address this problem  we introduce the principle of least energy. least energy states that one should make those decisions that 

require the most tenable assumptions possible. least energy is meant be quantify the notion of the most tenable set of assumptions. here we assume that facts are determined when they are supported by a sufficient amount of evidence. a fact that is supported by some evidence  but which is not yet determined  is said to be activated. in our processing model  when the activation of a fact reaches a certain threshold  then the fact will be determined. in addition  we assume that activation is spread to  nearby  facto in memory  cf. anderson and bower  1 . 
our theory assumes that the introduction and determination of a frame or instance of a frame requires a certain amount of activation  energy . at any given point  various  activated frames   i. e.  those whose activation level is greater than zero  may have different levels of activation  and therefore some of these frames require more additional energy for determination. the principle of least energy informs us that  when a choice is possible  we should determine those 
frames requiring the least amount of additional energy. 
least energy allows for context sensitivity  as previous events may change the activation energy of activated frames. in addition  it allows inherent predispositions into the system. for example  if we mentioned that john ate a hamburger  we would probably assume that it was a normal-sized hamburger on a bun  etc. this assumption is made because the frame describing a prototypical hamburger is given a disproportionately large initial bias. 
note  however  that so far we have no reason to promote a specific concept  such as a prototypical hamburger  when only a general concept is mentioned. the principle of concretion is necessary to supply this direction. this principle instructs the system to find the most specific frame consistent with the input. this is derived from what i have termed  the first law of knowledge application   which instructs us always to employ the most specific applicable knowledge. for example  if the understander learns that john loves mary  it needs to realize that this is romantic love rather than sibling love in order to make accurate predictions about john's behavior. thus a form of assumption b required in which semantic knowledge from the sentence  e. g.  that some sort of love relation exists  is compared against pragmatic knowledge of relationship types  i. e.  the various kinds of love   to find the interpretation that the speaker most likely intends. 
the principle of exhaustion insures that an input is exploited fully in the understanding process. for example  consider computing an explanation for the sentence  john sneaked over to the door.  one explanation for this action is that john wanted to be near the door. indeed  if the understander knew that john wanted to leave the room  such an explanation is likely to be determined. however  it is important for the understander to realize that this explanation is not sufficient. the deficiency is due to the fact that the explanation explains only the change-of-location part of the action  but it does not explain the manner in which it was accomplished  that is  why john sneaked rather than just walked. the principle of exhaustion declares this an insufficient result as it leaves an unexplained residue. 
the principle of poignancy distinguishes those aspects of the text that represent its essential content from those that are peripheral. points are represented as rather abstract frames to which a certain affective importance is attached. as with any other invoked frame  such frames may be determined if enough evidence can be found. the resulting determined  elaborated frames constitutes the essense of a text. 
1. implementation 
faustus  frame activated unified story understanding system  is an frame manipulation program created by peter norvig that is 
r. wilensky 1 
designed to embody the principles suggested above. the idea behind faustus is that the program should make assumptions based not on specific rules of inference  but on general mechanisms for memory manipulation and on the structure of knowledge in memory. 
faustus makes a number of kinds of assumptions  including the construction of explanations and the determination of story points in accordance with the principles specified above  by using the following set of fact manipulation primitives: 
1  invocation - initially considering a fact. facts are currently invoked because they have been indexed under a component that occurs as an input  or because they are explicitly associated with another invoked fact. 
1  determination - deciding if enough evidence for an invoked fact exists to infer the fact. 
1  instantiation - creating an instance of a determined frame to represent its occurrence in a story. 
1  elaboration - filling in an empty slot of an instantiated frame. this process corresponds to the top-down processing performed extensively by systems like sam and ms. malaprop. 
1  termination - realizing that an instantiated frame is no longer relevant. 
1  attrition - allowing an invoked but undetermined fact to fade from subsequence consideration. faustus measures time in terms of the number of fact invocations that have passed. thus if enough new facts are invoked before a previously invoked fact is determined  faustus will drop that fact from subsequent consideration. 
when faustus has an input  it first looks at instantiated frames to see if the input elaborates one of them  and then looks for frames that are indexed under the input. for example  frames suggesting the cause of an event are likely to be invoked by this process. faustus's determination process then looks for verification of these frames. supporting evidence includes the previous mention of one of these frames or of their constituents. thus faustus checks the story representation and other invoked frames for corroborating items. 
faustus allows invocation to spread along the constituents of invoked frames. for example  if faustus knew john want to be at a particular restaurant  and stored in the permanent data base b the fact that being at a restaurant b a precondition for eating at one  then this stage would invoke eating at that restaurant as a candidate action. in effect  faustus will have hypothesized the explanation that john intended to eat at the particular restaurant he wanted to be at. 
all the facto invoked in thb manner are now subject to confirmation. if one can be determined  the others will be either eliminated by exclusion or removed soon by attrition. if not  invocation will spread out again from the invoked facto. that is  if a reasonable explanation can be found within the story  it will be  a long  tenuous explanation may not be found due to attrition . if not  then intermediate hypothesises are suggested until a connection with the story can be found. 
1. faustus examples 
norvig's faustus implementation uses the phran natural language analyzer  written by yigal arena  as its front end  and the phred generation system  written by steve upstill and paul jacobs  for output  see wilensky and arens  1 . these stories demonstrates some general features of the understanding process. 
1 r. wilensky 
input text: 
ann got into her car. 
she went for a drive. 
she arrived at the movie theatre. she got a ticket. 
input: 	why did ann get a ticket  
output: she wanted to see the movie. 
input text: 
ann got into her car. 
she went for a drive. 
she got a ticket. 
input: 	why did ann get a ticket  output: she violated a traffic law. 
in the first version of the story  buying a ticket is one of the steps of the  movie-going  frame  and thus the input is incorporated into this frame  which was previously activated by a reference to going to the movie theatre. that is  the input is considered to be an elaboration of the  ticket-buying  sub-frame of  movie-going.  no other interpretation of the input is considered. 
in the second version  getting a ticket is not found to be part of any activated frame. indexing on this input returns a number of frames  including  traffic-violation  and  movie-going . since traffic violation receives activation from the driving frame  it is chosen; the other unrelated alternatives are discarded. thus concretion is performed on the input by finding the most precise frame consistent with the input that is supported by evidence from the story. 
1. conclusions 
one feature of this theory is that it ties processing very closely to representation  but not entirely  since activation can presumably spread along non-epistemological associations . since the theory is heavily dependent upon the nature of representation  a substantial commitment to a particular representational scheme is required before the details of the theory can be examined or evaluated. the details of such a scheme are beyond the scope of this paper. 
the examples above are certainly not beyond the capabilities of previous story understanders. the claim made herein is that the proposed formulation will be conducive to the expansion of such systems. presumably  if the theory of processing is correct  knowledge need only be represented correctly in order to be used. while it may be easier to build an inference engine tightly geared to a particular from of knowledge without solving these representation problems  i suggest that this only defers a problem that one will eventually have to confront. 
1. acknowledgments 
the ideas in this paper emerged from several seminars at the berkeley artificial intelligence research project and at the berkeley cognitive science program. participants at this seminar included  in addition to this author  yigal arena  margaret butler  david chin  joe faletti  chuck fillmore  paul jacobs  paul kay  marc luria  jim 
martin  jim may field  peter norvig  and lisa rau. independent work by chuck fillmore and paul kay and their students in the reading project was also responsible for some of the direction this work has taken. in addition  peter norvig has been working on implementing the processing scheme alluded to above; yigal areas has been working on the interaction of memory and linguistic processes. many ideas described herein are due directly or indirectly to their research. 
1. 