 
     the relationship between motives  emotions and learning in the design of intelligent systems has received relatively l i t t l e consideration to date. clarification of the relationship involves tackling fundamental questions such as the survival value or adaptive function 
of motives and emotions in intelligent systems  
the nature of motivational and emotional processes which are features of 'innate' endowment  the learning of additional motives and emotions as a result of environmental interaction  and the results of the influence of motives and emotions on learning processes and  conversely  the effect of learning processes on the nature of motives and emotions. 
introduction 
     the relationship between motives  emotions and learning in the design of intelligent systems has received relatively l i t t l e consideration to date. 	sloman and croucher  1  include mechanisms for changing the current set of motives and the need to learn motives in their l i s t of constraints on the design 
of intelligent systems which determine what would make them well adapted. they  also  point out that a complex and changing collection of motives and the emotions they generate 
must have a profound effect on what is learned when and contribute to enormous variations between individuals. pfeiffer  1  in presenting the general framework of a theory of emotion in cognitive science terms lists learning processes and evolutionary considerations among the important issues which have 
not yet been addressed. his theory has been partially specified in a computer simulation 
model called feeler which is implemented in an extended version of prism  langley and neches  1 . 
　　　clarification of the nature of the relationships between motives  emotions and learning in intelligent systems involves tackling an agenda of fundamental items 
which can be conveniently described in terms of human development. it is necessary to explore the survival value or adaptive function of motives and emotions in intelligent systems from an evolutionary perspective. what 
motivational and emotional processes must be assumed to be wired in as features of innate endowment  how does the learning of additional motives and emotions proceed as a response to environmental interaction  what are the results of the influence of motives and emotions on learning processes and  conversely  the effect of learning processes on the 
nature of motives and emotions  the remainder of this paper reports a preliminary exploration of these issues employing bairn  a general learning system  and adopting a perspective 
on motives and emotions derived from the work of sloman and croucher and pfeiffer. 
	bairn: 	a general learning system 
     as a comprehensive account of bairn has been provided elsewhere  wallace  1  only the features directly involved in the construction and representation of motives and emotions w i l l be described. the bairn project is aimed at the construction of a theory of cognitive development in the form of a selfmodifying information processing system in which productions are employed as the units 
of cognitive analysis. the specific objective is the construction of a computer program as 
a completely explicit and demonstrably sufficient version of the theory. 
     the bairn system comprises general learning processes and a world model which governs 
the nature of its interaction with the environment. an integrated form of representation for procedural and declarative knowledge is adopted in the long term memory  ltm  world model. it is composed of a network made up of nodes at which are stored production systems. the mode of operation of the network is based on three levels of consciousness  focal  peripheral and unconscious  which permit a limited number of nodes to be active in parallel. each node in the network has prepotency values which define the strength 
of its bid to be allowed to operate when specific inputs suitable for its activation are present. this feature provides an opportunity to explore the effects of variations in 
motivational structure on the system's operation. 
     the approach adopted in the bairn project maximises emphasis on general learning procedures. the learning processes are responsible for the creation and addition of new productions to ltm. 	discharging this function requires the ability to monitor the results of environ-
mental interaction. the mechanism adopted is a time line or episodic memory which contains a sequential record of the system's activity. if any regularities exist in 
interaction with the environment they are represented in the time line. self-modification takes place through the detection of this regularity by the learning processes and the subsequent addition to ltm of productions which w i l l capitalize upon i t . regularity detection involves two probabilistic features which constitute dimensions of individual difference. the f i r s t is the m atching  i ndex  c riterion  which has a constant value for each individual. the mic determines 
the level of agreement before two sequences are regarded as a match. the second probabilistic 
feature is the c ritical  c onsistency  l evel . unlike the mic  the ccl exhibits variations within a band characteristic of 
the individual. it reflects both the number of novel sequences and the degree of agreement between them which comprise a level of consistency warranting modification of the ltm world model. 
adaptive function of motives and emotions 
     in information processing terms the existence of motives can be attributed to the need for determination of directionality in intelligent systems endowed with a high degree of f l e x i b i l i t y or adaptability. appropriate constraints on the wide range of possible courses of action are essential for the establishment and maintenance of successful environmental interaction. the f i r s t step towards f u l f i l l i n g this function in bairn is the addition of motive generators to the system's i n i t i a l repertoire of processes. motive generators bias the construction of the system's representation of its world in particular directions and  as a result  constrain and direct its behaviour. they operate by scanning the time line trace for 
sequences representing experience falling within the area of their motives and initiating appropriate additions or modifications to ltm. this process is conducted both on-line and off-line. 
     emotions can be regarded as 'hard wired' sources of information that assist in a continuing process of discrimination which 
is crucial in canalising the behaviour of the system in appropriate directions. episodic records of physiological activity associated with emotions assist motive generators in performing their function by facilitating rapid detection and discrimination of time line segments both on-line and off-line. these records i n i t i a l l y reflect the operation of primary emotion generators included in 
the system's 'innate' repertoire. these are productions linking sensori-perceptual conditions with physiological actions defining primary 
emotions such as pleasure  fear  anger and so on. the physiological trace data is detected and reacted to by 'innate' motive generators. their conditions include patterns of physiological activity defining primary 
	j. wallace 	1 
emotions  indications of the level of emotional 
intensity derived from the intensity of sensory stimulation  and other situational features defining the area of the motive. in innate motive generators these situational features are of a relatively global nature  such as the perception of human contact. 
     the assignment of distinct  physiological definitions to emotions via primary emotion generators is at variance with the approach adopted in feeler 	since a general level of autonomic arousal is assumed the physiological component in feeler cannot be used to distinguish between different emotions. 	this objective is achieved by means of distinctions in the 
cognitive-evaluative aspects of emotions. in addition to employing specific variations in physiological arousal the present approach retains a fundamental function for the general level of autonomic arousal. it is assumed that it contributes to determining the nature of the spread of activation that occurs in the ltm network during each cycle. high arousal produces the lowest level of contextual inhibition and the least constrained spread. low arousal is associated with the most constrained spread and contributes to 'concentrated attention' while intermediate arousal leads to a controlled spread of activation well suited to complex processing such as problem solving. 
     interaction between the i n i t i a l repertoires of emotion generators and motive generators determines the episodic records which are selected as starting points for off-line processing of the time line in the search for consistent sequences. in some cases 
motive generators representing highly significant motives directly determine that a new node w i l l be added to ltm on the basis of a single occurrence of a sequence. in others the decision depends on the result of time line processing by the consistency detection processes employing the mic and ccl parameters carried out after a motive generator has indicated the starting point for analysis. when an addition to ltm occurs an i n i t i a l prepotency value is assigned to the new node by the motive generator s  involved in its creation. the prepotency reflects the status of the motive generator s  in a hierarchy of primary motives and specific values of the emotional intensity and situational feature variables included in the sequence. 
     since records of the operation of primary emotion generators are included in sequences giving rise to new nodes  productions providing direct access to the generators are incorporated 
in the definition lists of the new nodes. this ensures that future activation of the nodes w i l l be accompanied by experience of the associated emotions. 
     assigning of prepotencies is not confined to newly created nodes. individual nodes compare the results of their activations with expectations based on previous input/output conjunctions stored on their description 

1 	j. wallace 
l i s t s . unexpected or novel outcomes are flagged in the time line record to enable processing by motive generators and assignment of a prepotency value. the effect of this procedure is to provide each node with a range of context linked prepotencies as environmental interaction proceeds. this replaces the i n i t i a l global prepotency. 
     general functional characteristics desirable for effective environmental interaction and facilitation of learning can be conferred on the system by additions to the i n i t i a l repertoire 
of motive generators. frequent activation of newly constructed nodes encourages detection of their relationships with other nodes and contributes to further modification and enrichment of the ltm world model. this effect can be produced by a motive generator which temporarily increases the i n i t i a l prepotency level of new nodes on a decrement 
with repetition basis. 
     a similar approach can achieve the selective attention to new environmental features characteristic of human performance. in bairn repeated activation of nodes within a parameterised range of cycles is indicated by markers on the time line records of the repetitions. if 'newness' is defined as the absence of repetition markers  a motive generator monitoring time line entries online can produce a focussing of attention by temporarily increasing the prepotency level of the nodes responsible for the 'new' time line records. such increments would disappear 
with fewer repetitions of activation than the temporary increases accorded to new 
nodes. 
learning of emotions and motives 
     interaction of the 'innate' repertoires of emotion and motive generators not only contributes to construction of the system's world model but results in the learning of 
further emotions and motives. 	representations 
of higher level or compound emotions are derived from time line sequences containing activations of two or more primary emotion generators or two or more nodes with generators featuring on their definition l i s t s . higher level motive generators capable of processing the more complex physiological trace data produced by the compound emotion generators are derived from time line sequences including associated activations of the i n i t i a l motive generators which process primary emotions. these compound motive generators provide a capability to assign i n i t i a l prepotency values to new nodes derived from sequences featuring compound emotions. 
interaction of emotions  motives and learning 
processes 
bairn provides illustrations of the effect of learning processes on emotions and motives as well as the influence of emotions 
and motives on learning processes. 	the 
settings of the mic and ccl parameters determine the generalisation/discrimination boundary 
 bundy  1  that operates in the construction of new nodes. as a 
result wide individual differences in the specifics of the representations of compound emotions and motives constructed by a system 
w i l l be produced by varying the combinations of mic and ccl values involved in detecting the sequences from which they are derived. combinations emphasising the extremes of generalisation or discrimination w i l l result in emotions and motives which in humans are 
associated with pathology. 
     this interaction offers the prospect of endowing self-modifying intelligent systems with the basis of distinctive 'personalities' that w i l l emerge as construction of their 
world model proceeds. this would be achieved by manipulation of the i n i t i a l repertoires of emotion and motive generators and the values of the learning parameters. the possible membership of the generator repertoires 
is not restricted to the range of human 
emotions and motives. 	it is defined by the range of features of intelligent systems which are functionally equivalent to emotions and motives. 	the objective of providing intelligent systems with emerging personalities is to allow for self-modification within 
broad constraints. 	the system retains the f l e x i b i l i t y and general learning capacity 
necessary to construct a world model and 
maximise the effectiveness of interaction on the basis of the specifics provided by the 
environment. the environment  however  does not dictate the overall emphasis in the system's operation. systems designed on this basis would be suitable for the control of third generation robotic devices required to function for protracted periods without 
human supervision. 
references 
bundy  a. and silver  b- a critical survey of rule learning programs. proceedings of the european conference on a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. 1  1. 
langley  p. and neches  r. 	prism user's 
manual. department of computer science  carnegie-mellon university  1. 
pfeiffer  r cognition and emotion: an information processing approach. cip working paper no. 1  dept. of psychol.  carnegiemellon university  1. 
sloman  a. and croucher  m. why robots w i l l have emotions. proceedings of the seventh international joint conference on a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. 1  1. 
wallace  j.g. a developmental approach to general learning processes. proceedings of the european conference on a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. 1  1. 

artificial intelligence in the classroom 
wynne bell 
bedford college of higher education  bedford  uk. 

abstract 
　　　　　various teaching strategies have been employed in attempting to overcome the difficulties experienced by students learning computer programming on courses held at the bedford college of higher education england. 
         the problem remains unsolved; the main difficulty encountered lies in the development of the algorithm  not in the syntax or semantics of the language. the contribution gained by the use of flowcharts has been negligible; the major contribution came from allowing the students to work in groups. 
　　　　　the essay follows the argument that  accepting the premise that programming requires logical thinking  a solution to this problem may be forthcoming if it is tackled by helping these students to develop problem solving skills from an early age; thereby placing the onus on the schoolteacher. 
         use of educational tools  namely 	bigtrak  i n i t i a l l y 	for 	the 	very 	young  	followed by the turtle 	with 	logo 	programming  	and 	latterly microprolog is advocated. 
         the 	paper 	is 	introduced 	by 	a 	brief discourse on the concept of knowledge  in order to confirm that to teach thinking is 	d i f f i c u l t   	and hence 	that 	there 	is 	a 	role for some aspect of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence in the classroom. 
　　　by definition  a teacher's role in the classroom must be that of one who teaches  imparting knowledge and guiding the studies of the pupils. but  the concept of knowledge is d i f f i c u l t to define and cannot be determined precisely in the way that some words can. in attempting to define the constituents of the concept of knowledge  various notions can be considered  for example: information  instruction  enlightenment  learning  or practical skills. 
　　attempts have been made to break knowledge into divisions  hirst  1  put forward the suggestion that knowledge was separable into distinct forms  such as mathematics  physical sciences etc. but  if these forms are accepted then the concept of a particular branch of knowledge may even differ  depending on how it is presented. polya  1  states   mathematics presented in the euclidean way appears as a systematic deductive science  but mathematics in the making appears as an experimental inductive science.  
     the view that the four ways of thought: logical  empirical  moral  and aesthetic represent more fundamental divisions of knowledge  
philips  1  perhaps relates more closely to the aim of including more of the cognitive aspects of teaching in the classroom. 
     while the claim that knowledge is worthwhile on its own account  simply for the development of the mind  can be appreciated  as cribble  1  argues  forms of d r i l l are not intrinsically worthwhile. and while this form of teaching perhaps cannot entirely be dispensed with  the question often arises relating to whether teachers actually teach children to think  i.e. to develop their ability for reasoning  experimenting  making moral reflection  or to achieve an appreciation of aesthetic principles. the knowledge that is planted in a child has to be brought into action. 
     landa  1  considers that some teachers do teach children to think but that some do not. he admits that to teach thinking is a problem  because the operations that have to be carried out on the knowledge present in the student's head  in order to be able to problem solve are not well developed. 
     the assertion that organised teaching is not required for learning to take place  is held by papert  1   who puts forward the analogy of how a child learns to talk. 
　　the difficulty of teaching children to think then is evident  and while the computer can be a catalysing agent for promoting a different type of teaching to take place in the classroom  to-date the methods employed in computer-aided-learning  have on the whole  contributed l i t t l e to further the pursuit to help children to think. computer-aided learning techniques employed in schools generally follow the traditional method of classroom teaching  and if a child's development partially depends on this traditional approach to teaching  then present computer-aided-learning does seem to provide motivation and have a novelty value  albeit  possibly a temporary innovation. 
1 w. bell 
but paperfs  1  association of this use of a computer for d r i l l and practice  combined with the use of the basic language   with that of the qwerty keyboard  exemplifies the dangers imminent when tradition takes a firm hold  and the ensuing difficulty encountered when endeavouring to bring about any change; in this case in the way that computers are used in the classroom. 
     intelligent tutoring systems cater for the student more adequately  and aid research into learning  but are rarely found in schools. also a r t i f i c i a l intelligence programs which deal with aspects of human behaviour designed to simulate behaviour help to illuminate how children think. 
     in the classroom  a simple machine in the form of a toy tank  bigtrak  can be used by primary and infant teachers for mathematics teaching and to involve the children in logical thinking  besides providing an introduction to computer techniques. the tank can be programmed to move  turn  pause or fire and the children can think of their own problems and also how to solve them  and hence program the tank. they often act as bigtrak themselves in finding out the required movements  then logically assemble them to produce the program of instructions  which importantly  they realise may not be correct at the f i r s t t r i a l . 
hence  this toy enables a means of pupil-controlled investigation to take place  besides providing a by-product of introducing measurement and direction to them. the guidance of the teacher is required  as without this its value would diminish. 
     bigtrak then forms a medium for papert's ideas  1  although a rather unrefined tool in some respects  learning is achieved through its use without formal teaching  and its advantage in schools lies in its comparative cheapness. 
     the object that papert 1  advocates for use with children  the turtle  has a cost disadvantage at present  but with the i n f i l t r a t i o n of the microcomputer in a l l schools in britain  the concept of i t   as an educational tool in the classroom  is rapidly gaining acceptance  even though many schools have to be content with   t u r t l e   graphics on the screen  and it is expected that the cost w i l l be lowered. but  even with   t u r t l e   graphics  the child is in control and observations show that they usually enact the steps required to solve their particular problem. 
     the program language incorporating the use of the turtle  logo  evolved for applications by children by feurzeig et al. 1 . the f u l l version of logo provides additional f a c i l i t i e s to the usual high level language  for example  l i s t processing and recursive functions. but  in many schools in britain only a subset of the language is in use which relate only to controlling the screen   t u r t l e   . this reduces the amount of storage required and the cost of the software. programs are also written in basic which can provide a reasonably successful logo environment in the classroom. 
     while many school teachers in britain are just beginning to be introduced to the potential of the use of logo as an educational tool  possibly because it was devised for such a purpose  a reasonable amount of research and evaluation has been carried out. 
preliminary observations in primary schools in 
bedfordshire have revealed keen interest by both teachers and children in its use. the teachers have been impressed by the strategic skills shown by many of their pupils. 
	in 	their 	evaluation 	study: 	teaching 
mathematics through logo programming  howe et 	a l . 
1   the conclusion reached is that the understanding of mathematics by children who are less able can be improved by such programming-based activities. 
     an investigation into the claims made for the use of the turtle in the classroom  involving 1 special schools situated over a wide area of england and wales terminates in july 1. the research is co-ordinated by the chiltern advisory unit  hatfield  england; the final evaluation report should help teachers in deciding the contribution that the turtle can make to the development of children. 
     while it has been shown that girls generally do not achieve as high results as boys in computer studies  the opinion is emerging that they do marginally better than the boys when logo is used. 
     but  it is not only children who can benefit from using logo  du boulay  1  showed that student teachers who experienced d i f f i c u l t y with certain areas in mathematics gained a better understanding by writing logo programs to investigate the topics. 
     logo is used in british and american schools and developments in france  to ascertain its potential for use as an intrinsic part of their educational system  are taking place. 
	prolog-programming 	in 	logic  	designed 	by 
colmerauer and colleagues in 1  images human reasoning and utilises natural language. papert enthusiasts support the use of prolog for children; a close relationship exists between logo and prolog. 
　　　prolog is now being made available for microcomputer systems in the form of microprolog  developed by mc cabe 1. relatively l i t t l e work has been carried out on its use in the classroom  but  a project has been running since october 1   logic as a computer language for children   based at imperial college  london. evaluation is being conducted in a number of schools and colleges  and courses are being held for teachers in various parts of england. 
　　this project is led by robert kowalski who considers that microprolog contributes to promoting logical thinking for use throughout the 

school curriculum and that it can stand as a subject on its own. he considers that because it is not tied to a particular machine structure  it. is more suitable for use by children than languages which are. ennels 1 . 
     ennels  1  has expressed surprise at the quickness that children are learning microprolog. the pupils build their own database and formulate queries  so promoting clear thinking and expresssion. 
     these then are some of the tools that can be used in assisting teachers to teach children to think; many other micro-technology aids are available and although many are considered to be simply computer toys  an investigation into their potential use in the classroom may reveal that some are more than toys.  computer toys come closer to imitating the style of human intelligence than the teaching machines of the past and may well represent the educational wave of the future.   gardner 1 . 
     in conclusion  the educational tools suggested for use in this paper are mainly just being introduced to schools in the bedfordshire area  hence it w i l l be some time before there can be any evidence to show that the children's capacity for clear thinking has improved and as a result the difficulties experienced by the ones who may eventually wish to include further computer programming as part  of their future studies may be lessened. current research in this area suggests that this will be so. 
