 
   this paper introduces a representation of evidential relationships which permits updating of belief in two simultaneous modes: causal   i . e . top-down  and diagnostic   i . e . bottom-up . it extends the hierarchical tree representation by allowing multiple causes to a given 
manifestation. we develop an updating scheme that obeys the axioms of probability  is computationally efficient  and is compatible with experts reasoning. the belief parameters of each variable are defined and updated by those of its neighbors in such a way that the impact of each new evidence propagates and settles through the network in a single pass. 
	i 	introduction 
   the integration of new pieces of information to existing body of knowledge constitutes a fundamental problem in a class of decision-making tasks such as situation assessment  diagnosis  pattern recognition and speech understanding. knowledge-based expert systems and decision support systems must handle this problem to achieve expert's level performance and to derive valid recommendations. this paper addresses the issues of efficiently propagating the impact of new evidence and beliefs through a hierarchically organized inference network. the inference procedure described here simultaneously models both causal and diagnostic modes of reasoning. the causal mode of reasoning refers to the inference process of updating the likelihood of an event due to modified belief in its causal factors while the diagnostic mode of reasoning refers to that of updating the likelihood of an event as a result of an update in some of its manifestations  tversky and kahneman 1 . 
   the inference procedure described here is a 
   generalization of the eayesian methods previously applied to trees  ddi 1  pearl 1  toward a class of hierarchical networks suitable to model multiple causes. the tree representation insists 
1. supported in part by the national science foundation grant 1st 1. 
1. currently with hughes research laboratories  malibu  california. 
that only one variable be considered a cause of any other variable. this restriction simplifies computations and avoids the problem of maintaining consistency among interrelated variables. however  its representational power is so restricted that many real problems cannot be modeled naturally. in order to comply with the requirements imposed by the tree structure  we must group together a l l the causal factors as the set of states of one single variable. by contrast  when people associate a given observation with multiple potential causes  they weigh one causal factor against another as independent variables  each pointing to a specialized area of knowledge. as an illustration  consider the following situation: 
   mr. holmes received a telephone call from his neighbor notifying him that she heard a burglar alarm sound from the direction of his home. as he was preparing to rush home  mr. holmes recalled that last time the alarm had been triggered by an earthquake. on his way driving home  he heard a radio newscast reporting an earthquake 1 miles away. 
   mr. holmes perceives two episodes which may be potential causes for the alarm sound  an attempted burglary and an earthquake. even though these two events are a priori independent and so  not mutually exclusive  s t i l l the radio anouncement reduces the likelihood of a burglary  as it  explains away  the alarm sound. moreover  the two causal events are perceived as individual variables each pointing to a separate frame of knowledge. the computational scheme described here uses bayes calculus to model that kind of interaction among causes in addition to the ususal interaction among diagnostic indicators. 
   this paper is organized as follows. after presenting the basic concepts and definitions  we introduce two kinds of independencies which typically characterize the interactions among the various causes of a common manifestation and among the various manifestations of a common cause. exploiting these independencies  belief parameters are identified and an efficient belief propagation scheme is developed whioh updates the beliefs of a l l variables in a single pass through the network  avoiding infinite relaxations. 
	ii 	hierarchical causal network 
the basic definitions and ooncepts used here are 

	j. kim and j. pearl 	1 
borrowed 	from pearl 	 pearl 	1 . 	a node in a 

causal netwrok represents a variable. let a variable be labeled by a capital letter  e.g.  a  b  . . .   x  y  and .its various states subscripted by numbers  e.g.  x   y . a causal network is a 
directed graph where each link x -  y represents the relationship 'x causes y1  and is quantified by a conditional probability matrix m y!x  with entries: 

we restrict the arrows to follow the direction of causality insisting that variables be only related by conditional probabilities where the cause  not the effect  is the conditioned variable. the reason is that usually the probability p manifestation!cause  is psychologically more available  tversky and kahneman  1   and therefore  can be elicited with greater ease and validity than its counterpart  
p cause'manifestation   burns and pearl  1  . 
¡¡we w i l l restrict our attention to a special kind of graph  called generalized chow tree gct  where a node may have several parents but at most one underlying path exists between any pair of nodes . since no cycle exist  a link b -  a partitions the graph into two parts: an upper subgraph  g b   and a lower subgraph  gba .. these two graphs constitute hierarchical representations for the set of data which we shall call d r and d~   respectively. these data are defined as the observations and prior beliefs obtained only at the boundaries of network. likewise  every node a partitions the graph into two parts: above a  g .  and below a  ga   representing the data set d and d respectively. figure 1 shows the causal network representing mr. holmes' belief structure. 

	i l l 	structural assumptions of independence 
   the likelihood of the various states of a variable x would  in general  depend on the entire data observed so far. however  the existence of only one path from g to x implies that the 
1. a general causal network with cycles may be transformed i n t o a gct by a systematic treatment such as neglecting the least i n f o r m a t i v e l i n k  chow 1  kim 1 . 
which means that x and z are not independent a 
p r i o r i . but become independent once we know with certainty which state of y prevails. we will call this relationship inter-symptom independence.  see figure 1-a.  
   the inter-causes relation is typically perceived to work in the opposite direction  i.e.  causes are viewed to be a priori independent and once their common symptom is observed they become coupled. in mr. holmes' example  home 
burglaries can safely be assumed independent of earthquakes. however  given the alarm sound  the likelihood of a burglary becomes dependent upon the occurrence of an earthquake. we call this relationship inter-causes independence  see figure 
1-b   and formulate it via 


1 	j. kim and j. pearl 
 level 'alarm sound and 
	of 	the 
two 
the 
distribution axis 

v approximation of p alb.c  
   in principle  the specification of p a|b c  requires a table with one entry for each state combination of the variables a  b and c. needless to say  such a table is rather troublesome to obtain from experts due to its size. for this reason  it is necessary to approximate high-order conditional probabilities p alb c  from pairwise relations p a|b  and p. a|c . 
   a description of a state at a given level of detail is an aggregation of states of the next more detailed level  patil 1 . the state of an aggregated variable is determined by a relationship among i t s component states. consider the mr. holmes example again. the state 'alarm1 
1. we assume that a is chosen to make ¡Æbel  a.  = 1. however  one may relax this constraint to represent the degree of ignoranoe such as 
dempster-shafer system  shafer 1 . 
where a is a normalization constant. eq  1  means that the regions of conflicting labels are resolved by the dominance relation. 
   the dominance relation may not hold for some variables. for those  the regions of conflicting labels are ignored and the ratio of the diagonal regions serves to produce belief distribution. for this case  the combining formula is 

note that this formula resembles the dempster's rule of combination known as  orthogonal sum  devised for the treatment of ignoranoe  shafer 
1 . 
vi propagation of information 
   assuming that the vectors 1  and   are stored with each link  our task is now to prescribe how the influence of new information spreads through the network. 
a. 	updating 


   equation  1  and  1  also demonstrate that a perturbation of the causal parameter  ¦Ð  w i l l not effect the diagnostic parameter  x  on the same link  and vice versa. therefore  any perturbation of beliefs due to new evidence propagates through the network and is absorbed at the boundary without reflection. a new equilibrium state w i l l be reached after a finite number of updates which  in the worst case  is equal to the diameter of the 
network. 
   eq  1  reveals that if no data is observed below a  i.e.  a l l x's to a are an unit vector  then a l l x's from a are also an unit vector. this means that evidence gathered at a node does not influence its spouses until their common son 
gathers diagnostic evidence. in mr. holmes' case  for example  seismic data pertaining to earthquakes would not have influenced the likelihood of burglary prior to receiving the neighbor's telephone c a l l . it is a pleasing characteristic. otherwise  a node may gather support through purely mental constucts void of diagnostic support. 
   a node which has no predecessor needs a special parameter unless it is a data node. since no causal influence is available from i t s predecessors  it requires an external parameter summarizing the background  a priori knowledge 
1. according to webster's new world dictionary   a p r i o r i   means  from cause to e f f e c t   . 
j. kim and j. pearl 1 
pertaining to that node  thus serving the classical role of subjective prior p r o b a b l i l i t y . 
   generalization of eq  1  and  1  for more than two causal factors and more than two sets of manifestations is straight forward  kim 1 . 
vii conclusions 
   we have introduced a formalization for the interaction among multiple causes which r e f l e c t s the way people often view causal relationships. based on this formulation  we have extended the tree representation to a class of hierarchical networks capable of modeling multiple causes while s t i l l maintaining the computational efficiency provided by the tree representation: belief parameters are updated by local  nearest 
neighbors  computations  they reach equillibrium after a single pass through the network and remain consistent with the tenets of probability calculus. additionally  the causal network representation lends i t s e l f naturally to object-oriented formulation; each node is an object of the same generic type and the belief parameters are the messages by which neighboring objects communicate. 
