 symbol to a concrete reality. i don't just have a formal theory about an individual named reagan; i know who this name refers to. 
     but when we build robots  there is nothing inside the robot to actually  connect  a symbol to. in fact  the major intellectual achievement of computer science in western culture is to demonstrate that a device can manipulate symbols incorrectly  without knowing what they mean. previlusly  mind-theorists who tried to build theories based on symbol manipulation kept stumbling over the homunculus required to understand the symbols being manipulated. 
     does this mean that a robot does not succeed in referring to the world at all  no  as the following sketch should demonstrate. 
     a robot can be modelled as one or more formal systems  connected to the world by way of sensors and effectors. they w i l l be formal  systems in that they operate by applying elementary operations to uninterpreted symbol structures  deriving new uninterpreted symbol structures. the sensors create the f i r s t symbol structures; the effectors receive some of the inferred symbol structures  and execute them as instructions. 
     this works because the formal system has an interpretation  which matches the real world closely. i.e. there is an assignment of real-world entities  properties  and propositions to the symbol structures of the formal system  with the following properties: 
* input soundness: the sensor apparatus is constructed so that the symbolic structures it constructs usually correspond  under the interpretation  to actual states of affairs; that i s   they are usually true. 
* inferential 	soundness: 	the 	formal 	system 	is constructed 	so 	that 	it 	tends 	to 	infer 	true symbolic 	structures 	from 	other 	true 	symbolic structures. 
* output soundness: the effector apparatus is constructed so that it tends to perform the actions that the interpretation assigns to the symbol structures given to i t . 
     for example  when a car is coming  the robot's sensors put an expression  car-coming  into the formal system  which infers  should-do  jump    and sends  jump  to the effectors  which actually causes a jump. 
     having an interpretation  does not mean that the formal system has access to something  but that there exists an interpretation in the mathematical sense. it is f u t i l e to ask for more. if the robot had access to a thing purporting to  contain the meanings  of its symbols  then either this thing would be just another formal system  and wouldn't contain the meanings after a l l ; or the robot would not be a turing machine  but some more mystical entity. if we want to stick with the formal robots that have revolutionized our thinking about the mind  we must place the interpretations of their symbols outside their heads. 
     so the interpretation can play no functional role in how the robot works. it is simply an analytical tool  to explain how it works. 
     what if there is more than one interpretation of the formal system  after a l l   any interesting system w i l l have an i n f i n i t e number of different 
     
1 	a. sloman et al. 
models. but most of them w i l l f a i l to satisfy the three soundness conditions. there is an interpretation in which  car-coming  means  rice pudding present   and  should-do  jump   means  my mother is standing on her head   but the sensors  effectors  and inference machinery do not work correctly under this interpretation. 1 expect that for any robot  there is a  standard sound interpretation  that does satisfy the soundness conditions in our world. since these conditions are stated as engineering precepts   component x usually operates according to the interpretation    there are probably lots of unimportant variants of the sound interpretation  but 1 w i l l ignore this issue. 
     1 have now answered my original questions 1 and 1  how meanings actually work. we must now ask how humans and robots might think about how they work  hirst  let me acknowledge that there is a mystery here about why humans have any opinion at a l l about whether they assign meanings to symbols. the answer might be that humans are just naturally inquisitive  and have opinions about everything  but perhaps there is some special reason to have opinions of certain kinds about oneself. 
     the symbols people think they manipulate are not those in the robot's formal system. when people think of symbols  they think of words  names  mathematics  and road signs. suppose a human  to be specific  edwin meese  is mediating on the meaning of  reagan   he knows that this symbol refers to his boss  person he sees often. he believes he can think about reagan any time he wants  and that this name refers to that person. 
	the truth is that 	for 	meese 	to 	think 	about 
reagan is for him to manipulate symbol structures that refer to reagan in his standard sound interpretation. ironically  for him to think about the name  reagan  is to manipulate symbol structures in much the same way.  since the name is a social object about which various things are known  e.g.  i t ' s pronounced differently from the name of the treasury secretary.  the idea that the one object refers to the other is a third symbol structure  used mainly by natural-language modules. 
     the mind conceals such facts about i t s e l f .   i t is usually pretty easy to see why  but that i s n ' t my main topic.  it tells i t s e l f that to think about reagan is to  directly apprehend  him. you can think about an object if you are  acquainted  with i t   if you know  which object it i s   . 
     this is contrasted with another situation we have all been i n   where we know someone  or something  by name only. suppose someone has been marooned on a desert island for twenty years  and  having returned  hears people blame someone named  reagan  for a l l our troubles. obviously   this is someone he ought to know about; he ought to know who the name refers to. somehow  just knowing that reagan is  the person everyone is blaming for our troubles  is inadequate. after finding several more facts  and seeing reagan on television  he begins to feel tht he is  knows who reagan i s     that he can think about him any time he wants. 
     people feel a sharp difference between only knowing something's name and knowing the object directly. 1 think this is an i l l u s i o n ; in reality  one accumulates information about an object gradually. there is no well defined point at which one is  really  acquainted with i t . the sharp feeling is akin to a sharp feeling of hunger; there is no qualitative difference between an empty stomach and a f u l l one  but it feels like there i s ; if it didn't  you wouldn't work so hard at finding food. in the case of acquaintance  you need a reason to work hard to gather information. 
     whatever the source of this feeling  it leads to disbelief that all knowing is mediated by a formal system. if a l l you have is symbols  then you aren't  really  acquainted with anything  and you don't  really  understand anything. in fact  the sketch 1 started with explains quite satisfactorily how a purely formal system can nonetheless deal with the real world  and  in a certain sense  have i t s symbols mean things in that world. being  directly connected   or  knowing what the symbols mean   plays no role. 
     this answers my second question  how do people think they assign meanings to symbols  the fourth question  how might we get machines to think about themselves this way   1 w i l l leave unanswered. 
