 
　a formal  but pragmatic  method of recording and organizing human expertise into a knowledge-based system is presented. practical considerations and methods which increase system validity while minimizing demands on human domain specialists are explored. 
　the methodology concentrates on domain definition  background knowledge  references  situations  and procedures   on fundamental knowledge formulation  elementary rules  beliefs  and expectations   and on basal knowledge consolidation  review and correction cycles . experience gained from testing and from expert feedback is described. 
	i 	background 
　until recently. artificial intelligence researchers have developed knowledge-based systems  kbs  for problems in which the human expert was constantly available and involved. however  the very scarcity of the expertise to be modelled may be the motivation for system development. the expertise may be heuristic and dispersed among several individuals while a single expert may be difficult to locate  let alone interview. 
　traditionally  the knowledge acquisition  ka  phase of a new application has taken one of two approaches. in the first  an existing model well-suited to the new domain is used to develop a set of axioms and rules  i.e.  the knowledge base. such is the case with the puff program  kunz  1  under the emycin paradigm  van mellc  1 . a second ka method is the historically successful team approach where a domain expert and a knowledge engineer are locked away for months or years and return with a model and a computer program which are comparable in performance to human specialists. this method has produced several remarkable programs such as prospector  duda  1   internist  miller  1   and rl  mcdermott  1 . 
　other experimental approaches such as discovery systems  lenat  1  may be practical eventually. meanwhile  the knowledge engineer must still resolve the problem of limited availability of experts in disciplines where the expert is unique or indispensible and cannot be spared from the day-to-day task. for example  there are many human advisors in political or military domains producing situation assessment and warning reports  ben-bassat  1  who are also performing other critical functions. they often cannot dedicate months to develop an expert system which could be used to aid in the synthesis of the huge amounts of data which decision-makers must consider in order to warn of attack. 
   access to these experts may be restricted due to reasons of organization  geography  or security. additionally  the knowledge in political and military domains is often sketchy  diversified  distributed  and highly transitory. the more efficiently a knowledge engineer spends the available time  the more valid the model produced. it is reasonable to work on the assumption that any methodology which improves knowledge acquisition productivity in these extreme cases will also be helpful in less stringent cases. additionally  expert system verification  suwa  1  is a necessary component of formal knowledge acquisition and any limitations placed on the availability of human expertise places corresponding limitations on the scope and validity of the models and programs under development. 
*this work was sponsored by 1 internal trw research and development funds. 
　we must explore domains which break many of the traditional precepts upon which cautious knowledge engineering practice has relied. the expert may not be an available  authoritative individual  but instead a collection of part-time advisors aiding the engineer in the creation  rather than the recording  of consolidated expertise. we are in the early stages of approaching this problem  but present techniques and results are relevant to traditional knowledge acquisition tasks. these techniques may also be applied in the more general case of specifying solutions to large-scale software engineering tasks which use heuristic approaches and algorithms. 
	ii 	knowledge acquisition cycle 
　although generally undocumented  many knowledge acquisition techniques are intuitive  common practices. a significant innovation is the production of a ka document series. the establishment of this documentation would be a partial substitute for the expert and would provide system designers and users with a common medium for communication and reference. 
　the suggested knowledge acquisition methodology for a new problem domain takes place in three phases: domain definition  fundamental knowledge formulation  and basal knowledge consolidation 
 figure 1 . 


iii domain definition 
　after the problem is defined by the user and requirements team based on accepted engineering practices  the first phase of knowledge acquistion is the careful understanding and recording of the domain. the goal is the production of a domain definition handbook containing: 
  general problem description  
  bibliography of reference documents  
  glossary of terms  acronyms  and symbols  
  identification of authoritative *'experts   
  definition of appropriate and realistic performance metrics  and 
  description of example reasoning scenarios. 
　the second item deserves comment. source references are often sufficient to introduce the engineer to the domain; in particular  government sources have great volumes of useful documents  although they may not always be easy to obtain. 
　an informal experiment was performed to analyze effort expended on domain definition. a domain practitioner in washington  d.c. and a knowledge engineer in los angeles communicated over a period of fourteen weeks by telephone and mail couriers only. the domain was a plausible but fictitious military situation assessment problem where the expert examines standardized reports of sensor signals and produces an interpretation of their meaning from heuristic knowledge. the effort expended  which included development of a typical scenario for later analysis but no rules  was 
  1 hours ka time  1 time  
  1 hours expert time over 1 weeks  1 of ka time  
  1 hours secretarial time  1 of ka time  
  ka labor: interviewing 1%  collating 1%  analyzing 
1%  describing orally 1%  writing 1%  background study 1%  and evaluating 1% 
　the most surprising result is the time spent in the telephone interview. not so startling is the time spent in background study of documents and texts which could have been decreased by having the expert available to answer tutorial-level questions. this experiment produced 1 pages or approximately 1 words. 
	iv 	fundamental knowledge formulation 
　in the second phase of knowledge acquistion  scenarios are reviewed which have been selected by the expert and which fulfill five criteria of ''fundamental  knowledge: the most nominal  the most expected  the most important  the most archetypal  and the best understood situations. this review forms a baseline for minimum performance  predictable testing and correction  and careful delineation of capabilities which can be expanded and subjected to experimentation. this fundamental knowledge baseline should include: 
  an ontology of domain entities  object relationships 
 classes   and object descriptions; 
  a selected lexicon  vernacular ; 
  a definition of input sources and formats; 
  an initial state description including static  background  knowledge; 
  a fundamental set of reasoning and analysis rules; and 
  a list of human strategies  meta-rules  which may be considered by system designers for possible inclusion as control rules. 
　this corpus is written in english  rather than a formal language. some of this knowledge will have previously been acquired during domain definition. reasonable validity of this corpus can be tested only 
m. grover 1 
by presenting an implemented version of the knowledge with the scenarios from which it was acquired and producing the behavior expected by the original expert. 
a. 	interview techniques for rule acquisition 
     four different approaches for interviewing an expert during fundamental knowledge formulation were attempted in an unpressured setting;  1  forward scenario simulation  archetype acquisition    1  goal decomposition   twenty questions     1  procedural simulation  protocol analysis   and  1  pure reclassification  frame analysis . the first and last methods were the most useful and were later used in a highly time-restricted set of interviews. 
　in the forward scenario simulation approach the expert chooses a very elementary scenario and verbally  walks through  the reasoning necessary to reach a goal. this interview takes place in a laboratory setting  not an actual working environment of the expert. this approach  while apparently direct  has at least three difficulties: 
1. blazing a trail through uncharted territory involves terms and definitions whose details may not have been made clear in domain definition. delays and confusion may result. 
1. rule fanout problems are recognized but must be ignored if one is to carry through with the scenario. a rule may become too specific or a reasoning path forgotten. 
1. distinction between the reasoning methods and the job of the reasoner may be confounded. 
　the second approach  goal decomposition  is the traditional problem reduction approach and is useful for enumerating goal states and describing general categories of goals; however  efforts to acquire detailed rules in reverse have not been successful. the interview may begin with  suppose there is an x  but collapses at  what is prohibiting x from performing its mission  . such rules are illustrative of purposes but do not produce detailed interpretations of situations and objects. additionally  the fanout problem remains unsolved. 
　in the third approach  procedural simulation  a domain specialist is required to solve a specific problem in a normal manner and setting rather than to construct rules verbally. however  the interviewer must occasionally interrupt the natural reasoning process. otherwise  the knowledge engineer may infer  rather than elicit  the actual reasoning  simon  1 . at the very least  this approach enables the engineer to observe and appreciate the expert's job  and may contribute to overall design improvements. 
　the fourth approach  pure reclassification  considers that much of the effort in a situation assessment problem domain is spent reclassifying obscrvables into more specific objects and activities. the rules therefore will seek information to do that interpretation. it appears appropriate to guide the interview toward the construction of rules which fill in gaps in observations  similar to traditional backward chaining models. 
　presuming that the problem is object-oriented and that these objects are well known to the expert  then the construction of reclassification rules may be useful. although this construction also implies more complex rule control  it provides a means of sub-goal formation and allows work on many fronts at once. however  reasoning chains tend to be intricate and multi-leveled. 
　knowledge engineers at trw have commented that these hypothetical objects could be represented as  frames  with rules attempting to fill the slots in those frames. eventually  enough information is gathered to conclude the existence of one or more specific objects and activities. on the other hand  simple object-attribute pairs or a relational model may be sufficient. further  the term  frame  may be too inexact to be meaningful  and the simpler schemes of representation may be preferable. once the domain is explored in sufficient detail  a more concise model can be constructed. 
b. 	follow-up study 
　　a follow-up study was performed in which the engineer and expert from the domain definition experiment spent one week in the same location under intense interview conditions. eighteen hours of actual interviews resulted in fifty-three preliminary english analysis rules for 

1 m. grover 
the fictional military warning scenario and 1 background axioms and initial conditions. the refinement and implementation of these rules using a variety of computer languages is ongoing but incomplete. the following is one of the sample rules acquired. 
if some gun or missile unit is determined near some location  loc1 
and there is some gun or missile defendable item at some location  loc1  
	and 	the distance between  loc1  and  loc1  is 
less than the gun or missile range of 
that unit 
	unless 	that unit is moving 
then assert that unit is probably defending that item 
v basal knowledge consolidation 
　knowledge acquisition is a continuous process and the third major step in this process is the  review and improve'' cycle of basal knowledge consolidation  figure 1 . basal activity may be defined in the same sense as in physiology: the lowest level of activity  system behavior  essential to the maintenance of vital functions. in a kbs  this refers to a core system in which all of the components in an operational system are performing  but without the breadth and depth of a rigorous environment. it must  however  meet the initial minimum performance standards set in the domain definition. 

   basal knowledge  then  is that set of rules and definitions adequate to produce basal activity. the fundamental knowledge corpus is reviewed and enhanced by appropriate reconstruction of rules. corroboration with additional experts may be attempted at this point. confidence levels  if appropriate  are added. the expert is consulted in detail regarding strategy for the appropriate application and sequencing of reasoning rules; this strategy is used as  inspiration  for the selection of kbs control mechanisms. resource bounds for programs are different than those for humans. thus  control issues for attention management must be resolved on the basis of efficient use of computing resources not brain cells. extensive behavior checks are performed both with the original expert and panels a la internist  miller  1 . this review process continues through the addition of novel scenarios until the system consistently behaves within the established general domain in a manner approved by the original experts. this core system can undergo further development as required. 
vi commentary 
　some comments gathered from the domain specialist  snell  1  warrant special interest  e.g.  avoid talking about performance expectations during the early phases; do not rush the expert; keep rules as selfevident as possible; expect ambiguity; use existing documentation; and let the expert do the talking. 
　the intent of this paper is to encourage others to discuss related experiences. this pragmatic paradigm for knowledge acquisition under limited access to expertise deserves greater exploration in order to minimize the waste associated with poor use of expert time and. the frustrations of inadequate methodology. 
　these experimental results are somewhat anecdotal and further studies would be very useful. examination of similar cases should aid in the development of important applications involving rare expertise in  fringe  domains  as well as improve more universal knowledge acquisition efforts. the methods described in this paper are being applied to contractual work  grover  1; goodman  1  as well as a new domain involving expert tuning of numerical model parameters of a complex system. 
