 
consideration of the similarity between direct and indirect speech act understanding give rise to the notion that taxonomies of speech acts may not be helpful in modelling language understanding. a computer model which treats representations of direct and indirect speech acts similarly and succesfully has been implemented without any such taxonomy and without an explicit representation of the difference between direct and indirect speech acts. 
introduction. 
　　　speech acts theory is of great interest to many workers from various d i s c i p l i n e s interested in natural language. one of the problems that their work has highlighted is that of the indirect speech act: an utterance which the speaker makes carry an illocutlonary force more important than  and in addition to  the illocutlonary force derivable from the literal meaning of that utterance  searle 1 . 
     another problem which has received considerable attention  eg austin 1  searle 
1  dore 1  katz 1  vendler 1 hancher 1  stiles 1 and many others  is the c l a s s i f i c a t i o n of speech acts i n t o types. here there are two questions: 
1  what types of speech acts are there  
1  what should t h e i r c r i t e r i a for classification be  
i am going to suggest in the following that these questions may be avoided as the notion of speech act types is not essential for natural language understanding  nlu . furthermore i am going to reach this position by considering the understanding of a few direct and indirect speech acts and by arguing that direct and indirect speech acts may be understood by a s i n g l e mechanism. for brevity the discussion is restricted to request and inform type speech acts. 
an example. 
consider such utterances as:-
1  its cold in here. 
1  turn on the heater. 1  shut the window. 
	speech act 	t h e o r i s t s 	 eg austin 1  
searle 1  t e l l us that  1  is an inform type  direct  speech act  whilst  1  and  1  are directive or request type  direct  speech acts. however it is easy to visualize a situation in which a speaker  mary  say  utters  1  and her hearer  john  say  infers that she actually meant to convey something in addition to that  ie  1   or  1   or  1  and  1  . uttering  1  would then be termed making an  indirect  request. let us c a l l this situation case a. 
　　　similarly  one could utter  1  or  1  and simultaneously convey the inform meaning of  1 . however it is not usual to call either  1  or 
 1   indirect informs  as the inform is not their primary function. 	let us 	call this case b. 
     additionally  if mary enters a cool room and says  1  to john  as she believes the window to be open  it would seem very strange to c a l l 
 1  an indirect way of uttering the request  1  if john were to turn on the heater  as he knows that the window is already closed and that there is a heater which is turned off .  case 
c . 
　　　if it is accepted that case a above is a  classic  indirect speech act  how do we describe cases b and c  case b cannot be described as a typical indirect speech act as it is less important to mary that john infer  1  than that he confirm with her l i t e r a l request  1 .  that i s   if one accepts that the request is the more primary meaning in case a.  possibly one could avoid the problem by describing case b as an instance of a  background entailment   smith and wilson 1 . and consequently claim that a different mechanism is used to understand  1  from the utterance of  1  in case b than the mechanism used to understand  1  from the utterance of  1  in case a. however  this possibility does not help in the analysis of case c. 

	in case 	c 	john 	responds 	cooperatively 
 grice 1  perrault allen and cohen 1   to a request that mary did not intentionally make. note that this case does not seem to be accomodated by the work of allen and perrault who explicitly follow speech act theory in assuming that the speaker makes his utterances with the intention that the hearer recognizes his intentions  allen 1 pl1  allen and perrault 1 pl1 . however  to accomodate this case are we to say that  1  is understood from  1  by a different mechanism again than that used in cases a or b  or are we to look instead for a 
single mechanism which can deal with a l l three example cases and for which  indirect speech acts  are merely a special case  
　　　a single mechanism is certainly the most elegant solution  and its presence is suggested by an examination of mary's primary aim  or superordinate goal   in making either utterance in cases a  b or c: she wishes to be warm. 
　　　recognizing mary's aim t e l l s us john's action helped mary to accomplish her goal even when he turned on the heater and did not obey her l i t e r a l request to shut the window  ie case c . 
　　　from the above it would seem that john  or any hearer   is capable of inferring at least some of mary  or any speaker's   superordinate goal s  in making an utterance. however the hearer of an utterance can not tell in advance which of the speaker's utterances w i l l indicate higher unsatisfied goals  le be  indirect speech acts  . therefore it seems that the hearer must continually examine each of the speaker's utterances for such allusions. this must be so even for so called direct requests  as in case c. consequently the hearer must process direct and indirect speech acts identically and use the same inference procedures in order to understand both fully. 
　　　what then is the f u n c t i o n of searle's request speech act type  as hearers may choose not to acceed to requests  or decide to cooperate in other ways  case c   it would seem that requests only suggest  or inform  the hearer as to the speaker's desires. perhaps then requests may be l i t t l e more than informs in which the speaker expresses precisely the course of action she wishes the hearer to take. that is  from the point of view of the understander of speech acts it may not be relevant that utterances  1  and  1  are requests  as long as the hearer can detect from them the speaker's superordinate goal s . it therefore seems that the notion of different speech act types is not necessary for nlu** 
     additionally  it is clear from the l i t e r ature that the classification of speech acts into types is primarily for analytic purposes  austin 1  stiles 1 etc  and it is not stated anywhere that that this classification is essen-
j. ellman 1 
t i a l to the understanding process. this may seem strange considering the attention that typologies of speech acts have received but i believe this to be more a reflection of the differing aims of the workers from the various disciplines involved in the area  ie philosophy  linguistics  psychology etc  and those of computational linguistics. 
two suggestions have been made so far then  
1  that the notion of a speech act type is not essential for nlu. 
1  that direct and indirect speech acts may be understood by the same mechanism. 
a computer model. 
     a computer model has been programmed using the above ideas which is capable of understanding some indirect speech acts. the model copes with representations of cases a  b and c in its form of english. this involves only two types of mental predicates   following perrault allen and cohen 1  cohen 1  allen 1: eg speaker 
intends  hearer knows etc.  and uninterpreted propositions  eg: that a has the salt . additiona l l y   the model uses a notion of mutual belief  mb   see shiffer 1  smith 1 . mutual belief is necessary for the following reason: if a speaker makes some utterance successfully  he can reason that the hearer now knows the contents of that utterance. similarly the speaker 
knows that the hearer knows etc. whilst such processing may be limited in practice  clark and marshall 1   it is necessary in this implementation of the theory for knowledge states to be derivable to any depth from a mutually believed item. 
     the two participants in the conversation are modelled as concurrently executing production systems  ie  the model is more similar to that of power 1  than that of allen 1 .*** . they have independent agendas and beliefs and communicate by one special rule which the production interpreter recognizes as an inform speech act. this is the only type of speech act that the system knows about. the result of this act is to make the contents of the utterance mutually believed. that i s   not only does the hearer know the contents of the utterance  but the speaker knows the hearer knows etc. this differs from allen and perrault's  1  formulation of inform which only results in the hearer knowing the utterance's contents. 
     the model operates as follows: the participants are given i n i t i a l belief states. one of them is then given an intention to achieve some goal. if this goal or intention leads to the subgoal of making an utterance  the second participant t r i e s to infer the f i r s t participant's superordinate goal s  in making just that utterance. this inference process exploits the fact that the production rules used in making plans are applicable in reverse   ie given some result state the participants may infer the goal state that gave rise to that result.  

1 	j. ellman 
this method contrasts with that used by a l l e n   l 1 1   w h i c h i n v o l v e s s e v e r a l 
heuristics.*** 
　　　having inferred such a superordinate intention for the speaker  the hearer w i l l then find a rule which embodies grice's 1  cooperative principle. he w i l l apply this rule and in doing so w i l l  in perrault allen and cohen's  1  terms   adopt the speaker's goal as his own. this means that mary's uttering  1    1   or  1  w i l l lead john to infer that mary wishes to be warm. therefore john wishes her to be warm. consequently he w i l l shut the door  close the window  or do whatever else is appropriate. his actions and utterances are determined by his knowledge of the situation of which mary's utterance  and his inferences from i t     form just a part. it is not important to him that mary uttered a request or an inform speech act: it only matters that he is able to detect her most primary intention  or goal  in making that speech act. 
     the implication for nlu from this work is that not only is the notion of speech act types redundant  but so is the difference between  direct  and  indirect  speech acts. indeed  what is in classical terras a direct request used to convey its literal meaning may lead the hearer to disregard the speaker's superficial intention in favour of some action more consistent with the speaker's ultimate goal. 
notes 
	* 	current address: unilever research  port 
sunlight laboratory  quarry road east  bebington  
merseyside l1jw  uk 
     ** this idea has appeared previously in ellman  1  with an argument based upon the function versus content of several types of speech acts  and also in clark and carlson  1 . these authors reached this position from a discussion of mutual belief. 
　　　*** a f u l l comparison of this work with that of allen et al. is done in ellman  forthcoming . 
acknowledgement 
i thank mark steedman for supervision  support any many stylistic changes to this paper. 
