 
string grammars have been found in many ways inadequate for parsing inflectional languages with  free  word order. to overcome these problems we have replaced linear string grammars and tree transformations by their multidimensional generalization  graph grammars. 
in our approach parsing is seen as a transformation between two graph languages  namely the sets of morphological and semantic representations of natural language sentences. an experimental finnish question-answering system suvi based on graph grammars has been implemented. in suvi the role of individual words is active. each word is associated to a 
syntactico-senantic constituent type that is represented by a transition network - l i k e graph whose transitions correspond to transformations in the derivation graph. parsing is performed by interpreting the constituent type graphs corresponding to the words of the current sentence. 
1 why graph grammars   
in parsing highly inflectional languages with loose syntax by string grammars several problems arise with the formalism: 
   1   morphological structures cannot be adequately represented by trees and string grammars. 
   1 many relations between words and constituents are difficult to express by trees and string rewrite rules. for example  case  person  and number agreements are widely used. 
   1 relatively free word and constituent ordering found in inflectional languages leads to large and complex grammars with string grammars that are based on linear ordering of symbols. 
   1 discontinuous constituents occur often in inflectional languages. 
   1 the levels of morphology  syntax and semantics are quite intermingled in inflectional languages. for example  in finnish the correlation between morphological and semantic cases is essential. 
to solve these problems a stronger  multidimensional formalism that can cope with different levels of language seems necessary. in t h i s paper we suggest graph grammars / 1   1  1/ for the purpose. besides their high generative power graph grammars offer an i l l u s t r a t i v e formal tool for modelling language understanding processes. 
1 a graph grammar formalism for natural language processing 
algebraic graph grammars  agg  /1/ can be considered a multidimensional generalization of linear string grammars. in agg's the catenation of strings is replaced by the more versatile notion of  gluing  graphs together. string productions are generalized into graph productions which e x p l i c i t l y express structural transformations in the derivation graph. applying a graph production means that a subgraph corresponding to the l e f t hand side of the production is replaced by i t s right hand side in the derivation graph. however  additional  application conditions  must hold to quarantee that arcs with no source or goal node w i l l not arise and that the result of the derivation is well-defined. analogously to the string case a graph language is defined as the set of a l l terminally colored graphs derivable from an i n i t i a l start graph by some sequence of productions of the grammar. 
the formalism of this paper / 1 / contrasts the basic notions of agg's in three major ways: 
   - grammatical derivation sequences are given explicitly by transition network -like  control graphs  whose transitions correspond to transformations in the derivation graph  cf. the notion of  programmed graph grammars  /1/ . 
   - application conditions in our grammars are t r i v i a l l y true due to some restrictions and 
modifications to agg's. the resulting formalism is argued to be intuitive  semantically plausible  and computationally efficient. 
   - nodes and arcs in the graphs are associated to a set of properties that can be modified as a side effect of direct derivations  cf. the notion of  attributed graph grammars  /1/ . 
in our experimental question-answering system suvi nodes have three properties: ext  extension  is the set of a l l objects in the real world 
knowledge base the node currently refers to; quant is the quantifier of the extension; cat is the syntactico-bemantic type or category of the 

1 	e. hyvonen 
node. arcs have no properties. essentially  the derivation graph is a set of relations between quantified extensional sets of grammatical and real world objects belonging to different syntactico-semantic categories. 
1 	a graph grammar based semantic parser 
figure 1 depicts the function and structure of our suvl-systern. 

	figure 1. 	the overall structure of suv i and the graph grammer parser. 
first words and idioms are delinearized by the morphological analyzer into small frame-like word graphs representing morphological word forms. i n i t i a l node properties  ext  quant  and cat  are associated to the nodes. for example  the singular p a r t i t i v e noun  ohjelmaa   a program  
would refer existentially to a program in the set of a l l programs while the nominative plural form  ohjelmat   the programs  refers to all programs. morphological analysis cg-stack consists of the control graphs corresponding to the constituent types of the individual  words in the sentence and a set of sentence-independent transformational graphs. arcs in c-graphs usually correspond to direct derivations in the derivation graph but can perform other operations  too  like pushing new c-graphs into the cg-stack to be interpreted later. by this way  for example  nouns analyse their post-attributes and verbs their deep case constituents. 


the upper graph of figure 1 illustrates part of a derivation graph that contains the morphological structure of three successive finnish words  kaikki suuret ohjelmasi    a l l big 
programs-of-yours . the last word  ohjelmasi  is morphologically ambiguous but can be represented by a single word graph by setting non-unary extensions to nodes expressing the case and number. these extensions w i l l later be automatically focused in clause context by direct derivations demanding congruences between words and constituents. entries and word forms having different meaning or syntactico-semantic properties are considered lexically ambiguous. they are represented by a set of alternative word graphs. 
the goal of the parser is to generate from each morphological representation of the sentence corresponding hierarchical semantic case structure. the parser has three major dynamic data structures   f i g . 1 : the derivation graph  the stack of word graphs  wg-stack   and the stack of transition network - l i k e control graphs  c-graphs  with p r i o r i t i e s  cg-stack . after parsing begins by interpreting the f i r s t c-graph in the cg-stack. the constituent type c-graphs are defined in such a way that a l l word graphs from the wg-stack w i l l eventually be glued into the derivation graph and corresponding c-graphs interpreted. by the transformational c-graphs passive clauses and yes/no-questions are transformed into simple active declaratives. in the end cg-stack and wg-stack are empty and the derivation graph constitutes a labelled tree of semantic case propositions. 
c-graphs are i l l u s t r a t i v e descriptions of syntactico-semantic constituent types. for example  figure 1 t e l l s that in an np-human constituent genetive  pronoun  and adjective attributes with a quantifier may precede the main word in the combinations expressed by the graph. attributes can be already parsed lower level constituents as well as single words  because these both are represented in a compatible way. 

e. hyvonen 1 

 progr.  are well-defined after the derivation due to the congruence demand of the adjective attribute construction. 

	figure 1. 	production adj-attr for the adjective attribute construction. 
at the highest level of constituent generation in a clause - i.e. when interpreting the c-graph with the lowest priority in the cg-stack - semantic deep case relations are generated between the predicate verb and its deep case constituents. figure 1 illustrates a production for generating the ag-case. node  n1un-hum.  matches nodes with cat=noun-human and n1m part matches nodes expressing nominative or partitive case. arc     matches both  - and  -arcs. 
figure 1 depicts the resulting semantic representation for the question 
 kuka laboratorion luennoitsijoista on luennoinut jonkun serainaarimaisen kurssin tietojerikasittelyteoriasta syksylla 1     which lecturer of the laboratory has lectured some seminar-type course on computer science in the autumn 1   . 
figure 1. 	semantic representation of a sentence with three major constitupnts. 
dotted lines encircle the semantic case representations of the three major constituents of the clause. the case structures are generated by corresponding constituent type c-graphs. 
after parsing resp1nd-generator computes the extensions of the constituents in the clause context. this is obtained by recursively demanding that the semantic cases between the constituent nodes in the derivation graph hold for their extensions in the knowledge base. the final extension of the main-clause-node corresponding to the predicate of the sentence is a set of propositional deep case structures in the knowledge base that satisfy the semantic conditions expressed by the derivation graph. by comparing these propositions with respect to the quantified extensions of the deep case constituent nodes it is possible to generate answers to different kind of questions and requests. 
as a whole  the idea of our graph grammar parser is to construct a sentence-dependent graph grammar and apply it to the morphological representations  of the current sentence. the control mechanism to find the correct derivation sequence s  to corresponding semantic case structure s  is essentially defined by the constituent types of individual words. parsing is seen as a meaning preserving transformation between two graph languages - i.e. the sets of morphological and semantic representations of sentences. these graph languages correspond to two representational levels of the natural language to be parsed. 

1 	e. hyvonen 
1 the advantages of the graph grammar parser 
in this paper graph grammars have been introduced into the f i e l d of natural language processing. as a conclusion  l e t us l i s t what we consider important points from theoretical and practical point of view in our graph grammar approach: 
　　1  expressive power. using graph grammars any kind of labelled relations can be represented and processed  not only sequential and hierarchic ones. the same formalism can be used uniformly at different levels of language. 
　　1  designer friendliness. graphical drawings support design process in the same way as blue prints in many fields of engineering and offer the basis for documentation. the conversion from pictures to data structures is straight forward. 
　　1  uniformity. graphs can be used to express different kinds of procedural  and declarative knowledge like c-graphs and semantic networks. 
　　1  extendability and modifiability. in suvi constituent models can be designed and modified modularily by c-graph descriptions. we have 
asked the question what is in the word  ' a b i t in the same s p i r i t as in /1  1/. a major point in 
which our parser contrasts the  word expert  parsers is that i t s function is specified by e x p l i c i t syntactic o-semantic  models of constituents. 
　　1  computational efficiency. specialized cg-stack's are created dynamically for individual sentences. only relevant language knowledge is used during parsing. we argue that productions and grammars of our type can be designed to be e f f i c i e n t / 1 / . 
due to these issues the graph grammar approach seems promising in handling the problems 1 of parsing inflectional language as listed in section 1: 
　　1  complex morphological structures and many ambiguities can be expressed i n t u i t i v e l y by word graphs. 
　　 .  figures 1 and 1 i l l u s t r a t e rewrite rules containing multiple congruences between two words or constituents. 
   1  the production of figure 1 shows a way of representing free constituent order; the agent noun phrase can be situated either before or after the predicate. 
   1  problems of representing discontinuous constituents can be approached with productions in which congruences  category types etc. properties are demanded in stead of sequential relations. we have used this kind of productions in analysing allied verb forms. 
   1  morphological  syntactic  and semantic categories and relations are used in parallel in a single production   f i g . 1 and 1 . however  suvi identifies the difference between structurally and semantically  domain-dependently  incorrect sentences since domain-dependent c r i t e r i a have not been used to quide parsing. 
graphical representations have traditionally been used to i l l u s t r a t e different kinds of linguistic and computational phenomena. our i n t u i t i o n is that they should be used not only as i l l u s t r a t i o n s but as a discipline and a tool in designing and implementing models on these phenomena. 
1 acknowledgements 
thanks 	to 	the 	personnel 	of 	digital 	systems 
laboratory and jouko seppanen for f r u i t f u l discussions and proof reading earlier versions of this paper. finnish academy and the finnish cultural foundation have supported our work financially. 
1 