 
　　we present a new strategy for semantic paramodulation for horn sets and prove its completeness the strategy requires for each paramoduiation that either both parents be false positive units or that one parent and the paramodulant both be false relative to an interpretation we also discuss some of the issues involved in choosing an interpretation that has a chance of giving better performance that simple set-of-support paramoduiation. 
1. introduction 
　　in  it is argued that paramoduiation has the following advantages over resolution with the equality axioms: 1. paramoduiation emphasizes the use of the functional representation as opposed to the relational representation; 1. in functional representation terms are not split up and so demodulation is more effective; and 1. paramoduiation works directly on deeply nested terms as opposed to resolution which uses function substitution to build up or tear down terms one level at a time. on the other hand  paramoduiation has proven difficult to control. some restrictive strategies of a general nature have been developed  e.g.  1  but these are still not as effective as we would like. an often-times useful approach is to consider strategies for special classes of problems. in this paper we present a new semantic strategy for paramoduiation for horn sets  extending the work of . we prove the completeness of the strategy and discuss some issues relating to its use  in particular. some ideas about how interpretations should be chosen . 
1. preliminary theoretical results 
definition. a horn semantic resolution with respect to an interpretation i is a resolution inference which satisfies one of the following two conditions: l  one of the parents is a positive unit which is false in i. or 1  one of the parents and the resolvent are both false in 1. 
lemma 1   1  theorem l  . horn semantic resolution is complete for unsatisnable horn sets. 
　　for the rest of this section we use slightly modified definitions of ground clause and ground resolution in order to simplify the analyses of ground deductions. 
definition a ground clause is a multiset of literals. we use the notation c: -li -1 ... lnd to represent n occurrences of literal -l in a clause c. d represents the remaining multiset of literals in c. 
definition let ci: -li ... ln d and c1: li ... lm e be two ground clauses where cl contains at least n occurrences of literal l and clause c1 contains at least 
   this work was supported in part by national science foundation grant mcs 1. 
m occurrences of literal l. d and e are multisets of literals. the clause c1: d e is a ground resolvent of parent clauses cl and c1. we say that the set of n occurrences of -l in cl matches the set of m occurrences of l in c1 duplicate literals in a resolvent are not merged. 
　　note that a horn multiset clause still has only one occurrence of a positive literal and that resolution of horn multiset clauses yields a horn multiset clause. 
lemma 1. let dl be a horn semantic resolution deduction of a clause cl from a ground set s using interpretation i. then there exists a horn semantic resolution deduction d1 of a clause c1 where 
1. c1 is logically equivalent to cl  and 
1. for each resolution in d1 exactly one literal of the false clause is matched. 
proof. the following algorithm constructs d1 from dl 
1. choose a highest node in the tree representing dl in which more than one literal from the false clause is matched. if there is no such node then stop  otherwise  let the parents of the resolution be p1. -li ... ln d and p1: l e. the resolvent is r: d e. 
1. replace the above resolution by a sequence of n resolutions. the resolvents are rl: -li... -ln-1 d e  r1: -li ... -ln-1 d el e1  ...   rn: d el ... en. 
1 resolutions in dl on descendents of literals in e are replaced  recursively  by resolutions on the corresponding multiple copies in el ... en. go to 1 
neither pi nor p1 can be a positive unit false in i. therefore r must be false in i. because -l is false in i  each of the clauses rl ... rn is also false in i. thus each resolution introduced in step 1 is horn semantic. a highest node with the given property is selected at each iteration. the deduction is expanded  but only above the selected node; further  no new node above the selected node has the given property. thus  the algorithm terminates. clearly the resulting resolvent is logically equivalent to cl. 
qed 
lemma 1. let dl be a ground horn semantic resolution deduction of clause c from ground set s using interpretation 1. suppose clause -l eo is false in i and occurs in dl. suppose also that -l does not occur in c. then there exists a horn semantic resolution deduction from s of clause c in which 
1. the deduction of -l eo is the same as in dl  
1. -l is the literal upon which clause -l eo is resolved  and 

1. d1 has exactly the same number of nodes as dl. 
proof. let the deduction be as shown in figure la where 
ei+1 =  ei - |mi  u fi. l and mi are literals  and ei  fi and gi are multisets of literals. assume that literal -l in clause -l en descends from literal -l in clause -l e1.  recall that duplicate literals are never merged in a resolvent.  clause -lei is false in i because neither of its parents is a false positive unit. therefore f1 is false. similarly  each clause -l ei  and each multiset fi  1 n  is false in i. finally  en+1 is false in i. now consider deduction d1  figure lb  in which the clause l fn has been moved up in the deduction and resolved with clause l e1. all other resolutions remain unchanged. clearly gi = ei-1 + fn  1 n  is false in 1. thus all resolutions in d1 are horn semantic  it is clear that d1 has the same number of nodes as dl. qed 
lemma 1. similar results to those of lemma 1 hold for the case in which l e1 is the start clause  false in i as before  and en is not empty. 
proof. l ei   l i n  must be false because its parent l 
ei-1 is a false non-unit clause. en+1 is false because en is not empty by hypothesis. the rest of the proof is the same as in lemma 1. qed 
remark. lemmas 1 and 1 allow us to assume without loss of generality that given a false clause in a ground horn semantic resolution deduction  an arbitrary single occurrence of a negative iteral can be chosen as the literal matched for the next resolution. 
corollary 1. let s be an unsatisflable set of clauses  and let 1 be an interpretation of the symbols of s. then there exists a resolution refutation of s in which each resolution satisfies one of the following two conditions: 
1. one of the parents is a positive unit false in i  or 
1. the parent with the negative literal of resolution and the resolvent are both false in i. 
lemma 1. let c be a clause with the following properties. 
1. c occurs in a ground horn semantic resolution deduction with respect to e- interpretation i. 
1. c contains a positive literal l that is true in i  l descends from an equality axiom  and any remaining literals of c are false in 1. 
then c also has one of the following properties. 
1. c is itself the equality axiom. 
1. c is a unit clause obtained by resolving two false positive units with either transitivity  ttt  or predicate substitution  ttt . 
1. c is an immediate resolvent of function substitution  tt  with a false positive unit. 
1. c is an immediate resolvent of predicate substitution  tft  with a false positive equality unit. 
proof. trivial by case analysis. 
lemma 1. let c be a clause with properties 1 and 1 above but with l a negative equality literal  anot=b. 
then c also has one of the following properties. 
1. c is itself the equality axiom. 
1. c is an immediate resolvent of predicate substitution  ttf  with a false positive non-equality unit. 
1. c is an immediate resolvent of transitivity  ttf  with a false positive equality unit. 
proof. trivial by case analysis. 

1 w. mccune and l. henschen 
theorem 1. let s be an e-unsatisriable set of ground horn clauses  and let 1 be an e-interprc. ition for the symbols of s. then there exists a resolution and paramodulation refutation of s u fa=a| a is a ground termj in which each resolution is horn semantic and each paramodulation satisfies one of the following two conditions: 
1. both parents are positive units which are false in 1  or 
1. one parent and the paramodulant are both false in i. 
 paramodulation is defined so that either the left or right argument of an equality literal can match the term to be replaced.  
remark. we assume symmetric matching for equality. 
that is  we allow the literals a=b and bnot =a to match for a resolution. this simplifies the proof of the theorem and does not weaken the theorem. 
proof there exists a finite set e  of ground instances of equality axioms such that s u e' is unsatisfiable. we know from lemma 1 that there exists a resolution refutation  say dl  which satisfies the resolution restrictions of the theorem. we will construct from dl an acceptable resolution and paramodulation refutation d1. 
because we are assuming symmetric matching for equality and paramodulatic i is allowed from both sides of the equality  we may assume without loss of generality that dl contains no instances of symmetry 
let the initial deduction dl be written as a tree with the false parent of each node on the left. we transform dl by repeatedly replacing the leftmost occurrence of an equality axiom by paramodulation. because the equality axiom is true  it must occur as the right parent where it enters dl. because equality axioms are eliminated left to right  no literal to the left of the axiom being eliminated can descend from another equality axiom special cases  al  a.1  are introduced to handle the replacement when an earlier replacement has caused paramodulation into or from a descendant of an equality axiom occurring further to the right. each of the cases below is labeled with the type of equality axiom  p for predicate substitution. t for transitivity  etc  as well as with the truth value assignments for its literals. due to space limitations  we describe in prose only a few of the cases. the remaining ones are similar and are described by the figures 1. 
case p.ttt  figure 1 . the two negative literals must resolve immediately with false positive units a=b and pa. the order is not important. the resulting paramodulation introduces no new cases because both parents of paramodulation were to the left of p.ttt. 
case p.tff  figure 1 . the true literal a not =b must resclve first. lemma 1 allows us to assume that -pa resolves next. the resolution is replaced by a paramodulation as shown in figure 1. if pa descends from another equality axiom  that axiom is eliminated by special case a.l. 
case p.ftf  figure 1 . the true literal -pa must resolve first. lemma 1 allows us to assume that anot =b resolves next. if a=b descends from another equality axiom  that axiom is eliminated by special case a.1. 
case a.l. paramodulation into a true positive nonequality literal that descends from an equality axiom. let the clause be pb c  where pb is true and c is false. by lemma 1 there are possible 1 subcases. 
subcase a.l.1  figure 1 . pb c is predicate substitution with paramodulation into pb. lemma 1 allows us to assume that the two negative literals resolve next. the order is not important. this section of the deduction is replaced by two paramodulation inferences. paramodulation from a=b is covered in case a.1  and paramodulation into pa is covered in case a. 1. 
the remaining 1 cases are similar. 
qed 




1 w. mccune and l henschen 




1 w. mccune and l henschen 
1. related results 
　　t. brown and li da fa have reported independently on similar research. brown  proves the completeness of a version of semantic resolution and paramoduiation for horn sets. his conditions on resolution are the same as ours  but his conditions on paramoduiation are weaker. there is a restriction only on the into parent - it must either be a false positive unit or have the equality true and the remaining literals false.  brown defines paramoduiation differently so that all occurrences of a term in the into clause are replaced.  his method o  proof is induction using the excess literal parameter introduced by bledsoe  li da fa  has reported a completeness proof with conditions similar to ours but he assumes a very limited class of herbrand interpretations - namely those in which two terms are equal if and only if they are the same sequence of symbols. his proof is immediate. we are not aware of any reports of experimental results with either of these methods. 
1. experimentation 
　　we plan to conduct extensive experimentation with semantic paramoduiation using nuts  northwestern university theorem-proving system    an lma-based theorem prover  1   of course  we will use various techniques for efficient evaluation of clauses  eg.  1  and methods for insuring that later substitutions in the deduction don't eliminate all false instances of an earlier false parent  1 . 
　　while it will be interesting enough to compare horn semantic paramoduiation with other paramoduiation strategies  the main emphasis in our experiments will be to determine  if possible  what kinds of interpretations lead to good performance. experience has shown  1  that for resolution  choosing the wrong interpretation leads to little or no improvement over simple set-ofsupport resolution. this is also true for paramoduiation. for example  if we have all unit equalities  very often the case  and the interpretation assigns only the negative clause to be false  then the only allowable semantic paramodulations are those from any of the  true  positive equality units into the one false negative unit. moreover  the resulting negative unit also will be false. such an interpretation allows exactly the same paramodulations as if we had chosen the one negative clause to be the set of support. on the other hand  if we choose an interpretation in which the negative clause is true  but some special hypotheses are false  then the only initial paramodulations allowed are paramodulations from or into the false equality units which result in false paramodulants or between pairs of these false special hypotheses. if we have chosen a good interpretation  there will be fewer of these than one would get by allowing those special hypotheses to be in a set of support 
