 
     distributed artificial intelligence is concerned with problem solving in which groups solve tasks. in this paper we describe strategies of cooperation that groups require to solve shared tasks effectively. we discuss such strategies in the context of a specific group problem solving application: collision avoidance in air traffic control. experimental findings with four distinct air-traffic control systems  each implementing a different cooperative strategy  are mentioned. 
i. introduction 
     distributed artificial intelligence is concerned with problem solving in which groups solve tasks. through systems like strips |1   abstrips   build   and noah   we now have some understanding of how a single agent can solve problems. unfortunately  recent work suggests that the representations of knowledge    l  and planning expertise  required of agents in distributed or group problem solving is quite different than that required of single agent problem solvers. 
     in this paper we focus on one particularly important but littie understood topic: the kinds of strategies of cooperation that groups require to solve shared tasks effectively. we begin with a discussion of the difficulties facing distributed problem-solving groups. from this analysis we infer a set of requirements on the information-distribution and organizational policies such groups require. we then discuss a set of distributed problem solvers that we have developed in the domain of air traffic control. we concentrate on the particular cooperative strategies they embed  how they are implemented  and how they successfully overcome some of the obstacles that make it difficult to coordinate groups of agents. 
ii. distributed problem solving difficulties 
     to understand the difficulties facing groups solving problems it helps to note some important characteristics of distributed problems. the following traits are true of a wide variety of group situations: 
  most situations consist of a collection of agents  each with various skills  including sensing  communication  often over limited- bandwidth channels   planning  and acting. 
  the group as a whole has a set of assigned tasks. as in single agent problem-solving situations  these tasks may need to be decomposed into subtasks  not all of which may be logically independent. the group must somehow assign subtasks to appropriate agents. 
  typically each agent has only limittd knowledge. an agent may be subject to several kinds of limitations: limited knowledge of the environment  e.g.  because of restricted sensing horizons   limited knowledge of the tasks of the group  or limited knowledge of the intentions of other agents. 
  there are often shared limittd resources with which each agent can attack tasks. for example  if the agents are in a blocksworld environment  the shared resources are the blocks out of which their constructions must be made. 
  agents typically have differing appropriateness for a given task. the appropriateness of an agent for a task is a function of how well the agent's skills match the expertise 
t the work reported here was supported by contract mda1-c-1 from the information processing technology office of the defense advanced projects agency 
 dod  
required to do the task  the extent to which its limited knowledge is adequate for the task  and current processing resources of the agent. 
     several kinds of distributed problem-solving difficulties follow from this characterization. first  there are difficulties with optimal task assignment. many mappings of decomposed subtasks to agents are possible  but  because agents have differing appropriateness with respect to a given task  only a few agents will be acceptable for any task. in many distributed problems it is crucial for agents to adopt the right role. in addition to insuring that any given task is assigned to an appropriate agent  the group has to achieve task coverage. all subtasks should be assigned to some agent  complete role assignment  and multiple unnecessary agents should not be assigned a task  consistent role assignment . the limited knowledge of agents compounds the difficulty of optimal task assignment and task coverage. incomplete knowledge prevents consistent and complete role assignment because no one agent may have a global knowledge of all the roles or subtasks that need to be assigned. optimal task assignment is also threatened since agents may not know about tasks for which they are the most appropriate. 
     second  task coordination problems arise because tasks assigned to agents may not be independent. for example  if two blocksworld agents are each to build towers  as subtasks of a larger task   the plan that one agent produces might negatively interact with the plan of another if both intended to use the same block. while single-agent problem solvers have difficulties in handling non-independent tasks or subgoals  these difficulties multiply for 
distributed problem solvers. again  limited knowledge is the reason. if two agents have only local knowledge-if they know only the local environment  know only their tasks and intentionsthen they will not know of  or be able to prevent  negative interactions between their roles and those of other agents. 
     in summary  a main challenge to distributed problem solving is that the solutions which a distributed agent produces must not only be locally acceptable  achieving the assigned tasks  but also they must be interfaced correctly with the actions of other agents solving dependent tasks. the solutions must not only be reasonable with respect to the local task  they must be globally coherent and this global coherence must be achieved by local computation alone. 
iii. strategies for cooperation 
     how can groups achieve global coherence in the face of limited knowledge and the requirement that all computation be local  broadly  the key to coherent distributed problem solving lies in the fact that while distributed agents have greater difficulties in solving a given task  they have potentially more options as well. for example  a distributed agent may plan or act  but he may also request others to do so. in short  much of the power of distributed problem solving comes through cooperation and communication. 
     although communication between agents provides the basis for effective cooperative problem solving  it is just another problem-solving tool that may be used poorly or effectively. if the tool is used poorly then group problem-solving performance may be worse than individual problem-solving performance. considerable expertise is required to use communication effectively. we refer to such expertise as cooperative strategies. our main theoretical and empirical goals have been to understand two distinct classes of such strategies: organizational policies and information-distribution policies. 
     
1 s. cammarata et al. 
a. organizational policies 
     organizational policies dictate how a larger task should be decomposed into smaller  sub tasks which can be assigned to individual agents. typically a given organizational policy assigns specific roles to each of the agents in a group. such a policy is useful if for some tasks the resulting division of labor enables agents to work independently. for example  the corporate hierarchy is an organizational policy that is particularly effective if the corporate task can be decomposed in such a way that an agent at one level can work independently of others at that level  reporting results only to his immediate superior who takes care of any necessary interfacing. 
     organizational policies not only define a task decomposition but prescribe communication paths among agents. they turn a random collection of agents into a network that is fixed  at least for a given task. in the corporate hierarchy  again  the arcs between agents usually indicate which pairs are permitted to talk to one another  and  in addition  determine the nature of the messages that are allowed. such communication restrictions will be beneficial if they encourage only those agents who should communicate to do so; in particular  agents that have dependent tasks or who may share resources. in general  organizational policies strongly direct and constrain the behavior of distributed agents. if those constraints are appropriate to the task at hand  then the organization is effective  otherwise its performance may be sub-optimal. 
     in our distributed problem-solving systems and others |ll   groups begin by establishing an organizational policy. to do so  the agents must not only know which policy is appropriate to the current circumstances  but also must know techniques by which a group can implement the chosen policy in a distributed fashion. briefly  any distributed method of implementing an organizational policy must answer a variety of questions  including: 
  when does organization structuring take place' 
  how is the assignment of roles specified by the policy made to agents  in other words  how is the agent who is most appropriate found for a given task found  
  are agents  externally-directed  or  data-directed   1|  that is. does an agent arrive at its roles by being told thern or is information relayed  allowing it to make the assignment of roles itself  
  when an agent is requested by another to conform to a role  or take on another subtask for that agent  does the first agent have a right to negotiate  how does an agent weigh the value of competing tasks  
     smith |ll  has proposed the contract net as a formalism for implementing organizational policies in a distributed fashion. in section v.b.  we discuss how some organizational policies were imposed in distributed air-traffic control 
b. information-distribution policies 
     an information-distribution policy addresses the nature of communication between cooperating agents. decisions about how agents communicate with each other are  first of all  constrained by the choice of organizational policy  since that policy decides the network of permissible communicators. however  within these constraints  a great number of lower level decisions must be made about how and when communications should occur. briefly: 
  broadcast or selective communication. are agents discriminating about who they talk to. if so what criteria arc used to select recipients  
  unsolicited or on-demand communication. assuming you know who you want to communicate with  do you do so only if information is requested  or do you infer the informational needs of other agents and transmit data accordingly  
depends on current conditions. these include the bandwidth of the communication channel  the reliability of the channel  the load of the channel  the maximum acceptable information turn-around time  and the relative cost  and time  of computation versus communication. 
iv. distributed problem solving in air-traffic control 
     problem solving in air-traffic control may be distributed in several ways elsewhere |1  we discuss a variety of architectures of distribution. currently we have implemented only object-centered systems  where one agent is associated with each aircraft. in our air-traffic control task  aircraft enter a rectangular  1 x 1 mile  airspace at any time  either at one of 1 infixes on the borders of the airspace  or from one of two airports. the main goal of the agent associated with each aircraft is to traverse the airspace to an assigned destination-either a boundary outfix  or an airport. each aircraft has only a limited sensory horizon  hence its knowledge of the world is never complete and it must continually gather information as it moves through the airspace. information may be accumulated either by sensing or communication. agents are allowed to communicate over a limited bandwidth channel to other aircraft for purposes of exchanging information and instructions 
     distributed atc is a group problem not only because agents may help one another gather information but also because the goals of one agent may interact with those of another coal interactions come in the form of shared conflicts a conflict between two or more agents arises when  according to their current plans  the two will violate minimum separation requirements at some point in the future. when shared conflicts arise  agents must negotiate to solve them. in a crowded airspace  such goal conflicts can get particularly complex  and involve several aircraft  thus necessitating a high 
degree of group cooperation. 
     in terms of the vocabulary developed in section ii  the detection and resolution of conflicts are the main distributed problemsolving tasks. these tasks may be decomposed into several subtasks or distinct roles. agents may gather information about a shared conflict  evaluate or interpret the information  develop a plan to avoid a projected conflict  or execute such a plan. agents may be more or less appropriate for such roles depending on their current processing load  are they currently involved in helping resolve other 
conflicts    their state of knowledge  do they know a lot about the intentions of other agents in the conflict    or their spatial constraints   an they see many nearby aircraft  do they have much 1 excess fuel  . 
     the issue of optimal task assignment arises because a group of aircraft may fail to assign the agent that is the most appropriate to each role in a conflict-task if some of the conflictees do not know about a shared conflict in addition  care must be taken that a complete and consistent set of roles is assigned. some role inconsistencies can be fatal  lor example  two agents would be adopting inconsistent roles if one derides to move left to avoid a head-on collision with the second while the second decides to jog right. severe task coordination problems also threaten to arise in distributed atc. the action of moving to avoid one conflict may create or worsen other conflicts  negative task interactions  or lessen other conflicts  positive task interactions . both forms of interaction are caused by the fact that while several agents may be dealing with different conflict-tasks  they are nevertheless exploiting shared limited spatial resources. 
v. four distributed problem solvers for air traffic control 
     we now outline the cooperative strategies embedded in four distinct atc systems. all four systems are implemented in our 
     
  acknowledged or unacknowledge communication. do you indi-framework for constructing distributed agents |1 . this in turn is cate that you have received information  implemented in interlisp- d  running on xerox dolphins. 
	is a piece of information only sent once  or can it be 	a. information-distribution policies in atc repeated  how frequently  lesser and erman  refer to a repeated-transmission policy as murmuring. 
     poor decisions at this level result  at best  in the highly inefficient use of limited-bandwidth channels. at worst  such 
choices endanger global coherence by preventing agents whose tasks may interact from talking to one another. the goal of information-
distribution policies is to minimize these possibilities. as with organizational policies  the utility of communication policies      the information-distribution policy common to all four systems prescribes that information should be sent to other aircraft 
selectively  no broadcasting   without waiting for a request  without expecting an acknowledgement  and without repeating the information a second time. these choices are reasonable since we assume in all systems that communication is error-free. when we add noise to 
the communication channel  we envision adopting a policy that injects some needed redundancy or safety into communication; for   single-transmission or repeated-transmission communication. 
     
example a policy that includes murmuring i1|. we also assumed a constant effective communication bandwidth for all four systems. each aircraft was allowed to send a maximum of 1 messages per 1 seconds of time. 
b. organizational policies in atc 
     the organizational policy embedded in three of the four systems may be characterized as task centralization  and the fourth system adheres to a policy of task sharing. under task centralization  the agents involved in any given conflict task will choose one of their number to play most of the roles. in particular one agent will perform the evaluation role  do all the evaluation of the potential conflict between aircraft   the plan-fixing role  attempt to devise a plan-fix to dissolve the entire conflict  and the actor role  act on the new plan . the selected agent is required to modify only his plan to resolve the conflict  thus the remaining agents perform no planning or actions. instead these conflictees  having agreed on the choice of a replanner  adopt passive information-gathering roles  merely sending their intentions  plan  to the selected agent. the policy of task centralization  whatever its shortcomings  is worth considering because it enjoys many of the advantages of centralized  singleagent problem solving that it is meant to mimic. specifically  by centralizing most task roles in a single agent the group has to worry less about negative task interactions such as the threat of two aircraft acting in an inconsistent fashion  noted above. 
s. cammarata et al. 1 
most about other agents' intentions  because  in replanning  a well informed agent can explicitly take account of possible interactions between his intentions and those of other agents. more globally coherent plan-fixes should therefore result. in addition  this method also says that agents whose intentions are known by others should not replan. if such an agent does modify its plan  it will have violated the expectations of cooperating agents  making their knowledge incorrect and in turn making cooperation difficult. thus  this policy implements a common adage of cooperation: don't do the unexpected. 
     in spite of their simplicity  task centralization policies are often ineffective. although the agent selected to perform the centralized roles may be overall the best  that agent is rarely the best for each of the centralized roles. for example  we still might want to assign the actor role to the agent in a conflict set who is least constrained in the sense defined above. however  that agent might not be the best in the set for fixing his plan - for making a modification to the plan and evaluating the implications of such a change. presumably the best agent for this role is the  possibly distinct  member of the conflict set that knows most about the environment and intentions of aircraft neighboring the one whose plan is to be fixed. this aircraft is in the best position to determine that any changed plan is not only locally reasonable  solving the conflict  but that it is globally reasonable  not creating new conflicts with other aircraft. 
     
¡¡¡¡although three of our four systems embed a task centralization policy  they differ in how they measure and choose the agent who is the most appropriate for the several centralized roles. 
this method of selection maintains that the agent that is the most appropriate is the one with the most degrees of freedom for modifying its plan. it is a more complex selection than the shared convention  and should result in more effective replanner choices  although at some additional cost in initial communications. 
selection of the most knowledgeable  least committed agent. 
as above  aircraft share constraint factors with the other conflictees  but here they are computed differently. this method of selection maintains that the best agent to replan is the one who knows the 
     
1 s. cammarata et al. 
	shared 	least 	most 
convention constrained knowledgeable 
communications  i  	1 	1 	1 
processing time  ii  	1 	1 	1 
separation errors  iii  	1 	1 	1 
fuel usage  iv  	1 	1 	1 
 i  communication load = mean messages sent per aircraft while flying from infix to outfix 
 ii  processing time = mean xerox 1 cpu seconds per aircraft while flying 
 iii  separation errors = mean number of near misses or collisions for all aircraft in a scenario 
 iv  fuel usage = mean number of fuel units used for all aircraft 
figure 1. performance measures of three organizational policies 
 statistics averaged across 1 scenarios  
     the least constrained policy performed best overall. it did particularly well with high complexity  high difficulty tasks. in such cases the planning aircraft tended to be located at the edge of the fray  able to find more viable solutions than those aircraft in the interior. the policy was time and communication intensive  however  largely because of the high number of messages needed to cooperatively determine the replanner and to maintain consistency after replanning. in any of the three systems  when a replanner is successful it must send data retransmission messages to all aircraft to which it had previously sent its intentions. the number of data retransmissions was especially high under the least constrained policy. 
     the most knowledgeable policy was intermediate in performance. it performed best in tasks of low complexity and high difficulty  that is  tasks with primarily 1- and 1-body interactions but having few potential solutions. in complex multi-aircraft situations  if the wrong aircraft was chosen for planning  the effect was often catastrophic. this is because the aircraft that then received replan requests tended to have little knowledge about the routes of other aircraft. by design of the policy  this knowledge was typically concentrated in the initially selected planner. 
     when successful  the most knowledgeable policy's performance was in some ways better than that of the least constrained policy. in particular  when an agent found a solution to a local conflict-task under the most knowledgeable policy its solution was likely to be more globally coherent than under other policies  since the replanning agent was selected partially because of his wide knowledge of other aircraft's plans. this knowledge allowed the agent to more effectively replan without incurring new conflicts. in addition  a successful replanning agent under a most knowledgeable policy generally needed to issue less data retransmission messages than under the other policies  since it was selected to replan partially because its intentions were known to fewer others  i.e.  it was the less committed agent . we had initially anticipated minimizing data retransmissions would be very important for guaranteeing globally coherent performance. we envisioned situations where one retransmission would cause the receiving agent to re-evaluate  possibly finding new conflicts  causing more replanning  further data retransmissions  and so on in a vicious propagation of changes. this did not happen as much as we had expected under the the least constrained policy  although a few instances were observed. 
     another expectation that did not arise was a wide variation in processing times among the aircraft under the most knowledgeable policy. this policy should tend to bias replanning in the favor of a few agents. if an agent is the replanner once  it gains new knowledge of other's plans making it an even better choice as replanner for later conflict-tasks. we anticipated that this concentration would skew the processing times compared to a more uniform distribution of responsibilities under the other policies. this would have been a disadvantage in a truly distributed system  as some agents would be quiescent much of the time. the expected variation in times did not evidence itself  however  except in the relatively easy scenarios. 
vii. conclusions 
distributed problem solving is an enigma. potentially  a group of agents should be able to solve problems more effectively than the same agents working individually. in practice  however  groups often work ineffectively and their joint productivity is less than the sum of the productivities expected of each member. our aim is to discover the elusive cooperative strategies that enable groups to reach optimum productivity. on the theoretical side we are developing concepts that allow us to simply and formally describe various cooperative strategies. on the empirical side  we are testing such strategies by imposing them on groups and observing the resulting group performance. both phases are necessary. the theoretical investigations are valuable because most problem solving models presently available describe only the information processing of single agent problem solvers  not distributed problem solvers. the empirical work is necessary because many of the behavioral properties of complex cooperative strategies are not apparent without observing how they actually perform in real or simulated settings. 
