 
the problem is to organize search from an and node in a way that minimizes expected cost. the result is derived as a corollary to earlier work of simon and kadane. it is shown that  unless knowledge gained during the search changes the probability or cost estimates of remaining parts of the search  the original a priori strategy remains optimal. the effect of approximating the search statistics used to determine the optimal strategy is examined  and it is found that the impact on expected cost is linearly bounded by the quality of the approximation. then the case of searching an infinite conjunct is considered. finally  some related research topics are discussed. 
1. introduction 
　suppose that an unknown number  possibly zero  of treasure chests have been buried on a random basis at some of n sites  but that neither the sites or the depths of burial are known with certainty. at each site a sequence of one-foot slices can be excavated  and a treasure may be disclosed by the removal of any one of these slices. the probability that a treasure lies just below any specified slice is known  as is the cost of excavating that slice. develop a strategy with the minimum expected cost to find a treasure. 
　simon and kadane1 have solved the stated problem. it is a metaphor for satisficing search from an or node. each site is a disjunct  and finding a treasure at any site is sufficient to terminate the search. excavating a slice is analogous to performing the next atomic action in the search at one of the disjuncts  e.g.  expanding a node. the given probabilities and costs correspond respectively to the probability of a node expansion producing a goal node and the cost of expanding the node. 
　this paper develops an optimal search strategy from an and node. here  it is necessary to find a treasure at every site. if the search succeeds  the order of excavating slices makes no difference because the search at each site terminates exactly when a 
　treasure is found at that site. the search can fail only if the bottom of some site is reached without finding a treasure. therefore  the 
　this research is supported by the defense advanced research projects agency under contract no mda1 c 1. views and conclusions contained in this report are the author's and should not be interpreted as representing the official opinion or policy of darpa  the u.s. government  or any person or agency connected with them. 
1 
　simon  h. a.  and j b. kadane.  optimal problem-solving search. allornone solutions   artificial intelligence 1  1   1. 
best strategy should quickly discover a failure  if any  to preclude further search. 
　section 1 presents the best strategy for searching from or nodes and derives the result for and nodes as a corollary. the best strategy first digs at one site until either a treasure is found or the bottom is reached. in the first case  another site is selected  etc. in the latter case  the entire search is concluded. it is never optimal to switch back and forth between sites. section 1 develops notation that is used in the remainder of the paper. 
　section 1 considers what happens if knowledge is gained during the search. it is shown that unless the probabilities or costs associated with unexcavated slices are changed  the a priori strategy remains optimal. section 1 examines the problem of determining approximations to the optimal strategy when the probabilities and costs are not available. section 1 looks at the problems of a site being infinitely deep. finally  section 1 lists some important open questions related to these results 
1. the s i m o n - k a d a n e result 
1. optimal searching from or nodes 
　if s is a slice  let p s  be the probability that a treasure is just below s and c s  be the cost of excavating s. let b = s1..s where the s1 are slices. then b is an  admissible  strategy when  1  the s are distinct   1  if s and s1 are slices from the same site and i j  slice i is above slice j  and  1  if two slices from a site are in b  all the slices between these two from that site are in b too. a strategy is a proposed order for excavating slices. 
　the notation is generalized in a natural way so that p b  is the probability that strategy b will unearth a treasure and c b  is the expected cost of following strategy b.  recall that execution ceases if a treasure is found  hence some of the work proposed by b may not be done.  define the benefit-to-cost ratio as  p b  = p b /c b  with the assumptions that p s not =1 and c s not=1  where s is a slice. the assumptions entail respectively that no slice or site contains a treasure with certainty and that no slice or site can be excavated for free. 
　description of the optimal strategy for searching from or nodes depends on the idea of maximal indivisible blocs. a bloc is any consecutive set of slices from the same site. let b = s1...sr be all the slices from a single site ordered from top to bottom; thus  b is a strategy. if  sj   p sj + 1   join sj and sj+ as a bloc replacing the original pair. continue this process until it terminates and b has been divided into a sequence of blocs  b = b.-.b   where each b is 

a bloc such that . these b; are the maximal in-
divisible blocs for the site and depend only on the statistics of the slices at that site. 
　let b = b1...b   where the b. are now all the maximal indivisible blocs from all the sites. simon and kadane prove that strategy b is optimal if and only if  thus  the optimal strategy is unique up to permutations of maximal indivisible blocs with equal 
 note that even though the maximal indivisible blocs from a single site must be ordered in b from top to bottom  they need not be contiguous in the optimal strategy. 
1. applying the result to searches from and nodes 
　searching from and nodes is the dual of searching from or nodes. if the search is to succeed  every site must disclose a 
treasure. further  if the search is successful  the total amount of work is independent of the order in which the slices are excavated.  since the constraint of excavating top slices before bottom slices is still in force  each site is excavated until it discloses its first treasure.  a true treasure in an and search is to reach the bottom of a site without finding anything: since the and search can no longer succeed  the search remaining at the other sites can be abandoned. 
　from this viewpoint  it is easy to see that a true treasure can be discovered only by excavating the bottom slice of some site. the probability of finding a true treasure at any other slice is 1. for the bottom slice  the a priori probability of success is the probability that the entire site is free of ordinary treasures. thus  and search is just like or search where we are looking for true treasures. 
　it is obvious that the maximal indivisible blocs are entire sites since only blocs containing the last slice can have nonzero expectations of success  hence positive  therefore  the optimal strategy orders excavation  of entire sites  by decreasing values of the ratio of expected failure at the site  the probability of finding a true treasure  to the expected cost of excavating the site. the probabilities associated with the slices affect both the probability of search termination at the site  hence its expected cost  and the probability that the site contains a true treasure. 
　the next sections give explicit expressions for all the quantities involved. 
1. formalities 
　if s is a slice  then p s  is the probability that excavating s discloses a treasure and q s  = 1-p s . further  c s  is the cost of excavating the slice. let b be an entire site  where b = sr..s and the s1 are the slices of b in top-to-bottom order. we define p b  as the probability that site b contains at least one treasure and q b  = 
1-p b . it is obvious that 

now define e b  as the expected cost of excavating site 
b. evidently  

because slice s. is excavated and the cost c si  paid only if no slice above s. discloses a treasure; the probability of this is represented by the product in the formula for e. 
j. barnett 1 
　since a true treasure in an and search is to reach the bottom of a site without finding an ordinary treasure  the probability of success to cost ratio is  therefore  the optimal strategy orders site excavations in terms of decreasing values. 
　let b1..bn be the strategy of first digging at site b1 if a treasure is found  start digging at site b1  etc. if the bottom of some site is reached without disclosing a treasure  search ceases. then it is evident that e  the expected work for this strategy  is 
　it is assumed below that p s *l and i.e.  no slice discloses a treasure with certainty and no slice can be excavated without cost. further  is assumed  meaning that no site is known in advance not to contain a treasure. 
1. dynamic knowledge 
　so far  we have insisted that a strategy be formed before the start of excavation and not modified afterwards. knowledge gained during the search has only two effects:  1  the remainder of the strategy is abandoned if the bottom slice of any site is excavated without disclosing a treasure  and  1  if a treasure is found at a site  the remaining slices at that site are not excavated. 
　however  the knowledge that the slices already excavated did not disclose a treasure becomes available during the search. assume that the portion of the optimal strategy not yet executed is  where the s are the remaining slices at site 1 and 
the b. are the sites that have not yet been searched. since this is an optimal strategy  assume further that 
this is surely true initially. 
if s1 is excavated and discloses a treasure  then b1...bm is ob-
	1 	1 m 
viously the optimal strategy for the rest of the work. if s1 is a bottom slice  there is no problem in any event. if s1 does not disclose a treasure and is not a bottom slice  then the problem is to find 
but it has been assumed that no slice can be excavated without cost; thus   therefore  a contradiction has been reached. 
the immediate conclusion is 
　if excavating slices does not alter the probabilities and costs associated with unexcavated slices  the remainder of the optimal a priori strategy is still the best 

1 j. barnett 
strategy for the remainder of the search  i.e.  the optimal a priori strategy is the optimal dynamic strategy. 
　a similar result is true for or searches because of the nature of the construction of the maximal indivisible blocs; the  within the joined blocs do not decrease. 
1. approximations 
　for both the optimal and and or searches described above  it appears necessary to know the p and c values for the individual slices. for the case of an or search  estimation is a difficult process. a reasonable tactic is to estimate p and c  hence  for each indivisible bloc. however  this begs the question of how to identify these blocs in the first place. 
　the estimation problem for and searches is relatively easier because the blocs are entire sites. if the  p's for the sites can be approximated  the optimal strategy based on the approximations should not be very far from optimal. in fact  the exact  values are not needed; only their relative magnitudes make any difference. 
　in order to show the effect of approximating  assume for some r l that  where b1 and b1 are two sites. ob-
viously b1 ought to be excavated before b1. but what if is over-estimated by a factor of r so that the sites are excavated in the wrong order  with a little algebra  it can be shown that the relative amount of extra work is 
and the maximum of this expression occurs as 	ap-
proach 1  because the partial derivatives with respect to q b1  and are strictly positive-recall that q's are always less than 1. the limit value is r-1. therefore  if r = 1 + the maximum fraction of expected extra cost is just e. 
　whether or not approximations are used  knowledge may be gained during the search. if the knowledge does not alter the measures associated with unexcavated slices  or blocs or sites  for that matter   the previous section showed that the optimal strategy is unaffected. on the other hand  when the measures are approximated  it is likely that excavation will change some of them  particularly the measures for the remainder of the site of current excavation. if the estimate of  p increases  there is no need to reconsider the ongoing strategy-it is still optimal. the strategy need be revised only if the estimate for  of the remainder of the site drops below  for the next site in the strategic order. little more work is necessary if the search at one site affects the estimates of for other sites. 
1. black holes and tar pits 
　so far it has been assumed implicitly that a site has only a finite number of slices. this entails a site having a bottom slice. though this is an obvious pragmatic assumption  it is amusing to consider a case of an infinite site  b  with slices s1  where . as an example  define p and c as 
it is easy to see that 

by stretching the 
　is it lunacy to expend any effort during an and search at an infinite site before all the finite sites have been tried  this is not a trap for or searches; there it makes as much sense to explore a portion of an infinite site as it does a portion of a finite site-in fact  the right amount to search is a maximal indivisible bloc. but is an infinite site a black hole that soaks up all our resources in an 
and search  actually  no. if 	then 	and 
but in that case  is necessarily entailed; for the example here  the value of the sum is 1. thus  even though there may be an infinite number of slices  the total maximum work at the site must be finite or will be 1  so that the site will be searched last in any event. 
1. future directions 
in addition to the work described in section 1  simon and 
kadane solved the problem of finding the optimal strategy to search or graphs. an obviously important generalization is to develop optimal search strategies for and/or graphs. several of us have tried this problem and failed to produce any noteworthy results. the dilemma appears to be that the expected cost function depends in a nontrivial way on the exact execution results of all prior excavations. 
　a companion problem is what to do when only approximations of the cost and probability measures are available. for and/or graph searches  it is not yet clear even what needs to be estimated. do we need estimates for nodes as a whole or only for the next maximal indivisible bloc; if for the next maximal indivisible bloc  then what does one look like  also  is it necessary to have separate estimates for the expected costs of working below a node if the search succeeds and if it fails  
　another outstanding problem concerns the use of dynamic knowledge: if we are told in advance how the excavation of one slice might affect the measures associated with unexcavated slices  what is the optimal strategy  further  the definition of what a treasure is may depend on the site being searched. it is even possible that a treasure unearthed at one site can simultaneously satisfy the requirements for a treasure at another site  hence eliminating the need to search that site  and this knowledge can affect the optimal order of excavation. 
