 
systems which process natural language require a reliable source of information about words. not only must their lexical subsystems handle a large number of known words; they must also cope with coinages. the morphological principles underlying the notion  possible word  are under active study by linguists  and are articulated in the theory of word formation. this paper presents a technique for 
building lexical subsystems which embody these principles by emulating the behavior of word formation rules. these subsystems combine t o t a l l y idiosyncratic lexical information  stored in a dictionary  with systematic information derived from word structure. applications for lexical subsystems built along the lines described here w i l l be discussed. 
1. introduction. 
in many published descriptions of computer systems that process natural language  l i t t l e or no information is given about the sources of lexical information. instead  fully analyzed words  bearing a l l required categorial  syntactic  and semantic features  appear in the data structures presented as illustrations of the systems' operation. the dictionary structures which store these words  and the processes by which feature information is derived  are not usually revealed. 
when system descriptions do shed some light on their lexical processing  two general approaches can be 
discerned. in the f i r s t   typified by sager 1   the. words in the input text serve as keys for accessing dictionary entries where information about the words is stored. different inflected forms of a word serve as independent keys into the dictionaries' data structures  although morphological regularities are sometimes captured by allowing different dictionary entries for inflectionally related words to share sublists of common properties. 
the 	second 	category 	of 	lexical 	subsystems 	uses 
  a f f i x stripping  to economize on word storage  or  equivalently  to increase the apparent size of their word l i s t s . in the simpler versions of the procedure  the systems w i l l merely test if a valid ending is attached to a valid word  as in peterson 1  . in some cases adjustments are made to the spelling of the base after stripping the affix and before looking up the base in the dictionary  as in winograd 1  . these systems usually handle only words with inflectional suffixes  reducing them to their uninflected forms. words with derivational affixes again have separate dictionary entries. 
a more complex form of the affix stripping procedure is presented in cercone 1 . in that system  prefixes as well as suffixes are  recursively  removed from an incoming word  and the resulting bases are looked up in the. dictionary  as above. only if the base is of an appropriate category for the a f f i x   w i l l the input be accepted  however. furthermore  information that is redundantly associated with the affix--such as the fact that words ending in -ness are nouns--is asserted for the input word. cercone's system handles derivational as well as inflectional affixes. 
the system of morphological rules described in this paper is superior to the affix stripping systems in several respects. first  it allows for the features associated with a word to be a combination of t o t a l ly idiosyncratic information from a dictionary  
together with systematic information derived by the recursive application of morphological rules. second  it provides for the observation*of a complex set of restrictions on morphological rule application. the nature of these restrictions is known from linguistic research  and their observation allows for much tighter control over the attachment of affixes to bases. this enhanced control provides for the third type of improvement over previous systems: this system can exhibit much more reliable behavior in the presence of coinages--the creation of new words by human users. 
section 1 of this paper describes word formation rules and the restrictions that govern their application. section 1 presents a system of morphological rules based in the linguistic results of section 1. the final section l i s t s applications of the techniques developed in this paper. 
1 . word formation rules. 
linguistic studies of morphology have settled on the word formation rule as the best means of accounting for the structure of words. extensive descriptions 
of two varying views of this model can be found in aronoff 1  and selkirk 1  . briefly  word formation rules can be represented as in  1 . rule  la  w i l l apply to transitive verbs that select for animate objects  and w i l l produce animate nouns. using this rule  we can derive draftee from draft  but we can't get *singee  sing doesn t take animate 

objects  or 	*abdicatee 	 abdicate is intransitive . 
rule  lb  derives latinate adjectives from transitive verbs. for example  we can get interruptible and singable  but not *abdicatable. rule  lc  says that the inflectional affix -ed can be applied to verbs bearing the morphological feature  -ablaut   yielding a past tense verb. it w i l l apply to walk to produce walked  but not to sing which is  +ablaut  . 

three types of restrictions apply to word formation rules: boundary restrictions  subcategorization restrictions  and selectional restrictions. boundary restrictions refer to the fact that some types of affixes may only occur  outside.  of other types. 
selkirk 1  distinguishes three types of boundary. 
a  the  innermost  are those associated with non-neutral affixes which can alter the phonology of the base to which they apply. such an affix is +ee in  la  which alters the stress pattern of assign when forming assignee. these boundaries are denoted by  + . 
b  boundaries at the next level  denoted by  #   are associated with neutral affixes  such as #abl   which do not alter the phonology of their base. note that the stress of the base is not shifted in assignable. 
c  the 'outermost  boundaries are associated with inflectional affixes  ana are denoted by   -   . an example is the past tense suffix -ed. an important fact about inflectional affixes is that they do not pile up ; at most one is ever found on a s ingle word. 
subcategorization restrictions limit the occurrence of affixes to environments containing only certain word categories. thus  in example  lb   #abl may only cooccur with verbs. it cannot be affixed to nouns  *elementable  or adjectives 
 *temporaryable  . cercone's morphological analysis system captures subcategorization restrictions when it tests that the string remaining after affix stripping belongs to a certain category. 
selectional restrictions specify constraints on non-categorial features of an a f f i x ' s base. thus  the base to which the affix +ee can apply must not simply be a verb  it must also bear the features  -  transitive  and  +animate object  . 
since the word formation process is recursive  and since word formation rules themselves can assert new features for the words that they form  the selectional restriction mechanism can be a powerful tool. consider the rule in  1 . 
1.  +latinate  is an abstract morphological feature which roughly indicates that words so marked are of greek or latin origin. a particular use of this abstract feature w i l l be given below. 
r. byrd 1 
 1  	+ i t y : 	   + latinate  a    n 
because +ity only attaches to latinate adjectives  we get f a l s i t y but not *wrongity   its a b i l i t y to cooccur with singable in singability must mean that singable is   + latinate  . but since sing is not a latinate word  this must be so because of the suffix +abl in singable. thus  the derivational history of a word  in addition to its ultimate base  determines 
1 
what features w i l l be associated with i t . 
1. the morphological rule system. 
the linguistic theory of word formation rules  outlined above  can be advantageously exploited for natural language processing systems. a useful way of organizing the lexical subcomponent of such systems is to incorporate a dictionary  where truly idiosyncratic information about words is stored  and an interpretive mechanism for applying morphological rules derived from word formation rules. 
the information contained in the dictionary should include not only the usual categorial  syntactic  and semantic features. it should also include morphological  etymological  and phonological information relevant to word formation processes. this information can be e f f i c i e n t l y encoded  and the payoff--as this paper attempts to show--is well worth the additional cost. 
the morphological rules themselves consist of five parts: a  an affix name  b  a boundary specification  c  a pattern  d  a condition  and e  an assertion. the parts of a rule combine to emulate the behavior of a word formation rule in linguistic theory. the pattern specifies the base for the rule by describing the affix to be removed and further adjustments to be made. the condition embodies the subcategorization and selectional restrictions on the base. the assertion allows statement of the categorial and diacritic features for the output of a rule application. the boundary specification insures the observation of boundary restrictions. 
an example of a morphological rule is given in  1 . the five parts of the rule are labeled a  through e  . 
	 1  	+ion: 	ation1*e* 	 verb  	 noun +sg +abstr  
	b a  	c  	d  	e  
this rule would operate as follows while analyzing the word realization. the position of the boundary marker indicates that this is a suffix rule. hence  the right end of the word is checked for the pattern characters ''a-t-i-o-n''. this check succeeds  so 1 characters are removed and the  *  causes the result   realiz   to be looked up either in the dictionary or via a recursive invocation of the morphological rule processor. this look up fails--.it would have succeeded had the original word been  say  relaxation-so  e  is added  yielding  realize  which is 
1. in spite of appearances  the word singability is not a violation of the boundary restrictions mentioned earlier. see aronoff 1  for a j u s t i f i c a t i o n of the existence of two suffixes  #abl and +abl. +abl is the one in singability. 

1 r. byrd 
successfully looked up. the categorial and d i a c r i t i c features of the base are checked against the condi-
tion. in this case  the fact that  realize  is a verb suffices. furthermore  the boundary specification is not violated  since  realize  contains no neutral or inflectional affixes. so the assertion is applied  associating the categorial feature  noun  and the d i a c r i t i c features  +singular 
- -abstract  with the word  realization . 
these rules actually manipulate morphographemes   i . e .   the written form of words  rather than morphemes. while this is perfectly acceptable for computer applications  we must be clear about the correspondence between the abstract word formation rules  and their realization as morphological rules. thus  the three morphological rules in  1  represent different orthographical facets of a single word formation rule which handles the suffix #abl. 
 1 a. #abl: able1*e*  v +trans   a + lat -sg -pi  b. #abl: sible1d*  v +trans   a + lat -sg -pi  
	c. #abl: 	able1te* 	 v +trans   a + lat -sg -pl  
rule  1a  w i l l derive reachable from reach and likab le from l i k e .  1b  derives defensible from defend.  1c  derives delegable from delegate. a l l w i l l check that the base is a transitive verb  and assert that the result is a latinate adjective. similar clusters of rules w i l l exist for cases of allomorphy  as in in+continent  im+practical  i r r e v e r s i b l e   and il + l l o gical. in fact  the patterns of morphological rules can be used to capture the allomorphy and truncation phenomena discussed by aronoff 1  . in addition  they can encode purely orthographical phenomena  such as the spelling rules for silent e suppression  consonant doubling  c-k alternations  etc. 
in a lexical subcomponent constituted as suggested here  the information known about a given word is a combination of the inherent features found in the lexical entry for the ultimate base and the systematic features associated with the word's structure. thus  if one form of the verb realize is known to be transitive and to require an animate subject  as in  the sculptor realized his masterpiece in bronze    then we also know that realization is likewise transitive and requires an animate subject  as in  the sculptor's realization of his masterpiece  . furthermore  we know that the semantic properties of realize and realization are closely related. this means of attaching inherent information to many related words captures the lexical redundancy relations introduced by chomsky 1  and elaborated by jackendoff 1 . it goes far beyond 
sager's 1  scheme of having multiple dictionary entries for inflectionally related words point to shared sublists of common properties. 
1. applications. 
a lexical subcomponent based on the ideas presented here has been implemented and is being used in a system that produces syntactic and s t y l i s t i c critiques of english language texts in a word-processing environment. the system is described in heidorn  et al. 1 . as part of the development of that system's dictionary  a set of morphological rules for analysing inflectional affixes was used to automatically identify redundant 
words in a source dictionary. from among more than 1 original entries  it was possible to omit approximately 1 which were found to have completely predictable analyses. 
the morphological rule interpreter i t s e l f is being used as part of a linguistic study of restrictions on word formation rules  described in byrd 1 . this study should yield a highly detailed set of word formation rules which  in turn  w i l l provide the basis for morphological rules to be used in various computer applications. 
in automatic text-to-speech synthesis systems  accurate morphological decomposition as well as reliable phonological information  such as can be stored in our dictionary  is essential. a version of the morphological rule interpreter has been implemented which can decompose an input word into a base  for which a pronunciation is known  plus an ordered l i s t of affixes. see allen 1  for another approach to this problem. finally  with a highly articulated set of morphological rules  it seems likely that this technology could be used to generate words as reliably as it analyses them. such a capability 
would be invaluable in text generation applications. 