 
smoothness constraints have been used to facilitate the estimation of displacement vector fields. differing from horn and schunck 1 who employ a general smoothness requirement  this contribution reports an analysis of an  oriented smoothness  requirement: a change in the displacement vector field is only constrained in the direction perpendicular to the characteristic gray value variation based on which the displacement vector is estimated. an iterative solution for the resulting system of nonlinear partial differential equations is developed. it is shown how this system of equations relates to the one derived by horn and schunck 1. 


                                                 i-/ they employ the variational calculus to transform equation  1  into a system of second order partial differential equations for the two components u x  and v x . using a particular approximation on a 1 pixel grid for the laplacian of u and v  this system of two coupled partial differential equations has been converted into a sparse system of linear equations with two unknowns for each pixel in the image. an iterative solution of this large system of equations has been employed in order to study various examples. 
two aspects of this approach let it appear especially attractive. first  all hypotheses are introduced explicitly into a rigorous mathematical framework. second  well-known mathematical methods are employed to derive the solution so that the consequences of the various hypotheses and approxi-
mations can be studied in detail. one can recognize three sources of difficulties in the approach of horn and schunck 1: 
i  the smoothness requirement is applied indis-criminately across all gray value edges despite the fact that such edges might separate image regions with discontinuous displacement vector fields  see schunck and horn 1 . 
ii  no advantage is taken of the fact that cer-tain nonlinear gray value variations may constrain possible displacement vectors much stronger than image areas with smoothly varying gray values or straight line gray value transitions. 
i i i   the solution outlined in horn and schunck 1 does not indicate how to handle situations where a two-pixel gradient estimate or an approximation to the laplacian based on a 1 pixel window appear inappropriate. 
	1. 	 oriented smoothness  requirements 
several approaches have been investigated in order to cope especially with difficulty  i . yachida 1 assumes that a displacement vector can be estimated at prominent points. he propagates such estimates into neighboring areas with large gray value gradients  based on the method of horn and schunck 

1. his iterative improvement scheme  however  employs the inverse variance of displacement esti-
mates from a 1 window as a weight in order to suppress the propagation of displacement estimates with large local variations. 
cornelius and kanade 1 deactivate the smoothness requirement in the neighborhood of zero-crossing contours in order to avoid that estimates spill across potential discontinuities of the displacement vector field  for example associated with occluding contours. 
wu et al. 1 propagate a displacement estimate only along a contour line between corner points. at each new contour point  they combine the estimated displacement vector from the previous contour point with new estimates of the contour direction and of the displacement component perpen-
dicular to the contour in order to update the tangential component of the displacement vector. 
hildreth 1 minimizes the sum of two terms  integrated along a zero-crossing contour. the first term is the squared difference between the 'measured' and the estimated displacement component perpendicular to the contour. the second term represents the squared derivative of the displacement 
vector field with respect to the arclength along the zero-crossing contour  expressing the smoothness requirement  see also hildreth 1 . 
the current contribution proposes a broader approach. an  oriented smoothness  requirement will be introduced  constraining the variation of the displacement vector field only in those directions alonq which a displacement vector component can not be inferred from the spatio-temporal gray value changes. this  oriented smoothness  constraint 
will be tied directly to the gray value variation  
th s avoiding the introduction of additional 
machinery such as the variance of displacement estimates or the separate  prior determination of gray value contour lines. moreover  a single minimization task will be used both to estimate displacement vector fields from nonlinear gray value variations and to take into account the  oriented smoothness  requirement. 
two possibilities will be formulated to express an  oriented smoothness  constraint. both can be combined into a weight matrix which constrains the variation of the displacement vector field  nagel 1b . a matrix with the same structure appeared in earlier investigations to estimate displacement vectors at gray value corner points  nagel 1a . experiments with this earlier approach yielded encouraging results  nagel and enkelmann 1 + 1  and thus motivated the current investigation. 
smoothness perpendicular 
to the gradient direction 
as it is well known  equation  1  only restricts the displacement vector u along the gradient direction. it is therefore demanded that the variation of u in the direction perpendicular to the 
h.-h. nagel 1 


it is assumed that the gray values do not change except for position and possibly the effects of  dis- occlusion. the first term of this expression has been introduced and discussed in nagel 1a. this expression specializes to the approach of horn and schunck 1 if we make the following assumptions: 
i  the influence of smoothness requirements ori-ented alonq the principal curvature directions is dropped  i.e. a1 = 1. 
ii  the directional sensitivity of the smooth-ness requirement is suppressed  i.e. the outer product matrix  vg  1g ' is replaced by the unit matrix. 
i i i   the difference in the first term of equation  1  is approximated by a first order taylor expansion. 
the euler-lagrange equations for the minimization problem of  1  yield 
the right hand side immediately shows that large eigenvalues of the matrix c tend to suppress the influence from the smoothness requirement in their 
direction. 
 gray value corners  can be characterized as the location of maximum curvature in the locus line of extremal gray value slope  see nagel 1a . at gray value corners  both eigenvalues become large and damp down the influence of the smoothness requirement. this is advantageous because a gray value corner is defined well enough to allow the determination of both displacement vector components by  virtually local  measurements. 
according to our assumptions we may write for not to large u 

v. -  

h.-h. nagel 1 

	1. 	approximative solution 
in order to get some insight into the structure of solutions of the system of two equations  1  we assume that an approximative solution ug  x  is known. the true solution u x  should differ from u1  x  by a small correction vector field au x : 
the second bracket in equation  1  contains a term which corresponds to the slope of g1 at location x-u. this term is approximated by the slope of g1 at location x-u1 : 

introduction of these approximations into equation  1  yields a system of equations which are linear in the components of the correction vector field u x : 
it appears natural to evaluate all partial derivatives of g1 x  at the location x-u1  including those which enter through the  smoothness  term 
multiplied by alpha1. we obtain 
this system of linear equations for au cannot be solved without further consideration because the matrix  vg1  vg1  has been derived from an outer product and  therefore  has only rank one rather than two. 
a way to cope with this problem is suggested by earlier investigations. for digitized images  the partial derivatives of g x  are computed using the operators of beaudet 1 which are based on a bivariate polynomial approximation of g x  within a square window centered at x. the same operators should be used to compute the partial derivatives of u x  which appear  for example  in equation  1 . in this manner  a more general approach than that described by horn and schunck 1 is employed here. the use of these operators implies that the entities appearing in equation  1  are the result of a kind of averaging across the operator window. 
these considerations are applied in the following manner. the start values u1 x  are set identically 


this matrix has the full rank of two if both principal curvatures of the gray value distribution at location x differ significantly from zero. in this case we may invert the modified equation  1  and obtain 
u = un + au = u at image locations where the conditions for a  gray value corner  are satisfied. it is  therefore  suggested to estimate u at such locations using equation  1b . once these esti-
mates have stabilized after a certain number of iterations  the start value u x  at all other locations is set to zero and the smoothness constraint is switched on by setting alpha1 to the de-: sired value. during the subsequent iterations  equations  1a  are employed  using the beaudet operators to compute the required derivatives of g1 x-uc  as well as u x . the smoothness term will spread the non-zero estimates of the displacement vectors which have been obtained during the first few iterations at the  gray value corners . the matrix c is prevented from becoming singular by introduction of minimum values for the partial 
yields a very reasonable estimate of  oriented smoothness constraint  as represented in equation  1a . derivatives of g derived from the errors in the gray value measurements  see appendix of nagel 1a . 
	1. 	discussion 
in order to overcome some problems with the approach of horn and schunck 1   the concept of  oriented smoothness constraint  has been introduced. as a result  a coupled system of nonlinear partial differential equations  1  for the displacement vector field u x  has been derived. in order to study solutions of this system  an iterative method has been employed which is based on earlier experience. this approach comprises three steps: 

this result has to be handled in the following manner: initially  alpha1 = o and u 1  x  = 1. it has 
been shown  nagel 1a  nagel and enkelmann 1  that 
i  estimate both components of the displacement vector at  gray value corners  - see equation  1 b ; 
ii  improve these estimates through iteration at such locations  still with suppressed smooth-

ness constraint; 
i i i   spread the resulting estimates by further iterations  but now taking into account the 

the first two steps have already been implemented during investigations of the approach presented in nagel 1a. the very encouraging results have been presented in nagel and enkelmann 1 for step i  and in nagel and enkelmann 1 for step i i   . the experience gained through these studies led to the - heuristic - proposal to use the inverse of the matrix given in equation  1  as a weight for some kind of oriented smoothness requirement  nagel 1b  the current contribution is an attempt to derive this heuristic suggestion in a rigorous manner from clearly stated assumptions. moreover  all approximations are outlined in a derivation of a closed expression for an interative solution to the discretized version of the resulting system of coupled nonlinear partial differential equations. this approach is currently being studied experimentally. 
1. acknowledgement 
i thank w. enkelmann for many discussions during our experimental investigations. valuable comments by g. winkler on a draft version of this contribution are gratefully acknowledged. 
	1. 	