 
     the a* admissibility and optimality proofs presented to date have been based on overly restrictive assumptions about the relationship between real and estimated costs. this paper shows that idealism  accuracy and selectivity  properties hitherto thought to be unique to a*  are in fact common to all ordered searches  and do not require the evaluation function / = g+ h traditionally assumed. consequently  much of a* theory can be greatly simplified. 
	i 	introduction 
     it is shown that many of the properties hitherto thought to be unique to a* can be proven without recourse to the evaluation function f - g+ h. this permits greatly simplified statements of several well-known results. moreover  it implies that a*'s properties originate largely from the ordered search algorithm itself  rather than from the internal structure imposed on the evaluation function. 
     the evaluation function / = g+ h was traditionally adopted as a theoretical construction permitting demonstration of a*'s admissibility and optimality  when estimates a of a were bounded by 1   h   h. this decomposition into forward and backward cost components  the linearity of/  and the non-negativity of g and a  together comprise the  path-cost paradigm  which forms the basis of a* theory. 
     the contribution of this paper is a clearer understanding of the roots of a* behaviour. it begins by showing that the preconditions imposed on a are overly restrictive; they are sufficient but not necessary. hence the path-cost paradigm is refuted. following on this  the concepts of idealism  accuracy and selectivity - the foundations of the revised theory - are defined. the paper concludes by demonstrating how the resulting theory  which for the most part applies to the general ordered search  reduces to a* theory as a special case. 
1 refuting the path-cost paradigm 
     the addition of the same constant to the /estimates of all nodes makes no difference to the behaviour of a*. this conclusion may be restated in a more general form  proofs are trivial : 
theorem  equivalence : let   and   be evaluation functions whose values always have identical partial orderings  for any set of open nodes and for any graph. then a* using   can close precisely the same nodes as a* using  . 
this research was performed at the department of computer science  australian national university  canberra  australia. 
     the corollaries suggest some novel questions about the nature and role of a*'s evaluation function. in that capacity they motivate the ensuing discussion. 
corollary 1: under the conditions of the equivalence theorem  if   is admissible then so is   
corollary 1: a* using x   h can be admissible. 
     therefore  a* can preserve its admissibility for a far wider class of heuristics than is generally supposed. moreover  
corollary 1: even if h   h1  a* using h1 can close nodes not closed by a* using h1 
     hence a*'s optimality must originate from something other than the traditional concept of informedness  involving  by definition  the relative magnitudes of two h estimators . 
     the equivalence theorem thus opens two issues. firstly  the admissibility condition 1   a   h does result in admissible behaviour  but only because it happens to entail some other  more fundamental condition which can hold even when 1   a   a does not. secondly  and in similar vein  the magnitude of a is not an apt guage of  informedness  for optimality proofs. the next section discovers what it is about these conditions that makes a* admissible and optimal. 
ill elements of a* behaviour 
a. 	fundamentals 
     the a* algorithm never deals with real costs: it relies solely on / estimates. therefore  it seems strained to begin the study of a* by assuming the relation 1   h   a between real and estimated costs. 
     the algorithm is equally unconcerned about the decomposition of f as g + h. only the sum  / is relevant to the order in which nodes are selected for expansion. 
     also  a* is usually discussed in the context of delta-graphs; i.e. directed  possibly infinite  graphs such that the cost of traversing an arc is at least some small positive quantity  delta . however  ordered search is concerned with the /values attached to open nodes  not with forward and backward path costs. therefore it is more in accord with the algorithm to think in terms of weighted nodes rather than weighted arcs  and the delta-graph assumption may be relinquished  for the moment . 
     lastly  though the search may be regarded as traversing a problem-space whose states and operations define a graph  the algorithm itself generates a tree. even if one state recurs many times  a* 1 m. schoppers 
generates a different node for each occurrence  and each node is weighted by one of the various  associated with that state. 
for the purposes of this paper  visualise a* as traversing a 
 possibly infinite  tree having numerical weights attached to its nodes. those weights may be quite arbitrary  being  also attach a 
second  layer  of weights to the nodes  as their real weighting /. now select a subset of the nodes to be goals  and select from them a smaller subset of goals having minimal . then the following terminology applies. 
definition: a solution path is any path leading from the start node to a goal node. 
definition: a goal node is  if it has the minimal value of among the goal set. 
definition: a solution path is  if it leads to an optimal goal. 
b. 	idealism 
　　in the traditional admissibility proofs  was imposed to guarantee for all nodes n on an f optimal solution path. this comparison bctvween real and estimated path costs may be eliminated as follows. let p s t  be any solution path from s to t 
definition: idealistic if it cannot  in any graph  terminate with a solution path that is not 
	lemma  idealism . 	then 
idealistic. the proof is trivial: since a* always chooses the open node of lowest 	all nodes on p s t  must be closed before any goal. 
     notice that this lemma ignores the internal structure of only its value is relevant. 
     however  there is no longer any guarantee that will also be optimal. the correspondence between optimal paths can be restored by analysing the concept of informedness. 
g. 	accuracy 
　　traditionally  the inequality  implied that was a closer approximation to h  from which it could be proven that could not be less efficient than  however  corollary 1 shows that a 
     comparison between the relative magnitudes of two heuristics is not an adequate indication of their efficiencies. 
     at this point is necessary to distinguish the notions of selectivity and accuracy. while some heuristics will guide a* to an /-optimal path  they are accurate   they may not be very efficient  they have low selectivity . conversely  other heuristics can lead a* to an non-optimal goal  by being inaccurate  via a minimal number of nodes  good selectivity . accuracy is thus a correlation between real and estimated weightings  while selectivity is an efficiency relation between two estimated weightings. both these concepts were included in the term  informedness . 
definition: a* is at least as selective as a* if every node closed by a* is also closed by a* 
definition: a* is accurate if it cannot  in any graph  terminate with a solution path that is not 
     we are now in a position to corellate real and estimated weightings  preferably as loosely as possible while still ensuring that an  path will be found. again  proof of the lemma is trivial. 
lemma  accuracy . if the set of w optimal goals is a  nonempty  subset of the set of optimal goals  and if a* is idealistic  then a* is accurate. 
d. 	selectivity 
　　finally  let us devise a generalised performance yardstick. suppose that and are strictly monotonic increasing evaluation functions used in two searches over the same graph  and that they result in termination with the same goal node t. corollary 1 shows that any search using - = + will also find an optimal path. sincestrictlymonotonic increasing  all nodes having values b e l o w | will be closed by a* likewise  all nodes having values b e l o w w i l l be closed by a* but because   = i  if also 
	 n  	  then a* closes at least all the nodesclosed by 
　　substituting for   and rearranging  is at least as selective as whenever in 
     as soon more general evaluation functions are permitted   critical ties  |1p.l1  must be dealt with gelperin |1  formulated two theorems to avoid thrs problem. at bottom  both theorems required that for the less selective for all n on some  -optimal path. under this condition critical ties cannot arise. 
     once critical ties have been eliminated it can be seen that  1  remains valid even for non-monotonic evaluation functions. this establishes the following: 
ing the more nodes. 
     again  this selectivity theorem ignores the internal structure of it also says nothing about the real weighting. this is counterintuitive because it implies that 
1. an unrealistic evaluation function can be optimally selective; 
1. the  perfect  evaluation function is not necessarily the most selective. 
both implications are correct  but the original concept of informedness could not do justice to either. 
　　concerning the first point  take the perfect evaluation function  and subtract some arbitrary positive numbers from the weights of the nodes on some path. the result is clearly unrealistic  but the search using that evaluation function is nevertheless optimal. 
     secondly  when there are several /optimal paths a* can choose to expand a node on auy one of them  since the traditional /gives all nodes on all f-optimal paths the same value / s . reducing the weights of nodes on one /-optimal path forces a* to close only the nodes on that path. hence unrealistic evaluation functions can be more selective than the most realistic one. 
     
	iv 	a* = ordered search + completeness 
a. 	ordered search theory 
     as shown above  idealism  accuracy and selectivity - properties hitherto thought to be peculiar to a* - can be generalised to apply to ordered search behaviour. the internal structure of / is irrelevant to these properties  which can therefore be easily demonstrated without recourse to elaborate proofs. 
     the disproportionate extent to which the path-cost paradigm has been allowed to permeate a* theory can be seen from work on quantifying a* performance  1 . informedness was understood as an h magnitude comparison; yet the concept of selectivity rests neither 
on such informedness nor on path costs. 
b. 	completeness 
     however  if termination is not assured  neither is an optimal solution path. to realise the admissibility of a* it is necessary to add the  completeness  property. here the path-cost paradigm has its only justification: completeness is the only property possessed by a* which has no origin in the general ordered search. 
definition: a* is complete if  for any graph  it terminates with a solution path whenever one exists. 
lemma  completeness : a* using  is complete on any delta-graph. 
definition: a* is admissible if  for any graph containing solution paths  it terminates with an /-optimal solution path. 
theorem  admissibility : if a* is accurate and complete  then a* is admissible. 
c. 	deri vat ion of a* results 
     this perspective provides a closer affinity between theoretical preconditions and search behaviour. it is easy to see how is 
complete on delta-graphs; how 	  results in ideal-
ism; and how accuracy is guaranteed if the set of -optimal goals is a subset of the set of goals. admissibility is simply the conjunction of these conditions. then a* will find a goal if one exists; that goal will be ; and therefore it will also be /-optimal. 
     to show that a* theory is a special case of this ordered-search perspective  substitute into the idealism condition and rearrange to get 

now if h  t  is zeroed  this reduces to   for n on an /-optimal path  not necessarily in general! . 
     next  it is easy to show that  is accurate if h = 1 at goal nodes. for then  
f i  = g  t  g t  = f t    f 1  
for all goals t  with equality only for /-optima  paths to t. 
     finally  the informedness condition h1   h1 can be derived from the selectivity theorem by noting that when h1 t  = h1 t  = 1  / t  = f1it  = / s ; and since g1  n  = g1 n  for any given node n in tne search tree  the result is immediate. 
m. schoppers 1 
