 
   this paper gives an overview of a model for the reconstruction of task-oriented dialogues based on an interactive  multilevel parsing formalism. it is applied to route description dialogues. it will be shown  how the pragmatic aspects of such dialogues are taken into account on different levels of processing. the approach described is based on an extension of the concept of cascaded atns. further-
more this approach uses knowledge sources  kss  for every participant in the dialogue in which knowledge about the world and a partner model is build up during the analysis of a dialogue. these kss are supplied to the parsing process  as well. in this paper special importance is laid on the description of the interaction and cooperation of the different processing components of this formalism. 
introduction 
   in the project  prozedurale dialogmodelle  we have concerned ourselves with solving the follo-
wing problems by reconstructing task-oriented dialogues: 
1. what dependencies exist between the different linguistic processing components  lpcs  in realistic task-oriented dialogues** of the special type 'route description'  
1. which knowledge sources  kss  participate in such dialogues  
1. what informations do these kss contain  
1. at which point and with which information do the lpcs interact  
   furthermore  we assume that the cooperation of the various lpcs starts at a very early stage in processing an utterance in a dialogue. in our model the lpcs are organized as coroutines  and not  as suggested by the results of marslen-wilson and tyler    as parallel processes. so that  e. g. as soon as a partial syntactic description of an utterance is derived  the semantic components are triggered. 
   the linguistic basis of our approach is a scheme of dialogue interaction in a task domain  in 
which the purpose of an utterance in the dialogue context is determined with respect not only to the 
*the research reported here is supported by a grant of the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft. 
** the dialogues  we are dealing with  were recorded in frankfurt/main for w. klein  . maintainance of the interaction. 
the multilevel parsing formalism 
   the reconstruction of dialogues is carried out by a multilevel parsing formalism  1  1  in which the different components are independent  but closely cooperating. under this viewpoint  parsing  is taken to mean 'application of recognition procedures' and not 'recognition of syntactic sentence structures' . 
   the architecture of the formalism is based on the concept of cascaded atn  catn   with the following important differences: 
 1  the different levels of catn are not necessarily atns  and 
 1  levels of an catn can be 'by-passed'. 
   in addition to the usual means of communication in a catn such as transmit there is a 'blackboard'  the common ks  in order to store the results of the various cascade levels. while the rus parser  l  is a 1-stage cascade  our formalism allows an arbitrary number of stages  in this application 1. 
   the syntactic component  sync  is an atn. due to our dialogues  which were uttered in a rather colloquial language and therefore overwhelmed with incomplete utterances  this component must be very robust. therefore  a complete syntactic analysis is of minor importance. this is  e.g.  obtained by 
enabling sync to reach a permissible final state  if its analysis of an utterance is not rejected by the semantic or pragmatic components. so the main purpose of sync is to detect phrases in a utterance  noun-  prepositional-phrase  adverb-prepositiongroups  etc.  and to make suggestions on their role in the utterance. additionally it should detect 
wh- and imperative structures. as soon as a phrase 
or even a part of it is analysed  the semantic component is triggered in order to see how it can process the results of sync. this includes an early detection of wrong pathes of analysis. 
   the semantic component  semc  is a case oriented production rule system. because of the incremental manner of parsing  the semantic interpretation has to be tentative. the determination of a syntactic construct is - until the main verb is detected more a suggestion rather than a categorization. thus the case slots are defined in two ways. firstly  there are very general definitions of case slots applying before tne main verb is detected which build up a proposed interpretation of the utterance. 

1 m. gehrke 
secondly  more specific definitions of these slots are connected to the respective verb frame  thus 
meeting its special demands. when the verb is transmitted  the hitherto constituted case slots are tested and the definitions of the required case slots  which have not yet been constituted  are supplemented by the special requirements of the verb. every constituted case slot is transmitted to the task-communication component. 
   the remaining levels of the cascade are responsible for the interpretation of the dialogue from pragmatic points of view. for that purpose they are supported by kss that contain knowledge of the world and a partner model  wpkss . the infor-
mation  gathered by the initiator of the directiongiving dialogue  addresser  during the dialogue is stored in his/her wpks as well as the assumptions on how the dialogue may proceed. the content of the addresser's wpks could be stated after a first piece of route description  such as 
problem: addresser wants to get to the opera 
addresser wants to know: solution of the problem 
addresser believes: addressee knows the solution 
addresser believes: addressee will tell him/her the solution 
addressee says: go straight ahead to the church addressee says: arrive at rathenauplatz 
   on the other hand  the addressee's knowledge about the course of dialogue is stored in his/her wpks. in addition  each partner should have a problem solver which takes into account the appropriate ks for finding the way asked for. but this is beyond the scope of our project. 
   the task-communication-component  tcc  contains the task dependent  pragmatic categories. it is responsible for the detection of utterances bearing solutions to subproblems  while a general solution is the purpose of the dialogue. in the case of direction-giving dialogues the following task dependent categories are used: 
 1  route description  i.e. utterances containing a piece of the proposed route  e. g.  you go straight ahead on that street.  
 1  place descriptions  i.e. utterances bearing some information about where a change of direction will take place  or confirming that one is on the right path  e. g.  then there is woolworth's to the left.  
 1  partial goal determination  i.e. when an intermediate goal is reached and where a change of direction often takes place  e. g.  turn left at wollworth's.  
 1  goal declaration  i. e. that point in which the reaching of the goal is stated  e. g.  then 
you arrive at the station.  
 1  destination specification  i. e. where the addresser utters the goal he will reach  e. g.  we are looking for the bus station. . 
   an alteration of this type of task-oriented dialogues only requires a change in this component at 
the pragmatic level. 
the question-answer-interaction-component  qaic  
has to detect the patterns of speech acts used to control the cooperative organisation of mutual understanding. these are  e.g.  the exchange of question  answer  assurance  confirmation  etc. the task-interaction-component  tic  provides a general scheme of task-oriented dialogues with categories like ask-for-information  informationgiving  e.g.  there you'd better ask someone else.  . the final component is responsible for starting  keeping and ending the social contact  scc . 
all the components on the pragmatic level are 
atns  because task-oriented dialogues consist of rather fixed patterns of pragmatic categories. while it is true that a dialogue may be interrupted by a clarification dialogue  such a clarification has a fixed order  as well. thus it is only necessary to detect the beginning of an embedded dialogue. markers for clarification are whphrases inside the dialogue such as  where   or phrases like 
 i don't get it! would you please repeat that   
interactions with the syntactic component 
   the interaction of an atn with its neighbouring components is carried out by the transmit-action. after traversing an arc with this action  processing in the atn is interrupted and control is passed over to the next component. such transmits occur in sync for two reasons: 
1. at critical points in the analysis where a wrong decision can be rather resource consuming  e.g. when the head noun of a nominal phrase or a preposition after a nominal phrase is detected  
1. at points where important results for semc are detected such as verbs  deictic or directional adverbs. 
   sync can receive two types of message from semc. on the other hand  if semc lacks further information to process  then sync starts its analysis at the goal node of that arc on which the transmit occured. if  on the other hand  something is wrong 
with the analysis of sync  then backtracking is forced. 
interactions with the semantic component 
   semc can receive various types of message from sync. if a full verb is recognized  then it becomes head of the verb frame; previously filled case slots are matched against the specific requirements on case slots of that verb. in the case that further frames are possible for one verb these frames have to be instatiated and processed in a similar way. 
   all other syntactic constructs  nominal-  prepositional phrases  embedded sentences  are provided with case slots or categorized as modifiers of a verb  e.g. adverbs  auxiliary verbs  to mark tense  modality  etc. 
   when the end of an utterance is indicated  then the frame is checked for completion  i.e. a verb is recognized and all obligatory case slots are filled   
otherwise possibly additional instantiated verb frames are not completed  it is assumed that the 

utterance is some sort of cotextual ellipsis  and an inference mechanism  see below  based on the pragmatic assumptions is initiated. 
   finally semc can be  by-passed   when e.g. an interjection such as  yes  uhh  is detected by sync. an application of semc to such words doesn't contribute to the whole understanding process. therefore they are immediately routed to qaic  in which they 
may be categorized as an assurance  confirmation  etc. 
   tcc may signal to semc that its result is not correct. this could be caused by a wrong choice of the appropiate frame  e.g. a completed frame was sent as a interpretation  while an uncompleted frame held true for an elliptical utterance. then the latter frame is transmitted instead  otherwise sync has to resume its analysis. 
   in cases where no verb frame can be completed  results are transmitted  too  but marked as uncomplete. then several cases are to distinguish: 
1. to disambiguate elliptical utterances we had to consider that the missing phrase x is somehow described by the unsatisfied case slot and that 
x was in some way uttered earlier. then the wpks of the addressed participant is looked up  assuming that there is a referent for x. for an illustration  consider the following part of a dialogue: 
 da kommen sie auf den rathenauplatz  den liberqueren sie auch.   then you come to the rathenauplatz  you cross i t   too.   
the second utterance has two alternative analysis. either it is a relative clause with an incorrect word order. or it is an independent utterance where the noun referring to the definite article  den  is missing. the frame of  liberqueren  requires as an object case slot a physical object that could be crossed. secondly  the addresser has the strong assumption that the addressee will somehow conclude the route description. despite the missing phrase the utterance strengthens this assumption. thus the addresser's wpks is looked up in reverse order  see above  for a route or place description containing a referent to  den . here it will conclude in finding  rathenauplatz  as referent. 
1. for deictical particles referents are similarly found  because they are often used to denote the last partial goal. a subgoal can be expressed as a named location in the goal case slot in the last route description  or as a location in the place case slot in the last place description. 
these particles  esp.  there   may have the special meaning of denoting the goal  as in 
 and then you are there.  
1. if a verb is missing  then it is first assumed  that the utterance is a route description. therefore  this case frame is tested with verbs of the field  move   otherwise the test is continued with verbs referring to location. 
m. gehrke 1 
further work 
   hitherto sync and semc are implemented together with the procedures to build up the kss as well as the procedures for the interaction between the components. at present we begin to incorporate the pragmatic components  so we do not have confirmed results on the interaction between them and sync and semc. 
the parsing formalism runs on a tr-1 at the 
university of bielefeld. it is written in flavors 
  an object-oriented language  embedded in maclisp. 
acknowledgements 
	i would 	like to thank t. christaller  d. 
metzing and b. terwey  without whose cooperation this work would not have been possible. 
