 
　　analyses of vision have tended to focus on what may be under observation rather than considering the larger configuration including observer 
and observed. 	it is  however  possible to think systematically about the  missing link  of observer/observed relationships. 	the paper aims to clarify the logic associated with these relationships. 	at least three main types of observer/ observed relationship are interesting: when 
viewpoint is general  when viewpoint is representative  and when viewpoint is privileged. it is shown that knowledge about such relationships can support interesting conclusions - though the exact forms of these conclusions will reflect other empirical and a priori knowledge. the various viewpoint analyses may be regarded as aspects of a single issue - when and how an observer may legitimately assume that properties of stimulation are simply and directly indicative of features of the world. also  expressing observer/observed relationships calls for appropriate ways of classifying observables: so understanding observer/observed relationships feeds back into understanding what may be 
observed. 
 a  introduct ion 
　　the theory of vision deals with what can be called viewing configurations - configurations including an observer and things observed. relationships between the observer and things observed are an integral part of a viewing configuration  and so presumably we should in principle be concerned with understanding how 
these relationships can usefully be described  
and with establishing what a viewer can profitably assume or arrange about them. an example will suggest why it seen  worthwhile in practice to consider these relationships carefully. why should we accept that the lines in fig. 1 a  represent wires or edges which meet  not  say  a corner and a quite separate wire as in fig. 1 b   

a strong reason is that to accept the interpretation shown in  b  entails accepting that the observer was in a very specific pos i t ion   i .e .   somewhere on the line through x and y. we can usually sensibly assume that this kind of position-
ing is most unlikely  invoking what huffman  1  
and cowie  1  called the assumption that viewing position is general and binford  1  called the principle of indifference to the 
observer. here a reasonable and useful conclusion can be motivated by invoking a very weak assumption about observer/observed relationships. we 
should clearly like to know more about what this kind of reasoning can buy. 
     the aim of this paper is to provide an overview of interesting types of observer/observed relationship. three main forms of observer/ 
observed relationship have been explored in some ways. the paper proceeds by setting them out in turn  trying to make their underlying logic and relationships as clear as possible. 
 b  	general viewpoint 
　　the first type of relationship is associated with the idea of a general viewpoint  which has 
already been mentioned. 
     the rationale of general viewpoint arguments can be clarified considerably by starting with the issue of classification. this approach avoids 
problems with more intuitive approaches which were exposed by draper  1 . to invoke the general 
viewpoint assumption  one needs a system of three inter-related types of class. this kind of system is illustrated in fig. 1. first  there is 

a class of picture features which will be called trigger features. secondly  there is a class of scene fragments which will be called target features. thirdly  there is another class of 
scene features which will be called mimics. target features and mimics share the property that projections of them may be trigger features  and they must exhaust all the scene features which could give rise to trigger features. but target and mimic features must contrast in the ways in which they give rise to trigger features. target features must give rise to trigger features from 
any of a wide range of viewpoints. 	by contrast  
there will be associated with any mimic feature 
a locus whose volume is zero. the defining characteristic of this locus is that only when the viewpoint is on that locus will an image of that feature be a trigger feature. this kind of locus will be called a locus of deception. 
　　the point of a classification system like this is that one can strongly expect any trigger feature to represent a target feature provided that two conditions are met. 
　　 i  there must be no relationship between viewer and viewed which makes the point of 
observation particularly likely to lie in a locus of deception. it is strictly the assumption that this condition is met which has been called the 
assumption that viewing position is general or that the world is indifferent to the observer. 
　　 ii  the frequency with which target features occur must not be negligible by compari-
son with the frequency of mimic features. this will be called the target frequency condition. 
　　clearly  if both of these conditions are met then in any sample of pictures  trigger features will arise overwhelmingly more often as pictures of target features than as pictures of mimic 
features. correspondingly one will be right in the overwhelming majority of cases if one assumes that a trigger feature always represents a target feature. 
　　it is apparent from this that by using the assumption of a general viewing position one can get information with remarkably little a priori knowledge about the world. in fact there is even less need for a priori knowledge than it might 
seem. if trigger features of a particular type occur with some frequency in pictures of a given world  then one can infer that either viewing position is tending to fall on loci of deception  or the target frequency assumption is met. this is because if viewing position were general  and 
the frequency of target features were negligible  then the frequency of trigger features would also 
be negligible. there are two consequences of this observation. the minor one is that even if the target frequency assumption is not met  there is little risk of error associated with 
interpreting triggers as targets. 	one will 
simply not again anything  because one will rarely come across triggers. 	the major point is  as has already been noted  that one really needs minimal a priori knowledge to get information on the basis 
r. cowie 1 
of the general viewpoint assumption. 
　　　it remains to be shown what kinds of information can be obtained by using the general viewpoint assumption. this hinges on what systems of classes actually meet the abstract criteria which have been set out so far. 
     there are two extreme ways of developing appropriate class systems. to illustrate one extreme  one could take as the target class the class of cubes. though no proof will be offered  it is fairly easy to see that at least when 
orthographic projection is involved  all mimics have loci of deception associated with them. so if viewing position is general  it is a safe 
strategy to accept that any picture which could represent a cube does represent a cube. 
     this system can be extended to include any finite set of rectangular parallelopipeds  each 
with specified proportions  in the target set. adding a new rectangular para ilelopiped to the target set will add a new component to the locus 
of deception associated with many  or all  mimics. but so long as the number of rectangular parallelopipeds in the target set stays finite  the locus of deception associated with any mimic will remain at zero volume. what one cannot do is increase the target set to contain all rectangular parallelopipeds whose dimensions lie between some given limits. to do that would associate with each mimic a locus of deception with an infinite number of components which  added together  would occupy a non-zero volume. 
two points should be made about this example. 
     firstly  the example exposes a tempting misunderstanding of the general viewpoint assumption. it is obviously absurd to say   it follows from the assumption that viewing position is general that this represents a cube . the root of the absurdity is the assumption that specific interpretations of any sort follow from the general viewpoint assumption. in fact  the general viewpoint assumption is rather like free credit which nature extends to perceivers. only the amount available is fixed by the assumption: it is up to the perceiver whether he buys  so to speak  cubes; 
or rhomboids with angles of 1 ; or whatever. 
     secondly  the example shows that the general viewpoint assumption can support strong conclusions about a limited range of objects. 	this is the extreme which was mentioned in introducing 
the example. 
     the second extreme  naturally  involves weak conclusions about a large range of objects. this extreme is most simply illustrated in the case of interpreting drawings composed of straight lines.  binford  1  discusses a parallel kind of analysis on scenes involving curves.  
     analysis involves two levels: picking out a repertoire of basic trigger features  and building from these by inference. table 1 illustrates some basic trigger features. inference rules can group 

1 r. cowie 
edges into sets whose members are coplanar with one another.  coplanarity is a key relationship because the triggers provide information primarily about intersections. the knowledge that lines intersect implies that they lie in the same 
plane  so considering coplanarity provides a natural way of integrating information from 
triggers.  
　　this means that given only general viewpoint and target frequency assumptions  one can obtain much of the kind of information which huffman  1   clowes  1  and their successors obtained by using a good deal of a priori knowledge. the assertion that edges are coplanar 
carries a good deal of the information which the 
labelling programs provide by associating edges 
with a single surface. decisions about convexity/concavity and occlusion are always strongly constrained by coplanarity relations  as poly showed clearly  mackworth  1  and where tee junctions are present these relationships may 
emerge directly from an analysis based purely on general viewpoint and target frequency assumptions. these assumptions also provide a characteristic indicator that drawings may be problematic  an issue at the heart of the huffman-clowes tradition. the indicator is that all of the lines representing an object must be coplanar if viewing 
position is general. this giveaway is associated directly with the first two pictures in fig. 1  one of which we see as impossible and the other of which involves an accidental alignment. it is associated in an indirect form with 1 c   a  missing line  example discussed extensively by mackworth  1 . the edges of 1 c  do not fall into a single coplanar set  but they would if one assumed that the edges around a belonged to a single plane surface. this provides a motivation for splitting a which is a good deal simpler than the one proposed by mackworth. having mentioned 
similarities  it is worth pointing a contrast between the huffman-clowes tradition and analysis based on a general viewpoint assumption. the a 
priori assumption that surfaces bounded by straight lines will be plane is central to the huffman-clowes tradition. but it is not necessarily true  and the visual system does not always make it. fig. 1 d  illustrates. 


most people see the top face as curved. this is in fact implied by the general viewpoint-based interpretations of table 1. 
　　these examples may serve to illustrate the point that the general viewpoint assumption can sanction weak conclusions about a large range of objects  as well as strong conclusions about a limited range of objects. they should also serve to reinforce the point that although one needs 
minimal a priori knowledge to reach conclusions based on the general viewpoint assumption  the conclusions which one can base on it are very far from trivial. 
　　a final illustration may clinch this point. consider an observer moving from a to b towards a 
　　curved rigid configuration c  which will be taken as a stationary frame of reference.  see fig. 1 . his prospective point of impact will be called p. longuet-higgins and prazdny  1  showed that even if the observer's orientation changes between a and b  p has a distinctive feature which makes it identifiable: if two 
points appear to lie on a line through p when 
the observer is at a  then they will also appear to lie on a line through p when he is at b. this continued alignment simply means that the points lie in a plane through abp. now if a moving 
point is to mislead the observer into thinking that it is part of c  it must clearly be moving in a plane through abp. this constraint can 
easily be inverted into a constraint on the observer's motion. if we take a as fixed  then the moving point cannot be mistaken for part of c unless b lies in the plane containing a and the rogue point's initial and final positions. this means that a non-general viewpoint is needed for a non-rigid configuration to mimic a rigid one.  notice that if the observer moved to a third point  a new kind of constraint on viewpoint would come in. the third point would have to be at a particular distance from b  otherwise the observer would derive different estimates of the moving point's distance from the points in the 

r. cowie 1 
rigid configuration.  
     this analysis is  of course  closely related to the one which lets ullman  1  conclude that  the probability that three views of four points not moving rigidly together will admit a rigid interpretation ... is zero   p. 1 . ullman's 
conclusion seems extraordinary: given that stimulation is in principle profoundly ambiguous  how can we give a guarantee which implies  as this does  that a system may derive full interpretations with negligible probability of error  the point of the sketch above is to show that this property of  structure from motion  schemes is in fact yet another illustration of how much can be gained  and at what low risk  by trading on the assumption of a general viewpoint. we can be confident of interpretations involving rigid structures because to be fooled  the observer 
would have to be maintaining a strange and exact relationship to the things observed: and in our world  that will almost never happen unless the observer arranges it. 
 c  	representative viewpoint 
     attention is now turned to relationships which are very like those which have just been discussed  but less exact. these allow one to use what cowie  1  called the assumption that viewing position is representative. 
     research into this area was suggested by some strange facts about human vision. consider  for instance  fig. 1. we tend to see  a  and  b  


1 r. cowie 
as having different axes of symmetry  roughly those indicated by the- dotted lines in figs. 1 c  and  d  respectively. yet both types of symmetry could be imposed on both drawings. 
   it is not easy to explain our preferences here in terms of viewed configurations  and intui-
tion suggests that viewpoint might be an important consideration. roughly  if 1 a  represents a pyramid like the natural interpretation of 1 b  it is seen from an extreme and unhelpful angle. this intuition suggests that our preference might be justified by something akin to the general viewpoint assumption but relating to large and small volumes of space rather than zeroand nonzero volumes. 
   two kinds of relationship can be established which are relevant to this example. the 
numerical estimates are appropriate to orthographic projection  though they are probably not far out for perspective. 
    i  from most viewpoints  edges of similar length appear as lines of similar length. the 
strength of the relationship depends on the angle between the edges. if the angle is 1   the shorter line will be over 1% of the longer from around 1% of viewing angles. if the angle is 1%  about half of viewing angles lead to a 
shorter line more than 1% of the longer. 
    ii  from most viewpoints  edges which meet at a particular angle appear as lines which meet at a similar angle. edges which meet at 1 will appear as lines meeting at 1 or less from about 1＜ of viewing angles. edges which meet at 1 will appear as lines meeting at 1 or less from around 1% of viewing angles. 
   these results can be applied to fig. 1 a  as follows. 
   note that the lines which we see as roughly equal edges are themselves roughly equal. 	to assume that the edges were very far from equal 
would imply a viewpoint within a restricted range - unless the edges were at a fairly large 
angle to each other. but the lines are at a fairly small angle to each other  so to assume that the edges were at a large angle to each 
other would also imply a viewpoint within a restricted range. 
   this argument is not in itself a justification for our interpretation of fig. 1 a   because it lacks the analogue of the target frequency assumption. if edges which met were 
highly unlikely to be similar in length  then the proper conclusion would have to be that lines of a similar length meeting at a small 
angle were probably due to edges of dis-similar length seen at an odd angle. the point is rather that the viewpoint argument provides a 
pressure towards interpreting the pictures as we do. 
   note that this example involves a point which is familiar from  for instance  marr and nishihara  1 : certain features associated with symmetry are preserved to a reasonable approximation over a relatively wide range of viewpoints. analysing out the assumption that viewing position is representative is in part  therefore  simply formalising and clarifying a 
kind of argument which we do already use. 
     the kind of reasoning used above also applies to a very different  and very important context. the interpretation of curves has not yet been considered. the general viewpoint assumption can clearly be applied in some cases. for instance  conic sections could be used as triggers whose targets would be spheres or  in orthographic projection  circles and elipsoids. but it is difficult to image any comparable analysis being extended to very much of the huge range of curves  many very irregular  which we find in everyday life. 
     there are nevertheless very general senses in which reasoning about viewpoints does seem to 
bear on interpreting curves. for instance  it does seem that only in rather rare alignments would a curve like fig. 1 a  turn out to look 
like 1 b  from the side  with a totally unsig-
nalled kink. one can make some progress towards a principled rejection of interpretations like 1 b  by considering a curve as a series of straight line segments  and invoking the principle that the angle between lines tends to be like the 
angle between the edges which they represent. this is obviously not a good analysis. the important point is that viewpoint arguments do 
seem relevant to interpreting curves  and that representative viewpoint arguments may well be 
more relevant than general viewpoint arguments.  binford  1  shows that a more extreme case is handled by a general viewpoint argument.  
 d  	privileged viewpoint 
     the discussion of viewing configuration so far has invoked the idea that the viewer's position is likely to be unrelated to the relevant features of the world. the third kind of relationship is where the viewpoint is definitely 
not a random choice  but is specially and usefully related to the features in question. such viewpoints can aptly be described as privileged. 


   some instances of privileged viewpoint arise for very simple reasons. the obvious example involves verticals. we expect these to appear vertical. this is because a main axis of our viewing apparatus tends to be vertical. this is a restriction which is formally very like being in a locus of deception: we deny ourselves  so to speak  a degree of freedom in positioning our viewing apparatus. but we turn the restriction to advantage. 
   other instances of privileged viewpoint arise because we arrange them. many kinds of visual judgement we make by positioning ourselves to get 'a good view   for instance on a perpendicular to the centre of a surface or exactly edge-on to it  if we want  for instance  to judge whether a surface is truly flat . when 
we cannot control our own viewpoint  we expect our picture-makers to take account of our p