 
　　　we present a system which translates sentences from a subset of german into a database. this database will function as the basis for a question-answering-systern. 
　　　the system is applied to a complete text and not to isolated sentences. as an intermediate stage 
between the german text and the database we use the discourse representation structures  drs  invented by hans kamp. karnp's system has been chosen because 
it handles intrasentential and intersentential relations uniformly. within kamp's system one can account for certain types of anaphoric relations for which no other linguistic theory has provided a 
solution. 
　　　the input to our system is analysed by a parser which is based on lexical functional grammar. this is the first attempt to combine research on discourse representation with lexical functional grammar with the help of the formalism of definite clause grammar. 
　　　for the construction of the database out of the drs's  two solutions arc proposed. first  a translation of the drs's into a set of prolog clauses enriched with some additional deductive principles. second  the formulation of inference rules which operate directly on the drs. 
　　　so far we have implemented the following components: parser of german  translation rules which map syntactic trees into drs's and rules which translate drs's into prolog-clauses. 
i. 	the fragment of german and the parser 
　　　our parser is based on the formalism of lexical functional grammar  lfg . the implementation of the lfg-parser itself is described in  reyle/ frey  1 . 
we have chosen lfg for four reasons: 
a  lfg is based on research in theoretical and in computational linguistics. 
b  lfg has already been applied to a variety of 
languages. 
　　　this report describes work done in the department of linguistics at the university of stuttgart. it was supported in part by the german science foundation project ro 1. 
c  lfg does not require transformational rules. 
d  the output of the parse  called 'f-structure'  constitutes in form and content an excellent input to our semantic component. 
　　　our fragment of german comprises the following constructions: relative clauses  conditional clauses  universally and existentially quantified noun phrases  sentence and constituent negation  personal pronouns and definite descriptions. 
i i . 	semantic representation 
a. 	introduction 
　　　as semantic representation we use the discourse representation theory of hans kamp  kamp  1 a  

1 w. frey et al. 
the f-structure the construction of the drs in the following way: universal quantifiers  conditional 
sentences and negation introduce subordinate dr's. quantified common nouns and proper nouns introduce discourse referents. pronouns do not introduce new discourse referents but must refer to a discourse referent which has already been introduced. relative pronouns pick up the reference introduced by the nounphrase which dominates the relative clause. personal pronouns and definite descriptions pick up a discourse referent which was introduced before and which is accessible in the partial order of dr's. 

the names of the grammatical  unctions and features correspond to procedures in our program. in  1'  this means that we will have the following procedures: pred  spec  adj  num. the spec procedure builds up the dr configuration and introduces discourse referents. furthermore it is responsible for the representation of quantifier scope ambiguities. scope ambiguities cannot be represented in f-strur:tures  for good reasons . scope ambiguity is a semantic phenomenon and must be handled in the semantic representation .  the pred procedure introduces atomic conditions on the discourse referents. adj guarantees the correct semantic relationship between the relative clause and the common noun and num specifies the discourse referents to be discourse individuals or discourse sets. crucial for the program is the ability to build up structures which are not fully instantiated and leave unspecified parts as variables  see pereira  warren  1 . 
c. 	truth conditions for drs's 
　　　the drs-construction rules are such that they allow for a uniform treatment of indefinite descriptions in arbitrary contexts. consider the sentences: 
{1  a farmer owns a donkey. 
 1  if a farmer owns a donkey  he beats i t . in  1  the indefinite phrase 'a donkey' is to be interpreted as existentially quantified  whereas in  1  it has a universally quantified reading. by the drsrules indefinite descriptions are interpreted as referential terms: they always introduce a discourse 
referent. 
the resulting drs's are: 
 1'  
u 	v 
farmer  u  donkey  v  1 
 owns  u ryl 
 1'  	the same as  l''  above. 
whether the discourse referent introduced by an indefinite description implies existence or not  depends 
on its position in the partial ordering of the dr's. exactly those referents introduced in the main dr's imply existence; all other referents are to be'inter-
preted as universally quantified  if they occur in the antecedent-dr of a pair of sub-dr's  or as existentially quantified  if they occur in the consequent-dr. of course the interpretation of the latter  i. e.  the existentially quantified referents 
depends on the interprctation of all universally quantified referents accessible from them. thus the role of the partial ordering of the dr's is twofold. first it forms the base for the definition of truth-conditions on the drs. second it defines an accessibility relation '- -'  which restricts the set of possible antecedents of a pronoun or definite description to the accessible ones. the truth conditions of a drs are necessarily recursive. recall that each dr consists of a set of individuals and atomic conditions  i. e.  it can be considered as a partial model. a partial function f from a dr m into a model m is called a proper embedding  if it is a homomorphism of in into m-with respect to the- atomic conditions of m. suppose 1 satisfies the predecessor of a sub-dr m of k - if there is one; if not let 1 be the empty function. then g is said to satisfy m  if it is a proper embedding of m that extends 1  and if m dominates two sub-dr's m1 and m1 then additionally every k that extends g and satisfies m1 must be extendable to a h that  satisfies m1  . let us call the union of the 'highest' dr's of a drs k the main dr of k. then k is true in m  if there is a proper embedding of the main dr of k into m  for an exact  formulation of the truth conditions see  kamp  1 a  . 
　　　two remarks  are in order. first  the truth-definition of a drs of a discourse d is defined for the whole discourse and not for the conjunction of the individual sentence's that occur in d. this is necessary in order to account for intersentenfial dependencies like anaphorical relations. second  in spite of the fact that we do not. want to check the truth of a discourse d in a given model the exact-
model theoretic interpretation of the drs's is crucial for our aims to build up an  intentional  database out of d. the reason is that in order to get correct answers to questions abaout such a database  containing facts and rules  the structures upon which it will be built up must be logically transparent. 
d. 	anaphoric pronouns and definite description 
　　　in analysing a pronoun one has to look for a suitable discourse referent which is to be substituted for the pronoun. the set of candidates is restric ted by the partial ordering of dr's. only discourse referents  which are accessible from the dr under construction  are possible antecedents  see example   consider however sentence  1 : 
 1  wenn kein mann ein auto besitzt  das ihm gefallt  dann 1st er unglucklich. 
      if no man owns a car he likes then he is unhappy the corresponding drs looks like: 

 we represent negation by means of a dr false for which no proper embedding exists.  
it is not possible to find an antecedent for the second pronoun in example  1 . therefore a text which consists only of this sentence is not wellformed. 
　　　another problem which should be tackled intersententially are definite descriptions. the sentence  the mad hatter hates alice  is only used correctly if a hatter was mentioned in the preceding discourse and if it is clear to the reader that there is only one mad hatter. therefore  in order to analyse definite descriptions we have to take into account the preceding discourse and we have to check whether the existence and uniqueness conditions are fulfilled. for the drs theory this means that we have to look for a discourse referent intro-
duced in the preceding drs for which the description holds and we have to check whether this description holds for one referent only. our algorithm proceeds as follows: first an intermediate stage is built up 
where the definite description is replaced by a variable over discourse referents. the attributes of the definite description are- given to a search procedure. this procedure succeeds if one and only one match with a subset of the attributes of an already introduced accessible discourse referent is possi-
ble. a text is coherent only if all its variables over discourse referents can be resolved. 
　　　in our approach  contrary to others  it is not necessary to expand the representation of the sentence containing the definite description with clauses stating the existence and uniqueness conditions. 
1. from drs to database 
from the model theoretic interpretation of the drs it follows that the atomic conditions contained in the main dr express the facts asserted in the dis-
course. the information contained in the sub-dr's express the rules. 
in order to answer queries about the content of the discourse represented by the drs we consider two possibilities: 
 i  translating the drs into a prolog - database  ii  formulating inference rules which operate directly on the drs. both lead to a logical database. 
the extensional part  i.e. the facts  and the intensional part  i.e. the rules viewed as integrity constraints  are expressed in the same language. 
*surely this is a special case. the attributes of the definite description could be hyponomious to the ones with which the match works. furthermore the required discourse referent does not have to appear in the drs representing the text; it could appear in a presupposed drs which represents world knowledge. 
w. frey et al. 1 
ad  i : for the translation of the drs's into prolog-clauscs we developped an algorithm which operates directly on the drs's. thus it is not necessary to translate the drs's first into predicate logic. if only the consequent-dr*s of a drs introduce a new pair of sub-dr's the drs is equivalent to a set. of horn-clauses. the translation procedure replaces the discourse referents introduced in the main dr and in the consequent-dr's by their corresponding skolem functions. all other discourse referents are replaced by variables. 
if the consequent-dr's contain more than one atomic formula  each of them gives rise to a separate hornclause . 
example: every man loves a woman 

	drs 	prolog-clauses 
for arbitrarily branching dr's which are not equivalent to horn-clauses the algorithm is more complicated. in this case it is not convenient to translate into clausal form  because the procedural interpretation of the resulting clauses depends on the skolem function  appearing in the antecedents  the ex-
tension of which is not represented in the programme. the clausal forms for the sentence jede frau  die jeden mann liebt  den sie kennt  ist uberfordert. 
 every woman who loves every man she knows is stressed  . 
are: 
iiberfordert  x  --frau  x    not  mann  f x   iiberfordert  x   - frau  x    not  kennen  x f x    iiberforderf  x   --frau  x    lieben  x f x   
to get a programme we have to translate into iiberfordert  x   - frau  x    not  mann  y    kennen  x y    not  lieben  x y    
 with 'not' interpreted as 'negation as failure' . hence one has to take into account special prolog requirements and has to build up new representations. furthermore the programme has to be enriched with special 'meta'-procedures to render adequate answers 
 e.g. a rule yielding the contraposition of a clause . ad  ii : because of the problems mentioned under  i  
we want to investigate the possibility of using the drs itself - together with inference rules operating on it - as database. a set of inference rules has been proposed by hans kamp. 
references 
kamp  h.   a theory of truth and semantic representation . in: j.a. groenendijk  ed.   formal methods i n the study of natural language i.  1 
kamp  h.   evenements  representations discursives et 