 
   how do doctors make diagnoses based on their medical knowledge  in this paper a hypothesis is proposed concerning a diagnostic method used by doctors. the knowledge for the hypothesis has been provided by an authority in the field of medicine  and a diagnostic system for headache and facial pain  named rhinos  has been implemented using the programming language prolog  which is operative on an nec pc-1 microcomputer. because it is operative on a microcomputer  rhinos is portable and readily available. 
   rhinos has four kinds of rules: two levels of rules perform as forward links from manifestations to diseases. it also has disease-images that act as backward links from manifestations to diseases. it also has disease-images that act as backward links from diseases to manifestations. through harmonious use of this knowledge  rhinos makes not only single diagnosis but also makes differential-diagnoses. it also diagnoses cases of complications of two or more diseases. the disease-image link made this possible. 
   rhinos was used to diagnose 1 patients and 1% of its diagnostic results were equal to those made by a specialist  1% were close to those made by a specialist. this shows that rhinos is capable of diagnosing patients in almost the same way as a specialist. 
i introduction 
   recently  many new ways of clarifying patients' conditions have been introduced to clinical settings. they have enabled doctors to diagnose more precisely and more objectively. however  anamneses and physical examinations are still important  especially in some fields where other information about patients is hard to obtain. without adequate knowledge or experience in such fields  no doctor can make a precise diagnosis. therefore  if a diagnosing mechanism containing the knowledge of doctors having the necessary knowledge and experience were represented and programmed into a computer  doctors with less experience would be able to make diagnoses precisely through the assistance of the computer. 
   prior to creating a diagnosing mechanism and installing medical knowledge into a computer  one must clarify what kind of knowledge expert doctors use and how they go about diagnosing patients. to illustrate this point  the authors developed a hypothesis about the way expert doctors make diagnoses. and based on the hypothesis  the authors acquired knowledge from expert doctors  programmed the diagnosing mechanism and the knowledge into a microcomputer. the authors constructed  rhinos   rule-based headache and facial pain informatbn organising system  as an application of their hypothesis  and evaluated the system using authentic clinical casea mataumura 1 . 
address for correspondence: michio kimura 
1-1 futaba nagata 
kobe hyogo 1 japan 
   with regard to inference mechanisms of medical consultation systems  one can find a production system with certainty factor used in mycin shortllffe 1   and a causal network used in casnet weiss and kullkowskl 1  and caduceus pople 1 . rhinos uses rules as forward links from manifestations to diseases  and classifies these rules into four categories according to their degree of certainty. rhinos also uses disease-images as backward links from diseases to manifestations. by harmoniously integrating these two kinds of knowledge  rhinos makes diagnoses almost as precisely as expert doctors. 
ii diagnosing model in rhinos 
   let d/ /=1 ...  be all diseases on earth at past  present and future  and let sf be sets of manifestations of all patients of each disease. and assume that s  is a subset of s1  which comprises all elements that are already known. also assume that a patient's manifestations are r. diagnosing can be said to be an inference of  which s/* includes r   judging from the information of s{. expert doctors acquire knowledge necessary to make this inference from s/  which are sets of known manifestations of the past d1. 
   the authors created the following five categories of knowledge to use as inferences. 
a. definite rule  d-rule  
   according to this type of rule  if all manifestations listed in the premise part are fulfilled  the patient is suffering definitely from the disease indicated. 
example: 
if nature of pain - throbbing pain  1  
history since onset - paroxysmal repetitive  1  
prodromal syndrome - scintillation scotoma  1  
concurrent neurological sign during paroxysm - none  1  
then 
this case is definitely a classic migraine. 
   if any item in the premise part  1 - 1  is lacking  it cannot be concluded that this is definitely a classic migraine. the authors call this situation as  premise part is locally minimized.  d-rule is defined as follows. 
   a necessary and sufficient condition for manifestation-set r to be a premise part of a d-rule for disease of/ is 


1 	m. kimura et al. 
the 	authors 	call 	sa r d/  	a 	 satisfaction 	index  for manifestation-set r and disease d . the second condition indicates that the premise part is locally minimized. 
b. strongly suspect rule  ss-rule  
   according to this type of rule  if an item of the premise part are fulfilled  the patient will probably have the disease indicated  but there is also a slight chance that it could be another disease or other diseases. 
ss-rule is defined as follows. 
a necessary and sufficient condition for manifestation-set r to be a premise part of an ss-rule for disease d/ is 

where e is a constant relatively close to but less than 1. 
c. weakly suspect rule  ws-rule  
   according to this type of rule  if an items of the premise part are fulfilled  the patient may have the disease indicated but there is also a certain probability that it is another disease or other diseases. the purpose of this rule is to prevent the omission of cases in which patients with disease d/ were not caught by d-  ss- or ws-mles of said disease. however  the ws-rule must maintain uniqueness in diagnosing disease d/. 
therefore  the ws-rule for disease d/ may be multifaceted for the purpose of covering a wide range of disease d/  where dand ss-rule for disease d1 are unique. 
the ws-rule is defined as follows. 
a necessary and sufficient condition for a set rj  which comprises manifestation-sets r1 to be the premise part of the 
ws-rules for disease d1 is 

 ri is a set whose elements consist of the premise parts of dand ss-rules for disease d/.  
 e* is a constant which is close to but less than e.   e** is a constant which is close to but less than 1.  
the authors call co d/  a  covering index  for disease d/. 
d. associate rule  a-rule  
after focusing on a disease through the application of the 
d-  ss- or ws-rules  this rule makes more probable the system's diagnostic belief. 
example: 
 middle-aged women often suffer from classic migraine headaches. however  the system cannot diagnose the allment as a classic migraine simply because the patient is a middle-aged women  nor  conversely  can it reject the poeslbmlty that it is a classic migraine merely because the patient is male. but if other evidence suggested that it was a classic migraine  the fact that the patient is a 
 middle-aged women makes more probable the system's diagnostic belief. 
e. disease image 
this shows all the possible manifestations of disease d/. 
example: 
age - over 1 
sex - male or female 
pain location - whole head  half of the head  frontal  temporal  parietal  occipital  or suboccipital 
nature of pain - throbbing pain  continuous pain  or bursting pain 
with these five kinds of knowledge  a through e above   
rhinos makes inferences  whose sequence is described as follows.  assume that s is a manifestation set of a patient.  
   1. if the d-ruie of disease d/ matches the patient's manifestations   which means that the premise part of the d-rule is a subset of or equal to 1   and s is a subset of or equal to a set of disease-image of d/  the system will indicate that  the patient is suffering from d/.  
   1. if the ss-rule applies  in the same manner as described in number 1 above   the system will state that  dj is strongly suspected.  
   1. likewise  if the ws-rule applies  then the system will state that  there is some possibility of d/.  
   1. if the d-ruie of disease d/ matches the patient's manifestations  but s is not a subset of nor equal to the disease-image of d/  the system will state that  this is a complication of dj and other diseases.  
   1. if the ss-rule of disease d/ matches  but s is not a subset of nor equal to the disease-image of d/  the system will state that 'this is a complication of d/ and other diseases  or this is not d/.  
   1. if the ws-rule of disease d/ matches  but s is not a 
   subset of nor equal to the disease-image of disease d/  the system will state that 'this is a complication of df and other diseases  or this is not d/.  in this case  however  the possibility of the latter is greater than that of the former. 
   1. in steps 1 and 1  if no d-rule  ss-rule  nor ws-rule of any disease other than d/ matches  the system will state that 'the possibility that this is not d/ is reduced.  
   1. if any of the d-  ss-  or ws-rules of disease d/ matches the patient's manifestations  and if the a-rule of disease dj matches  the system will state that the certainty of the diagnosis is strengthened.  
   there is a slight chance that the patient may be suffering from d/ but that  having completed the sequence above  the system may make inappropriate diagnosis when none of the d-  ss-  or ws-rules of d/ matches the patient's manifestations. 
the probability of this case is evaluated using the coveringindex as  

where  p{d1  is an a -priori probability of disease d/. 
in order to prevent inappropriate diagnosis  the following step has been added. 
   1. if s is a subset of or equal to the disease-image of disease dlt the system will state that  d/ must be differentiate.  meaning that the provisional d/ indicated cannot be ruled out yet  pending additional information. 

   if s is a manifestation of one single disease  the above warning will be issued in order to avoid oversight. however  if s is a combined manifestation of multiple diseases and s is not specific enough for these diseases  the system will make inappropriate diagnosis. this may be prevented through the classification of disease-image  e.g. exclusional disease image  inclusional disease image  etc. . it must be remembered  however  that in such cases  even a medical specialist may experience difficulty in making precise diagnosis. 
ill knowledge acquisition procedure 
   the knowledge required for the system was acquired from medical expert through algorithm shown in fig. 1. the amount of knowledge extracted through this procedure and the number of steps executed can be enormous. but each step of the procedure is rather simple. 
iv rhinos system profile 
a. diseases that can be diagnosed by rhinos 
   rhinos is aimed at patients whose chief complaint is headache and or facial pain. the classification of headache and facial pain used by rhinos was derived from a classification of such pain drawn up by a committee of six american specialists chaired by a. p. friedman in 1 friedman 1 . for convenience of inference  the authors then reclassified the information into 1 diseases. first depth classification of diseases are following 1. 

	m. kimura et al. 	1 
1. intracranial diseases 
1. muscle contraction headache 
1. vascular headache 
1. neuralgic headache and facial pain 
1. psycogenlc headache and facial pain  in narrow sense  
1. inflammation of the eye  including glaucoma  
1. ear diseases 
1. nasal sinus diseases 
1. jaw joint and teeth disease 
1. nose diseases 
1. invasive diseases to the skull 
1. craniocervical anomaly 
1. arteriosclerotic headache 
b. working environment 
   rhinos is implemented by a programming language prologkaba sakuragawa 1 . all the knowledge used in rhinos is represented in a predicate-logic manner of prolog. the pattern matching feature of prolog is a very efficient and useful function  which makes the retrieval and evaluation of information quick and convenient kimura 1 . 
   prolog-kaba is operative on cp/m-1 on nec pc-1 microcomputer  cpu: 1  ram extended to 1 kb . this means that diagnosis can be carried out through medical consultation system rhinos on hardware costing less than jye1  ~ us$1 . retailing rhinos is planned in a near future. the maximum cpu time for one case does not exceed 1 minute. no user is needed to wait for the microcomputer response longer than 1 seconds at any scene. 
c. system architecture 
   rhinos is comprised of four parts: input  knowledge base  inference engine  and output. 
1. input 
   rhinos first requires that information on the following 1 items be screened. 
age 
sex 
pain location 
nature of the pain 
severity of the pain history since onset 
frequency of the paroxysm duration of the paroxysm 
prodromal syndrome 
concurrent neurological sign during the paroxysm interval of the paroxysm state of sleep 
ratio of present pain severity to the past severest period tender spot 
   after acquiring information on these 1 signs  rhinos applies rules for the case. if more information is required by the system  additional questions will appear on the screen. 
1. knowledge base 
   the knowledge base of rhinos is mainly comprised of five kinds of knowledge  described earlier in this paper. the number of rules and images are as follows. 
d-rule  ss-rule  ws-rule: 1 
a-rule: 1 disease-image: 1 
1. inference engine 
   procedure of inference sequence was described earlier in this paper  see ii . 

1 	m. kimura et al. 
1. output 
   output is not a final diagnosis but a list of the possibilities from the view of anamneses and physical examinations. an example is given in fig. 1. 
v evaluation 
   fifty cases of patients whose chief complaints was headache and/or facial pain were surveyed at kansai medical college  department of neurosurgery. a comparison was then made between the rhinos diagnosis and that of a human expert  professor of the department   whose diagnosis was based on the medical records of anamneses and physical examinations only. 
   in 1 out of 1 cases  both the rhinos' and the doctor's diagnoses coincided. in the 1 other cases the following problems arose: 
type 1. rhinos did not rule out a disease the expert ruled out.  1 cases  
type 1. rhinos stated 'this case may be disease d1 but manifestation m  can't be explained.  the expert rejected this possibility.  1 cases  
type 1. rhinos stated only one disease with  manifestation mj can't be explained  the expert concluded that the case was a complications of two diseases.  1 case  
type 1. rhinos could not provide conclusive information because the disease was very rare and no existing rule applied to that disease.  1 case  
type 1. the medical record was apparently erroneous.  1 case  
   actually  there is no serious problem in type 1. even in types 1 and 1  rhinos provided a suggestion for the right answer. discarding type 1  the authors reacned the following conclusions: 

coincided with the expert: 1% 
answered with little discordance: 1% 
discordance: 1% 
   the result show that rhinos is capable of providing almost the same as a human expert. however  the following problems still remain. 
   1. the disease-image of rhinos is a set of manifestations of a disease that can arise  but the disease image of a human expert is far more complex. this made it impossible for rhinos to rule out a disease that the expert ruled out. 
   1. because manifestations of headache and/or facial pain are rather subjective  a certain amount of ambiguity must be accouted for in the information obtained. the human expert put emphasis on the key manifestations  which he then reconfirmed in many ways in order to get the information as correct as possible. rhinos does not do this. 
vi finaling remarks 
   rhinos is now used mainly by the resident staff in the office of the department of neurosurgery. it is also used as cai for students. the portability of the system  as well as the quality of consultation  enhanced the actual use of this system. 
   as noted before  in order for this system to make more precise diagnoses for patients suffering from more than one disease  the introduction of classifications of disease-image  necessary image  sufficient image  exclusionary image  etc.  will prove effective in diagnosis. 
   the authors are already planning some other improvements on the system. it is planned for rhinos to focus on and reconfirm key manifestations that are fundamental to diagnosis. 
   the authors are already planning some other improvements on this sytem. it is planned for rhinos to focus on and reconfirm key manifestations that are fundamental to diagnosis. plans also exists for rhinos to suggest  1  what laboratory examinations be examined in order that a more precise diagnosis may be achieved; and  1  methods of treatment beyond diagnosis. 
   in this project  the authors confirmed their hypothesis to the domain of headache diagnosis  even though it was a subjective-fact oriented domain. being so close to the fundamental procedure of doctors1 diagnoses  this hypothesis can be applied to other diagnostic domain as well. 
