 propositional representation is not sufficient for understanding reasoning in this domain. another form of representation is the mental model which has been proposed to explain the obtained results. in contrast to this  we discuss some steps towards a computational theory founded on the notions of a conceptua! m o d e l and levels of reasoning which is able to reproduce the experimental results within a single abstract form of representation. some empirical consequences are outlined and tested. a tentative conclusion is that the experimental results do not reflect fundamental differences in representational form but strategy differences in how to solve the tasks. 
1 . i n t r o d u c t i o n 
     an interesting explanatory concept in current cognitive science research is the notion of mesial models. the concept has been used in such diverse research areas as rentoning  e.g.  |1|   problem tolling  e.g.     and human-computer interaction  e.g.   . there must  of course  be several similarities between the different uses. however  no precise definition has been put forward as to what it means for something to be a mental model. that is  there is no definition which is supposed to hold among the different areas of research and it is even hard to find a definition that is not ambiguous within a particular area. so  one can really ask what it is that makes something a mental model or to put it differently   what's in a mental model   
     a common theme within the three research areas is the emphasis on knowledge repretcntation  or perhaps we should say mental repretentation. of particular interest in this respect is the ongoing debate about the status of images and their relation to mental models. 
     some researchers claim that images correspond to a basic and concrete form of mental representation that is essential for the brain's way of representing the environment  e.g.   . others hold the view that images can be analyzed into a more fundamental and abstract representation. in this view  images are seen as products of processes operating on an abstract representation  e.g.   . thus  mental models as images could be regarded as either a fundamental format of representation or as a result of a strategy-driven process. 
     the concept of mental models as developed by johnson-laird  is very interesting in this perspective. in discussing how meaning is mentally represented  johnson-laird emphasized the distinction between a statement's eztension  or denotation  in contrast to its istention  or sense  and concluded that current theories of knowledge representation in cognitive science  e.g.  semantic networks  lexical decomposition etc.  cannot give a satisfactory account of the relation between intension and extension. instead  what is needed is a concept of a mental moid in order to explain how meaning comes into mind. 
for example  when a reasoner heart a sentence like  
the knife it to the right of the fork  
it is encoded in an abstract propositional  or conceptual  representation  e.g.  
right knife fork   
but its meaning is not reached until the reasoner builds a model of it  
e.g.  
	 fork 	knife  
     it is clear that for many domains a mental model corresponds to an image. this is particularly relevant when the domain consists of spatial descriptions as the above example. thus  a mental model in this conception is basically realized through an introduction of a new representational format. moreover  it seems as if the notion is based on the assumption that a model  by definition  should be concrete  i.e.  the model should have structural similarities to the real world object. 
     in this paper we intend to discuss the concept of a mental model as developed by johnson-laird and discussed in |1     and . naturally  we are also interested in generalizing the theoretical work to mental models in general. the fundamental concept we explore is the notion of a conceptual model showing many resemblances with conceptual ttructuret  and structural detcriptiont  1|. the computational theory we try to build is essentially an attempt to realize the   mental model phenomenon  in a conceptual form of representation. the emphasis is on processes operating on an abstract representation and thus creating an   image-like  structure. let us start by a brief review of some experiments which gives the discussion a concrete content. 
1. experiments with spatial descriptions 
     the task domain we use as a means for the discussion has been studied by  for example   and . 
description 1. the spoon it on the left of the knife. the plate it on the right of the knife. the fork it in front of the tpoon. the cup it in 
front of the knife. 
description 1. the tpoon it on the left of the knife. the plate it on the right of the tpoon. the fork it in front of the tpoon. the cup it in front of the knife. 
figure 1. examples of spatial descriptions. 
     figure 1 shows two spatial descriptions used in the experiments in . the task is to read a description and then  i  to draw a scene   ii  to recognize a scene  or  iii  to recognize the sentences among a set. in  we reviewed five experiments and presented steps towards a 
     computational theory able to reproduce the empirical findings. in the following we concentrate on the notion of spatial determinacy  which is the difference between the descriptions in figure 1. 
1 spatial determlnacy and mental models 
the experimental situation for descriptions 1 and 1 is as follows 
 1 . you are instructed to read a set of sentences and afterwards you might be presented with 
  a diagram and asked to decide whether or not the diagram corre-sponds to the description jnst read  e.g.  diagram 1  or 
  four descriptions each containing three sentences and asked to rank order the sets in terms of their resemblance to the original set. 
     
     the four sets could be composed of the original description  a paraphrase set or a set containing an inference  and two confusions sets. 
spoon knife plate fork cup 
diagram 1 
     the difference between descriptions 1 and 1 is easily seen if diagram 1 is compared to diagram 1. description 1 is ambiguous since both of these diagrams satisfy the description which is not the case for description 1. description 1 is a determinate description whereas 1 is an indeterminate description . 
	spoon 	plate 	knife 
	fork 	cup 
diagram 1 
     it is argued that a pure conceptual or propositional representation is unable to catch the difference between an indeterminate and a determinate description. this argument is verified if the descriptions are represented in a semantic network  c.f.   l| . that is  there is no structural difference between the two propositional representations which corresponds to the difference in the underlying meaning. 
     if this conception is cognitively relevant  human reasoners should be able to process and remember the descriptions equally well. on the other hand  if the network is further processed into a mental model format - for instance  a mental diagram as shown in diagram 1 or 1 then the differences between determinate and indeterminate descriptions should show up. 
     the experiments showed that human reasoners were able to recall diagrams as consistent with the descriptions more correctly if they were determinate. also  the reasoners were more likely to recognize the original descriptions if they were indeterminate. this was interpreted in  and  as indicating two quite different processes. when the description is determinate  reasoners build a mental diagram of the scene which makes it possible to mix original and inferred sentences. when the indeterminate description is processed it leads only to a verbal or propositional encoding. 
     thus  these experiments together with others have been interpreted as not supporting a pure propositional form of representation  but a notion of mental models  1|. however  in the next two sections we show that this interpretation is not completely without problems. we start by introducing a general view of reasoning processes. 
1. reasoning and conceptual models 
     the steps towards a computational framework of reasoning have been discussed in     and |1 . in this section we review some of the central aspects of this framework. 
1.l designing and running conceptual models 
     the fundamental concept in the theory is the notion of a conceptual model briefly  we consider a reasoning process to be composed 
of a detign process in which a conceptual model of the task is built. in this process the reasoner tries to interpret the information making up the task and activate knowledge that can help the design process. when a model has been developed it can be run. thus  we can understand a conceptual model as a program which can be interpreted and executed. by running the model it is possible to generate inferences that  depending on the task  might lead to a terminating state. in order to execute the model  we need a control structure  which is discussed below. the next phase is a refinement process in which the model is modified according to results of the execution or to some other knowledge source. the model can then be run again  and so on. a more detailed description can be found in  and  1 . 
     moreover  we want to explore a flexible control structure which can be modified during a reasoning process. of course  this is to move 
	g. hagert 	1 
the  real  control somewhere else. what we want to reach is the ability of executing the same conceptual model according to different control strategies. for example  the model might be executed by a depth-first search strategy through a forward inference rule or by a breadth-first search through a backward inference rule. we discuss this further in section 1. 
     finally  we intend to model the above processes within a logic modeling framework   meaning that we emphasize logic as a 
     representational language. it also means that we use computational techniques developed in the area of logic programming  1 . this is in line with proposals and claims raised by  for example  . 
1 levels of reasoning and conceptual models 
     in logic it is a well-founded idea that a reasoning system can be viewed from two perspectives. usually these are referred to as the object level and the meta level  respectively. for instance  the meta-level has most often been discussed in terms of how to control a line of reasoning. what inference should be made  how is the search through the space conducted  these are of course important questions for any reasoning system. 
in discussing different logical levels of problem solving sterling 
 identified three different levels and called them domain level  methods level and planning level in a sense  the latter two concern the way a representation can be manipulated and reasoned about  i.e.  a meta-level. we use the same terminology as in  except for the methods level which is called strategy level here. 
     the distinction illustrates the levels we want to emphasize in the present context. earlier we proposed the term flexible control structure in order to emphasize the ability of a reasoning system - be it a simulation model or an ai program - to modify and redirect its reasoning. mechanisms for such processes can be explored if we make a distinction between different levels of reasoning. 
     a conceptual model should include all three levels in order to be executable. in some domains it might not be necessary to develop a 
very sophisticated planning level since no essential problem solving is involved. that is  the planning level corresponds to reasoning about how to design a strategy to use at the domain level. the levels indicate that it is a possible for a reasoner to carry out a line of reasoning on the domain level or at the planning level. in our conception  the latter means that the reasoner tries to design or refine the model so that it can be executed at the domain level. 
     with respect to the mental representation issue it is important to consider the domain level of a conceptual model. that is  how is the problem actually represented  to take our current example  what basic representation and process can underlie the processing of spatial descriptions  
     in the remainder of this paper we will focus on the domain and strategy levels. an important point we are going to make is that it is not possible to predict a domain level without considering a strategy level since experimental differences might not correspond to differences at the considered level. 
1. conceptnal models in spatial reasoning 
     let us assume a domain level in which the basic form of representation is a proposition as found in different semantic or propositional network theories  c.f.   l . for example  description 1 in figure 1 is then represented as follows  
left spoon knife   1  right plate knlfe   1  front fork spoon   1  front cup knife   1       we use basically first-order predicate logic with an implicit v quantification. variables will denoted by x  y  z  etc. and constants by a beginning upper case letter. function and terms begin with a lower case letter. 
     
1 	g. hagert 
     in  we proposed domain-knowledge to be represented as schems built up through a set of rules. in this context  we assume a schema to belong to the domain level the following set of rules represents a hypothetical part of possible domain-knowledge. 

　　the rale in  1  can be translated to: if tie on the left of y and y i$ on the left of 1  then z to the left of a composite object eon$i$ting of y end z tuck thnt y is to the left of z. the rule in  1  says: x i$ on the left of y and of z nni in front of y  if * is on the left of the composite object in which p i$ in front of z 
     this rule-schema can compute a composite repretentntion or structural description from a set of sentences. furthermore  it can also decompose a structural description into its elementary constitutents. the different usages are dependent on the particular design of the strategy level. 
     executing a conceptual model consisting of the above schema and a strategy level based on a forward inferencing and a depth-first search on description 1 we get the following edited trace showing assertions and where they come from. 

     let us also give an example trace when the description b indeterminate. in this case  the execution of the conceptual model will not lead to a single composite representation. the process terminates with a few partially combined structures which cannot be further processed into a single composite representation given the design of the schema. we can say that we have a partial composite representation. 

     if we change the strategy level it is possible for the model to derive sentences which were not included in the original description. notice that we do not change the domain level  but only how the domain level is used. for example  if we have the structure 
left front fork spoon  front cup kfiift   
we can through the rules in  1  and  1  infer that 
left fofk cup  
     this short illustration should have indicated some of the properties we find especially interesting with respect to the notion of a conceptual model and levels of reasoning. it is also clear that this theory can explain the results discussed in section 1 . in the next section  we will discuss some empirical observations of human reasoners engaged in the same tasks as were formally treated above. 
1. conceptual models end empirical relevance 
     suppose a human reasoner is asked to read a set of sentences describing a scene  as in figure 1  and then to 
  draw the scene described in the sentences or 
  rank order a set of four descriptions according to their verbal simi-larity 
     what can then be predicted if the difference between the descriptions lies in how spatially determined they are  what consequences follow the notion of conceptual models as described above  
     the major and essential difference between processing a determinate description versus an indeterminate description as found in the present theory  is the degree to which the process leads to a single composite conceptual representation. in the latter case  we end up with a partial composite representation whereas in the former case we end up with a single composite representation or structural description. let us discuss the tasks of drawing a scene from memory and recognizing a description from memory given this conceptualisation. 
     in section 1 we showed how the execution contained at least two partial representations when description 1 was processed. they were as follows  
left front fork spoon  front cup nife    1  left front fofk spoon  plate   1       let us assume a drawing process which simply takes a composition as input and outputs the objects accordingly. it is easy to show bow this can be done using the same domain model but changing the strategy level to a backward inference mechanism  1 . we get diagram 1 when  1  is taken as input. 

diagram 1 
     next  we execute the process with  1  as input and diagram 1 is extended to include one more object and we get diagram 1  

diagram 1 
     diagram 1 should indicate  in bold face  what objects are processed and that the plate and the knife  share  the same position relative the spoon. 
the drawing process for a determinate task is straightforward. 
this exercise shows that both processes are very similar  but that processing effort it greater when the task is indeterminate. the very same general prediction holds for the task of recognizing the original sentences among a set. thb is in contrast to predictions found in  for example   1  and  1 . 
1 methodological considerations 
     fifteen subjects  ss  participated in this experiment. each of the ss solved 1 spatial reasoning tasks of which 1 were indeterminate 
     
and 1 were determinate  examples are found in figure 1 . afterwards  the ss were asked to either  i  draw the scene described or  ii  rank order four alternatives in terms of their resemblance to the original description. 
     in each group of descriptions  i.e.  determinate or indeterminate  1 of the descriptions lead to the task of drawing the scene  1 contained the task of rank ordering where one alternative contained a paraphrase  i.e.  if the original description contained a sentence like  the fork it to the left of the spoon  then it was replaced by  the tpoon it to right of fork   and the remaining 1 consisted in a rank-ordering task where one alternative contained and inferred sentence  i.e.  a sentence not included in the original description but which was true irrespective of whether or not the original was indeterminate or determinate . the content of the tasks varied  i.e.  each task described the relations among five objects where the same objects could not be found in another task. 
     each s was tested individually and the whole session was taperecorded enabling us to record reading-times as well as solution-times for each task. no time-limit was set. the 1 descriptions were randomized for each subject. 
1 some empirical results 
     we only give some very brief comments on the results that are of special interest in the present context. a more detailed account is given in |1 . 
     drawing a scene. a drawing was judged to be correct if it was consistent with the corresponding description. the somewhat surprising result was that 1 out of 1 drawings were correct for both types of descriptions. it was also observed that there was no systematic difference in the types of errors the ss made. 
     of the 1 correct drawings when the description was indeterminate  1 could be classified as being similare. in structure to diagram 1. that is  where two objects were placed in the same position relative a third object. 
table 1. mean reading time and mean drawing time for both descriptions  sec . 

reading drawing indeterminate 
1 
1 determinate 
1 
1 
　　from table 1 we can see that there is no difference in the time taken to read the descriptions. however  drawing the scene requires more time when the description is indeterminate. 
     recognising a description. the percentage of rank-orderings in which the original and the paraphrase were ranked prior the confusion descriptions was 1% for the determinate descriptions and 1% for the indeterminate descriptions. 
     the corresponding percentages when the task included a description with an inferred sentence were 1% for the determinate cases and 1% for the indeterminate ones. no major difference in reading times or in times for doing the rank-ordering was observed. 
in short  the pattern that emerges is very similar for both tasks. 
the sufficient point to make here is that the experiment does not reject the framework developed in this paper. of course  it is possible that the result is in line with other theories as well. it is interesting to note  though that ss did draw a scene in the manner outlined earlier in this section. only in 1 cases did ss draw a hypothetical scene  i.e.  a scene in which the indeterminacy was resolved by a  guess  and where the drawing is similar to diagram 1 or 1 rather than 1. 
1. concluding remarks 
     we have tried to discuss the mental model concept within a conceptual frame of reference. rather than postulating different forms of representations we have assumed a basic abstract form embedded in 
	g. hagert 	1 
a conceptual model. we emphasized that the model includes different levels of reasoning. the focus here have been on the domain and strategy level. it is obvious that we need more analyses and studies  both computational and experimental in order to be more precise as to what the levels might contain and how they interact. in particular  how can modification of conceptual models be understood in this perspective  
　　taken together  the experiments briefly described in section 1 and in section 1  seem to indicate that in order to further develop a 
　　computational theory we need to consider not only the domain level but also the strategy level. it is on this and the planning level we find a reasoner's search for a strategy that is effective relative the task demands and the goals. in a sense  this is only a reformulation of the thesis discussed by anderson  1| in which the claim was that it is necessary to consider both repretentation and process in order to develop a computational theory. 
acknowledgment. this work is supported by the national swedish board for technical development  stu . i thank anna malmsjo for collecting data described in section 1 and ake hansson for several valuable discussions. 
1. 