 
　　　the comprehensive o i l log interpretation is a procedure of numerical calculation and logical  or plausible  inference. in other words  the results of preliminary inference w i l l provide a basis for the choice of parameters of calculation formula  and then the results of numerical calculation w i l l be used as evidences for further inference  and so on and so forth. in view of this situation  we have designed a model expert system  tool system  mes and established a comprehensive o i l log interpretation expert system welies based on the system mes. 
　　　in mes  we introduced the concept of  task  to make numerical calculation intergrated with logical or plausible  inference during the task solution. the execution of mes is a procedure of task solution. ways of solving a task are defined by task transformation rules. 
　　　the knowledge representation is divided into two parts: 1  task transformation rules  including task decomposition rules and task derivation rules; 1  inference rules  including production rules and procedure rules. 
     we adopt dempster/shafer's evidence theory  to express uncertainty. 
introduction 
　　　rule-based expert system has come into wide application since the 1's . developments of mycin   prospector   dipmeter advisor   and other well-known expert systems have become the foundation for the development of pragmat i c expert systems. these systems  whether colleting data from users in the interactive way or from some on-line instruments  emphasize only logical or plausible  inference. however  in many applied fields  for instance in the f i e l d of o i l log interpretation  the procedure that experts use to solve problems is as follows: analyzing various preliminary information  qualitative interpretation  and then determining the parameter values needed by further quantative interpretation and then calculating using theoretical or empirical formula and then analyzing qualitatively further the results of calculations and so on and so forth. we hope to establish a uniform framework to deal with numerical calculation and l o g i system mes 
chang minche   zhao jizhi 
well logging campany 
daqing petroleum administrative bureau daqing  p.r.c. 
cal  or plausible  inference without impairing the advantages of the rule-based system. 
　　　we began to develop a comprehensive o i l log interpretation expert system in the march 1. we have designed a model expert system or tool system  mes and a comprehensive o i l log interpretation expert system welies based on mes. 
　　　this paper w i l l not attempt to explain the comprehensive o i l log interpretation expert system welies in detail  but we w i l l use it as an example to explain the system mes. 
     one version of mes and the system welies are implemented on perkin-elmer 1 in fortran 1. 
	i 	knowledge representation 
　　　definition:   x  object  value  support  plausi1bility  is called an assertion. 
     where  in welies   x is the name of some physical information or conclusion; value is the value 
of the object; support is a measurement of how evidences support the value of the object; plausibility is a measurement of how evidences do not oppose the value of the object. we w i l l explain these two concepts later. 
definition: t= tn  tv  is called a task  where 
tn is the name of a task   tv is the value of a task.  tv gets value from { 'true'  'false1  . 
　　　in mes  there is a task name for every object  respectively. 
　　　a task is set whenever a task name is provided to the task solution program. in the following  a task solution of our definition means a procedure to evaluate a task. a task solution is finished when the task has a value. 
　　　for every task t= tn  tv    tv=true' means that the solution for the task succeeds  and  tv= 'false1 means that the solution for the task f a i l s . we w i l l explain these in detail in the sec.iv. 
　　　ways to solve a task are defined by task transformation rules. 
	 i  	task transformation rules 

1 	g. jiwen et al. 


to the items in the condition part. 
　　　a rule w i l l not be invocated if i t s certainty of the condition part is less than a fixed threshhold. 
       certainty of every item in the action part of a production rule is defined dynamically by a function s certainty of the condition part  stat i c certainty of this item . certainty of the action part of a procedure rule is defined as the certainty of the condition part. 
	i i i 	main parts of mes 
mes is mainly composed of: 
1  task solution program 
1  explanation program 
1  subroutine base and its management program 
1  rule knowledge base and i t s management program 1  comprehensive data base and its management program 
　　　in welies  the subroutine base is composed of standardized well-log interpretation software. any program in the base has no argument. the beginning parts of a l l these programs are communication blocks communicating with comprehensive data base management program to get parameter values needed. 
	iv 	task solution 
　　　execution of the system mes is driven by task solution  and task transformation rules define the ways of solving tasks. 
　　　definition: a task t gets 'true'  if and only if :  1  the object corresponding to the task t has a value with strong support  or  1  the decomposed subtasks t l   t 1 /     t k of the task t a l l have values and at least one has a value 'true' ; a task t gets a 'false'  if and only i f :  1  the object corresponding to the task t has some special value indicating contradiction or mistake  or  1  a l l the decomposed subtasks t1 t1 *-'  tk of the task t have values 'false'. 
　　　ways of solving a task t imply the ways of evaluating the object corresponding to the task t. the procedure of evaluating an object  i.e.  a procedure to produce a new assertion happens simutaneously with the procedure of solving a task.we c a l l the procedure the  side effect  of the task solution. 
　　　every object has a f i e l d of value from which it may get values. this f i e l d does not include a l l 
values indicating contradictions and mistakes. the object corresponding to a task has the same f i e l d of value as a l l objects corresponding to a l l the task's decomposed subtasks. 
　　　the procedure of evaluating an object except for the objects with number values  is a procedure of evaluating the uncertainty of every member in the f i e l d of value. 
　　　the procedure is as follows: 1  evaluating with inference rules: the certainty of an item in the action part w i l l be used to define the primary support value m of the corresponding member in the f i e l d of value. primary support value of a member is defined as 1 if the member has no corresponding items in the action part of an inference rules; 1  evaluating with task transformation rules: if a l l decomposed subtasks of the task corresponding to the object have values and are not a l l 
	g.jiwen et al. 	1 
1
  false'  let mil mi1  - mik  the primary support functions on the f i e l d of value respectively of a l l the decomposed subtasks with values 'true' and m the primary support function on the f i e l d of value of the object  we define 
　　　we w i l l now take the system welies as an example to describe roughly how the system mes solves a task:  1  users put the reqirements of what they want the system to do and set a general task;  1  when a task has an unused task transformation rule  use the rule and produce new tasks; derivation rules have higher priorities than decomposed rules;  1  when a l l decomposed subtasks of a task have values  evaluate the task and do  side effect-;  1  when the object corresponding to a task has a value with strong support  evaluate the task;  1  if a task is finished  and the object corresponding to the task has unused inference rules that can be used fordward  use the rules;  1  when a task has no unused task transformation rules and the correponding object has no values with strong enough support  find a l l inference rules of the object that can be used backward  use them;  1  if some items in the condition part of an inference rule has no corresponding assertion in the data base  set a new task to get the assertion needed;  1  when the condition part of a production rule has a big enough certainty  use the rule;  1  when the condition part of a procedure rule has a big enough certainty  c a l l the subroutine through subroutine base management program;  1  the use of an inference rule produces new assertions and the system w i l l store them into data base;  1  use 1 repeatedly u n t i l the general task is finished. 
	v 	conclusion 
this paper introduced the model expert system 
mes. we have intergrated numerical calculation with logical inference in a uniform framework in welies based on mes. we plan to establish some other o i l expert systems based on the system mes. 
