s axiom sets and their extensions are viewed as functions from the set of formulas in the language  to a set of four truth-values t f  s for undefined  and k for contradiction. such functions form a lattice with 'contains less information' as the partial order and 'combination of several sources of knowledge' as the l.u.b. operation we demonstrate the relevance of this approach by giving concise proofs for some previously known results about normal default rules. for non-monotonic rules in general  not only normal default rules  we define a stronger version of the minimality requirement on consistent fixpoints  and prove that it is sufficient for the existence of a derivation of the fixpoint. 
1. introduction and overview. 
non-monotonic logic may be studied either in terms of non-monotonic inference rules  reiter 1  goodwin 1  or in terms of non-monotonic operators in the language such as the unless operator  sandewall 1  mcdermott and doyle 1 . in this paper we pursue the former approach. 
the concept of fixpoints b central to the study of non-monotonic logic: for a given set v of propositions and a given set of rules  we are looking for an extension le. a set s' of propositions which contains v as a subset  and which is a fixpoint of the set of rules. fixpoints are also used in the denotational semantics approach to the theory of programming languages  scott 1; see also e.g. manna 1  stoy 1  blikle 1 . there  the recursive definition of a function is viewed as a functional  i.e. an operator on partial functions  and the function b viewed as the fixpoint of the same functional 
in thb paper we propose that the functional approach that is taken in denotational semantics  can be adapted and serve conveniently for the study of non-monotonic logic. this b attractive since logical inference b often viewed as a high-level form of computation  and since computational inference often needs to be non-monotonic. the power of thb approach b demonstrated through simple proofs of some of reiter's  1  results for normal default theories. other results in the paper apply to non-monotonic rules in general. 
although several fixpoints may exbt in the monotonie case  the criterium of being   minimal fixpoint  i.e. all other fixpoints are 'larger1  is a sufficient one  and there b only one minimal fixpoint  which b then the lea$t fixpoint. other  larger fixpoints contain spurious information which b not warranted by the given facts and 
this research wee eponeored by the swedish boerd of technical development. 
inference rules. in the case of non-monotonic rules  there is of course in general no single least fixpoint  and the criterium of fixpoints being minimal is not sufficient: there may be minimal fixpoints which have the given set of propositions as a subset  but which still can not be reached or approached  in the sense of a limit  by any derivation using the given set of rules. in this paper we define a concept of approachable fixpoint  which is stronger than the concept of minimal fixpoint  and which is proven to be a sufficient condition for the existence of a derivation that reaches or approaches the fixpoint. 
the following formal machinery is used. we start from two domains  a domain l whose elements are called formulae and a domain j of truth-values. v is the domain of valuations i.e. continuous functions 
from l to j. 
a set of axioms is seen as a valuation that maps some formulas  the axioms  to t  for true  and  all  other formulas to u  for undefined .  exception is made for the top element of the domain l . derivation of theorems is done by proceeding from the initial valuation to others where some formulas change value from a to t or /  for false . a set of inference rules corresponds therefore to a binary relation on valuations  i.e. a subset of v x v  which we shall call a deduction. a derivation using a deduction f is a sequence of valuations  

where* 

deductions in this sense can be used for characterizing both proofs and semantics  provided that there are syntactic functions and predicates on l which characterise the abstract syntax of the language. this includes predicates which indicate whether a formula is a conjunction  a disjunction  an implication  atomic  etc.  as well as functions e.g. for composing the conjunction of two other formulas. the conventions for calculating the truth-value of a propositional expression may then be seen as a dednction f where  e.g. in the case where: 
		for all other formulas & 
here a a b refers of course to the formula obtained by composing the formula a  the conjunction operator  and the formula 1. 
the concepts and results of conventional logic can easily be re-phrased along these lines. in the case of non-monotonic logic  

	e. sandewall 	1 
there 	is 	however a 	particular 	advantage 	with 	doing so: 	a 

non-monotonic rule 

can now be seen as a deduction f which a l l o w s e . g . in the case where 
		otherwise. 
in other words  one derivation step using f will change the truth-values of the two formulas b and e at the same time. this is different from the viewpoint in ordinary logic  where the intuition is that each formula or proposition has 'its' truth-value  so that rules of inference may contribute additional information about 'the' truth of a proposition. in non-monotonic logic  we must be prepared to recognise multiple extensions of the given axioms  or multiple fixpoints of what is here called a deduction. it therefore makes sense to correlate assignments of truth-values in the way just described. 
suppose now  in the above example  that b has already been assigned the value t  maybe by an ordinary rule that does not use unless   and therefore we have v b  - t. in order to deal with such cases it is convenient to consider two deductions f and g as follows. for g there is no v'such that   this expresses the intended meaning of unless. for f we take the view that information has now accumulated both that b is t and that it is f. a new truth-value k is introduced for this purpose  and there is a v'such that v' b  = k and 

we therefore obtain a four-valued logic  with the truth-values t  f  u  k. this logic has previously been studied by belnap  1 . one can think of these truth-values as the ones assigned by committees  cf. borgida et al  1 : if some members of the committee assign the value t to a proposition and the others assign the value    then the committee assigns t  but if some members assign t and others assign /  then the committee assigns the value k to the the proposition. 'committees' are a convenient metaphor whenever there are several parallel sources of knowledge  such as when several inference rules are being used. 
the deductions g and f are in general related so that  and the difference occurs in cases like the one just discussed  where g 'refuses' to use a rule if it means that the non-monotonic antecedent  the formula given as argument to unless  then obtains the truth-value k 
this has been an outline of the key ideas of the paper. we now proceed to the systematic treatment. 
1. monotonlelty and fixpoints for relations. 
the domain j contains the elements {u t f k} as already discussed  with the partial order 
thus it is a flat lattice with ¡ö as the bottom element and k as the top element. 
the flat domain l is called a language and its elements are called formulas  with lb as the bottom element and it as the top element. 
notice that we say a derivation - to v' - even in the case of an infinite sequence where v' is never reached  just approached as a limit. 
a deduction f is monotonic iff 

it is linear iff 

clearly every linear deduction is also monotonic. 
a valuation v' is a fixpoint of a deduction f iff 
thus in particular v' is a fixpoint if f does not allow any 'successor' 
v 
  for a given valuation v and deduction f  we shall be interested in fixpoints of f above v  i.e. fixpoints of f which are v. a fixpoint of f above v is minimal iff no 'smaller'  by fixpoint exists for the same f and v. 
what has been described so far uses some of the tools of denotational semantics  but in a diffferent fashion than usual. the differences are dictated by our desire to deal with logic using these tools. the reason for that  again being the wish to consider non-monotonic deduction. anyway  the obvious properties of the monotonic case follow easily  in particular 
proportion 1. a  a conservative  monotonic deduction has a unique least fixpoint above each f. 
b  the lu.b. of any derivation from v is the least fixpoint. 

1 	e.sandewall 
proof  a  consider a set {vi} of fixpoints of f above v. we wish to 	proof. let the derivations of v'and v  be: 


linearity the sequence is a derivation using f  and its lu.b. is clearly 

we can now proceed to introducing the counterparts in our system of inference rules. 
a kernel is a pair  where v and v' are finite valuations  and t 

kernels may be used for expressing how the truth-value of a 
	e.sandewall 	1 
with non-monotonic antecedents  is that the resulting valuation should differentiate explicitly between that information which has been obtained as a consequent  and that which was 'merely* assumed in order to be able to apply the rule  i.e. the assignment to the non-monotonic antecedent s . we however view that as a book-keeping issue  which need not concern the formal treatment of the deduction as such. 
thus non-monotonic rules differ from monotonic ones  partly by causing several formulas to change their truth-value as one inference step is performed. a possible objection against this way of dealing the direct realization of an nm-rule is the direct realization of its corresponding kernel 

1 	e.sandewall 
1. correct extensions  approachability. 
throughout this section  we assume that v is a valuation  and r b a set of nm-rules whose direct realization is f and whose restricted realization is g. 
a valuation v' b termed a correct extenrion of v w.r.t. r iff: 
1. v' is a fixpoint of g above v  meaning in particular that 

1. v'is consistent 
1. there b some derivation from v to v' using g. 
 remember that the phrase is an extension of  means simply that  the notion of correct extensions expresses stringently what are the desirable fixpoints for given v and g. if v' b not a fixpoint then some additional derivation steps remain to be performed. if v' is inconsbtent it b for either of the following reasons: a  v is inconsistent 
b  the set of nm-rules implies an inconsbtence and 
one of the rules b 
c  some non-monotonic antecedent was assumed to be /early during the derivation  and later in the derivation we had an nm-rule with the same proposition as a consequent  which invalidated the assumption. 
finally  if there b no derivation from v to v' then v' is 'unfounded1  like a non-minimal fixpoint in the monotonic case. 
the third condition in the definition corresponds to goodwin's requirement of well-founded ness. the above formulation b however problematic in that it refers to the exbtence of a derivation. by contrast  the minimality requirement on a fixpoint need not refer to derivations: it just states that no 'smaller' fixpoint exbts. we would similarly like to have a static condition  which guarantees the exbtence of a derivation  instead of having to prove its existence whenever needed. the remainder of thb section will give such a result. 
although the definition of correct extensions uses  1  the deduction f provides a partial characterization of them  and will be used as a 
tool* 
proportion 1. each consistent fixpoint of g above v is a maximally consistent extension of # w.r.t. f. 
proof. follows easily from the definition of g from f  since 

implies that v 'b inconsbtent. 
the converse does not hold  i.e. there are maximally consistent extensions of t w.r.t. f which are not fixpoints of g over v. thb happens in those cases where a truth maintenance system has to shift in nodes to out status. consider 
example t. suppose we have the following nm-rules: a maximally consbtent extension of w.r.t. f  but 
not every set of nm-rules has a correct extension: example 1. consider the nm-rules 

and  u u  does not have any correct extension w.r.t. these nm-rules. 
some of the propositions in earlier sections can now be extended to apply to the realizations of nm-rules. the basic idea b to first use those results for f  and then to transfer the result to g by introducing a consistency requirement. 
proportion 1a. if  ' b a correct extension of v w.r.t. r  then for every y such that 

there exbts a derivation from p to v' uslug u. 
proof. according to proposition 1 thb holds for f. however  it follows from the definition of g that if f z z'  and z' b consbtent  then g z z' . since v' is consbtent  so must all intermediate steps in the derivation from p be  because g b conservative. therefore we have a derivation from y to v' using g.  
corollarp   minimality of extensions  - reiter . if v' and v  are correct extensions of v w.r.t r  then 

proportion sa. if there are derivations from r t o f' and from v to v  using g  and v' u v  is consbtent  then there b a derivation from v to v' u v  using g. 
proof follows directly from proposition 1. 
corollarp. if v'and v  are dbtincl correct extensions of v w.r.t. r  then b inconsbtent. 
thb corollary subsumes reiter's  1   orthogonality of extension  theorem. - proposition 1 of course extends similarly. 
let us return now to the issue of the third criterium in the definition of a correct extension. thb requirement can not be omitted  since that would allow fixpoints for which there is no support. for example  the valuation  t u u  b a consbtent fixpoint of g in example 1 above. in the monotonic case  such fixpoints are eliminated by the requirement to be minimal  but that requirement b not sufficient here since  f u u| is indeed a minimal fixpoint in the example  no 'smaller1 fixpoint exists . however  we can substitute instead of the third requirement another one which b similar in spirit to minimality  as follows. 
a fixpoint v' of g over v b called approachable from v iff 

for lack of adequate characters in the font  is used for strict i.e. excluding equality. intuitively  thb says that whenever we are on the path from v to v'  there b some step allowed by g that will take us closer to v'. 
thb concept b a strengthening of the concept of least fixpoint  since the definition directly implies: 
proportion 1. if v' b an approachable fixpoint of g over t  then it b minimal. 
it b easily seen that the least fixpoint  t u u| in example 1 is not approachable. thb approach ability condition can replace the third condition in the definition of the correct extension  since: 
proportion 1. if v' is a consbtent fixpoint of g over v  and v' b 
approachable from v  then it b a correct extension of t w.r.t. r. 
proof. v' immediately satisfies the first two conditions for being a correct extension. it remains to show that there b a derivation from v to v'using g. 
suppose this were not the case  i.e. every chain from t whose members are   the existence of at least one such chain b 

	e. sandewall 	1 

1 	e. sandewall 
acknowledgements 
i wish to thank jacek leszexylowski for his constructive comments on an earlier version of this paper  and brian mayoh who brought bemap's paper to my attention. the term 'conservative' was chosen to conform to the terminology in a manuscript for a paper by allen brown  who discussed 'belief conserving' rules of inference. 
