 
a representation scheme for arbitrary beliefs and wants of an agent in respect to a situation  as well as to arbitrary beliefs and wants of other agents  is presented. the representation makes use of elementary situation descriptions  which are formulated in kl-one and delimitated by partitions   and acceptance attitudes in respect to these descriptions  or to attitudes thereabout. the scheme forms the representational base of vie-dpm  the user modelling component of the german-language dialogue system vie-lang. 
1. introduction 
three detailled proposals have been made up to now for representing a system's assumptions about the beliefs and wants of another agent: in the  syntactic approach    belief of an agent is equated with derivability in a first-order object-language theory of the agent. in the  semantic approach   1   knowledge and wants are equated with accessibility relations between possible worlds. finally  in the  partition approach    beliefs and wants of an agent are equated with the presence of representation structures in specific nested belief and want spaces reserved for the respective agent. 
　　　in the field of epistemic logic  beliefs and wants of an agent have originally been regarded as  propositional attitudes   i.e. attitudes of the agent in respect to certain propositions about the world  1 . in this paper  a new representation scheme for beliefs and wants will be presented which is based on a similar idea  and which also integrates aspects of the partition approach. the proposed scheme forms the representational base for the user modelling component vie-dpm  1   which is part of the german-language dialogue system vie-lang . our representation for beliefs and wants is thus fully integrated into a natural-language environment. 
1. situations and situation descriptions 
in our representation scheme  basic beliefs and wants of an agent  i.e. beliefs and wants which do not concern other agents' beliefs and wants  are regarded as attitudes which the agent holds in respect to situation descriptions  either of the current 
the research reported here has been supported by the austrian ministry of science  contract no. 1 . i am indebted to stuart s. shapiro for his comments on an earlier version of this paper. 
situation  or in the case of wants  of a situation which is aspired by the agent. a situation  as we define i t   is a set of individuals and relations between individuals. the former will be denoted by ' i '   ' i 1 '   etc.  the latter b y ' r '   ' r 1 '   etc. i f there is a relation r   i 1   i1  in the situation  the pair  r  i1  is called an attribute of i 1 . 
　　　for describing situations  a description language is needed. in our representation  the individualized level of the kl-one formalism  is used for this purpose. minor re-interpretations have been necessary in order to adjust this scheme to the specific needs of belief and want representation. we assume the reader to be roughly familiar with the kl-one philosophy  so that we can restrict ourselves to explicating the role of kl-one in our own representation scheme. 
　　　fig.1 shows a very simplified example of our representation  expressed in the usual network notation. layer a forms its conceptual level  layer b its individualized level. for our purposes  it suffices to regard the former as consisting of general concepts  and general attribute descriptions associated with general concepts. general concepts can be regarded as one-place predicates which apply to individuals. fig.1 exemplifies  that more and less specific concepts can be ordered in a superconcept hierarchy. a general attribute description consists of a role  for our purposes  a one-place predicate applying to relations  and a value restriction concept for role f i l l e r s . the latter can itself posses associated attribute descriptions  etc. more advanced aspects of kl-one's general level will not be considered here  since they are not as important for belief representation. 
　　　structures of the individualized level are created by assigning individualized concepts and individualized attribute descriptions to their general counterparts. through this process of individualization  elementary situation descriptions are created: the individualization 1 the general concept c into the individualized concept ic expresses that an individual i exists in the situation to which c applies. the individualization of the general role gr into the individualized role ir expresses that the relation r exists in the situation  to which gr applies. in both cases  ic and ir are said to designate this individual or relation  respectively. in fig.1  the general layer has been individualized three times. each substructure expresses the following elementary descriptions: individuals 1 exist in the situation  to which the predicates 'objtrans'  'john'  'mary'  'sue'   'book'  'user' and 'system' apply  respectively  the latter has been left out in the central and right-hand substructure . 

	1 	a. kobsa 
moreover  relations exist between 1 and 1  1 and 1  and 1 and 1  to which the predicates 'agent'  'recipient' and 'object' apply  respectively. 
　　　it is important to mention that  apart from being the language used for situation descriptions  structures of the individualized level also serve two other purposes in the vie-lang system. they are the target structures for the parser   which individualizes general concepts and attribute 
descriptions that are addressed by input words. moreover  they are the starting point for the nl generator of the system   1     this threefold usage of individualized structures facilitates the transfor-
mation of a user's input into assumptions about his beliefs and wants  the transformation of beliefs of the system into system replies  etc.  1   
1. single acceptance attitudes for representing basic beliefs and wants 
in vie-dpm  basic beliefs of an agent   i . e . beliefs about the current situation  are represented by describing the situation from the agent's point of view. the descriptions are expressed by individualized 
kl-one structures  the agents position is captured by indicating the acceptance attitude which the agent holds in respect to these situation descriptions. acceptance attitudes may take the values ' + '  '-' and '1'  actually we use a continuous range of values . they are applied to the elementary situation descriptions  i.e. to the individualized concepts and roles. 
　　　when applied to the individualized concept ic  the valuations ' + '  ' - ' and '1' express that the respective agent accepts that / does not accept  that / 1s uncertain whether ic denotes an individual in the current situation   i . e .   that/whether there is an individual in the situation to which the predicate of the general concept of 1c applies . when applied to the individualized role ir of an individualized attribute description  ' + '  '-' and '1' express that the respective agent accepts that / does not 	accept  that / 	is 	uncertain  	whether such a relation as is described by ir exists in the situation. these interpretations are observed by all access 	and 	inference procedures. 
　　　an example is given in the left side of fig. 1  part b   where the agent  in this case  the system  accepts everything but the individualized role between the individualized concepts labelled '1bjtrans1' and '1mary1'. this means that the agent  in our case  the system  does not accept that there is a relation between 1 and 1  to which the predicate recipient applies. thus  though it believes that john gives somebody a book  it does not believe that mary is the recipient. 
　　　basic wants of an agent are represented in vie-dpm by describing the situation which is aspired by the agent. the acceptance attitudes can then be  employed in a similar way: when applied to an individualized concept or role in such a description  the valuations ' + '   '-' and '1' express that the respective agent accepts  that / does not accept  that / is indifferent to whether the individualized concept or role should designate an individual or a relation in that situation. for instance  when regarded as a description of an aspired situation  the left side of fig.1/b expresses that the agent wants john to give a book to anybody but sue. 
　　　by using individualized concepts which possess no attribute descriptions  or only attribute descriptions with very general role f i l l e r s   it is furthermore possible to represent basic  unsaturated  beliefs and wants. an example for the former is that an agent believes that / does not believe that / is uncertain whether there is an x so that p x   and for the latter that an agent wants that / does not want that / is indifferent to whether it should be the case that there is an x so that p x . examples for such beliefs and wants include  e.g.  that a believes that john gives something to. mary  or that a wants 

that someone should give a book to mary. 
1. partitions and multiple acceptance attitudes for representing beliefs and wants in respect to beliefs and wants 
to allow for a parallel representation of both an agent's basic beliefs and wants  and his/her beliefs and wants in respect to beliefs and wants of other agents  the individualized level of our representation is separated into partitions. so-called  contexts  have been introduced which tie together either the 
 hypothesized  basic beliefs of an agent  or 	his/her  hypothesized  basic 	wants. 	beliefs and wants of an agent in respect to beliefs and wants of other agents are then represented through context hierarchies. 
　　　fig.1 shows a simplified example with three contexts: context sb contains the system's beliefs about the current situation  sbub the system's beliefs about the user's reliefs about the situation  and sbuw the system's beliefs about the basic wants of the user. 
　　　sbub and sbuw contain not only single  but double acceptance attitudes. the additional valuation expresses the attitude of the modelling agent in respect to the valuation of the modelled agent with regard to the particular situation description. the meaning of this additional acceptance attitude depends on the type of superordinated context. if this is a belief context  the valuations ' + '   '-' and '1' 
express that the modelling agent accepts that / does not accept that / is uncertain whether the modelled agent assigns the particular acceptance attitude to the particular situation description. if the superordinated context is a want context  these additional valuations express that the modelling agent accepts that / does not accept that / is indifferent to whether it should be the case that the modelled agent assigns the particular acceptance attitude to the particular description. 
　　　fig.1 gives an example for the former. in each attitude pair  the left value specifies the attitude of the modelling agent  and the right one that of the modelled agent. sbub expresses that s is uncertain whether u believes that john gives mary a book.  just for comparison: the belief of s  that u is uncertain whether ... would be expressed by reversing the '1+' pairs.  sbuw expresses that s believes that the user wants john to give the book to anybody but sue. 
　　　the nesting of belief and want contexts can obviously be arbitrarily extended  if necessary. triple acceptance attitudes are then assigned to descriptions on the third level  quadruple to descriptions on the fourth level  etc. thus arbitrarily nested beliefs and wants in respect to beliefs and wants of other agents  such as that s wants that u believes that a does not believe p  can be expressed in the representation scheme. it is also possible to represent arbitrary  reflexive  belief and want nestings  
i.e. constellations in which the modelled agent of 	a lower context 	is 	identical with the modelling agent 
of a superordinated context. 
1. discussion 
the representation system of vie-dpm has been completely implemented in an index-sequential data base  which is accessible through interlisp . it should be noted that  due to a lack of space  only a small portion of our representation could be described in 
	a. kobsa 	1 
this paper. more advanced topics  such as the representation of  knowing  wanting to know  whether    knowing  wanting to know  the x so that p x    as well as the representation of  or-beliefs   mutual beliefs and infinite-reflexive beliefs  a generalization of mutual beliefs  have been described in  1 . all these beliefs are arbitrarily combinable  and in principle there is no limit to the possible depth of nesting. these characteristics are particularly important in the field of user modelling. though the usual depth of embedding is not excessive in this field   i t hardly ever goes beyond the levels 1   the diversity of belief and want combinations which can arise even in normal communication is quite impressive  1 . 
　　　our representation demonstrates that  when advocating the partition approach for the representation of basic beliefs and wants  one is not compelled to also introduce additional sub-partitions for notbeliefs and  or-beliefs   as was done by . thus the doubts of  1  concerning the feasibility and efficiency of multi-partition processing do not apply to our proposal. 
