 
this paper describes a constraint transformation approach to automatic example generation and its implementation in this approach examples are generated as the result of successive transformations of thf constraint formulas such transformations are carried out based on various forms of knowledge systematic global simplification  largely based on declarative knowledge  mitigates tht impact of applying problemspecific and efficient procedural knowledge  with a uniform problem representation scheme the approach suggests a general framework for example generation in which a language for describing examples can be defined ft also combines a general formal reasoning capacity and problem-specific procedural knowledge  to achieve both generality and efficiency the implemented system has proven to be expressively powerful and efficient for a variety of applications 
1. introduction 
examples are important in artificial intelligence they are critical to machine learning  automated reasoning  knowledge representation  intelligent human interface  and computer-aided instruction |1. 1. 1  1. 1  1 . examples illustrate abstract notions and complicated procedures  provide us with a source of information on which ideas and concepts are developed  and serve a  a tool with which hypotheses can be validated. 
generating examples is  however  a difficult task in general a problem for example generation can be specified as a constraint - a 
conjunction of conditions each of which must be satisfied simultaneously. those conditions usually interact with each other in complicated ways  1| it is often the case that an example generation system is used as a component of a larger system in such cases  it is important that the example generator be efficient enough that it does not detract from the performance of the larger system 
example generation differs from database retrieval or problem solving database retrieval deals with only the previously sorted and stored data items  whereas example generation often requires constructing novel examples where known examples fail problem solving usually involves finding a solution or solutions  largely ignoring the issue of finding good solutions. however  example generation is constantly concerned with choosing good examples from among many possibilities. this problem appears difficult to solve because it involves highly abstract notions like utility  motivation  and objective. 
automatic example generation raises two fundamental issues. representation and evaluation the representation problem addresses the questions what is an example and how should it be represented  the evaluation issue deals with methods for evaluating whether and/or how well a proposed example satisfies the initial constraint in most cases example is not clearly defined evidence  samples  models  diagrams  and even arbitrarily defined data structures are often referred to as examples the vagueness in the meaning of example causes difficulties in making use of the existing methodologies and tools for powerful reasoning; such reasoning appears critical to example generation for an effective and efficient evaluation capability it is required that the involved concepts be defined unambiguously or somehow related to their effective computational procedures it is quite natural that an automatic example generation system should be based on the rigorous formalism of its problem domain 
due to such difficulties  the approaches to automatic example generation in the current literature are problem application specific or limited in expressive power in the transformational approach examples are generated as the result of successive transformations of the constraint formula this approach suggests a general framework for example generation and also provides a uniform representation scheme for problems in which problem-specific procedural knowledge can be applied to achieve efficient as well 
the example generation system  egs  presented here has adopted the boyer-moore theory  1| as the underlying domain formalism 
several advantages are immediate 
  the boyer-moore theory provides a general and expressively powerful language 
  the problems of representation and evaluation can be easily solved 
  egs can share with the boyer-moore theorem prover  which implements the boyer-moore theory  a substantial portion of its reasoning capability and knowledge base 
  the theorem proving environment serves as a rich source of problems for application of examples 
|1  1. 1. 1  1  
egs  written in interluisp  currently running on a dec-1 under tops-1 has been implemented on top of the boyer-moore theorem prover in egs  a constraint is specified as a  well-formed  formula in the boyer-moore theory the variables of tbe constraint  called constraint variables  are interpreted as existentially quantified. an example is defined as an assignment of qixjted constants to the constraint variables  this assignment causes tbe constraint formula to evaluate to non-f. a counter erampu is 

1 m.kim 
similarly defined except that the assignment causes the constraint formula to evaluate to f. for instance  the assignment '  x .  quote  a b     is an example of  listp x   whereas '  x .  quote 1    is a counter-example however    x  cons u v    is not an example of  listp x  since x is assigned a non-quoted constant 
the example generation problem in egs is specified in terms of constraints the egs command. 

may be read as-
find examples of list-palindromes containing at least two difftrent members 
findx is a top-level command for example generation its first argument is a constraint and its second argument specifies the resource limits such as a time limit or the maximum number of examples to be generated the output might be-* 

1. the boyer-moore theory and their theorem prover 
the hoyer-moore theory is obtained from the propositiooal calculus with variables and function symbols its three principles the induction principle  the shell principle  and the definition principle characterize the theory. variables in a formula are implicitly universally quantified. lacking quantifiers and allowing recursion as an alternative gives rise to the constructive nature of the theory. the language of the theory can be viewed as a  functional  programming language since function definitions  admitted  are like programs. in fact  the language of the theory is akin to that of the pure lisp. 
when a function is defined  the boyer-moore theorem prover generates compiled lisp code corresponding to the definition . this provides a simple and yet efficient interpreter for the language. the interpreter  if given a term together with a proper environment  will compute the terms value with respect to the environment. this feature  in fact  gives a straightforward solution to the evaluation problem 
1. the implementation of egs 
egs has been implemented as task-driven in that examples are generated as the result of iterating the task generation and task performing sequence a task descriptor  which describes a task  is a list of task srorr  task opt rat or  hard-list  soft-ltst  and referencelist. the hard-list is a list of condition formulas assumed conjoined. the soft-list is an association list   each component of which is of the form  v t  corresponding to a substitution equality1  equal v t . the reference-list contains information needed in performing the task for example 

describes a test task in a task descriptor  the hard-list and the soft-list together can be considered as a subgoal and we call the pair of the hard-list and the soft-list a context in this paper subgoal and context are used interchangeably 
each task operation corresponds to a particular transformation of formulas. such transformations include partially instantiating variables with constants  analyzing terms by cases  solving equations  and unfolding definitions simplification is a non taskspecific global transformation  which is invoked after a task-specific transformation is completed. generally a task transforms formulas of the hard-list to create subgoals tasks are maintained in an agenda in the order of task scores; the task on the top of the agenda is performed. the result of performing a task  in turn  is further processed to produce more new tasks egs repeats this sequence until any termination condition is met - the agenda becomes empty  the specified number of examples are generated  or the time limit is exceeded. an illustration of egs example generation will be given later. the task-dn en structure of egs with agenda can be viewed as best-first search its search space can be represented as a tree  each node of w hich corresponds to a task 
egs consists of six major functional components. preprocessor  
executive  	task 	 unirator  	task 	performer  	simplifier  	and 
evaluator 	and a global data structure task agenda. 	also the 
knowledge bast maintains knowledge of various forms. figure 1 depicts the general architecture of egs. the function of each component is described in the following. 
preprocessor 
this component checks the syntax of the input constraint and also translates the constraint  which may be input in an abbreviated format  into the corresponding well-formed formula. for example   and p q r  is translated into  and p  and q r  . 
executive 
the executive manages the flow of control in egs. it controls other components of egs to maintain the proper sequence of example generation control loops through the task generation and 

   egs is non-deterministic in that the outputs of egs to the same question may vary. the non-determinism has been intentionally introduced; however  this feature can be turned off. 

ta sk performing sequence until any termination condition is met. 
   an equality of the form  equal ihs rhs  where ihs rhs  is a variable and rhs lhs  is a term not containing the ihs rhs  variable. 

task generator 
this component generates tasks from contexts resulting from performing  a previous task a task is generated by assigning an applicable task operator and attaching the collected task-relevant information to the context this task is scored with its plausibility. 
the scoring algorithm is 

	op-score 	the score associated with the task operator  
s-score the score computed based on the syntactic complexity of the formulas in the hard-list  credit the score for extra credit  and c1  c1 and c1 are the weight coefficients. 
this 	scoring 	mechanism 	provides 	egs 	with 	substantial 
controllability 
task performer 
lach task operator is associated with a unique process which generates a list of subgoals  contexts  performing a task involves retrieving the relevant information and applying the process corresponding to the task operator to the context of the task the following are the functional descriptions of the task operators 
  start marks the initial task for a single session of example generation 
  test retrieves known examples corresponding to a clue and tests each of the examples with the hard-list until the fixed number of successful tests are obtained a suhgoal for each of the successful tests is generated. 
  solve invokes the built-in linear solver to solve the simultaneous linear equations/inequalities or applies the solver knowledge to directly solve a condition or a set of conditions 
  analyze applies the rase knowledge to do case analysis. 
m.kim 1 
  dcpand opens up the definition of a selected function in the hard-list. for an dcpand task  each of the resulting subgoals is temporarily inactivated by making a recall task. 
  assemble reconstructs an example based on information from the soft-list 
  recall activates an inactive suhgoal for being processed by other task operations 
simplifier 
the major functions of the simplifier are 
1 to transfer sequentially each substitution equality in the hard-list onto the soft-list  after carrying out the corresponding substitution on the formulas of the hardlist   
1 to rewrite condition formulas on the hard-list to make them simpler and easier to handle 
the simplifier is generally invoked on each of those subgoals resulting from performing a task simplification possibly eliminates a subgoal or splits it into more subgoals the resulting subgoals are then subject to furl tier processing by the task generator 
some of the important advantages of simplification are as follows 
  by earning out a global simplification  the simplifier relieves the task generator of the need to care about mundane details 
  by normalizing formulas  the simplifier allows the task generator to be able to relatively easily predict the patterns of formulas to be encountered 
t by eliminating apparently unsatisfiable subgoals  the simplifier enables egs to focus more on the promising ones 
  the fact that the simplifier makes use of rewrite lemmas provides egs with some degree of extensibility. 
evaluator 
this component evaluates how well the proposed examples satisfy the initial constraint this evaluation function would be important for the system to be able to learn or self-organize from experience currently it only judges whether a proposed example satisfies the initial constraint 
1. the knowledge base of egs 
egs's ability to generate examples critically depends on its knowledge base egs employs various forms of knowledge  heuristic information  definitions  theorems  known examples  and equation solvers in the form of production rules  etc under each concept  function  name  knowledge is frame-structured knowledge is divided into the knowledge shared with the boyer-moore theorem prover and egs-specific knowledge  boxed under x-frame in figure 
1 . 
definitions and lisp code 
when a function is being defined  the boyer-moore system generates 
lisp code  which implements the defined function in the running 
lisp environment  1| this code is invoked when a term is evaluated evaluating terms is extensively required when ft test task is performed or a proposed example is verified by the evaluator 

1 m.kim 
the symbolic definitions of functions are also important. performing an expand task retrieves the definition of a selected function and expands the corresponding function call in the hard-list with the definition by appealing to the symbolic definitions  egs is able to generate examples for constraints which are very restrictive or involve novel concepts 
concept-name 
sdefn 
interlisp-code' 
induction-machine 
type-prescription-lst¡ö 
controller-pockets-
level-no  
lemmas x-frame 	|
examples 
typical: 
boundary: 
counter 
solvers quick: 
genrl 
cases accor. 
controls 
fold 
lock: 	figure 1: 	frame-like egs knowledge structure 
lemmas 
in the boyer-moore theorem prover lemmas are proved and stored under their ke  function names with the user-assigned types the egs simplifier makes use of rewrite type lemmas when it rewrites terms 
known examples 
known examples are important knowledge to egs because they play the role of building blocks for generating examples. generated examples are often simply known examples or  at least  constituted of known examples. rich and well-sorted known examples substantially increase the efficiency of egs and make the system behave more naturally. known examples are used when a test task is performed. 
in egs  for a given function a known example is represented as a list of quoted constants - actually stored unquoted - each of which corresponds to a formal argument of the function. known examples for a function are classified into three types: typical  boundary  and counter. known examples for member can be represented as. 

currently known examples must be sorted and given by the user. 
this  however  has advantages in that generated examples are more user-tuned. 
solvers 
a solver is user-supplied  procedurally attached  production rule-like knowledge whose action part transforms a formula  possibly a set of formulas  into a form which is simpler and easier to handle for example  a formula:  equal  reverse l   quote  a b c    can be directly transformed into:  equal l  reverse  quote  a b c    . the built-in linear solver is a special solver for simultaneous linear equations/inequalities solvers are specific to the patterns of formulas and often heuristic; however  they are efficient. the solver knowledge substantially increases the efficiency of egs 
1. 	a 	simple 	illustration 	of 	egs 	example generation 

1 the top task is processed. the task performer retrieves member's typical and boundary stored examples - let's assume member's stored examples are given as  *  - and tests them with the hard-list i.e. evaluates each of condition formulas in the hard-list under the environment established by associating the clue arguments with the corresponding values in an example. only the example  1  1 1 . 1   survives the test; in 

m.kim 1 

	figure 1: 	some egs-generated examples 
l   this example is verified by the evaluator more examples would possibl  he generated by continuing the similar procedure of performing and generating tasks 
1. related w o r k and future research 
examples have long been used for many a i. tasks  especially for machine learning |1. 1. 1  however  very few learning system can generate examples by themselves and often examples are given by the user interactively or are stored initially in the system. lenat's am |1| lacks reasoning for example generation  therefore  its example generation capability is limited am generates examples for a concept simply by executing the algorithmic specification   a 
lisp-like program  of the concept with the known examples gelernter |1  experimented with the idea that humans almost always draw diagrams when trying to prove geometry theorems in his geometry machine  gelernter used diagrams to prune the backward chaining during the proof search the use of diagrams in this way reduced the proof search many orders of magnitude. ceg  1  is a 1-phasc structured example generation system over the domain of lisp data and programs. in ceg  a constraint is specified in the form of a set of desired property-value pairs. ceg's expressive power and ability in problem handling are limited. moreover  its means-ends analysis method for example modification may not be suitable for cases where moderate expressive power is required. ballantyne and bledsoe's grapher  generates 
¡¡¡¡1 here examples are printed without  quote  for most cases the thown example have been generated well within 1 seconds of cpu time. 

1 m.kim 
counter-examples for non-trivial topological conjectures. given a conjecture  grapher constructs a set-theoretic relationship graph among the set variables occurring in the conjecture the graph serves as a global constraint specification when the set variables are assigned values ref-arf |1  employed the constraint-satisfaction technique ref-arf was able to solve admittedly difficult problems such as cryptoarithmetic problems and the 1-queens problem. the regression method for plan modification  1   proposed by waldinger can also be useful for example generation green's qa1  and the prolog interpreter |1| are both driven by resolution-based theorem proving  however  they can hardly be classified as example generators in their own right 
experiments have been carried out applying egs to the problems of controlling backward chaining in the boyer-moore theorem prover and semantically checking conjectures by way of finding counterexamples these experiments have shown egs to be powerful and efficient howe er  several improvements are still needed  the following only describes those projected for the near future. 
  incorporating a simple learning capability - updating the stored examples in favor of better examples through evaluating and classifying experienced examples; 
  devising a high-level control mechanism for dynamically adjusting the task score computation - for example  the task tree which represents the derivational relationship of tasks. can be used to evenly distribute examples  
  extending and elaborating the knowledge base; 
  enriching the user interface facility. 
integration of egs into the boyer-moore theorem prover is also being considered this would result in a user-friendly environment for theory development where examples can play an invaluable role 
1. conclusions 
in this paper  a new approach to automatic example generation and its implementation have been presented. the transformational approach has several advantages 
  it suggests a general paradigm for example generation. in this approach  example generation is viewed as transformation from a constraint specification to a representation which conforms to an example description scheme - the substitution equality for egs. this view provides flexibility in selecting representation schemes for constraints and examples. 
  the problems of representation and evaluation can relatively easily be solved. 
  it enables general formal reasoning and problem-specific procedural knowledge to cooperate with each other to achieve both generality and efficiency. 
  it 	provides modifiability 	and 	controllability 	of the system. 
considering the important role examples play in human intelligence and in a i as a study of computer simulation of human intelligence  the author believes that better understanding of the true nature of examples will lead us to greatly enrich contemporary a.i. research. 
a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
i would like to thank dr. robert boyer and dr. j moore for their invaluable advice and support. i owe much thanks to prof. w. w. bledsoe for his encouragement. my gratitude also goes to william 
young  who patiently proofread the original draft dr donald good generously permitted me the use of space and resources for the preparation of this paper 
