 
　　　there it no general consensus on how bett to attack evidential-reasoning  er  problems  particularly in expert-system applications. several approaches have evolved  but they have their roots in diverse fields  such as statistics and philosophy  and have neither a common terminology nor a common set of assumptions. the research reported here provides two useful results. first  it structures the evidential-reasoning problem in a general paradigm robust enough to be of practical use in design and construction of expert systems. second  it uses this paradigm to formulate five important theoretical approaches in a parallel fashion in order to identify key assumptions  similarities  and differences. the five approaches discussed are classical bayes  convex bayes  dempster-shafer  kyburg  and possibility. 
i. structuring the problem 
　　　the handling of evidence is a central element in such expert-system applications as diagnosis  integration  and control. in most tasks  evidence accumulates over time to dynamically affect uncertainties  so that the decision preferred earlier may differ from the one preferred later. however  delaying a decision is often not feasible  since this may foreclose opportunities or increase costs. thus  it is important to understand how accumulating evidence will affect the decision process in the face of uncertainty. 
　　　the evidential-reasoning  er  problem may be expressed in the following way: given reports about the world  and a set of current beliefs about the world  how shall i revise my beliefs as new reports are received  reports may range from the simple to the complex  referring to various objects and events  and may contain various uncertainties. beliefs also range from the simple to the complex  and have a notoriously obscure structure. 
　　　the fact that several different theoretical approaches to evidential rationing have evolved makes it difficult to formulate and answer important questions of application. for example  what are the rules for structuring the reports about the world that feed raw material into the updating schemes advocated by each theoretical approach  what are the constraints on er that are implicit  and explicit  in application of each of the approaches  
     this leads us to seek a structured paradigm broad enough to encompass the models associated with each approach. such a paradigm can be constructed in four parts as follows: 
background elements - this portion of the paradigm contains a definition of the domain of discourse  that is  of the world-model to which we shall apply the er process. it also contains current knowledge of that world including  possibly  knowledge of the cost of various actions in that world. knowledge is described in terms of belief 
observation reports - this portion of the paradigm describes the structure and content of reports about the external world that are the raw material for revision of the knowledge embedded in the background. 
updating mechanism - this portion of the paradigm describes the assumptions  rules  and algorithms used to revise knowledge upon receipt of observation reports. 
decision mechanism - this portion of the paradigm describes the assumptions  rules  and algorithms used to choose among various courses of action given revised knowledge of the world. 
we shall use this paradigm as a framework for the remainder of the 
ii. theoretical approaches 
     we will discuss five major approaches to evidential reasoning: classical bayes  convex bayes  dempster-shafsr  kyburg  and possibility. each will be presented separately using the structured er paradigm described above. 
a. 	classical bayes 
background elements - the background in this approach consists of three elements:  1  an algebra of statements   1  a probability function defined over this algebra  and  1  a utility function defined over the same algebra. the algebra defines the domain of discourse  the probability function assigns degrees of belief to elements of the domain  and the utility function provides a means of reaching decisions in the domain when the decision mechanism. 
     the algebra used in the classical bayes approach consists of base elements  operators  tod statements obtained by application of the operators to the boot elements. the boot 
1 t. thompson elements are assumed to be mutually exclusive  to the application of the disjunctive operator alone expands the base elements into the set of til possible legal statements about the domain of discourse. 
　　　for example  if there art four mutually exclusive bate elements labelled  1   1    1   and  1   than the oat of legal statements bat the following members: 

in general  there will be na legal etatemente when there are n bate elements  where 

　　　the second major element of the background if a probability function defined over the algebra of etatemente that obeys the following axioms: 

in addition  the turn of the probabilities assigned to the base elements is required to be one. 
　　　the probabifity function assigns numbers to the legal statements based upon these axiom*. for example  if the probabilities assigned to the four base elements are each 1  then the legal statements have the following p-value* 

　　　the third major element of the background is a utility function defined over the algebra of statements. this is often construed as a less functions; it gives the loss  1y incurred when the 1th action is taken in the face of the stats of nature corresponding to the jth base element in the algebra  b1  c1  
jl . 
observation reports - the observation reports are direct assignments new p - v a l u e to elements of the algebra of statements. that is  they assign a number to certain propositions that may be construed as a new degree of belief in the truth-value of that proposition. the assignment of this new p-value causes a re-assignment of p-values to all other etatemente in the algebra via the updating mechanism. 
　　　there are several ways in which this direct assignment of new p-values may be viewed: 
 1  each observation report could consist of the assignment of a single p-value of 1 to some element in the algebra of statements. 
 1  bach observation report could consist of the assignment of a single p-value in the interval  1  to some element in the algebra. 
 1  bach observation report could consist of the assignment of two p-values in the interval  1  to some element in the algebra. these serve as lower and upper p-values for the element. 
the primary effect of these different views is upon the else of the algebra of statement*. the number of statements required is largest under the first view  since we must have a single statement corresponding to each and every possible observation  value read on a meter  etc . the other views allow us to use fewer statements  since we may map several observations onto a single statement. ordinarily  only the first view is utilised in the classical bayes approach. 
updating; mechanism - the classical bayesian approach reete upon bayes1 rule for calculating posterior probabilities of states of nature from two items:  1  prior probabilities on those states  and  1  conditional probabilities for evidence given certain states of nature. in symbolic form  

where 
is the posterior probability of state s1  given evidence ej   
 is the a priori probabifity of stats s   i.e.  before evidence is taken into account   
 is the conditional probability of ej  given 
state si . 
if we have a probabifity or degree-of-ballef distribution on the evidence   we compute the current p-value for each state of nature from the posterior probabilities and the evidential p-values according to a conditionalization formula such as 


whew we assume that the distrbution on the evidence is normalized to one. variations on this formula are possible depending upon the structure of the algebra of statement*. note that the formula used here is compatible with the first and second interpretations of observation reports. 
　　　in terms of the alfebra of statements discussed thus far  there is no necessary differentiation between categories of statements in the algebra. that is  observation reports could be received for any one of the statements. 
　　　some writers explicitly divide the statements in the alfebra into two distinct classes: hypotheses and evidence  e g.  d1 . hypotheses are often called states of nature  while evidence is often termed a measurement. in any case  the basic idea is that there is a directionality or hierarchy in the web of inference: we reason from evidence to hypotheses. 
　　　there may be an advantage in taking some form of hierarchical approach. first  the inferential relationships between statements in the alfebra are made more explicit than they are in the undifferentiated algebra. second  the computational burden associated with each updating cycle may be lessened in that the effects of an observation report are limited to portions of the hierarchy explicitly connected with the statement set that is the subject of the report. 
　　　whether or not the approach is hierarchical  if we use the first interpretation of observation reports  the updating mechanism operates just once. we have the a priori p s1   we receive an observation report that assigns a p-value of 1 to one of the evidential statements  and we calculate a new set of 
　　　under the second and third interpretations of observation reports  p-value* may be less than 1 and may therefore change over time. updating cycles could thus continue as long as new reports are received. 
decision mechanism - given that the updating mechanism provides us with p-value* for the states of nature  and given that the background contains a measure of utility in the form of a loss function  we can formulate the expected loss of the ith action as follows: 

where the summation is over the j states of nature. the general bayesian decision function is simply to chose  whenever a decision is required  the action that corresponds to the minimum expected loss. 
b. 	convex bayes 
background elements - the background in this approach  like the classical bayes approach  consists of three elements:  1  an alfebra of statements   1  a probability function defined over this algebra  and  1  a utility or loss function defined over the tame alfebra. these elements serve the same functions as in the classical approach. the algebra again consists of base elements  operators  and statements obtained by application of the operators to the base elements. 
	t. thompson 	1 
     the probability function in the convex bayes approach differs in a significant way from the function in the classical approach. here the function is a convex set of p-funetion*  li . that is  the belief state is not characterised by a single function  but by a set of functions having the property of convexity: the set contains every linear combination of any two members of the set. in general  if there are n base elements  the belief state will correspond to a domain in a space of  n-1  dimensions  since the nth component of the belief state can be determined if  n-1  components are known. 
observation reports - the convex bayes approach  like the classical approach  construes the observation reports as direct assignments of new p-values to element* of the algebra of statements. this new p-value again causes a re-assignment of p-values to all other statements in the algebra via the updating mechanism. 
     in addition to the three interpretations of observation reports previouly discussed  there is now a fourth way in which assignment of new p-value* may be viewed: 
 1  some observation reports could consist of the assignment of two or more linked bounds on the convex set of p-values. these bounds are linked in the sense that they jointly specify limits on the set. 
as before  the primary effect of these different interpretations is upon the size of the algebra of statements. 
updating mechanism - the updating mechanism in the convex 
bayes approach operates much eke the updating mechanism of the classical bayes approach. the key difference is that the entire convex set of functions comprising the belief state is used  rather than a single function. 
　　　as before  we use bayes' theorem to obtain conditional probabilities based upon the observation reports. the formulae are similar to those in the classical bayes approach  but each probability is now indexed: pr is the rth member of a convex set of probability functions. each nsw evidential input thus induces a mapping from one convex set of p-functions to another convex set. 
　　　it would seem that the computational burden of the updating mechanism will be increased by use of the convex set of p-functions in place of a single function. however  little work has been done in actual computation of updated convex belief states  so the extent of this burden is unclear at present. 
decision mechanism - upper and lower probabilities for some statement in the algebra can be taken from the convex set of pr siiej  using the technique of supporting lines  planes  or hyper-planes  li . however  no general procedure exists to handle upper and lower bounds in a utility function. 
　　　one method of attack is to suppose that the decision indicated is the one that minimises the expected lots as was done in the classical bayes approach. using the convex sets of 
               we derive upper and lower bounds on each so that  for each action  there are now upper and lower bounds on the expected loss. such expected-loes intervals for 

1 	t. thompson 
different actions will  in general  overlap. no generally accepted method for choice of actions has yet been developed  although kyburg  k1  tad levi  l1  have explored minimax technique. 
1. 	dempeter-shafor 
background elements - tht background b this approach  like tat first two approaches  consists of throe elements:  1  an algebra of statements   1  a mats function defined over thlt algebra  and  1  a utility function dafiaod over the aamt algebra. tht elements ttrvt the same purposes at before  but tht utility function hat received little attention in the literature. it will bt required  however  b practical applications. 
　　　tht matt function ttrvtt at the book vehicle for assignment aad manipulation of degrees of ballot matt it attributed across the set of tubtttt of the elements of tht domain of discourse  that is  ovtr tht tot 1 of  1 exp 1   propositions constructed from the 1n atoms that wort in turn constructed from the a base elements. 
tht matt function m1  for subset a1  of 1 hat tht following 
properties: 

tht value of m1  f1 is taken to bt tht weight of belief that it ascribed just to fr . tht fi for which m1  fi   it nonsero art called focal elements of m1 since 1 is itself a member of s  m1  s  describes tht wtifht of belief unassigned to any smaller tubttt of s; this is generally termed tht uncertainty. 
　　　this approach provides two measures of belief state for a given proposition q: support  spt  and plausibility  pls . they art calculated at follows  s1 s1 : 

tht support for q is thus tht torn of the matt attributed to all statements that imply q  while tht plausibility of q it one minus the support for tht negation of q. the plaotibifity can alto be expressed at tht sum of tht mass attributed to all subsets of 1 that contain some element of q. it follows that the plausibility of q is always greater than or equal to tho support for q. 
　　　tht belief state concerning q can bt written as an interval using spt q  at the lower endpomt aad pl1 q  at the upper. 1omt anthers describe this at an bterval-valued probability on q. kyburf hat shown  k1  that closed convex sets of classical probability functions can represent belief states la a fashion that includes the matt-function representation at a special east. 
　　　tht baekfrouad alto contains moans of traatlatlaf observation reports into matt functions. oat method is that of a mass-function distribution; this distribution providtt a normalised measure of the matt to bt assigned to each element of tht domain in the event of sach possible observation. these distributions art analogous to tht class-conditional probability density functions of standard probability theory. 
observation reports - observation reports  at least to the extent that they art expected to mesh with mass-function distributions  consist of statements like the following: 
*the brightness of object x it between 1 aad 
1.  
	 object x 	it surrounded 	by 	between 1 aad 1 
objects of similar brightness.  
*in region y  tht expectation of encountering an object of class c1 is much higher than that of any other class.  
　　　each type of observation report it taken to generate a separate matt function. this prtsentt no problem at long at it is completely clear that tht evidential impact of a given report can be property assigned to particular subsets of the domain of discourse. however  how the domain of discourse is to be structured in order to guarantee this proper assignment it not a 
　　　trivial matter  since we must ensure the inclusion of subests that can serve at recipients of matt from each and every observation report that will bt received b performance of a given task. 
updating mechanism - suppose that wt have received two observation rtportt that have individually engendered matt functions m1  and m1. wt combine m1  aad m1 to form a new matt function  m1 defined over subsets of tht domain of 
discourse. 	in symbolic form  

　　　tht updating procedure assumet that a current matt function  m1  to available aad that a asw matt function  m1  has beta presented  based upon new obstrvations . m1  and m1 art combined to form m1 aad thlt to used at the current function should other new mast functions bt presented. 
decision mechanism - the type of decision mechanism compatible with the dempster shafar approach to not weo understood. support aad plausibility functions for each statement b the domain of discount can bt calculated based upon the current mast function. these may be used at upper and lower bounds upon the probabulty of sach statement  but there to at yet no accepted  general mechanism for decision- makingbased upon these bounds. 

	t. thompson 	1 


1 	t. thompson 

	t. thompson 	1 

