 
　　default reasoning is reasoning with generalised knowledge which we want to use if there is no more specific knowledge also applicable. this paper presents a formal  model-theoretic characterisation of default reasoning. defaults are treated as possible hypotheses in a  scientific  theory to explain the results. one of the problems with systems that reason with defaults occurs when two answers can be produced  and one is preferred. in terms of our default logic  we define a semantic characterisation of the notion of the more specific theory. this overcomes many of the problems which motivated non-normal defaults  and provides a semantics for correct inheritance in inheritance systems  where we want choose the result supported by the most specific knowledge. we also show how to produce a general computational mechanism in terms of normal first order predicate calculus deduction systems. 
1. introduction 
　　various formalisms have been proposed to give a semantics to systems with knowledge with exceptions  reiter  mcdermott and doyle  mccarthy 1   moore 1   poole 1b c  . one problem which arises  particularly with respect to inheritance systems  etherington and reiter  touretzky   is how to resolve ambiguity when different defaults can be used to produce different answers. 
　　poole  1b  gives a model theoretic definition of default reasoning with defaults as possible hypotheses in a scientific theory. an answer is explainable if it logically follows from some consistent set of default instances  a theory  together with the facts. in this paper we propose  in the case of ambiguous answers  a theory comparator to find the answer supported by the best explanation. this is applied to the problem of default inheritances in semantic networks  where the most specific theory is preferred. if there is general knowledge applicable to an answer  and more specific knowledge also applicable  then the most specific knowledge is preferred. 
1. default logic 
1. syntax 
　　the syntax is an extension of the first order predicate calculus. a wff is a well formed formula of the first order predicate calculus. the input of the system is defined as follows: 

inputs of the first type are called facts  and inputs of the second type are called defaults. an instance of a default is the wff with values substituted for the variables appearing before the assume. 
　　the facts correspond to the axioms in a normal logic  and the defaults are knowledge which can be used as long as they are consistent. 
1. formal semantics 
　　if f is the set of facts  and the set of defaults  we say that g is explainable if there is some d  a set of instances of elements of 
a such that 

and fud is consistent. 
d is said to be the theory that explains g. d is like a  scientific  theory. theorems  is the corresponding  logical  theory. 
　　that is  g is explainable if there is a theory which explains it. the instances of defaults are the possible hypotheses in this theory. this theory must be consistent with all of the facts. 
1. example 1. 
　　consider the knowledge that  birds fly  this is knowledge we may want to use although it has exceptions  eg. emus  penguins  roast ducks  little chicks etc. . the default  a bird can fly unless it can be shown not to  is given by: 

if we are also given the knowledge that emus are birds that don't fly  and that tweety is a bird  and edna is an emu  we input 

from this knowledge we can explain flien  tweety  with the theory 
　　{bird  tweety  flies  tweety } which is consistent  its negation cannot be proven   and together with the facts can be used to prove flies  tweety . 
　　we cannot explain flies edna  as the corresponding theory for edna is not consistent  as its negation can be proven from the facts. 
1. example 1 
　　suppose that we modify the first example to have  emus don't fly  as a default rather than a fact. we get the following system: 

we can now explain everything we could in example 1  and can also 	explain 	flies  edna  	with 	the 	theory  with the 
　　this is an example where there are two different things which can be explained  and where one is preferred. we prefer to say that edna does not fly  as our knowledge that emus don't fly is more specific than our knowledge about birds flying. 
1. a theory comparator 
　　so far we have given the semantics of a default logic  closely related to the normal defaults of reiter   see section 1 . our theories differ from his extensions  as our theories are intended to be minimal  the simplest theory to explain the results   whereas his 

	d.poole 	1 
extensions are the theorems following from maximal sets of instances of defaults which are consistent. 
　　as in example 1 above  a problem arises with normal defaults when two different answers can be produced in two extensions  but where one is preferable over the other  reiter and criscuolo 1l  . 
　　within inheritance hierarchies we want default links  but want to use the most specific knowledge to deduce an answer  etherington and reiter  touretzky . within our system this is done by preferring the most specific theory to explain the results. we want our definition of more specific to be a semantic rather than a syntactic definition so that it can be understood and justified independently of any implementation  and so that it does not fall into the problems of shortest paths and redundant knowledge which arise with particular syntactic definitions of best inheritance  touretzky . 
　　to formalise the notion of one theory being applicable whenever another one is  we need to be able to talk about   what if something else were the case  to do this we divide the facts into two classes: 
fn those facts necessarily true in any world in our domain. 
fe those facts which happen to be true in the case we are considering. 
in the birds fly example above   is a neces-
sary part of our domain. we do not want to consider the case  what if emus were not birds  . this should be contrasted with the fact emu edna . in this we want to say the theory which explains flies edna  is more general as it is applicable even if we only knew edna was a bird. thus we do want to consider the case where edna is not an emu. 

1 d.poole 
the two corresponding theories are both more general than each other. this can be shown by considering the possible facts republican  dick   which makes the theory explaining his nonpacifism more general  and the fact quaker dick  making the alternate theory more general. thus we prefer neither explanation. 
1. example 1 
　　to show that we can handle more complex cases  even where no contradictory results are obtained  consider the following example: 

from the contingent fact  at emu farm randy   we can explain say randy   runs  and say  randy   flies . the solution of say  randy  flies  is more general  as it is also applicable for the fact bird randy . however  we cannot show that the solution explaining say  randy  runs  is more general. thus we prefer the solution of say randy  runs . 
1. example 1. 
　the following example shows how the comparitor may produce a seemingly unintuitive answer. consider the defaults 
　　　　although the theories to explain -c and -d are strictly more specific than the corresponding theories to explain c and d  and the theory to explain g1 is more general than the theory to explain g1 the theory to explain g1 is more general than the theory to explain g1. this can be shown by considering  this problem cannot be fixed up by simply making fp be compatible with d1 
1. implementation 
　　for the general case of finding the best explanation a standard first order predicate calculus deduction system can be used  eg. poole 1a  . to prove that a goal is explainable  we use the deduction system in two phases. in the first we try to prove the goal using the facts and the defaults as the axioms in the deduction system. the defaults used in the proof of the goal can be collected into a potentially explaining theory. this theory can be checked for consistency by using the same deduction system to try to prove the theory and the facts are inconsistent. this is  of course  undecidable  in general. see poole 1c  for a provably correct procedure for such a system  together with a description of the reverse skolemisation needed to match the instances giving an inconsistency with those explaining the goal. 
　　the general proof for more specific is also a set of standard first order proofs. in general  standard first order proof techniques are adequate for handling the default system. there will  of course  need to be ways to improve the efficiency of such a system by allowing the proofs to interact to prune each other's search spaces  and by exploiting the structure of specific domains  see for example poole 1c  . 
　　if we have a restricted language  for example in inheritance systems where logical entailment can be implemented by looking up the lattice  the corresponding efficiency can be transferred to handling the problem of finding the most specific theory. for the case of inheritance in semantic networks  touretzky 1  has provided an efficient way to implement our preference of the most specific theory by conditioning an inheritance system so that a shortest path reasoner will work. 
1. a comparison w i t h other systems 
1. semantic networks 
　　an attempt to characterise the notion of using the most specific knowledge is incorporated in preferring the shortest inference path in netl  fahlman 1j . as pointed out in touretiky  this causes problems when there are redundant links and ambiguous extensions. as our system uses a semantic notion of more specific rather than some syntactic notion  it does not fall into these problems of shortest paths. 
　　when everything is in the form of a semantic network  our logic provides a semantics for the inferential distance of touretzky. the inferential distance is whether there is an inheritance path from the subclass  the more specific  to the superclass. the superclass then provides the fact which makes it more general. our logic is not  however  restricted to the simple implications found in semantic networks  but can use arbitrary wffs as both defaults and facts. it also handles a mixture of defaults and facts rather than treating all arcs as defaults. as shown in example 1  our system can find more specific theories when there are different  but not necessarily contradictory answers. 
1. reiter's default logic 
　　this work can be most directly compared with the defaults of reiter. the definition of default above corresponds to his definition of a normal default. his normal defaults of the form are expressed as the 
difference being that we allow the contrapositive of our defaults. we have a simple model-theoretic semantics as well as a proof theory  see poole 1c  for a detailed comparison . 
　　the problems which gave rise to non-normal defaults  have however been solved in a very different manner. we have more modular statements than the corresponding semi-normal defaults  reiter and criscuolo  etherington and reiter   as we do not. need to change the more general rules to add in exceptions to them  or know all of the more specific rules that may override a general rule we may have. we can add both more specific and less specific knowledge in a modular way without needing to change the other knowledge  or even needing to know that there are exceptions. the use of abnormality conditions  mccarthy  still does not give the modularity of our system  but rather allows the exceptions to a general rule to be stated in a more modular way  but it must still be changed. in summary we have the notion that more specific knowledge is preferred as an integral part of the logic  rather than needing to be explicitly given. 
1. conclusion 
　　we have outlined how defaults can be treated as possible hypotheses in a scientific theory used to explain the results. the problem of multiple answers can be overcome by allowing a comparison of theories to choose the answer which is supported by the  best  theory. when we have a set of knowledge which consists of general knowledge and more specific knowledge we want to choose the more specific knowledge in preference to the more general knowledge when there is a conflict. 
　　this paper gives a formal account of a system for such reasoning. this is defined in terms of normal first-order model-theoretic semantics  and is defined so a normal first-order predicate calculus deduction system can be used to derive results. 
　　we also provide an alternate semantics  and motivation for the  correct  inheritance in inheritance systems  touretzky 1  . there are considerable advantages over non-normal defaults in terms of modularity for solving the same problem. 
　　this is not an attempt to solve all of the problems of when one theory is better than another. this may change from domain to domain  for example in the diagnosis domain  jones and poole  where it is the theory  which is the diagnosis  that is important  and for example in learning systems where we want the most general theory  within constraints  which explains the observations. there are examples one can imagine where there is more domain-specific knowledge about which explanation is better. 
acknowledgements 
thank to eric neufeld  paul van arragon  randy goebel and 
sumo kindersley for valuable comments on an earlier draft of this paper. this research was sponsored by no defence department. 

