 
     default and non-monotonic inference rules are not really epistemological statements  but are instead desires or preferences of the agent about  the makeup of its own mental state  episternic or otherwise . the fundamental relation in non-monotonic logic is not so much self-knowledge as self-choire or seif-determination  and the fundamental justification of the interpretation *  and structures involved come from decision theory and economics rather than from logic and epistemology. 
1. introduction 
     non-monotonic logic and other formulations of non-monotonic reasoning schemes have usually been presented jus studies of a logical or epistemological topic   that is  concerned with belief  selfknowledge  and self-consistency. while some topics in the literature arc properly logical ones  for example circumscription see 
 doyle 1    recent work on reasoned assumptions   doyle 1   indicates that non-monotonic logic and reason maintenance are more psychological topics than logical or epistemological ones  and are closer to economics and decision theory than to logic. this paper reviews the work on reasoned assumptions to point out these connections. related considerations appear to motivate recent work by borgida and imielinski   who relate nonmonotonic logic to committee decisions but do not draw on the decision-making literature. 
     to summarize the present view  default rules and non-monotonic inferences are not really epistemological statements  such as generalizations and inductive hypotheses from which one draws conclusions in a statistical or inductive logic   but are instead desires or preferences of the agent about the makeup of its own mental state  episternic or otherwise . the fundamental relation is not so much self-knowledge as self-choice or self-determination  and the fundamental justification of the interpretations and structures involved come from decision theory and economics rather than from logic and epistemology. self-consistency is prominent in non-monotonic logic simply by accident  because it is one convenient encoding of presence and absence of beliefs within the logical language  not because the issues involve it. other encodings do not involve self-consistency at all  see  doyle 1  . 
*  c  copyright 1  1 by jon doyle. this research was supported by the defense advanced research projects agency  dod   arpa order no. 1  monitored by the air force avionics laboratory under contract f1-k-1. the views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author  and 
should not be interpreted as representing the official policies  either expressed or implied  of the dcjcnse advanced research projects agency or the government of the united states of america. 
1. what arc reasoned assumptions for  
     one basic problem faced in thinking about what to do is that there are too many things to think about  and not enough  or too much  known about them. one approach to this problem taken in artificial intelligence is to reduce the required effort and circumstantial uncertainty by using  habitual  rules of thumb. standard assumptions are used to remove uncertainties  rules of anti-agnosticism   and standard decisions are used to resolve conflicts  rules of anti-confusion . these rules of thumb are either formulated ahead of time and applied when needed to get the assumptions and decisions  or are formulated and applied when needed  or both. these rules of thumb have many applications in artificial intelligence systems  especially as sources of defaults and expectations in plans  frames  and inheritance hierarchies  but we will not go into any applications here. 
1. what are reasoned assumptions  
　　we consider here only a very simple sort of rule of thumb  the simple reason. a simple reason  without li gives c   means  in the case that a  li  and c are sets of potential beliefs  that the items in c should he believed if each of those in a are believed and none of those in li are believed. conclusions drawn from simple reasons are called reasoned assumptions  reasoned because they are derived from reasons  and assumptions because they may depend on the absence of defeating or qualifying information. simple reasons have corresponding meanings in case other mental elements like desires  intentions  concepts  fears  etc. are involved  
but we treat only the case of belief to simplify the discussion. 
for example  one simple reason might be 

the intent of this reason is to make the assumption that fred can fly as long as there are reasons for believing that fred is a bird and no known reasons for believing that fred can't fly. 
　　the precise interpretation of a simple reason has two principal parts. the first partial interpretation is as one of the agent's selfspechications  as a possibly non-inonotonic  closure condition  on the agent's set of beliefs. we say that a mental state is admissible  with respect to simple reasons  iff satisfies each of its component simple reasons. that is  a state s is admissible just in case for each simple reason s. 


1 j. doyle 
　　the second partial interpretation of a simple reason is as one of the agent's restrictions on derivability or arguability of conclusions  that is  as nonmonotonic  inference records.  we say that a state e is an admissible expansion of a set s iff each element of the state is  grounded  in s. there are several different interesting notions of groundedness. the two principal ones are local groundedness  in which each element has an immediate argument from s and e  and strict groundedness  in which each element has a noncircular argument from s alone. formally  e is locally grounded in s just 
in case for each either or for some with e is strictly grounded in s just in case for each there is a finite sequence  go         gn  of elements of 
e such that and for each either or there is some such that  1  for each for some and for each 
     continuing the example above  s1 and s1 arc each locally and strictly grounded in s1  while s1 is not locally grounded or strictly grounded in s1  but is locally grounded and strictly grounded in itself. 
expansion of s'1 and it is locally but not strictly grounded in s'1. 
moreover  s'1 is strictly grounded in each of s'1 and s'1. 
　　the theory of simple reasons  elements of which arc developed in  doyle 1   reveals several important facts about the structure of admissible expansions. recall that one can intuitively interpret each simple reason as a sort of closure condition. one theorem is that these  local  closure conditions can be combined into one  global  one. that is  the strictly grounded expansions of a set are exactly the fixed points of a natural  closure  operator. these fixed points are not always limits of the operator  and non-limits arc sometimes non-computable  as in non-monotonic logic . but conceptually  this result permits one to think of strictly grounded expansions as equilibria. from this point of view  they are reminiscent of the more abstract notion of  reflective equilibrium  described by rawls - the conscious agreement of principles and judgments-and of the decision-theoretic notion of  ratifiable  decision proposed by jeffrey --decisions rationally chosen for the person one expects to be once one has chosen. in the following  wc will see that these similarities to nominally political and economic theories are no accident. 
1. group decision making 
     the fundamental problem in the theory of group decisionmaking is that of combining individual attitudes  beliefs  preferences  etc.  to get the corresponding attitudes of the group. pollsters  elections  markets  and committ es are some of the most respected means commonly used; bureaucrats  politicians  dictators  and prophets are other means. the underlying theory developed by economists abstracts from the hurly-burly of actual decision-making in groups of people by studying  decision rules   mathematical functions that describe the input-output behavior of decision processes  the inputs being the attitudes of the individuals  the outputs being the resulting group attitudes. due to the abstractions commonly used  economists typically discuss only the case of combining individual preferences to get group preferences  and we will also concentrate on that case here   see  arrow 1  and 
 debreu 1  for classic treatments.  
     economists abstract from humans and other biological species and base their theories on a creature called homo cconomicus  or economic man. economic men  and presumably economic women and children too  are marvels of consistency and calculation  but their powers of calculation are not relevant here. for our purposes  the most important property of the economist's abstraction is it requirement of consistent preferences. we write x   y to mean that the agent prefers x to y. if the agent is an economic man  then its preferences arc consistent  that is  it does not prefer x to y and y to x. economic man's preferences are also transitive  x   y and y   z entail r   z . if neither x   y nor y   x we say that the agent is indifferent about the choice of a or y  or in the common corruption   x and y are indifferent  . 
　　in the theory of group decision-making  each individual is internally consistent in the above sense  but different individuals may contradict each other. that is  as long as alice and bob are individually consistent  wc may have in some case that 
and  lndeed  if we never did  group choice would not be a very interesting topic. but people do disagree  and group choice is difficult for the theory requires that group preferences be consistent as well  that is  that the results of choice result in a composite economic man  a  group individual.  the conflicts must somehow be resolved. 
     in mathematical form  the theory of group derision making considers functions  decision rules  from sets of consistent sets of preferences  those of the group members  to consistent sets of preferences  those of the group as a whole . in addition to rest.riding the input and output  preference sets to be consistent  the theory also restricts the sorts of functions allowed. this is done because there are many decision rules the economist deems uninteresting or undesirable. for example  one such rule is the rule of  apathy   namely the rule yielding the constant result of the empty set of prefrences. having no preferences at all is perfectly consistent  and this rule says that all groups are indifferent about all choices this sort of rule is not very useful in practice  and to avoid it  among others  the economist restricts consideration of decision rules to those satisfying the pareto condition  named after vilfredo pareto  an italian economist of the last century . the pareto condition is that it all members prefer x to y  then the group prefers x to y  that is  the group agrees with unanimous opinion. the rule of apathy fails to satisfy this condition  since it admits no group preferences  even when the individuals are unanimous. 
     parcto optimality is an even stronger condition than the parcto condition. pareto optimality means the group preferences agree with as many individual preferences as possible  or more precisely  that any change to the group preferences that better satisfies one member must satisfy another member less. satisfying the pareto condition implies pareto optimality when agents are never indifferent. to see this  suppose the group preferences include x   y  and that alice has the opposite preference  y  alice x. since the group preferences satisfy the pareto condition  we know that some other member must disagree with alice. otherwise  the members would be unanimous about y   x  and the group preferences would have to agree. let us assume x   bob y- then it is easy to see that if wc changed the group preference to y   x to make alice happier  we would violate bob s preference and make him unhappier. that's parcto optimality. 
1. reasoned assumptions and parcto optimality 
　　 ne are now in a position to indicate the link between these topies. consider a group decision concerning invitations to a party. we assume that each person p has a very simple set of preferences  which we abbreviate  meaning that p prefers 
sets s of invitations that satisfy the condition 

to those sets not satisfying this condition  and is indifferent to choices within these two classes. we might express p's preferences as  if we invite the a's and don't invite the b's  we should invite the c's.  what are reasonable choices for invitations if wc take the preferences of the guests as seriously as the preferences of the hosts  
　　this decision about party invitations should look familiar. it is not hard to prove that with these individual preferences  the pareto optimal sets are exactly the admissible states defined earlier. 
  doyle 1  employs the term  satisfaction optimal  for this result.  put another way  interpreting simple reasons as preferences about mental states leads naturally to the idea of admissible states  and to the interpretation of mental states as decisions by the agent about what to be. the moral is that reasoned assumptions are economic entities.  this docs not exclude them from being logical or other sorts of entities as well.  
     it is worth noting that these interpretations take some liberties with the standard formulations of group decision-making. in our applications  the group membership may vary with the choice  and preferences about preferences  reasons about reasons  are basic. these differences lead to an interesting extension of the usual economic theory  in preparation . 
one may carry the economic interpretation of reasons further. 
consider agents like the party-goers before  except that among the sets of invitees satisfying the individual conditions  these folks prefer 'validating  satisfying sets to  invalidating  satisfying sets  that is  p prefers sets s such that  to those failing this condition. with these more refined preferences  one can prove that e is paretc optimal among the strictly grounded expansions of s whenever e is a strictly grounded expansion of s.  see  doyle 1  on validity optimality.  i do not know if the converse is true  but the moral here extends the previous one. not only are the admissible mental states natural economic entities  but the derivability relation of strictly grounded expansion is an economic notion as well. 
1. reflections on economic theory 
　　the preceding has indicated the economic nature of some important notions in artificial intelligence. in this section  wc draw 
some conclusions about the role of economic theory in artificial intelligence  and about the possible influence of artificial intelligence on economic theory. 
     first  the identification of reasoned assumptions as the results of group choices constitutes a substantial regression of the usual theory of individual choice. current economics is based on the economic man idealisation of humans. since humans fall short of this ideal  some people are tempted to dismiss economic theory as useless if not wrong  but the previous discussion suggests that whatever their value as a model of humans  the standard idealisations of economics may be quite useful at a lower level than the 
	j. doyle 	1 
whole human. the elementary building blocks  e.g. reasons  procedures  etc.  may all be consistent  if simple  individuals  with more complex mental faculties and the mind as a whole stemming from the activity of these elements  that is  as group choice  see  doylic 1b  . minsky has urged something like this view for years with his  society of mind.  it is instructive to find a very similar proposal  even including some neurodevelopmental epistemology  in the works of the economist robert mundell  1  ch. 1 . once one grasps this point of view  it becomes clear that much of artificial intelligence has labored under an enormously restrictive methodology  that of seeking purely bureaucratic organisations. with few exceptions  notably minsky's  heterarchy  and society theories  perceptron-class theories  and more recently the work of thomas malone   artificial intelligence has ignored market-like structures  which appear to have great information-transmission advantages over bureaucracies in many circumstances. bureaucratic organisation may be best tor largo numbers of specific computational problems  but it seems unreasonable to ignore other organisations for tasks as complex as thinking until that  is shown to be reasonable. this ignorance is especially dangerous if one attempts to adapt artificial intelligence ideas to the design of human organisations. 
     if the economic interpretation of reasoned assumptions provides a role for standard economic theory in artificial intelligence  other artificial intelligence notions might be used to broaden economic theory. f'or example  nonmonotonic rules of reasoning are pervasive in artificial inlelligence  but violate most of the economist's idealizing axioms specifically  an agent based on the theory of simple reasons violates axioms about the consistency and transitivity of preferences and about the independence of irrelevant alternatives. a simple reasons agent may easily accommodate conflicting preferences  defaults   and come to dillerent  possibly inconsistent  conclusions depending on the complete set of reasons involved. this isn't some undesirable side-efle  t of the artificial intelligence ideas. these properties are w'hat non-monotonicity is all about. eventually artificial intelligence may provide new idealised psychologies on which to base economics  psychologies as precisely formulated as that of homo tconomicus  but much closer to the informational  computational  and logical limitations of humans. i am studying such possibilities in my work on rational psychology  and a comprehensive treatment is in preparation. 
1. conclusion 
     we have seen how the important artificial intelligence concept of reasoned assumption has a natural economic interpretation  in which reasons and defaults express preferences of the agent about the composition of its own state of mind  and in which the admissible states of mind are the results of decisions baaed on these preferences. 
　　as a final note  wc remark that because artificial intelligence agents are non-atomic and these decisions arc group decisions  the results may be ambiguous in the sense that several incomparable outcomes are possible.  in fact  except in dictatorial organisations  such ambiguities may be hard to avoid.   doyle 1  shown how one may develop a theory of degree of belief or subjective probability by measuring these ambiguities. this  epiphenomenal  role for subjective probabilities appears to fit the practical needs of artificial intelligence much better than the  foundational  role given to them in standard applications of decision theory  as the qualitative information used in reasons is often easier to obtain and to modify than the quantitative information derived from it. see  doyle 1a  and  doyle 1c  for more on this idea. 

1 j. doyle 
acknowlcgements 
     this paper is based on a talk presented at the csli workshop on planning and practical reasoning  stanford university  june 
1.i thank joseph schatz for his advice and comments  and monnett hanvey and one of the ijcai referees for discovering an error in an earlier draft. 
