 
　ways in which physical objects interact are explored  and in particular the concept of freedom is analysed. intuitively  the fit between two shapes in a given spatial configuration is a statement about how much one shape needs to mutilated in order to be made identical to the other. the freedom of one object with respect to another specifies what motions the first object can go through without the second one moving. the formulations  termed naive kinematics  are compared to work that was done in the kinematics of machinery in the 1th century and that has since been somewhat neglected. 
1. introduction 
different sorts of reasoning make different use of the 
 shape  of objects. the notations devised so far have typically been  autonomous  in nature: the shape of each object is described independently  and the problem of reasoning about the interaction between several objects is relegated to the user of the shape representation. in these notes my primary concern is exactly the interaction between several physical objects. i would like to be able to reason about questions like 
  if i place a smooth plate on a smooth table - will it move if pushed sideways  
  if i bang a nail into the wall - will it move if poshed sideways at its base  
  why can you stack spoons economically  in term of  wasted space   but not knives! 
  what is the magic quality of m.c.escher's fish'n'bird drawings! 
  what geometric features makes a piston work  
　the two central notions in reasoning about such issues seem to me to be goodness of fit and amount of freedom. the goodness of fit between two shapes says something about how much one shape needs to be mutilated in order to be made identical to the other. the amount of freedom of one shape with respect to another is a statement about the physical world   if you had objects of the two shapes  how would the movement of the first be constrained by the second. 
　to illustrate the probably obvious distinction between the two notions  consider the configuration of two objects a and b shown in figure l-l. 1 

figure 1: a cross in a square 
the fit between the two shapes is lousy  but placing the cross inside the square  in the only possible position  gives it sero amount of freedom. 
a notion similar  and at some places identical in name  to 
 freedom  appears in the literature on the kinematics of machinery1. interestingly  the earlier literature from the 1th century is very close in spirit to my formulation while the later literature is farther apart. we will see that my formulations are actually a generalization and formalization of some principles expressed by reuleaux in the 1s. reuleaux uses the word kinematics in a restricted sense to denote the science of constrained motion  without reference to ideas such as time or force  a.b.w.kennedy  his translator  suggests the term metastatics . it is in this sense of the word that one can view my formulation as naive kinematics. i will discuss the kinematics literature in a later section. 
　this work was done as part of the  commonsense summer  project at the ai center at sri international. the purpose of that project was to begin the creation of a large database of knowledge about the real world  and in order that the formulations of different people be integrable it was decided that all theories be expressed in first order predicate calculus  or at least be readily translatable into it . in  hobbs 1  a 
   1  i'll be restricting the discussion in these notes to 1-space. i don't know how well things scale up to 1-space. 
　1i' m indebted to ken porbue for directing me to that litersture and in particular to the work of f. reuteaux. 

	y. shoham 	1 
fuller version of these notes appears which makes an attempt to make the theory of naive kinematics formal  but in these notes i will be largely informal. in that report i also analyse the concept of which will not be mentioned any more in these notes. i have another reason for referring the reader to 
  hobbs 1  beside as a more detailed description of naive kinematics; there are other papers there that fit in nicely with my formulations. particularly relevant are the reports by greg hager and henry kautz  attempting to axiomatize materials and space respectively. 
organization of the sections: 
section 1 is concerned with translational freedom and 
section 1 with rotational freedom. these formulations have an unintuitive property that is briefly discussed in section 1. section 1 discusses the literature on kinematics  and section 1 summarises these notes and points out where more research is needed. 
1. translational freedom 
　the freedom of an object in a spatial configuration characterizes its possible motions assuming the rest of the configuration is static. the freedom of an object with respect to another  in a configuration   is its freedom assuming that it and the other object are the only objects in the configuration. 
　the two basic motions of an object are translation and rotation. in this section i consider translational freedom  and in the next section rotational freedom. there are two fundamental axioms of translational freedom. 
1. the first axiom of translational freedom 
　at any point on a curve the tangent curve may or may not be well defined. if it's not then  in our domain  that curve forms an angle at that point. in fact  the case where a tangent 
exists can be viewed as a special case where the angle is 
figure 1: the general schema of touching 
1 'i'll omit this comment when it's clear from the context 

1 	y. shoham 

	figure 1: 	case1: the object has reflect angle 
obstacle that has an reflect angle. in this case the translation of obj is restricted by p1 to be  going clockwise  between and 

　notice that case 1 is actually the limiting case of both case 1 and case 1. 
1. t h e second axiom of translational freedom 
　let us call a point where an object touches an obstacle  in a configuration  a touchpoint of that object  in the configuration . 
　the translational freedom of an object is the intersection of translational freedoms allowed by all its touchpoints. 
1. examples of the second axiom of translational freedom 
example 1 

figure 1: a trapped circle 
　figure 1 describes a circle trapped by three circular objects. there are three tonchpoints - say p1  p1 and p1 corresponding to the objects obstl  obst1 and obst1. they individually restrict the direction of translating obj to the following plane segment*: 

　the intersection of these allowable plane segments is empty  and so obj has no freedom whatsoever. 

figure 1: a piston in a cylinder 
figure 1 describes a two dimensional piston in a cylinder. 
considering the piston as our object and the cylinder as an obstacle we compute the freedom of the piston in the configuration. there are an infinite number of tonchpoints - all those between a and b and all those between c and d. however all the points between a and b place an identical restriction on the translation of the piston  as do all the points between c and d. let p1 be any point on the former segment and p1 any point on the latter one. they restrict the movement of the piston as follows: 

	p1 	p1 
　since the boundaries of these restrictions are included in the freedom direction  the intersection of the directions allowed by pi and p1  and therefore the intersection of the directions allowed by all touchpoints  is  that is in either direction along the x-axis. 
1. theorems on translational freedom 
　the following are theorems that fall directly out of the two axioms of translational freedom. they are not the only important ones  but will serve to illustrate the power of the axioms. 
the two point theorem 
you need at least two touchpoints to eliminate translational freedom of an object. 

	y. shoham 	1 
yon need at least three touchpoints to eliminate translation*! freedom of a convex object by convex obstacle s . 
the three point theorem relies on the following 
 lemma: the translational freedom of a convex object that is allowed by a single touchpoint spans an arc of at least 
　a smooth object is one whose boundaries have no angles different than 
the two obstacle theorem 
given an and object and two smooth obstacles or a smooth object and any two obstacles it is possible to arrange them in space so that the translational freedom of the object is limited to the two directions along some single axis1. 
the theorem of maximum effect 
　suppose you're given an object obj and an obstacle obst and you are required to arrange them in space so that they touch at a single point and so that the translational freedom of obj is minimal. the theorem states that your arrangement must have them touch at a point where the boundary of either obj or obst forms the largest angle such that the other can be arranged to touch there and only there. 
1. rotational freedom 
　the treatment of rotational freedom is only slightly more complex than that of translational freedom  and most of the ground work has already been done in the previous section. any rotation is defined by its center  a point in space  and its direction  clockwise or counter-clockwise . our axioms will state for each point in space whether it can serve as an center of a clockwise rotation of the object and whether it can serve as an axis of a counter-clockwise rotation of it. as for the translational case  there are two fundamental axioms of rotational freedom. 
1. the first axiom of rotational freedom 
　consider again the general schema of touching in figure 1. the first axiom of rotational freedom states that the clockwise rotation of obj allowed by p is around all points that lie in the space segment trapped  going clockwise  between the rays r1 
and r1  where the orientation of rl is 

1 	y. shoham 
　recall that the segment boundaries are included in the freedom. thus the intersection of the segments of clockwise freedom is the center of the circle as is the intersection of the segments of counter-clockwise freedom. that means that the only rotation possible for the circle is about its center  in either direction. 
figure 1 described a two dimensional piston in a cylinder. 
all the points p1 between a and b allow different rotational freedom as do all the points p1 between c and d  although as we saw that was not the case with translational freedom  where all the points p1 allowed the same freedom as did all the points p1 . however it b easy to show that as we move left on ab the clockwise rotational freedom only decreases and as we move right the counter-clockwise rotational freedom only 
decreases. since we are interested in the intersection of all such freedoms anyway we can restrict our attention to points a and b. by a similiar argument the only points on cd that we need consider are c and d. the rotational freedom allowed by each of these points is shown is shown in figure 1. 
　the intersection of the four plane segments of clockwise rotational freedom is empty  and the same holds for the segments of counter-clockwise rotational freedom. the piston 
therefore has no rotational freedom at all. 
figure 1: rotational freedom of a piston 
1. theorems on rotational freedom 
　as for the translational case we give some theorems that illustrate the power of our formulation. 
the two point theorem 
you need at least two touchpoints to completely eliminate rotational freedom of an object in a given direction  clockwise 
or counter-clockwise . 
the three point theorem 
you need at least three touchpoints to eliminate all rotational 

freedom of an object. 
　the reader is urged to read section 1 before trying to come up with counter-examples to this last theorem. 
the two obstacle theorem 
given a smooth object and two obstacles of any shape or two smooth obstacles and an object of any shape yon can arrange them in space so that the rotational freedom of the object is completely eliminated in one direction - unless the object is a circle.  here too the smoothness requirement can probably be weakened . 
the incomparability theorem 
there exists a configuration where an object has zero translational freedom but some rotational freedom. there also exists a configuration where the converse holds - an object has some translational freedom but no rotational freedom. 
 proof: see figures 1 and 1 . 
　if the limiting case of zero freedom serves to distinguish between the two kinds of freedom  the opposite limiting case relates them: 
the theorem of absolute freedom 
an object has total translational freedom in a configuration if and only if it has total rotational freedom in the same configuration. 
1. an observation about the nature of freedom 
　our formulations so far have been  local  in flavor  that is we discuss freedom in term of touchpoints. this causes some unintuitive results. for example  does the object in figure 
1 have translational freedom  does it have rotational 

　the answer to both questions is yes in our system  although in both cases it is freedom that is deprived as soon as it is exercised. the translational freedom is along the x-axis and the rotational freedom is in either direction around all points on the y-axis. fortunately these controversial cases tend to arise when there are very few touchpoints  and usually there will be many. still there's something discomforting about such a result  and the solution seems to me to define something that might be called  continuous freedom   either translational or 
	y. shoham 	1 
rotational . some theorems will extend from freedom to continuous freedom  like the three point theorem for translation  and some will fail to do so  like the three point theorem for rotation . i don't pursue this further in these notes. 
1. naive kinematics and real kinematics 
　when i started this work i intended to make concrete some notions that seemed to me intuitive and fundamental for reasoning about objects. in doing that i found my work  and in hindsight not surprisingly  overlapping with that of researchers in the kinematics of machinery. as early as 1 f. reuleaux stated that 
...the elementary ... parts of a machine are not single  but occur always in pairs  so that the machine  from the kinematic point of view  must be divided rather into pairs of elements that single elements.    reuleaux 1  p.1 . 
　reuleaux then goes on to state assumptions that are very close to the ones i used - objects are rigid  space is fixed  i.e. a global frame of reference   only one object can move. he then has two sections -  restraint against sliding  and  restraint against turning . as might be expected these deal respectively with what i have termed translational freedom and rotational freedom. it turns out that in both cases reuleaux considered case 1 of sections 1 and 1. this amounts to the assumption that all objects are everywhere  smooth   that is the tangent to their boundaries is defined everywhere. my results for this special case are identical to reuleaux's. he also gives an informal version of the three point theorem for translational freedom  and analyses cases of rotational freedom where three  four and five points are need to completely eliminate rotational freedom. like in these notes reuleaux restricts the discussion to 1-space. in 1 p. somov proved that in 1-space at least seven points of contact are needed to completely eliminate freedom    somov 1  . 
　to avoid giving the wrong impression it must be emphasised that these issues are only a small part of what these learned kinematicians are concerned with. they only introduced them in order to define complicated notions like the crank and the screw-pair  so they could reason about actual machines like the newly-invented train. in fact as far as i could see in most of the more recent texts this introductory analysis doesn't appear 
- for example in the texts by hardison  1   dijksman  1   shigley  1   sue & radcliffe  1   hinkle  1   barr  1   guillet  1  and beyer  1 . 
the concernes of these texts are typified by a quote from 
 hardison 1  
a major aim  of this book is  to provide explanations for ... the more difficult concepts. 

1 	y. shoham 
computers of coarse need explanations for the  easy  concepts too  and it is those i've been concerned with in these notes. 
　one exception is  rosenaner & willis 1  where reuleaux's results are reproduced in a slightly more rigorous way  and new terms are used which may not sound totally unfamiliar -  field of translational  rotational  freedom   'yield of restraint . 
　current interest in robotics has produced more recent related work. one example is  salisbury 1  which analyses possible designs for a robot hand. based on this analysis one was in fact built - the stanford/jpl three-fingered hand. involved in the analysis is classification of surface contacts  which unlike my  or reulaux's  treatment allows friction. his analysis of them is by determining the  degree of freedom  of each contact type  rather than directly in terms of translational and rotational freedom. 
   what then is the relation between naive kinematics and the real thing! the answer seems to me that the naire version is concerned with the basic notions underlying the kinematics of machinery  which were explicated more than one hundred years ago when some folks were attempting to make the kinematics of machinery a science rather than an engineering discipline  and that in the meanwhile have been somewhat neglected. in the process of recreating that information i arrived at a formulation that b more general than the original one. we can now build on top of that basis a richer theory - but it will probably look very different from the one found in the kinematics literature. gears  cams  linkage chains and screws are unlikely to appear in the formulation  at least not at the early stage they do in in kinematics. 
1. summary 
　i have outlined an approach to object representation - instead of describing each object without regard to other objects  center the representation around the relation between objects. in doing that there are two main notions to consider   freedom  which i analysed here  and fit  which i did not. 
　there are several directions in which the analysis offered in these notes should be extended: 
  the notion of fit should be analysed and related to freedom. some results along those lines are offered in my report in  hobbs 1   including an application to robot grasping. 
  1 mentioned the unintuitive local  flavor of the formulation  and suggested that it could be avoided by defining  continuous freedom . 
  a rich library of shape tuples  should be created  each analysed in terms of fit and freedom. in doing that one important issue b abstracting away from configurations: we want to know the relation between two shapes regardless of how they are embedded in a specific spatial configuration. in terms of our our formal notation in  hobbs 1   we want to get rid of the  configuration  argument to the freedom and fit predicates. this can be achieved by essentially quantifying over configurations in a sense this b where things get really interesting - in these notes i have only provided the machinery for creating such a knowledge base. 
  natural language concepts such as touch  contact  pointed  aligned  abut  rap around  encircle  trap  lean against  tangled  fit like a glove  hold  grasp  grip  pinch  clasp  slide along  turn  insert   guide   hinge  bottleneck  wedge  hang and others could be analysed in terms of concepts defined in these notes. 
acknowledgements 
　thb work was done while i was at the ai center at sri international and supported by a gift from the systems 
developement foundation. thanks to jerry hobbs who organised the project and supervised thb research  to greg hager and henry kauts with whom i had useful discussions  and to the other participants of commonsense summer. pat hayes and ernie davis gave detailed comments on previous versions of thb paper. tomas losano-peres and various members of the mechanical engineering department at 
stanford helped fill in the gaps in my knowledge of robotics. 
