 
         in this paper we present a process model of the reasoning underlying arguments of persuasion and its embodiment in a computer program  the persuaoer  which gives counsel for the resolution of impasses in collective bargaining. we show how goal trees can be searched to produce arguments 
involving economic quantities. 
	i 	argumentation strategies 
　　　　arguments of persuasion are those used by the participants in cooperative problem solving. while others have worked on argumentation  none so far has worked on persuasive arguments. the work of flowers  et a l .  1  was concerned with adversary arguments and spohrer and riesbeck  1  have investigated understanding causal relationships among economic quantities based on arguments given in newspaper articles. 
	 convincing  	someone 	to 	accept 	a 
proposition can be effected by two strategies: 1  showing that the proposition furthers the person's goals  or 1  indicating how refusing the proposition threatens his goals. in labour negotiations  the second strategy is crucial. this paper presents a procedure for constructing threatening arguments during labour mediation. 
　　　　collective bargaining is the process through which a company and a union arrive at a contract. argumentation is used to persuade the opposing party to grant concessions  to support one's own demands  and to thwart attempts by the opposition to gain concessions from one's own side. a mediator  called in to help the two sides reach an agreement  tries to convince each party to accept the necessary concessions. the final agreement incorporates the tradeoffs that each party found acceptable. by the time the mediator appears  most secondary issues have been settled. the mediator's job is to convince the parties to accept compromises on the last important issues. 
　　　　events 1 and 1 below illustrate how a mediator uses threatening arguments to do t h i s . 
event 1. the company refuses to accept a particular wage settlement. the mediator argues that inefficient plant operation w i l l occur from the resulting employee dissatisfaction. 
*this work was supported by nsf grant no. ist-1 and by aro grant no. daag 
1-k-1. 
event 1. the union refuses to accept a wage settlement. the mediator argues that if the company grants higher wages  it w i l l become noncompetitive and w i l l 
be forced to la  off workers. 
	i i 	representing the parties' goals 
　　　　to generate an appropriate argument  the arguer must know the goals of the parties in question. we represent these goals in goal trees. in the subsequent two figures  we depict partial goal trees of a union and a company. 

	figure 1 	company goal-tree 

　　　　searching goal trees in order to understand and/or predict the behaviour of various actors has been investigated by carbonell   1   spohrer and riesbeck   1   and wilensky   1 . the relationships among goals are adapted from spohrer and riesbeck   i1a . a  +  sign corresponds to the goal of increasing the particular quantity to which it refers while a  -  sign corresponds to decreasing the quantity. for example  prof its  +  means that the company's highest level goal is to increase p r o f i t s . a goal is violated by an action when the action opposes its sign. for example  a reduction in employment  employment  -   violates the union's goal employment  + . 
　　　　the children of a node  connected to it through support links  denote the subgoals through which the supergoal is satisfied. for example  in the company's goal tree  diminished labour costs can be achieved either by decreasing the economic concessions granted to the union  economic -   or by decreasing the number of employees  
employment  - . thus  a path x to y in a goal tree constitutes a causal chain that produces an explanation of the change in y in terms of the change in x  assuming no other change has occured in the rest of the tree. 
　　　　a conflicting goal h as a  +  sign in one goal tree and a  -  sign in th e other. when  in one party's goal tree  the same goal exists in more than one place with opposite signs  an internal conflict exists fo r this party. the company has an internal confl ict: it wants to increase economic concession s  economic +   in order to increase efficient pl ant operation  while simultaneously it wants to decrease economic concessions  economic -   in order to reduce its labour costs. 
　　　　the above representation  while allowing the arguer to do some qualitative reasoning  de kleer and brown  1  regarding the parties' goals  is clearly a crude approximation of reality. not only the direction  but also the amount by which a quantity is being changed  is important for determining the acceptability of a proposed settlement. to simplify our explanation  we w i l l assume that a mediator has a means of generating a reasonable value for each demand  and that her task is to generate convincing arguments for their acceptance. 
	i l l 	generating threatening arguments 
　　　　argument generation is guided by the goals of the parties. in addition  the processing depends on which party must be convinced. to convince the union  the strategy is to discover a company action which threatens one of the union's important goals. to convince the company  the strategy is to discover whether the company's refusal w i l l result in a violation of an important company goal. since the company controls the hlrii.gs  firings and concessions  both of these strategies require a goal directed search of the company's goal tree. the union goal tree is used to find the threatened union goals and their importance. the process assumes that the other 
party has agreed to the proposed settlement. 
　　　　creating an argument to convince the union regarding issue x and change of quantity  *   
k. sycara-cyranski 1 
 where  *  	is either  +  or  -     is as follows: 
 1  find out which company goals are violated by the union's refusal. 
　　　　this is done by following the support links starting with x  not*  in the company's goal tree i.e.  tracing the consequences for the company of the negation of its goal. the effects of negating x are propagated by changing the signs of x's ancestor goals along the path. 
 1  find out what compensating actions the company might carry out to offset the effects of negating its goal x. 
	this is done by 	considering 	the 	children 
zl ...zn of each goal y found in step 1. to qualify as a threatening argument  a potential compensating action zi has to satisfy three conditions: 1  it must be controllable by the company  1  it must violate a union goal and 1  the importance for the union of this violated goal 
must be greater than the importance of the demand under discussion. if the third condition is not satisfied by z i   its children are checked to see whether they satisfy conditions 1  to 1  ; otherwise  the subtree of zi is pruned  and the siblings of zi are considered in the same way. if some zk proves suitable  a potential argument is saved. whether or not an argument has been generated  steps 1 and 1 are repeated starting from y. thus  the whole set of arguments is generated. 
         consider  for example  the generation of the argument used in event 1. at issue was a decrease in wages. the process starts by following wages  +   a negation of company's goal wages  -  up the tree. figure 1 shows the fragment of the company tree after propagation of wages  +  has started* 

　　　　wages  +  leads to economics . fringes  -  is considered as a possible action of the company to offset the increase in economic concessions. thus  a possible argument might be:   i f the company is forced to grant higher wages  it w i l l reduce the granted fringes . generating this argument depends on whether the company can reduce the fringes. assuming that the fringes were not under negotiation in this case  the argument is rejected and the search continues from economics . labours  is reached  whose c h i l d   employment -  is controllable by the company and conflicts with the union goal employments . assuming employments  is more important for the union than a wage increase  the argument   i f the 1 	k. sycara-cyranski 
company is forced to grant higher wages  then it w i l l lay off workers  is generated. 
　　　　generating an argument to convince the company about issue x is similar: the x  not*  path is followed in the company's goal tree. the mediator points out to the company the deleterious results that x  not*  has on one of its higher 
level goals. 
	iv 	an example from the persuader 
　　　　the persuader is a program that generates appropriate contract proposals and tries to persuade the parties involved in the negotiation to accept them. in this example  it is handling an impasse in negotiations between a transit company and its union. the persuader has generated a fair wage value  which the company has accepted and the union refused. the goals are organised as in figures 1 and 1. importance of goals is expressed on a 1 to 1 scale. here we see the persuader trying to generate a threatening argument for the union. 
importance of # m-wage-g1al 1  is 1 for # m-l1cal 1  
searching # m-transit-company 1  goal tree. matching # m-wage-g1al 1a1  . . . 
increase in # m-wage-g1al 1  by # m-transit-company 1  
results in increase in # m-ec1n-g1al 1  
at this point  the persuader considers fringe benefits but rejects it because it is not involved in the negotiation. it continues its search from # m-ec1n-g1al 1 . 
increase in # m-ec1n-g1al 1  results in increase in # m-lab1r-c1st 1 to compensate  # m-transit-company 1  w i l l decrease # m-empl1yment 1  which is contrary to # m-l1cal 1  goal 
importance of # m-empl1yment 1  is 1 for # m-l1cal 1  
one possible argument found 
	v 	the convincing power of arguments 
　　　　when the argument-generating process described above produces more than one potential argument  the best one must be chosen. one strategy is to try the  weakest  argument f i r s t   presenting  strong  arguments only if the weaker ones f a i l . this requires a means of ranking arguments according to their  convincing  power. the ranking follows the order of importance of the goals that the arguments threaten. in particular  the importance of the goals of a company  union  depends on the financial situation of the company  the state of the industry  the labour supply and the general economic climate. for example  the goal of reducing labour cost is more important for a company in an industry with high labour cost; if there is abundant labour supply in an area  the goal of employment is stronger for a union in that area. in this case  a threat to the union of layoffs has the greatest convincing power. without enough information  the default ranking of arguments  from weakest to strongest  is: 
	1  appeal 	to universal principle 
　　　here  the arguer appeals to some moral belief of the interlocutor. for example  a particular wage value may not afford the workers a  decent 1iving standard . 
1  appeal to precedents as counterexamples 
　　　counterexamples point out contradictions between the claimed and the actual behaviour  thus threatening the c r e d i b i l i t y goal of a party. 
	1  appeal 	to 	 prevailing practice  standard 
　　　arguments based on this standard address economic goals. for example  a company cannot underpay its employees for fear of losing them to competitors; a union cannot insist on concessions much above what is given in the industry for fear of lay-offs. 
1  threat of strike  lockout  
　　　a strike threatens to stop production  necessary for company p r o f i t s . a lockout threatens the existence of the union. the mediator's role here is to convey to the recalcitrant party the dire consequences of the action. 
	vi 	summary 
　　　　to generate a threatening argument to convince a union  the company's goal tree is searched to find company actions that w i l l offset the effects of a union demand. to convince a company  the deleterious effects on the company of its demand are found by searching its goal tree. though we have not addressed i t   generation of arguments based on furthering of goals  can be done by a similar search. 
acknowlegments 
　　　　i wish to thank janet kolodner and bob simpson for helpful discussions and comments. 
