ion mccarthy in his characterization of simple abnormality theories makes a sharp distinction between these two types of facts: 
-the general facts involve usually abnormality variables 
-the specific facts do not involve abnormality variables 
　　we will make this distinction explicit and view a default theory as a triple  where wf is the set of facts  wr is the set of general  monotonic  rules and finally d is the set of defaults. for the sake of conciseness of notation we will refer to both w and d by d  a set of defaults and general rules . abnormality theories will be viewed simply as where the first two elements have the same meaning as in default theory and  is the partial order corresponding to circumscription scheme. 
　　one must be very careful when defining the notion of translation. first of all we have to decide - what are we going to translate  
　　by translation  we mean reformulating the general facts represented in default theory into general facts specified in abnormality theory. for example  see |1|  the translations of general facts to abnormality theory set may have the form 
 for the  bird  example. intuitively  the abnormality predicates  propositions  reflect typical and atypical properties of objects under consideration. we insist that the specific facts remain unchanged since it is the case in simple abnormality theories  see  1  . therefore we are interested in translating specifications not particular instances. 
　　formally we say that the set of defaults d is modularly translatable or represent able by the order semantics iff there exist a set of formulas ab and the order relation  such that for every set w of the of specific facts from the language l and for every formula a we have 

　　the set of formulas abr is expressed in some extended language  which results from l for example by simply adding propositional variable's  like abnormality variables. the order  is defined over the models of extended language l . in terms of circumscription this simply means that we can possibly minimise on abnormality predicates. in other words  the circumscription schema may involve additional variables 

 abnormality variables  which do not belong to l. notice that we do not limit here in any way the number of additional variables introduced to the language l. in order to establish translatability it is sufficient to find any extension of l which would make a translation possible. 
   modularity is the desirable properly of translation both from the conceptual and computational point of view this is the case simply because every time an update is made and a new specific fact is taken into account we do not have to  recompute  or change the existing content of our database  i.e incremental updates of specific facts in default theories are also incremental for abnormality ones  besides  from the conceptual point of view it preserves the clear distinction between specific facts and general facts by translating  separately   or modularly  specific and general facts finally  the modular translation is the only case when we really can say that the translation of the set of defaults into circumscription exists  i.e there is a single reformulation of general facts   time invariant  properties  expressed in the default theory in the abnormality theory. 
   we may certainly consider nonmodular translations  in fact as we will show in this paper  in many important cases we have to  in which the order  is fixed  for the give d  but. the set abr will depend on the set of specific facts w. in this case however each new specific fact added to the default theory will require a recomputation of the ''old  translation. it is therefore hard to talk here about single translation of d  we rather get a family of translations a good example of such a nonmodular translation is provided in database theory. the translation of closed world assumption into the completed database |1  is nonmodular. 
indeed  the addition of new atomic facts changes the completion axiom. 
　generally speaking  it may be just as difficult to compute the nonmodular translation as just to compute the extensions of the default theory in such a situation translation does not make much sense. for instance  we could provide such an  expensive  translation  given the default theory by constructing a translation to the ordinary propositional theory in the following way: if a is derivable from w and ~b is not than translate w to  otherwise leave w unchanged. this is the kind of nonmodular translation which we certainly want to avoid. 
   finally let us point out that if the set of defaults d is changed than obviously even the modular translation allows both changing the  order relation and the set  the same may happen if the new general rules are added. this is simply because we may then assume that this is not the instance of external world which has changed but rather specification of the system. we do not talk here about such changes restricting ourselves to the changes of the specific facts of the system. 
b. main results - negative part we are here interested in: 
1. describing the class of default theories which can be modularly translated into abnormality theories. 
1. determining what is the advantage of abnormality propositions. in other words   we would like to establish whether there exists a class of defaults which are translatable when the abnormality variables are used  but are not translatable when we do not use 
	t. imielinski 	1 
these additional variables predicates . 
we present now our main negative result: 
　theorem 1: the set of defaults where b is independent of a   i e both {a b} are consistent   is not modularly translatable into abnormality theory  no matter how many abnormality variables are introduced 
proof 
　suppose there is such a translation let ab be the corresponding formula l e t b e the resulting order relation let us take w to be {a} or any set which implies a without the loss of generality let us assume that both and {a b} are consistent. than for any model ml such that there must exist a model m1 such that is true and notice that must be 
consistent. indeed  otherwise the consistent theory {a b} would be translated into the inconsistent one. 	let now 
     by lemma 1 and the definition of our order relation * we have hence  since ab is true in every minimal model of     we obtain simply by modus ponens  that 

   this is however not the case in the original default theory: it is not true that  since the order relation and the formula ab were chosen arbitrarily  we have proved our theorem. 
   notice here that if either {a b} or {a  b} are inconsistent the situation is trivial  since the above default is totally redundant. 
   let us now point out an important difference between the defaults  the second default is easily translatable by circumscription  the first one as our theorem points out is not. in his paper grosof  claimed that he has provided translation of the normal defaults with prerequisites  i.e. of the first type  into circumscription  while in fact his construction is correct only for the defaults of the second type. the important difference between these two types of defaults is best seen when we consider two default theories with defaults: 
	respectively and the same 
set of specific facts w={black a } . if we do not know whether  a  is a bird or is not we do not want to conclude that if  a  is a bird that it would fly  since a  may turn out to be an atypical bird 	the 	first 	default 	would 	not 	give 	this 	answer while the second one would 
   the above result is definitely a pessimistic one  specially because normal defaults with prerequisites constitute the most important class of defaults. the result indicates that it is possible only to construct nonmodular translations. this in turn faces a danger that the overall cost of translation in terms of both the size of the abnormality theory and the time required to compute it may be higher than deduction using the original default theory. in fact the large size  the number of formulas  of abnormality theories corresponding even to simple defaults  see 
1 	t. imielinski 
the papers |1     reinforces this apprehension. 
   notice also that our result ran be formulated even in the stronger way as long as circumscription is based on the minimalization versus some arbitrary order  the modular translation of normal defaults with prerequisites is impossible. this is because  as we demonstrated  no partial order between the models can capture normal defaults with prerequisites. 
c. main results - positive part 
   we will now characterise those defaults which are translatable into simple abnormality theories. we will also address the second of our previous questions describing the class of defaults whose translatability require the presence of additional abnormality variables  i.e. the defaults which otherwise are not translatable. therefore  the answer for our second question about the usefulness of additional abnormality variables is positive. 
   lemma 1: seminormal and normal defaults without prerequisites are modularly translatable into circumscription even without abnormality variables. 

　the translation obtained here is the direct consequence of the correspondence between defaults and partial order as described in the second section. we cannot apply this mechanism however for the arbitrary defaults which are not necessarilly seminormal. indeed the default  such that is not false would get us rather the order equivalent to the default this follows directly from the construction of the order relation as in section 1 or as in the lemma 1. it is interesting to observe that seminormal defaults are  special  from the point of view of the order semantics and that seminormaiity is in fact critical to translatability into the order semantics. 
   in general it can be showed that arbitrary combination  and also ordered combination  of seminormal defaults can be translated modularly into circumscription. 
   by the multiple default we mean the default of the form  where  if n=1 we will talk about singular 
defaults. now let us present the result related to the usefulness of additional abnormality variables. 
proof: definition 1: let us consider a seminormal default d of the form let l be a propositional language. by the inference rule r    lemma 1: multiple seminormal defaults are not modularly translatable into circumscription unless abnormality variables are introduced. 

   one may argue that multiple defaults are not practically applicable. we do not discuss this point here. we have only established the technical result which shows the essential difference between multiple and singular defaults. 
we will discuss now the problems of representation of the various combination of the set of defaults. we will introduce here the notion of inference rule as the generalisation of monotonic  modus ponens  generalisation  resolution etc  and nonmonotonic  defaults  inference rules. 


　　parallel composition corresponds to the intersection of the set of formulas obtained by applying r1 and r1 in the different order. the reason for using  triple  composition is that the application of the rule r1 may make the application of r1 possible when it was not the case before. the second application of r1 cannot however change anything according to our principle  therefore three compositions are enough. 
　introduction of these formalisms will help in establishing the class of general inference rules which are representable by the order semantics. in a way therefore we will be able to determine the limits of this semantics. besides that the formalism enables us to be more general and not to restrict ourselves to any particular semantics associated  for example  with combination of defaults  if they are our basic inference rules . for example for the same set of defaults a number of different definitions of the corresponding combination can be provided. compare for example proposals of reiter  s  and lukaszewicz  or the different possible definitions of extensions of the default theory in which 
and 	where 	may  logic of 
mcdermott and doyle  or may not be implied  reiter's default theory . we do not want in our study to comit ourselves to any of these possible semantics of the combination of defaults  since 
i. imieiinski 1 
there is no agreement about them. instead  we rather want to have a formal apparatus to express and study the problem of translatability for all these alternative definitions of combinations of defaults. besides we can also define the ordered  prioratised  combination of defaults through the operation of composition applied to the default rules r1 and r1-
　　now let us define what does it mean for the general inference rule to be represented by the partial order between the structures of l. 
definition 1 
　　the inference rule r over l is representable  translatable  by the partial order  defined over the set of truth assignments of some extended language l iff there exist a formula ab such that 
for every 
notice that if r is the syntactical consequence of propositional 
 predicate  logic than the corresponding partial order relation is trivial. it is defined over truth assignments of l in such a way that any two different assignments are incomparable. this definition is a generalization of the previous one in a sense that we can now talk about various combinations of defaults. let us now present the main positive results of this section: 
　　theorem 1: if r1 and r1 are representable by the partial order so are r1 and r1 r1-
　　the proof follows by the construction of the order relation corresponding to r1 r1  from the order relations corresponding to r1 and r1. 
　　the operations of composition and parallel composition of the inference rules are important - they correspond to the  ordered and unordered  composition of the set of defaults. we have here as the direct consequence of the theorem 1 and preceding lemmas the following result 
　　theorem 1: arbitrary combination  ordered and unordered  of the set of seminormal defaults without prerequisites is representable by the circumscription. 
　　the combination of defaults which we have in mind can have both the semantics in the lukasiewicz and reiter sense. in fact showing the representability for lukasiewicz semantics is easier we can apply directly theorem 1  for parallel combination of the inference rules . to show it for reiter's definition of extension requires transformation of the set of defaults to the equivalent set for which the parallel composition can be used. the main reason for why we have to do this is that in reiter's definition of extension it is not sufficient to apply applicable defaults - the consequents of defaults should not contradict the premises of the other defaults. 
　　in fact we have even the stronger result - the complete characterization of the expressive power of the order semantics in terms of default theories. 
　　theorem 1: the default theory is modularly translatable to circumscription   simple abnormality theory  iff it is equivalent to the combination  ordered  unordered  of the seminormal defaults without 
1 	t. imielinski 
prerequisites 
　　two sets of defaults are considered equivalent here if they lead to the same sets of conclusions for the same set of facts 
　　in one direction the theorem is the direct consequence of the previous one   soundness  completeness follows from the ''reconstruction  of the set of defaults from the partial order relation as described in the first section the above result provides therefore a precise limit to the expressive power of the order semantics  if we restrict ourselves to the classical models 
	i v 	conclusions 
　　it is important to establish the formal criteria of translatability between different nonmonotonic systems. there are many potential advantages  inter alia  the possibility of determination of limits of the systems under consideration. in this paper we have provided such a criterion for two important nonmonotonic systems and we have established a number of positive and negative results the negative result obtained here has rather disappointing consequences for a perspective of  clean  modular translations from the default theories to circumscription as long as circumscription is based on one fixed partial order relation induced over the set of models. in fact we proved that there is no partial order between the models which could capture the important class of normal defaults with prerequisites. one way out is to make a circumscription  conditional  by changing the circumscription axiom to the conditional formula  if c then  circumscription axiom   in this way instead of one single order relation we would have rather a family of order relations  possible semantic orders   and depending on the theory which is going to be circumscribed the particular circumscription axiom would be selected   or in other words the particular order relation would be chosen  this will lead however to even more complex proof theory and may be not worth the effort overall 
　　the order semantics considered here is interesting by itself as an intuitive and attractive formally candidate for semantics of nonmonotonic logic. it remains to be investigated what are the limits of this semantics especially if w reconsider the order semantics also for nonclassical models like for example kripke structures. as the semantical tool order semantics can be used to establish various equivalence results for example one may be interested in determining whether one set of defaults is equivalent to another we may also be interested in a more restricted question whether two sets of defaults are equivalent modulo particular sublanguage  i.e. the set of conclusions if restricted to this sublanguage are the same. the other question which can be successfully answered on the basis of order semantics is the characterization of the class of formulas with respect to which the given system is monotone. 
　　these topics and the extension of the order semantics to capture more expressive power are the subject of a forthcoming paper. 
acknowledgement 
　　the comments of alex borgida  ray reiter and anonymous referee are gratefully acknowledged. 
 mccarthy j  circumscription - a form of nonmonotonic reasoning  aj 1  1  1  mcderrnott d. 	and doyle j 	 nonmonotonic logic 1.  	ai 
1  1  1 |s| 	reiter r 	 a logic for default reasoning.  aj. 	1.l 	 1  
1 |1| grosof.benjamin  default reasoning as circumscription   in workshop in nonmonotonic logic. aaa1  oct  1. |1|  mccarthy john  application of circumscription to formalize common sense knowledge   in workshop in nonmonotonic 
logic. a a a i   oct  1 |1  lifschitz vladimir 	 some 	results 	on 	circumscription   	in 
workshop 	in 	nonmonotonic 	logic 	a a a i   	oct  	1 |1  reiter r. and criscuolo g.  on interacting defaults  in international joint conference on artificial intelligence 
a a a i   1  1. |1| reiter  r    on closed world databases.  in logic and databases plenum press  1  . |1  lukaszewicz witold 	 considerations 	on 	default 	logic.  	in 