 
     a formal framework is presented that models communication and promises in multi-agent interactions. this framework generalizes previous work on cooperation without communication  and shows the ability of communication to resolve conflicts among agents having disparate goals. using a deal-making mechanism  agents are able to coordinate and cooperate more easily than in the communication-free model. in addition  there arc certain types of interactions where communication makes possible mutually beneficial activity that is otherwise impossible to coordinate. 
뫫1. introduction 
1 the muiti-agent paradigm and ai 
     research in artificial intelligence has focused for many years on the problem of a single intelligent agent. this agent  usually operating in a relatively static domain  was designed to plan  navigate  or solve problems under certain simplifying assumptions  most notable of which was the absence of other intelligent entities. 
     the presence of multiple agents  however  is an unavoidable condition of the real world. people must plan actions taking into account the potential actions of others  which might be a help or a hindrance to their own activities. in order to reason about others' actions  a person must be able to model their beliefs and desires. 
     the artificial intelligence community has only lately come to address the problems inherent in multi-agent activity. a community of researchers  working on distributed artificial intelligence  dai   has arisen. even as they have begun their work  however  these researchers have added on a new set of simplifying assumptions that severely restrict the applicability of their results. 
1 benevolent agents 
     virtually all researchers in dai have assumed that the agents in their domains have common or non-conflicting goals. work has thus proceeded on the question of how these agents can best help one another in carrying out their common tasks  1  1  1  1  1   or how they can avoid 
     this research has been supported by darpa under navelex grant number n1-c-1. 
interference while using common resources  1  1 . multiple agent interactions are studied so as to gain the benefits of increased system efficiency or increased capabilities. 
     of course  when there is no conflict  there is no need to study the wide range of interactions that can occur among intelligent agents. all agents are fundamentally assumed to be helping one another  and will trade data and hypotheses as well as carry out tasks that are requested of them. we call this aspect of the paradigm the benevolent 
agent 	assumption. 
1 interactions of a more general nature 
     in the real world  agents are not necessarily benevolent in their dealings with one another. each agent has its own set of desires and goals  and will not necessarily help another agent with information or with actions. of course  while conflict among agents exists  it is not total. there is often potential for compromise and mutually beneficial activity. previous work in distributed artificial intelligence  bound to the benevolent agent assumption  has generally been incapable of handling these types of interactions. 
     intelligent agents capable of interacting even when their goals are not identical would have many uses. for example  autonomous land vehicles  alv's   operating in a combat environment  can be expected to encounter both friend and foe. in the latter case there need not be total conflict  and in the former there need not be an identity of interests. other domains in which general interactions are prevalent arc resource allocation and management tasks. an automated secretary   for example  may be required to coordinate a schedule with another automated  or human  secretary  while properly representing the desires of its owner. the ability to negotiate  to compromise and promise  would be desirable in these types of encounters. 
     finally  even in situations where all agents in theory have a single goal  the complexity of interaction might be better handled by a framework that recognizes and resolves sub-goal conflict in a general manner. for example  robots involved in the construction of a space station arc fundamentally motivated by the same goal; in the course of construction  however  there may be many minor conflicts caused by occurrences that cannot fully be predicted  e.g.  fuel running low  drifting of objects in space . the building agents  each with a different task  could then negotiate with one another and resolve conflict. 
1 	j. rosenschein and m. genesereth 
1 game theory's model and extensions 
     in modeling the interaction of agents with potentially diverse goals  we borrow the simple construct of game theory  the payoff matrix. consider the fqllowiug matrix: 

     the first player is assumed to choose one of the two rows  while the second simultaneously picks one of the two columns. the row-column outcome determines the payoff to each; for example  if the first player picks row b and the second player picks column c  the first player receives a payoff of 1 while the second receives a payoff of 1. if the choice results in an identical payoff for both players  a single number appears in the square  e.g.  the a d payoff above is 1 for both players . payolls designate utility to the players of a particular joint move . 
     game theory addresses the issues of what moves a rational agent will make  given that other agents are also rational. we wish to remove the a priori assumption that other agents will necessarily be rational  while at the same time formalizing the concept of rationality in various ways. 
   our model in this paper allows communication among the agents in the interaction  and allows them to make binding promises to one another. the agents are assumed to be making their decisions based only on the current encounter  e.g.  they won't intentionally choose a lower utility in the hope of gaining more utility later on . the formalism handles the case of agents with disparate goals as well as the case of agents with common goals. 
   we denote by ms an element of ms: this is a joint move for the players in 1  to and correspond an element the payoft function for 
a game is a function 

whose value at  is the payoff for player i if move is made. 
     each agent is able to specify a set of joint moves  i.e.  elements of mp  that specify outcomes the agent is willing to accept; this set is called an offer group. if any move or moves offered by one agent are likewise offered by all other agents  this set of moves constitutes the deal  i.e.  the deal is the intersection of all the agents' offer groups . in practice  a single element of the deal set will be selected by a fair arbiter  and the result of the selection communicated to all agents. at that point  the agents are all compelled to carry out their part of the move. of course  if the deal set has only one member  no arbiter is needed. 
     we define a secondary payoff function pay the set of possible payoffs to i of making move mi  and suggesting offer group pi 

we designate by alluwedrn{i mi  the set of moves that other agents might potentially make while i makes move mi  and by allowed1{i di.    the set of offers that other agents might make while i suggests offer group di. our formalism implicitly separates offer groups from moves  in other words  there will be no effect on moves by offer groups or vice versa . intuitively  this reflects simultaneously revealing one's move and offer group  with one's eventual action determined by others' offer groups  that is  only if there is no agreement will you have to carry out your move . future work might investigate the situation where offers arc made before moves are chosen  and may thus affect them. 
1 rational moves 
     we will denote by the set of rational moves for agent % in game p. we use the following definition to constrain what moves arc elements of  that is  what moves arc rational  we will follow the convention that free variables are considered universally quantified : 
  1  
in other words  if  when no binding agreement will be reached  every possible payoff to i of making move yt is less than every possible payoff to i of making move xt   then yi is irrational for i. of course  this does not imply that xi is rational  since better moves may still be available. 
     in general  it will not be possible to fully specify the value of pay for all mn since there is not full information as to the moves that the other agents will make. instead  we use  1  to show that some moves are not rational. because the dominance relation is transitive but irreflexive  and there are a finite number of moves   it is impossible to show that all moves are irrational. 
1 rational offer groups 
     we define a rational offer group in a way analogous to how we defined a rational move above. we denote by  the set of rational offer groups for agent % in game p  and characterize a rational offer group by the following constraint on 
in other words  if for some move mx every possible payoff resulting from offer group pt is less than every possible payoff resulting from offer group 1   then pi is not a rational offer group. 
     there is one more constraint on members of r1 p i : rational offer groups specify  through the function p  a continuous range of payoffs that are acceptable to an agent. intuitively  a rational offer group must reflect the notion of  monotonic satisfaction - -if a rational agent is satisfied with a particular payoff  he will be satisfied with one of equal or greater value  this is a fundamental meaning of  utility  . formally  we write 
 1  
for all 	for a particular 
game and player  a rational offer group can thus be unambiguously specified by any of its members with the lowest payoft. 
     in general  there may be more than one rational offer group for an agent in a game. if full information were available to an agent about the offers others were going to make  along with their  backup moves    it would be trivial to determine  in practice such information is not available  but a rational agent i may be able to discover some rational olfer group  i.e.  some offer group provably in r1 p i . 
1 rational moves and offer groups for a set of players 
     we also wish to define the rational moves and the rational offer groups available to a set of players. for 
we denote by the rational moves for the group s in the game p. it follows that the members of arc elements of ms. we assume that 

	j. rosenschein and m. genesereth 	1 
this states that no rational move for a set can require irrationality on the part of a subset. an obvious consequence of this assumption is that 

a move that is rational for a group of players is thus rational for each player in the group. 
     similarly  we denote by  the set of rational deals for s in the game p  that is  the members of. are sets of elements from  it is the  crossproductintersection  of rational offer groups for the individual agents: 

1 rationality assumptions 
     the value of pay i m  y i   will depend  of course  on the values of allowedm i  mt  and allowcd1 i  yt   i.e.  the moves and the deals that other agents can make . in order to constrain the value of pay  we now define each of the allowed functions  allowedm is defined as in  . 
1. m i n i m a l move rationality: allowedm i mt  = mi each player assumes that the others may be moving randomly. 
1. separate move rationality: 
each player assumes the 
   others arc moving rationally. 1. unique move rationality: 

and  alloedm  i  m t  1= 1. each player assumes that the others* moves are fixed in advance. this may be combined with separate rationality. 
     the assumptions above do not fully specify what is or is not a rational move. rather  they help constrain the set of rational moves by allowing us to prove that certain moves are not rational. we* now define analogous assumptions regarding deals other agents might be making: 
1. minimal deal rationality:  denotes the 
power set of mp. each player assumes that the others may be making random deals. 
1. separate deal rationality: 
 each player assumes that 
the others are making rational deals. 
1. unique deal rationality: for all and the others' offers arc fixed in advance. this may be combined with separate deal rationality. 

1 	j. rosenschein and m. genesereth 
     we refer to the combination of separate and unique move rationality as individual move rationality  and to the combination of separate and unique deal rationality as individual deal rationality. as in   any move that can be proven irrational under the assumption of minimal move rationality will be similarly irrational under the other move rationality assumptions. analogously  any offer group that can be proven irrational under the assumption of minimal deal rationality will be irrational under the other deal rationality assumptions. 
뫫1. rational deal characteristics 
     with our notational conventions defined  we can now prove several characteristics of  henceforth use 
s to denote any move that gives agent i his highest payoff. 
theorem 1  existence of a non-null rational offer group . 
proof. if were empty then i would do best by making no offers and relying on his move to generate his payoff. but pay will be greater than or equal to pay for all mt  since will either be matched by other agents  increasing i's payoff  or will not be matched  and will therefore be harmless since it doesn't affect other's moves . thus the offer group  would also be in guaranteeing it to have at least one non-null member. 
     it follows directly from the definition of a rational offer group  1  that all non-empty members of i's set of rational offer groups include  together with theorem 1  this implies that it is always rational for an agent to include in his offer group the move that gives him his highest payoff. 
     in addition  an agent can often restrict his offers to those whose payoffs arc higher than that which he can get by making the null offer  relying on his move to give him this payoft. 
theorem 1  lower bound . assuming unique deal rationality  if for any move m  and joint move 


     note that theorem 1 will not hold for s  i.e.  the joint move that gives i his highest payoff  since that would contradict theorem 1  theorem 1's proof makes implicit use of the fact that  in its construction of the dominating offer group ot . note also that theorem 1 will not hold under minimal deal rationality. imagine that a perverse opponent chooses his ofter group as follows: 
모1. if you include in your offer group deals with low payoff 
 for you   he will accept the deal with your best payoft; 
모1. if you don't offer that low deal he will accept no deals and you will have to rely on your move to get a payoff. under these circumstances  fully consistent with minimal deal rationality   it might be to your advantage to offer a low-payoff deal   since that might be the only way to get your maximal payoff. 
1 restricted case analysis 
     the consequences of theorem 1 will differ  of course  based on assumptions about allowedrri since these will affect pay  for any given mt. consider the following payoff matrix: 

     it is shown in  that  assuming minimal move rationality  potentially random or even malevolent moves by other agents   the row agent can still use  restricted case analysis  to constrain his move to b. if unique deal rationality can be assumed then the offer group consisting solely of move b c  i.e.  bottom left corner  is guaranteed by theorems 1 and 1 to be a rational offer group. of course  there may be other rational offer groups  for example the offer {b d b c}  depending on what deals the other player can offer. 
wc formalize part of the above discussion: 
corollary 1  restricted case analysis . assuming minimal move rationality and unique deal rationality  if for some xi and yt  for all xi and yi  

then there exists an  such that no 
proof. follows from lemma 1 in  and theorem 1. 	뫳 
1 case analysis and iterated case analysis 
     there are restrictions on rational offer groups analogous to corollary 1 that apply for case analysis and iterated case analysis under the assumptions of unique and individual move rationality  respectively. the case analysis situation is represented in the following payoff matrix  seen from the row player's perspective: 

     the row player need only assume that the column player's move will not be affected by its own move  i.e.  unique move rationality  to realize that making move a is in all circumstances superior to making move 1. as long as unique deal rationality can also be assumed  there is a guaranteed rational offer group consisting only of move a c. 
corollary 1  case analysis . assuming unique move rationality and unique deal rationality  if  or some xi and yt  or all 

then there exists an  such that no 
proof. follows from lemma 1 in  and theorem 1. 	a 
     similarly  if the column player can assume that the row player is rational and making moves independent of the column player's moves  i.e.  individual move rationality   then he can prove that move d is optimal in the above matrix  since the row player will play a . with unique deal rationality  he has a guaranteed rational offer group of {a d b  c}  the offer group {b c} is also rational . 
     the effect of theorems 1 and 1 is to show us that there is always a rational offer group that includes an agent's highest payoff outcome  and includes no outcomes below or equal to what he could achieve without deals. below  we consider other constraints on an agent's rational offer groups. 
 the group rationality theorem 
     the work in  and  was concerned with the formalization of cooperative behavior  given certain constraints about the agents participating in an interaction. using our notation  a desirable general result would have been 

	j. rosenschein and m. genesereth 	1 
that is  if any joint move for all players is dominated by any other  then the dominated joint move is not rational for them. this result could not be proven  and the inability to do so stemmed directly from the lack of communication inherent in the model. without at least minimal communication  e.g.  sell-identification   there is no way to coordinate on a universally perceived best move when several such moves exist. 
     we are now able to derive an important result about ro p  p  very similar to the elusive non-communication result in  1 . 
theorem 1  group offers . 	assuming individual deal 
rationality  

proof. there are two possible cases: 

     because of theorem 1  a rational agent interacting with other rational agents knows that he need not offer a move that is dominated for all players-doing so cannot increase his payoff. if the other rational agents also know that all agents arc rational  they too will realize that they can refrain from offering a move that is dominated for all players. higher levels of knowledge   such as their knowing that all agents know that all agents arc rational  are not needed. in addition  because of the definition of rational offer groups  1   the agents can refrain from offering any moves with smaller payoffs  since those groups would necessarily include the dominated move. 
뫫1. examples 
     we will now examine the consequences of our rational offer theorems in several additional types of games. 
1 best plan 
the best plan scenario is reflected in the following 
1 	j. rosenschein and m. genesereth 
matrix: 
c d a 1 1 b 1 1 all agents recognize that there is a single best move; how will their offer groups reflect this  from theorem 1  a rational agent knows that he can safely offer the move that gives him his best payoff  i.e.  move a c   even assuming minimal deal rationality on the part of other players  though the theorem is noncommittal as to whether other moves can or should be included with it . all players can also rule out move a d using theorem 1 if unique deal rationality holds  since a d yields the lowest payoff . if there is an assumption of individual deal rationality  theorem 1 can guarantee each agent that the offer group consisting solely of a c is rational. communication thus allows coordination on the best plan under more intuitive assumptions about the interaction than those used in . 
1 breaking symmetries-multiple best plan 
     our rational offer group theorems allow us to solve the  multiple best plans  case that could not be solved in . the following matrix illustrates the scenario: 
c d a -1 . 1 b 1 -1 j assuming minimal deal rationality  an agent can rationally offer b c and a d. in addition  assuming unique deal rationality an agent knows that he can rationally not offer a c and b d  since they arc lowest yield moves . this analysis can be done by both agents if they are rational and operating under the unique deal assumption. their offer sets will overlap on the multiple best outcomes; selection of a single alternative from the multiple agreements then occurs. 
1 prisoner's dilemma 
     the prisoner's dilemma is represented by the following matrix  we choose different names for our moves so as to conform to the literature : 
c d c 1 1 d 1 1 each agent most desires to play d while the opponent plays c  then to play c along with the opponent  then to play d along with the opponent  and least of all to play c while the opponent plays d. the dilemma comes about because case analysis implies that it is always better to play d; both players choosing d  however  is less desirable for both than if they had chosen c. the dilemma has received much attention within the philosophy and game theory literature  1  1  1  1 . in the usual presentation of the prisoner's dilemma  playing c is called  cooperating   and playing d is called  defecting.  with the presence of binding promises  in fact  there is no dilemma: 
corollary 1  prisoner's dilemma . if all players know that all players are operating under the assumption of individual deal rationality  agents will cooperate in the prisoner's dilemma. 
proof. the first player knows that it is rational to offer d c  since it is rational even under minimal rationality  theorem 1 ; he also knows it is irrational to offer c d  from theorem 1  since individual deal rationality includes unique deal rationality . by theorem 1  there is a rational offer group without d d. now he knows that the other agent will not offer d c  since the other agent is assumed rational and operating under the assumption of unique deal rationality  theorem 1 . since d c will certainly not be met  pay  i d  {d c}  pay i d {d c c c} . thus  the offer group {d c c c} is rational. the second agent will  if rational and working under the same assumptions  come to the same conclusion. the deal c c will be struck  and the agents avoid the d d trap. 
뫫1. extending the model 
     for certain types of interactions  the model presented above  i.e.  the various assumptions and theorems about rational moves and deals  does not specify rational activity in sufficient detail. we can extend the model in a variety of ways to handle these cases  and at the same time capture a wider range of assumptions about the interaction. in this section  we briefly present some of the extensions that might be made to our original model. 
1 similar bargainers 
     consider the following payoff matrix  equivalent to game 1 in rapoport and guyer's lixonomy   
c d a 1 1 b 1 1      assuming separate deal rationality  the first player can assume that b c should be in a rational offer group of his  and that b d should not be. what else can be said about what constitutes a rational offer group in this game  there arc three choices  namely {b c}  {a c b c}  and {a d a c b c}. in order to decide among the choices  

we would like to make more assumptions about the  bargaining tendencies  of the other agent  since  in fact  some agents might be tougher deal-makers than others . we will ignore what value the agents might place on making a particular move in the absence of a deal  since the payoff is underdctermined. 
     let us define two offer groups ot and 1 to be similar if and only if they both have the same lower boundary for what deals are included or not included. it is true that similar 
for some number n. if we use the similar bargainers definition  wc implicitly assume some meaningful measure for comparing inter-personal utility. 
   one assumption to use in deciding upon rational offer groups is now that the other agent will accept deals that you would accept; that is  where similar 
     under this assumption  we can decide what deal is rational in the above game. player 1 reasons that if he offers 
{b c}  player 1  who is a similar bargainer  will offer only {b d}. there will be no match. in the same way  if it would be rational for player 1 to offer {a c  b c} then player 1 will offer {a c b d}  with an agreement on a c and a payoff of {1} for both. if player 1 offers {a d a c b c} then player 1 will offer {a d a c 1 ci} and there will be agreement on a d and on a c  with a payoff of {1} for both. since {1} dominates {1}  agents who assume common knowledge  of the similar bargainer assumption should choose the rational offer group that yields agreement on a c. 
1 stochastic model-the game of chicken 
     note  however  the following payoff matrix  commonly known as the game of chicken  : 

     two agents  even if they assume individual deal rationality and the similar bargainers assumption  will be faced with the following choices: a payoff of {1} or a payoff of {1 1}. according to our definitions  neither of these sets dominates the other. 
     if  however  we extend the model to include a probabilistic choice from within the agreement set  it is clear that the latter agreement set dominates the former  with an expected value of 1 versus 1 . a further stochastic extension to our model would allow moves themselves to be specified probabilistically  e.g.  a with probability .1  and b with probability .1 . in the game theory literature  
	j. rosenscheln and m. genesereth 	1 
this is the distinction between pure strategics and mixed strategics . an analysis of this model is beyond the scope of the present discussion. 
1 conjunctive offers-battle of the sexes 
     in the game of chicken example presented above  there was an added complexity that was temporarily ignored: the possibility of  defection.  if one agent reasons that the other agent will accept all payoffs above 1  it is to the first agent's benefit to only offer moves of payoff 1  this is analogous to the prisoner's dilemma  with the same potential that both players will use identical reasoning and no agreement will be reached . a similar problem can be seen in the so-called battle of the sexes matrix  seen below. 

     one approach to solving this problem is to allow  composite  offers  for example  an offer consisting of a conjunct of several moves  the conjunct must be matched exactly in order for a deal to occur . thus  the offer consisting of  can consistently be made by both agents without the potential of defection  and with an expected utility of 1 for each . this notion can be extended to general logical offers consisting of disjuncts  conjuncts and negations of joint moves. the battle of the sexes can thus be uniquely solved with the assumption of similarity in bargaining  if conjunctive offers are allowed. 
뫫1. previous work 
     the subject of interacting rational agents has been addressed within the field of artificial intelligence as well as in the discipline of game theory. here we will briefly review relevant contributions from these two areas  and contrast our present approach with previous efforts. 
1 work in artificial intelligence 
     as mentioned above  researchers in distributed artificial intelligence have begun to address the issues arising in multi-agent interactions. lesser and corkill  have performed empirical studies to determine cooperation strategies with positive characteristics  such as  for example  what types of data should be shared among distributed processors . they are solely concerned with groups of agents who share a common goal  but have acknowledged the benefit even under this assumption of having agents demonstrate  skepticism   i.e.  not being distracted by others' information . 
     georgcff  1  has developed a formal model to combine separate plans of independent agents. the primary 

1 j. rosenschein and m. genesereth concern is to avoid destructive interference caused by simultaneous access to a shared resource. the model used assumes that the agents have separate goals  but that these goals do not directly oppose one another. cooperative action is neither required nor exploited  except insofar as it allows agents to keep out of each other's way. 
     other notable efforts include smith's work on the contract net   malone's work extending the contract net model using economic theory   and the theoretical work on knowledge and belief of carried out by appelt  moore  konolige  halpern and moses  1  1  1  1  1  1  1 . 
     the current work extends these previous models of interaction by allowing a fuller range of goal disagreements among agents. by using a framework that captures total and partial goal conflicts  it allows investigation into compromise  promises and cooperative action. 
     this paper considers the communication scenario in ways similar to the manner in which previous work  1  1  investigated cooperation among rational agents when no communication occurs. below we briefly note the advantages that were gained when communication and promises were added to the interaction model. 
     the best plan interaction was handled in our framework by assuming individual deal rationality. because in the no-communication case this scenario could not be solved using individual move rationality  other assumptions were introduced: informed rationality in  and common rationality in . informed rationality constrained 
allowcdm in a way that assumed each player would respond in a rational way to the others' moves  whatever they might be. 
     it should be noted in passing that an assumption of common knowledge of rationality will also allow for a solution to the best plan case  though this has not previously been pursued in the literature. 
     to solve the prisoner's dilemma  even more assumptions had to be introduced. the interested reader is referred to |1  and  for full details; see also . 
     even using a variety of assumptions  previous work could not handle the multiple best plan case  where there arc several outcomes all equally recognized as best by all players. to break the symmetry  some communication is needed  though this communication can be as simple as self-identification and reliance on a common rule  e.g.  agent with lowest name performs lowest ordered action . 
1 game theory 
     game theory has focused on a variety of interactions  and sought to characterize the types of actions that rational agents will take in each. many of the same questions that come up in our work have been addressed by game theoreticians. their approach  however  has left some important issues unexamined. consider the following quote from the classic game theory text  : 
though it is not apparent from some writings  the term  rational  is far from precise  and it certainly means different things in the different theories that have been developed. loosely  it seems to include any assumption one makes about the players maximizing something  and any about complete knowledge on the part of the player in a very complex situation...  games and decisions  p. 1  
     as another example  consider the following best plan interaction: 

it was demonstrated above that the best plan case can only be solved under particular definitions of rationality. rapoport and guyer  however  writing in   put forward the following assumption regarding agents' behavior  citing the similarity with  : 
{a1 . if a game has a single pareto equilibrium  the players will choose the strategy which contains it... 
our assumption  a1  says that a1 is the natural outcome  which  of course  is dictated by common sense... we shall refer to this as a prominent 
solution.  a taxonomy of 1 x 1 games  
     in short  game theory has sometimes been willing to take for granted certain types of behavior without carefully formalizing its definitions of rationality  or its assumptions of inter-agent knowledge. 
     these questions are particularly important in the field of artificial intelligence. we arc not interested in characterizing game matrices: we want to characterize agent rationality and explore the consequences of various assumptions. the goal is to be able to implement intelligent agents whose strategies of behavior will be provably rational. 
뫫1. conclusion 
     intelligent agents will inevitably need to interact flexibly in real world domains. previous work has not modeled the full range and complexity of agents' varied goals. the benevolent agent assumption  which assumes that agents have identical or non-conflicting goals  has permeated previous approaches to distributed ai. 
     this paper has presented a framework for interaction that explicitly accounts for communication and promises  and allows multiple goals among agents. the model provides a unified solution to a wide range of problems  including the types of interactions discussed in  and   
through the use of communication and binding promises  agents are able to coordinate their actions more effectively  and handle interactions that were previously problematical. by extending the communication model even further  a wider variety of interactions can be handled. 
acknowledgement 
모모the authors wish to thank matt ginsberg  who has played an invaluable role in the development of our ideas on cooperation among rational agents. 
