 

we describe an integrated programming environment for develop ing knowledge-based systems. the environment contains a variety of general-purpose tools: a rule interpretation system  a semantic integrity manager  a task representation system and a file manager. although the tools have different origins  e g . rule 
based systems  database management  process control   an obiect-oriented foundation lends modularity and consistency to the tool kit. 
this paper describes a rule interpretation system  a semantic integrity manager  a task representation system  and a file manager for storing and retrieving objects these tools implement the inter pretation of the declarative representations for the entities they manage rules integrity constraints  tasks  files the salient fea tures of strobe needed for the presentation of the tools are intro 
duced in the next section each tool is then described first through examples of the declarations it supports - drawn primarily from crystal - and then by showing the obiects that implement it 

i. introduction 
by now the value of powerful tool kits for developing knowledge based systems is well-understood. such tools act as substrates - computational bases that allow system builders to concentrate on the problems of acquiring and formalizing domain knowledge. in this paper we discuss a number of specific tools that we have found to be useful. we also argue for the utility of an object-oriented foundation that ties the individual tools together in a coherent fashion 
the foundation for our tool kit is an object-oriented knowledge representation system called strobe  1. 1 . it has been used in a variety of applications  most recently in crystal   a system that supports interactive manual and automatic interpretation of well logs   i e   measurements made in boreholes  this system was developed for two main classes of users  end users  / e log interpreters  doing interactive well log interpretation  and inter pretation program developers. it combines graphic display and manipulation of logs with graphic editors and menus it controls distributed execution of interpretation programs either on the xerox workstations or on ethernet connected vaxes these programs have been written from a variety of computational perspectives  e.g.. statistical  pattern recognition  symbolic  and in a variety of programming languages. strobe and crystal provide the glue that binds these heterogeneous components together. 
the crystal knowledge bases incorporate a number of subsystems that are neither specific to the crystal application nor to well-log interpretation. these subsystems are the tools of a modular  general-purpose knowledge-management tool kit that can be used to extend strobe. each tool is incorporated into a basic strobe knowledge base by adding slots to one of the initial domainindependent objects  or by adding one or a few objects. each tool is modular in that it doesn't require modifying slots or functions defined by other tools. 
ii. strobe 
a strobe knowledge base is a collection of objects of two types classes which can be specialized  and individuals which cannot obiects are organized into taxonomic hierarchies  which may be tangled  along which properties are inherited  alternative in heritance paths are also supported  
a strobe obiect has properties called slots  and a slot has properties called facets both slots and facets may be inherited some facets namely. value and datatype  are system-defined and exist for all slots  others are user defined message-passing and event-oriented computation are supported. 
strobe supports multiple knowledge bases in the same address space also  messages can be sent to objects in any knowledge base  even if that knowledge base is on another machine con nected by ethernet.  indeed  any strobe operation can be per formed across the network.  to further support distribution and computational heterogeneity  strobe had been implemented in a variety of languages' interlisp-d on xerox workstations. mainsail. commonlisp and c on vaxes. this paper concentrates on the interlisp-d version. 
interlisp-d strobe has a display-oriented editor called impulse . 
this editor is itself built as a collection of strobe objects. as a 
result  it can be specialized to suit the needs of strobe applications  based on the types of declarations supported by the tools discussed here. an example of such a specialization is presented in . 
a. user-defined datatypes 
a datatype in strobe is itself implemented as an object. datatyping provides another form of inheritance in that a slot may inherit some of its facets  typically operations  from its datatype. more precisely  receivers for messages sent to facets may be inherited 
from slots in the datatype object. such slots are characterized by the fact that their name starts with the atom  datum  . for in stance  a message sent to the put facet of a slot is forwarded to the datum-put slot of the object implementing the datatype of the slot if no receiver can be found through standard taxonomic in hentance. 
b. user-defined facets 
user-defined facets are useful for metadata encoding. they have been used extensively in crystal to support communication be tween knowledge bases by agreeing on the meaning of a rela tively small number of facets  knowledge bases can interpret each other's objects and slots without detailed knowledge of each other's domain of application  e g . object and slot names . for example  a part of an entity may be identified based on a role facet set to part rather than on the name of the part each of our tools defines some facets and incorporates an interpreter for them 
c. initial objects 
a strobe knowledge base starts with a few general objects which are organized in the generalization hierarchy shown in figure ii 1. datatype is the ancestor of all datatype objects. initially  it comes with a few slots that contain functions for implementing basic operations such as putting a value into a slot  getting  printing or editing a slot value the message handlers for some of these slots  eg  datum-edit or daium pr int.  are defined in the descendants of daiatypl: bitmap. text  lisp  for interlisp d functions and lambda expressions . expr  for arbitrary s expressions  and object  for slots whose value points to strobe objects  

figure ii-1: initial strobe knowledge base objects1 
iii. rule interpretation 
the rule interpreter  included in our tool kit applies rules in a forward-chained manner. the rule syntax supports a number of types of match variable instantiation in the left-hand side in addition  the system provides support for user extensions to the syntax. a form of rule compilation can be used to generate code and speed up rule application. rules can be grouped into ruiesets and control structures defined for attempting and firing rules associated with ruiesets. uncertainty is currently handled according to the emycin model  1 . there is also a simple mechanism for generating natural language rule translations finally  and most 
   figures showing objects are to be read as follows general information about the obiect  such as its synonyms  whether it is a class or an individual  its immediate generalizations  is shown first. slots are then shown indented with respect to the object information  and when shown  the facets of a slot are indented with respect to the slot name. the value  if any  is printed following the slot name. names in curly brackets are synonyms for the slot with which they are associated. 
	g. lafue and r. smith 	1 
important  rules written for this system can access domain knowledge encoded as strobe objects.1 
a. declarations for rule interpretation 
each rule in the system is itself a strobe object - an instance of the class rule figure iii 1 shows a sample rule  taken in concept from the dipmeter advisor system   

figure 1: late fault rule 
clauses may refer to strobe objects  e.g.  via the the function  in 
figure 1  which accesses a slot of an object  as well as other lisp data structures. they may also bind variables that can be accessed during the matching and execution of the rule. we have defined an initial rule language of approximately 1 left-hand-side predicates and 1 right-hand-side actions. the rule language may be augmented as desired by end-users by defining interlisp func tions  and translation templates  if desired  
to match norma ifau h1 against the database  the rule interpreter attempts to find a normal fault zone and a zone charac terized by a signal pattern known as a red pattern  such that the two zones together satisfy the predicates associated with condition1. the rule interpreter attempts to match the rule by sequentially instantiating the match variables. as each match variable is instantiated  the truth value of the clause is tested. if true. then the instantiation process continues  but if false  then the process backtracks to the last variable instantiated that has un tried values in its domain and reinstantiates it to its next value.1 
     1the ability to integrate rules and structured objects as well as the ability to extend the rule syntax in a flexible way are not easily managed in existing rule interpreters  like ops1 we have opted for the flexibility end of the flexibility/speed spectrum 
mark of schlumberger 
1 
   note that there may be several zone pairs for which the conditions are satisfied. to find them all  some form of iteration is required this is performed automatically  as desired  by the rule interpreter. 

1 	g. lafue and r. smith 
there are several forms of quantified-condition clauses. in the standard case  the domain of a match variable is the set of in stances of a specified class  as in figure iii-1 . alternatively  it can be the set of instances of a class and of all its subclasses other possibilities can be defined by the user another type of quantified-condition clause that we have found useful is illustrated by the rule in figure iii-1 this rule expresses the fact that a tidal flat is characterized by a number of signal patterns known as blue patterns  that have alternating azimuth. we do not know a prion how many such patterns there will be - their number depends on the thickness of the flat. set quantification in a single rule appears to provide a useful match to the way that variable thickness units are conceptualized and detected by our domain specialists 
rules are grouped into rulesets a ruleset defines the control structure to attempt and fire the rules it contains it can eliminate the need for clauses often found in flat rule systems that are aimed at setting the context for rule application. figure iii 1 shows a ruleset used for stratigraphic interpretation of dipmeter data 
the simplest ruleset contains a single list of rules called normal -rules. these rules are attempted one at a time accord ing to their order in the list. each time a rule fires  the content of the control-strategy slot determines whether scanning is to continue with the next rule  continueafterfiring  or is to begin again with the first rule  restartafterfinng  1 this iteration continues until no rules can be successfully fired  this default termination condition can be overridden in particular rulesets.  
a ruleset can also contain the following lists of rules fire-once-rules can only be fired once for each invocation of the ruleset. they can be used to initialize the execution of a ruleset. fire-always-rules are attempted on each iteration regardless of the control strategy. they can be used to respond to the firing of other rules  e g . to update dependent relationships . unlike normal-rules and fire-once-rules  fire-alwaysrules can be fired more than once with the same match variable bindings within a single ruleset invocation. 
to assist in explanation and debugging  the execution history of each ruleset invocation is recorded as an instance of the ruleset class. it retains information such as the rules that were attempted and fired  together with their match variable bindings and the objects created or modified as a result of their firing . 
b. rule interpretation subsystem 
the rule interpreter is implemented via the rule object and the ru leset object  figure iii 1   not all of their slots are shown   
an additional feature has proved quite useful for hypothesis test ing. in applying a ruleset  or a rule   the caller is allowed to pass in a set of bindings. these bindings are analogous to lambda bindings and allow ruleset invocation to be considered as a form of function invocation. match variable bindings may be included in 
this list  in which case  the rule interpreter tries to fill in the remaining instantiations. 
　　the restartafterfiring option is useful when the actions of an individual rule could interact with the conditions of other rules it is often used in combina tion with a rule ordering that places the most specific rules before the most general rules. the cont inueaf t e r f i r i n g option is useful when individual rule actions are independent or additive  it is the default strategy.  

object: deep-marlne -rui esei type: individual 
generalizations- ruleset 
normal-rules: marinf-1 marine -1 i mar inf - 1 marine-1 
                   marine 1 marine -1 control-strategy- restartafterf if mq 
figure 1: deep marine ruleset 
object: rule type:ciass 
generalizations root 
if 
then. 
ruleset 
	translate: 	translate 
translation 
apply: applyrule 
match: matchruie rule object. ruleset type-class 
generalizations: root normal rules: 
fire-once rules. 
fire-always-rules: 
control strategy: termination-condition knowledge base: 
	apply 	applyruleset matchali. matchruleal l 
execute. executerule figure 1: rule interpretation objects 
iv. semantic integrity management 
the integrity management system allows the user to define constraints on slots of objects  and to define actions to be taken in case of constraint violation or satisfaction  with appropriate defaults . the system analyzes the constraints and derives the information it needs to check them at run time  i.e.  the constraint variables and the operations that require checking . currently  our constraint language is a combination of interllsp-d and strobe. 
	g. lafue and r. smith 	1 
a. declarations for integrity management we distinguish several types of integrity constraints. a single-slot constraint involves a single-slot. a datatype constraint applies to all slots having a particular datatype. a multi-slot constraint involves several slots  in one or several objects. since slots can be set-valued  constraints are divided into element constraints  that apply to the elements of a slot value  and set constraints  that apply to a slot value as a set . 
two alternatives for encoding a constraint are supported. 1  as slots of an obiect and  n  as facets of a slot in this section  we discuss constraints encoded as objects for a presentation of slot encoding  and criteria for choosing between the two alternatives  see  and  1  
figure iv 1 shows the object that defines a well location in terms of a town  county  state  country and continent. the continent slot is subject to a  single-slot  constraint that its value must belong to the set of names enumerated in the candidates facet the constraint is implemented in the cont inentconstraint obiect  figure iv 1  whose condition slot encodes the constraint definition and correction slot the correction of violations  here  simply an error message  
object. weiilocat ion type class 
generalizations object 
well 
town { township } 
	coun 	{county parish} 
	stat 	 state province} 
	nati 	{nation country} 
	cont 	{continent} 
datatype. ixpr 
candidates-  europe north-america south-america asia africa 
austraiia  
putelementconditions. continentconstraint addelementconditions: continentconstraint 
figure iv-1: the welllocation obiect 
object 	continentconstraint 
type: class 
generalizations: 	singleslolconslraint 
condition.  member value candidates  
correction:  error value  is not one of   candidates  
	setorelementconstraint. 	eiement 
constrainedobject. well location 
constrainedslot: continent facets: candidates 
figure iv-1: single-slot constraint on continent 
figure iv-1 shows the measurement datatype object and one of its constraints: the internalunitsconstra int  implemented in the object shown in figure iv-1. the constraint states that if slots whose datatype is a measurement specify the units for their values-their internal units-the values they are assigned 
must be in those units. the correction slot contains the code to make the conversion if necessary. 
object: measurement 
synonyms: dimensionedquantity type: class 
generalizations: datatype unitsconversion: 
internalunitsconstraint: internalun itsconstraint datatype: datatypeconstraint 
putelementconditions. internalun itsconstraint addelementconditions: interna lunitsconstra int 
figure iv-1: the measurement object 

figu re iv-1: datatype constraint for internal units 
figure iv-1 shows the condition slot of an object that implements a multi-slot constraint involving several objects the constraint is between different regions  or components  of a geological fault  referred to as the upper and lower distortion regions  or blocks  and the breccia region  the zone between the blocks characterized by crushed rocks  it states that the upper distortion region of a fault is above its breccia region which  in turn  is above its lower distortion region. it assumes that there exist  i  fault objects with upperdistortionregion  lowerdistortion region and brecciaregion slots  and  n  distortionreg ion and brecc laregion objects with faul t  top and bottom slots. 

figure iv-1: multi-slot constraint between fault regions 
the user fills the condition slot and optionally  the correction and action slots  the latter states a side effect of constraint satisfaction . these slots can contain function names  lambda expressions or s-expressions. they can reference slots and facets as 
free variables rather than by using strobe access functions. in single-slot and datatype constraints  value refers to the current slot value. in multi-slot constraints involving several objects  the the function references slots in relation to their objects. 
the checking declarations generated and used by the system basically consist of identifiers of the constraint variables to allow d  insertion of triggers from the variables to the constraints at analysis time and  n  efficient binding of the variables at run time. 
a single-slot constraint object has a constramedqbject slot and a 
constrainedslot slot. a datatype constraint object has a datatypeobject slot and a constraintslot slot. since these constraints can involve facets other than value  e.g.. internalunits in internalunitsconstraint  such facets are declared in a facets slot. a slots slot in a datatype constraint declares the slots of the datatype object involved in the constraint  and in a multi-slot constraint  it declares the constrained slots together with their respective objects. 
a trigger associated with a slot is implemented by a facet that points to single or multi-slot constraints. the facet name indicates 1 	g. lafue and r. smith 
the operations on the slot that require checking {put  add  remove 1. it also indicates whether the constraints are set or ele ment constraints this allows the user to reset the order in which constraints are checked  e g element constraints before set constraints  and the system to efficiently order the constraints to check at run time for example  the putelementconditions facet of the continent slot  figure iv-1  indicates that continentconstramt must be checked when a value is put in the slot. 
a trigger associated with a datatype object is a slot that points to the constraints for the datatype. its name encodes the same information as trigger facets the addelementconditions slot of measurement shows that internalunitsconstramt must be checked when a value is added to a slot whose datatype is some measurement. 
b. integrity management subsystem 
the integrity management system consists of slots added to the datatype obiect  figure iv-1  and of constraint obiects. the constraint objects are organized in a taxonomic hierarchy. the constraint object is shown in figure iv-1. 
the datumput  datum add. and datum-remove slots of datatype contain the operations for which integrity may be checked. these operations are also declared in the operationswithlntegnty slot of constraint defauitoperations declares the default operations for which integrity is checked 

figure iv-1: datatype obiect for integrity management 

figu re iv- 1: the constraint object 
the datum-analyzeconstramts slot of datatype and the analyze slot of constraint provide alternative ways of analyzing constraints. the former is a message handler for analyzing constraints encoded in slots. the latter is a message handler for analyzing constraint objects. for example  an analyzeconstramts message sent to the putelementconditions slot of 
measurement results in filling the datatypeobiect  constramtslot and facets slots of  an analyze message to the interna lunitsconstra int object results in filling the same slots as well as the putelementconditions and addeiementconditions slots of measurement. 
the verify slot in constraint verifies whether a hypothetical value for a slot violates the constraints that apply to the slot. instead of executing the corrections associated with the violated constraints  it returns an association list of the names of those constraints and the bindings of their variables. the constraintcheckingorder slot declares the default order in which constraints are checked and can be reset in any datatype. 
v. task representation 
declarative task representation has been successfully used to capture component function and structure in a number of domains1 hardware design  fault detection  well-log interpretation our motivation for task declaration is to provide a structure within which  1  a knowledge-based system can reason about tasks   n  a unified mechanism can control task execution  and  iii code writ ten from a variety of computational perspectives and in a variety of programming languages can be integrated an example is described in . it shows how the crystal knowledge base responsible for the user interface interprets information about tasks to guide the user through their execution and how it prompts him for the necessary input to date  we have concentrated on 
task/subtask relationships  data description and control flow 
a. declarations for task representation 
in our formalism  task declarations are made in subclasses of the 
module object. the execution history of a task is recorded as an instance of its class  analogous to ruleset invocation  figure v 1 shows some of the slots of a task called eigen which represents a principal component analysis on the logs identified in the activelogs slot for the well identified in well from topdepth to 
bottomdepth. among the outputs are principal component logs  represented by the pclogs slot 
a task can be a substask of another task  which is called its abstraction. it points to that abstraction via a slot whose role facet is set to abstraction for example  the faciolog slot of an eigen instance points to an instance of a module  called facio log  - a program that finds zones of similar log responses in a well  and whose first subtask is the principal component analysis carried out by elqen conversely  a task points to its subtasks via slots whose role facet is set to expansion. slots representing expansions also have an order facet that indicates the relative  partial  order in which each expansion is normally to be executed.  e i gen has no expansions.  
the slots representing input and output parameters of a task are denoted by a role facet set to port and a direction facet set to in  out or  in out . these slots also have an order facet that indicates to the system the relative  partial  order in which each input parameter should get its value. the origin facet identifies where the value for the slot can be obtained. it may  i  identify the user  which in crystal causes the user interface knowledge base to 

take charge ;  ii  specify a slot of another object; or  hi  indicate 
   currently  the identification of the operations that may cause a constraint violation is based on heuristic  rather than formal  analysis  and can be overridden by the user mark of schlumberger 
that the task will compute the value itself the default facet contains an s-expression that evaluates to a default value  and the candidates facet evaluates to a set of possible values. these two facets are used by the user interface knowledge base in its prompting of the user  e.g.  by presenting a menu if there are 
candidate values . other facets are discussed in . 
the other facets associated with an input port are for integrity management. the act i velogs slot  for example  is subject to an 
p 
figure v-1: eigen module 
element constraint that each value be drawn from the logs associated with the well  and to a set constraint such that no more than one log can be of type gammaray. furthermore  its cardinality is limited to 1. 
b. task declaration subsystem 
the mechanism to control task execution is implemented in the 
modu 1 e object  figure v-1 .  only some slots are shown.  

figure v-1: module object 
the computation carried out by a task may execute either on the xerox workstation or on a remote machine  in a language other 
	g. lafue and r. smith 	1 
than interlisp-d. in the former case  the computation is specified in the code slot  which typically contains a function name. in the latter case  it is specified in the remoteexecutionobject slot the value of that slot points to a strobe object on the remote machine  identified in the host facet  which is responsible for calling the foreign language program that object  written in mainsail. commonlisp  or c strobe if it resides on a vax  exchanges input and output parameters with the current module obiect written in interlisp-d strobe. 
the returncontrol slot identifies where control is to be passed next  in terms of a host  knowledge base  object  slot and facet  
a task executes when its contro i slot receives a message. this slot contains the function that implements the task execution control mechanism. basically  that function  /  acquires the input parameters;  n  instantiates and executes expansions as required  if there are expansions  or else executes the task computation  and  m  passes control to the next module. dynamic alteration of control flow is supported by resetting returncontrol slots on the fly. note also that the contro 1 slot has facets to modify con trol flow  e g.  to iterate through a task or to pause for interaction before starting a task  of course  the default values for these facets defined in the module object can be overridden in its specializations 
vi. file management 
strobe manages objects in virtual memory at the end of a session  all objects in a knowledge base are generally stored on the same file. subsets of objects from a knowledge base may also be loaded and stored. the file management tool extends this basic capability in that  i  it allows more generality in specifying the subsets of objects  by description as well as by name   and  n  it keeps track of the files on which such collections are stored. our goal is to provide dbms like facilities to cope with increasing numbers of objects as knowledge bases scale up. 
a. declarations for file management 
the filing mechanism is implemented via file indexes. a file index is defined as a conjunction of slot names. it maps values of that conjunction into file names. for example  a file index may be defined by the conjunction  well creat i ondate  and an index value may be  wella 1-oct-1 . the object implementing that file index associates  wella 1-oct-1  with the name of one or several files that contain objects whose we 1 slot value is wella and whose creat iondate slot value is 1ct-1. 
figure vi-1 shows a file index whose conjunction  defined in the index slot  is  well creat iondate . the slots indexvaluel. indexvalue1 and indexvalue1 represent index entries  i.e.  tuples of the mapping between index values and file names. the value facet of such a slot is an index value  e.g.   wella 
1ct-1   and its files facet points to the files that contain objects corresponding to its value1. slots implementing index entries are created and managed automatically by the system and are of no more concern to the user than the implementation of 
　　an index value may point to several tiles because it is our policy to avoid duplication of objects on several files as a result  an object corresponding to two index values  for two different indexes  is stored in only one of the two corresponding files  and that file must be pointed to by the other index value. 

1 	g. lafue and r. smith 
b trees in a dbms. the user need only be concerned with loading and storing objects  not with the system's implementation of those operations 

b. file management subsystem 
the file management subsystem 	is implemented 	in the 
f ileeindex object  figure vi 1  its specializations are individual user defined obiects representing file indexes such as well index address specifies the host  device  and directory where the files are actually found. loadobjects contains a func tion that takes an index value as argument and loads the objects corresponding to that index value similarly  storeobjects stores the objects corresponding to an index value. 

vii. conclusion 
we have described the implementation of knowledge management tools for strobe knowledge bases and presented examples of the capabilities they offer. each tool is confined to a few general domain independent objects which can be added to an initial knowledge base. the addition of a new tool is modular in that it consists only of defining new objects or new slots of an existing object. figure vii-1 shows the initial taxonomic hierarchy of a knowledge base incorporating all tools described in this paper 

figure vii-1: initial objects for knowledge management tools 
implementation of the tools has been unified through an objectoriented foundation. this foundation also helps to unify access to the tools - through invocation via message. this is a simple  yet powerful concept that helps to integrate objects  rules  tasks  and procedures. 
tool kits such as ours offer a number of alternative styles of programming: rulesets  modules  constraints  and procedures. while they do help integrate these various styles  criteria for selecting among the alternatives for any given task are not always clear. for instance  a computation to be carried out as the result of an operation on a slot could be encoded as a constraint  possibly with maintenance actions   or as a ruleset  or as a module whose invocation is triggered by a demon associated with that slot. our intention  then  is to use the tool kit both as a development vehicle for knowledge based systems and as an exploration vehicle for seeking selection principles. 
acknowledgments: we gratefully acknowledge the crystal team for providing the context for this work. eric schoen built impulse  parts of the task representation system and lower level tools such as the networking and strobe vax execution environ ment. robert young made a number of valuable suggestions. 
