 
     the behavior of dempster's rule of combination in typical situations is examined. particularly  it is shown that assessing a zero value or a very small value may lead to very different results. moreover a comparison with a possibility theory-based approach in case of conflicting information is provided. the general problem of representing uncertainty with one or several numbers is addressed. lastly  the propagation of uncertainty from a fact and  if...then...  rule is discussed in the framework of belief functions. 
i - introduction 
　　　the treatment of uncertain information in knowledge engineering has encountered an increasing interest among ai researchers in the recent years. roughly speaking  there are at least two basic problems when reasoning with uncertain facts or rules ; namely the combination problem and the propagation problem. the combination problem refers to the aggregation of uncertain pieces of information issued from different sources dealing with the same matter. the propagation problem deals with the aggregation of the uncertainty concerning the satisfaction of the condition-part of a rule with the uncertainty of the rule itself in order to deduce the uncertainty pervading the conclusion of the rule. two theoretical frameworks have recently emerged for discussing these problems : the dempster-shafer theory of evidence   1   and zadeh's possibility theory ; see prade   1   for a comparative overview. in the following we examine how dempster's rule of combination behaves in typical situations and how the result given by this rule may depend on the assessment of the values of the basic assignment. then moreover this rule is associative. 
1  the case of two alternatives 
       in the following we completely investigate the case where  only contains two known alternatives  each one being regarded as opposite to the other one  i.e. this case is interesting in the scope of expert systems because it is found when general rules enable the same conclusion a to be derived with various levels of uncertainty  and as such  is often encountered in applications. in this case a basic probability assignment m is defined by the three numbers which have to satisfy 
the constraint  1 . then the degree of belief in the alternative a is given by bel a  = m a  while the plausibility of 
a is computed as  from the general formulas   1  
  1  
where the overbar denotes the set-complementation. alternative a may be regarded as probable to a degree 
which belongs to the interval while the probability of the opposite alternativeia 
lies in the interval 	the quantity 
　　corresponds to the amount of ignorance. note that in general we need two numbers  m a  and for expressing the uncertainty pertaining to alternative a. however if   the uncertainty of a is expressed by a single number  its probability ; when or when m a =1  the useful information about an alternative lies in its degree of belief or in the degree of belief attached to the opposite alternative  respectively. in that case  the plausibility function is a possibility measure in the sense of zadeh   1  . 

the propagation problem is briefly discussed in shafer's framework.comparisons are made with the possibilistic approach as well as with the treatment of uncertainty in inference systems such as mycin. the key question of the representation of the uncertainty of a fact or of a rule by more than one number is discussed throughout the whole paper. 

1 	d. dubois and h. prade 


	d. dubois and h. prade 	1 

