 
　　　in the presence of uncertainty  computation of the certainty factor of a hypothesis requires  in general  the availability of rules for combining evidence under chaining  disjunction and conjunction. the method described in this paper is based on the use of what may be viewed as a generalization of syllogistic reasoning in classical logic - - a generalization in which numerical or  more generally  fuzzy quantifiers assume the role of probabilities. for example  the proposition qa's are b's  in which q is a numerical or fuzzy quantifier  may be interpreted as  the conditional probability of b given a is q.  in this sense  the knowledge base of an expert system may be assumed to consist of propositions of the general form  qa's are b's.  
　　　it is shown that six basic syllogisms are sufficient to provide a systematic framework for the computation of certainty factors. a comparison with the rules of combination of evidence in prospector  mycin and other expert systems is presented and a connection between syllogistic reasoning and the dempster-shafer theory is established. the syllogistic method of reasoning lends itself to a computationally efficient implementation and thus provides an effective tool for the management of uncertainty in expert systems. 
i. syllogistic reasoning 
in the existing expert systems  the computation of certainty factors of hypotheses and conclusions is carried out through the use of probability-based methods  barr and feigenbaum  1 . more recently  the use of belief functions in the context of the dempster-shafer theory has attracted increasing attention  wesley  lowrance and garvey  1 . 
　　　in a different approach which is outlined in this paper  syllogistic reasoning is employed to provide a basis for the formulation of rules for combination of evidence. classically  the major and minor premises in syllogistic reasoning are allowed to contain only the standard quantifiers all and some. for example  the paradigmatic syllogism barbara is expressed by the rule 
where a  b and c are arbitrary predicates in two-valued logic. this syllogism expresses the transitivity of set containment and  as such  provides the basis for property inheritance in knowledge representation systems. 
research supported in part by nasa grant ncc1  nsf grant 1st-
1 and darpa/nesc contract n1-c-1 

california  berkeley  california  1 

1 	l.zadeh 



where most is the fuzzy subset of the unit interval which represents the denotation of the fuzzy quantifier moat. in this way  the meaning of the propositipn usually  x is f  may be expressed in terms of the meanings of f and most. in a similar fashion  in the case of conditioned usuality  the meaning of usually  x is f  may be expressed as 

where   denotes the relative count of elements of f which are in r. 
　　　the concept of usuality makes it possible to extend the domain of applicability of syllogistic reasoning by allowing a premise in a syllogism to be qualified - - implicitly or explicitly - - by the adjunction of usually  with the understanding that usually may be interpreted as a conditioned or unconditioned fuzzy quantifier. as a simple illustration  a special case of the intersection/product syllogism is the dispositional modus ponens 

1 
where usually is the product of the fuzzy number usually with itself in fuzzy arithmetic. syllogisms of this type are of particular relevance to commonsense reasoning. 
　　　in summary  syllogistic reasoning provides a systematic framework for inference from premises which are imprecise and/or not totally reliable. in this mode of reasoning  numerical quantifiers play a role analogous to that of probabilities in probabilistic reasoning  nilsson  1 . however  the facility provided by syllogistic reasoning for manipulation of fuzzy quantifiers as fuzzy numbers within the framework of fuzzy arithmetic goes beyond the capabilities of existing probability-based methods and makes it possible to deal computationally with rules and facts whose certainty factors are not known with sufficient precision to justify the use of numerical probabilities. 
