 
     circumscription is a transformation of predicate formulas proposed by john mccarthy for the purpose of formalizing non-monotonic aspects of commonsense reasoning. circumscription is difficult to implement because its definition involves a second-order quantifier. this paper presents metamathematical results that allow us in some cases to replace circumscription by an equivalent first-order formula. 
1. introduction 
     research in the theory of commonsense reasoning has revealed a fundamental difference between how universal assertions arc used in mathematics on the one hand  and in the area of commonsense knowledge on the other. in mathematics  when a proposition is claimed to be universally true  the assertion includes a complete list of conditions on the objects involved under which the proposition is asserted   for all sufficiently large natural numbers   etc.  but in everyday life we often assert that a certain proposition is true  in general ; we know that there are exceptions  and we can list some of them  but the list of exceptions is not a part of the assertion. the  abnormality  of each item on the list is a separate piece of commonsense knowledge. we know  for instance  that birds  generally  can fly. we know  futhermore  that ostriches are exceptions. and penguins are exceptions. and dead birds arc exceptions. all these assertions appear to be separate commonsense facts. 
     the language of predicate logic has been created primarily for the purpose of formalizing mathematics  and it docs not provide any means for talking about what is  generally true  and what  exceptions  are. if we want to use that language for representing commonsense knowledge then methods for formalizing assertions about exceptions have to be developed. 
     the study of such methods belongs to the area of non-inonotonic logic. extending an axiom set can force us to retract some of the conclusions we have derived from the axioms if the new axioms include additional information about abnormal objects. the set of theorems depends on the set of axioms in a non-monotonic way. 
     consider a simple example which illustrates some of the difficulties involved. let  represent the conditions  i is a bird    1 is an ostrich    x can fly  and  i is abnormal . we want to express these commonsense facts: birds  generally  can fly; ostriches are birds and cannot fly. consider the formulas: 
		 a1  
these formulas represent a part of what has been said about the ability of birds to fly  but they do not say one important thing: objects are considered normal if there is no evidence to the contrary. the three available facts imply that ostriches are abnormal  and they give no information about the abnormality of any other objects. we want to be able to conclude then that ostriches are the only exceptions: 
		 1  
but  1  does not follow from the conjunction a of a1  
     we discuss here one of the approaches to this problem  the theory of circumscription  mccarthy 1  1 . the process of circumscription transforms a into a stronger formula a' which says essentially that ad has a minimal possible extension under the condition a. it turns out that a' is equivalent to the conjunction of a and  1 . 
     a' depends on a non-monotonically. in this sense  circumscription provides an interpretation of nonmonotonic reasoning in the usual  monotonic  logic. 
     in more complex cases  wc deal with several kinds of abnormality  and the extensions of several predicates ab1  ab1 .... have to be minimized. these minimizations sometimes conflict with each other  and there may be a need to establish relative priorities between them  mccarthy 1 . 
     
1 	v. lifschitz 
   currently there are no working systems of knowledge representation based on circumscription. such a system would include a database a and a metamathematical statement describing how circumscription should be performed.  such a description would specify  for instance  which predicates should be minimised  and what their priorities are . the system would also include a theorem prover capable of deriving logical consequences from the result a' of circumscribing a. 
     the design of such a system has to deal with a major difficulty: the definition of circumscription involves a second-order quantifier  so that a' is a formula of a 
     second-order language. the purpose of this paper is to present mctamathematical theorems which  in some instances  enable us to replace the result of circumscription by an equivalent first-order formula. these methods can be successfully applied to some examples of circumscription that seem to be typical for applications to the formalization of commonsense knowledge  and  hopefully  they can be used as a basis for implementing circumscription. our main tool is a theorem which establishes the equivalence of a special case of circumscription to a modification of clark's predicate completion  clark 1 . connections between these two concepts were first studied in  reiter 1 . 
     proofs of some special cases of the results stated in this paper can be found in  lifschitz 1 . complete proofs will be published elsewhere. 
1. second-order formulas 
     a second order language is defined  just as a first order language  by sets of function constants and predicate constants  each of some arity . in the second order language we have  besides object variables  also n-ary function variables and n-ary predicate variables.  object  variables and constants arc identified with function variables and constants of arity 1 . both function and predicate variables can be bound by quantifiers. a sentence is a formula without free  function or predicate  variables. 
     a structure m for a second order language l consists of a non-empty universe functions f r o m t o m 
representing the function constants and subsets of representing the predicate constants. for any constant k  we denote the object  function or set  representing k in m by m k . equality is interpreted as identity  function variables range over arbitrary functions from |m|n to m  and predicate variables range over arbitrary subsets of  a model of a sentence a is any structure m such that a is true in m. a implies d if every model 
     
	v. lifschitz 	1 

     
1 	v. lifschitz 
     notice that the formula of this example is  good  by all logical standards: it is universal and  moreover  horn  and it contains no function symbols. what syntactic features make it difficult for circumscription  this question will be answered in the next section. 
1. separable formulas 
     in examples 1 and 1 above we saw that there are two classes of formulas for which the result of circumscription can be easily determined: formulas without positive occurences of p  and formulas of the form  where u does not contain p. what about formulas constructed from subformulas of these two types using conjunctions and disjunctions  
     first let us look at conjunctions of such formulas. let p be again a tuple of predicate constants we say that a p  is solitary with respect to p if it is a conjunction of 
 i  formulas containing no positive occurences of and 
 ii  formulas of the form where u is a predicate not containing 
     using predicate calculus  we can write any solitary formula in the form 

where n p  contains no positive occurences of pi ...  prn  and u is a tuple of predicates not containing 
p1- pm- then the result of circumscription is given by the formula 

using this formula  we can do  in particular  the circumscriptions of examples 1  1  1 and 1. 
     next we want to be able to handle formulas with disjunctions  like examples 1 and 1. if a formula is constructed from subformulas of forms  i  and  ii  using conjunctions and disjunctions  we call it separable. in a separable formula  positive occurences of p 1  ... pm are separated by conjunctions and disjunctions from negative occurences and from each other. 
     any separable formula is equivalent to a disjunction of solitary formulas and consequently can be written in the form 
		 1  
where n{ p  contains no positive occurences of pi ...  p m   and each ul is a tuple of predicates not containing 

     the following theorem generalises  1  to separable formulas. 
theorem 	1. if a p  	is 	equivalent 	to 	 1  	then 
circum a p ; p  is equivalent to 
		 1  
where d   is 

     thus the result of circumscription in a separable first-order sentence is a first-order sentence of about the same logical complexity. circum a p ; p  asserts that p may have one of the finite number of possible values u1  u1  hence every model of circum i1 p ; p  belongs to one of a finite number of classes: there are models in which p is the same as u1  models in which p is the same as u1  etc. if m is a structure in which p = ui then dt is the additional condition which  if true in m  guarantees that m is a model of circum ;1 p ; p . 
     the transformation of i  is based on the same idea as predicate completion of  clark 1 : transforming sufficient conditions into necessary and sufficient. when applied to non-separable horn formulas  like the formula of example 1  predicate completion often gives conditions that arc weaker than the result of circumscription. on the other hand  the transformation of  1  into  g  is not restricted to horn formulas and is in this respect more general. 
     using theorem 1  we can easily do all circumscriptions of examples 1. examples 1 and 1 arc not separable. 
     example 1 shows that there arc non-separable formulas for which circumscription can be done in the firstorder language. here is one more example: 

the first argument can be easily written in the form separable with respect to p1 and in the form separable with respect to p1  but it is not equivalent to a formula separable with respect to the pair p1  p1. 
     
	v. lifschitz 	1 
     theorem 1 cannot be applied directly to circumscriptions with a non-empty z  like  1 . two observations often help in such cases. 
　　first  every circumscription with a non-empty z can be reduced to a circumscription with the empty z: 
proposition 1. circum a p  z ; p; z  is equivalent to 
		 1  
for example   1  reduces to 
		 1  
where fl is a binary predicate variable. 
　　the problem with this trick is  of course  that the first argument of circumscription in  1   generally  contains new second-order quantifiers. in our example  we have to circumscribe ab in a formula with the quantifier 
     the second observation sometimes helps eliminate quantifiers like this. if q is a tuple of predicate variables  and a q  is separable with respect to q  then we can write a q  in the form 
		 1'  
 separability with respect to a tuple of predicate variables is defined in the same way as separability with respect to a tuple of predicate constants . it can be easily seen that eqa q  is equivalent then to vin tui  . in our example  
the only positive occurence of fl is in the first conjunctive term  so we write the conjunction as 
then the first argument of  1  is equivalent to the conjunction of a1 and 
     many other examples of circumscription arising in connection with the formalization of commonsense reasoning can be handled in the same manner. 
	1 	v. lifschitz 

     
not overlap. in  1  we make the extension of p1 as small as possible  even if it leads to making the extension of p1 larger; that makes p1 identically false and p1 identically true. 
     in applications it is reasonable to assign higher priorities to the abnormality predicates representing exceptions to  more specific  commonsense facts. in the example above  we use the circumscription 
  1  
     how to compute the result of a prioritized circumscription  we can try to use theorem 1' and proposition 1'. it turns out  however  that in cases when priorities are essential  the axiom set is usually not separable with respect to the collection of all abnormality predicates; at best  we have separability with respect to individual abs or small groups of abs. even in simple cases  doing prioritized circumscription requires an additional tool. 
     such a tool is given by the fact that any prioritized circumscription can be written as a conjunction of parallel circumscriptions  as follows: 
is equivalent 
to 
     according to this theorem  we can do circumscription  1  by taking the conjunction of 

and 

each of the two circumscriptions can be easily evaluated using the methods of section 1. the first of them gives  the second  the conjunction' 
of these formulas is equivalent to the right-hand side of  1 . 
     the result of circumscription  1  can be determined along the same lines. we come up with the conclusion that  1  is equivalent to the universal formula 

	v. lifschltz 	1 
acknowledgements 
     i am indebted to john mccarthy for introducing me to problems of non-monotonic reasoning and circumscription. i have also benefited from discussing this work with david etherington  michael gelfond  benjamin grosof  
kurt konolige  nils nilsson  donald perlis and raymond reiter. 
