an endorsement-baaed plan recognition program 
michael sullivan and paul r. cohen 
department of computer and information science 
university of massachusetts 
	amherst  massachusetts 	1 

　　　this paper describes a plan-recognition program built to explore the theory of endorsements  cohen  1 . the program evaluates alternative interpretations of user actions and reasons about which are the most likely explanation of the user's intentions. uncertainty about the various alternatives was encoded in data 
structures called endorsements. the paper describes the workings of this program and the successes and limitations of the endorsement-based approach. endorsements. the next section describes a plan recognition program that uses endorsements to reason about the uncertainty in interpreting user actions. we then discuss some of the problems we encountered in implementing this program  problems which highlight some of the key issues involved in dealing with endorsements. the final section is a discussion and summary. 

1 introduction 
　　　historically  expert systems and other artificial intelligence programs have employed numerical techniques to assess subjective degrees of belief in uncertain alternatives. the advantages of this approach are apparent: alternatives are easily ranked by their degrees of belief  and the degrees of belief in combinations of evidence are easily calculated by simple arithmetic rules. the disadvantages are also apparent. subjective degrees of belief generally do not behave as probabilities  tversky and kahneman  1   so we must wonder what interpretation to give them  and whether probabilistic combining methods are valid. expert system builders report that experts are uncomfortable committing themselves to numbers  e..  gadsden  1 ; the numbers may be ambiguous - composed of salience and probability considerations  buchanan and shortliffe  1  chapter 1 ; and  depending on how the numbers are used  their accuracy has little or no effect on performance  buchanan and shortliffe  1  chapter 1 . if the interpretations of subjective degrees of belief are unclear  eg.  if they are ambiguous  then combining degrees of belief only clouds their semantics further. finally  numbers represent very little about uncertainty: they tell us how much to believe  not why to believe. 
　　　the theory of endorsements answers some of these concerns about numbers. endorsements are records of sources of uncertainty; they provide explicit records of the introduction of uncertainty into reasoning. this paper describes a program that reasons explicitly about uncertainty in plan recognition problems. the first section introduces the theory of 
1 endorsements 
　　　endorsements represent knowledge about uncertain situations  cohen  1  this knowledge can include  but is not limited to  reasons to believe and disbelieve uncertain propositions. the major advantage of endorsements is that they make sources of uncertainty explicit  so we may reason about them directly  instead of implicitly through some sort of numerical calculus. 
　　　although we give endorsements evocative  mnemonic names in this paper  e g.   could be a mistake    they are just tokens. their meanings derive from specifying the situations in which they are applicable  how they combine  and how they are ranked. to build an endorsement-based system  then  one first identifies and names the sources of certainty and uncertainty in a domain. the names are called endorsements. then  one specifies how these sources interact  so that more or less certain evidence can be combined. finally  one gives rules for ranking combinations of sources of certainty and uncertainty  so that decisions can be made. each of the three specifications will be discussed in the context of an example. 
1 	hmmm 	  	an 	endorsement-based 	plan 
recognition program 
　　　h m m m is a plan recognition program that infers which of several known plans a user intends by combining the evidence provided by successive user actions. plan recognition is uncertain for two the user might make a mistake  in which extrapolating from the action might suggest the wrong 

1 m. sullivan and p. cohen plan; or a user action may be ambiguous; i.e.  the action might be consistent with several known plans.1 if all the user's actions belong to only one known plan  the interpretation process is straightforward; but when an action can be interpreted as a mistake  or as belonging to more than one plan  hmmm is uncertain of the user's intentions  and so generates endorsements 
for the competing interpretations. hmmm is a simplified version of poise  carver  lesser  and mccue  1   an office automation system with an intelligent user interface  which discerns a user's plan and off en assistance by automating some plan steps. 
     individual plan steps are interpreted in the context of developing plans. the program uses its knowledge of the user's previous actions to restrict the interpretations of the current action. for example  assume the program knows the following plans: 
plan steps plan1 a b d plan1 b d e plan1 a c d 
     given that the user takes the actions a followed by b  we can construct three interpretations for each action: 
 start planl a  
 start plan1 a  
 mistake a   continue planl b  
 start plan1 b  
 mistake b       however  the interpretation of b as continuing planl would not be valid unless the first step of planl  a  had already been taken. we account for these syntactic restrictions with data structures called step linkages . each step linkage represents an interpretation of all the plan steps taken so far. step linkages for the  current  step are constructed from the existing step linkages  which link all previous steps. for an interpretation that continues an already-opened plan  as b above continues planl   each step linkage that mentions the preceding step is extended to include the new step. for an interpretation of a plan step as starting a new plan  as b above is interpreted as starting plan1   all step linkages are extended to include this interpretation. 
     each step linkage carries endorsements. these are reasons to believe and disbelieve the interpretations of plan steps represented by the step linkages. for example  a reason to believe that b continues planl  
other sources of uncertainty in plan recognition include an incomplete library of known plans and inaccuracies in the plan library. we limited our exploration to unitended and smbtgnoni above  is that  continuity is desirable.  recall our contention that these reasons have no implicit meaning  no matter how evocative are the strings we use. the following example shows how meaning is ascribed to endorsements and how endorsements facilitate reasoning about uncertain interpretations. 
1 	an 	example 	of 	endorsement-baaed 	plan 
recognition 
     suppose we have a simple environment in which we know that the user intends exactly one of two known plans  
 plan planl plan1 steps a b c b d e and the user types the input actions a followed by b followed by d. briefly  we can imagine interpreting the first input as evidence for planl  and the second as further evidence. the third input lends support for the plan1 interpretation of b  and casts doubt on the planl interpretation of a  and indirectly supports the possibility that a was a mistake. if a fourth input was c  we'd want the system to reaffirm its belief in planl  whereas an input of e should have the opposite effect. 
1 applicability conditions for endorsements 
     hmmm uses endorsements to reason as just described. the actions a  b  d result in the following syntactic interpretations: 
step interpretation 
1: a  start planl a  
1: b  continue planl b  
b  start plan1 b  
1: d  continue plan1 d  enforcements 
 a only grammatical possibility +  
 a could be a mistake -  
 a b continuity is desirable +  
 b other 	grammatical possibility -  
 b could be a mistake -   a b discontinuity is undesirable -  
 b 	other 	grammatical possibility -  
 b could be a mistake -  
 d 	only  	grammatical possibility +  
 b d continuity is desirable +  
 d could be a mistake -         the endorsements are associated with the interpretations by rules specifying their applicability conditions:  other grammatical possibility  is applicable whenever a plan step figures in more than one possible plan;  could be a mistake  is always applicable;  continuity is desirable  is redundant with the interpretation of a plan step as continuing an open plan; and  discontinuity is undesirable  applies whenever a plan step is interpreted as disrupting an already open plan by starting a new one. some endorsements are positive  meaning that they support the interpretation with which they are associated. others are negative reasons to disbelieve their associated interpretations.1 
1 combining endorsements 
　　　the endorsements associated with an interpretation are brought along when that interpretation is appended to a step linkage  and they are combined with endorsements from the previous steps in the linkage to give the endorsements of the plan up to that point. for example  the input s is evidence for planl  and b is 
further evidence for planl. note that b is a different kind of evidence from a  because it is ambiguous between planl and plan1. applicability conditions for endorsements give us the mechanism to distinguish between the kinds of evidence - each kind carries characteristic endorsements - but they don't specify how to combine the endorsements of pieces of evidence  such as s and b  when they support the same hypothesis  in this case  planl . to this end  we have implemented semantic combining rules  two of which follow. 
scr1: if  plan n: step i could be a mistake -  and 
 plan n: steps i j continuity is desirable +  
then erase  plan n: step i could be a mistake -  
scr1: if  plan m: steps i j discontinuity is undesirable -  and 
 plan m: steps j k continuity is desirable +  and 
 plans n m: step j other grammatical possibility -  
then erase  plan m: steps i j discontinuity is undesirable -  
　　　both rules use the occurrence of two consecutive plan steps as a basis for removing negative endorsements that may have accrued to the first of the steps. the general idea is that consecutive steps in a 
' applicability caodtiaos for endorsement! include rules to decide whether sn endorsement is positive or negative. this is essy in hmmm  bat we believe it to be difficult in general to decide whether evidence speaks for or against a hypothesis. 
	m. sullivan and p. cohen 	1 
single plan eliminate uncertainty about the interpretation of the first step. given these rules  the combined endorsements for the planl interpretation of the inputs a  b and the plan1 interpretation of the inputs a  b  d are derived from the endorsed step linkages shown above: plan 1 interpretation of a. b; pan1 interpretation of a. b. d; 
 a only grammatical possibility +   b other grammatical possibility -   a b continuity is desirable +   d only grammatical possibility +  
 b could be a mistake -  	 b d contmuity it desirable +  
	 b other grammatical possibility    	 d could be a mistake -  
　　　note that  s could be a mistake -  has been erased by application of scr1 for the planl interpretation  and that  b could be a mistake -  and  s b discontinuity is undesirable -  have been erased by scr1 and sgr1 respectively for the plan1 interpretation. 
1 strengthening endorsements 
　　　the semantic combining rules discussed above are unintuitive because they eliminate endorsements entirely  rather than increasing or decreasing the weight of endorsements  eg.  a more intuitive version of scr1 should reduce the concern that a plan step is a mistake  not drop it entirely . currently  we use numerical weights to reflect the strengths of endorsements  and adjust the weights to reflect combinations of endorsements. since we are concerned that these numbers should mean the same under combination as combinations of endorsements  we have strictly limited ourselves to a single case of combination  namely corroboration of endorsements. we have identified three general situations where endorsements corroborate  that is  where two endorsements combine to create another  weightier  endorsement: 
1. corroboration of multiple instances of the same endorsement within a single plan step. for example  if an ambiguous plan step could continue one plan and start numerous others  then the weight of the  continuity is desirable  endorsement is greater than it would be if the step could continue a plan 
1. corroboration of instances of different endorsements of the same sign  both positive or negative  within the same plan step  resulting in a kind of synergetic increase in the belief in an interpretation. for example  the two negative endorsements 
 discontinuity is undesirable  and  other grammatical possibility  have a combined weight which is greater than the sum of their individual weights. 
1 	m. sullivan and p. cohen 
1. corroboration of multiple instances of the same endorsement over consecutive plan steps. we believe in a plan more strongly if it is successively reinforced by the same positive endorsement*. for example  we increase the weight of endorsements associated with a plan if the  continuity is desirable- endorsement appears in several consecutive steps. 
1 risking eadorsement 
　　　we have said that the three components of semantics for endorsements are applicability conditions  combining rules  and ranking rules. we.have explored two methods for ranking combinations of endorsements: one used the numerical weights of endorsements as described above  the other was a classification scheme to separate likely and unlikely alternatives. 
　　　we wanted combinations of endorsements to dictate at least a partial ordering on alternatives facing any decision-making program. we accomplished this in h m m m with a scheme for classifying step linkages as likely  unlikely  or neutral 1 contingent on the presence of particular endorsements or combined endorsements. for example  a sufficient condition for being considered likely  might be corroboration of two different  positive endorsements  and the condition for  unlikely  might be any negative endorsement. interpretations can be ranked by assigning them to one of these implicitly ordered classes  based on their endorsements. we think this kind of classification scheme can serve as a general model for ranking endorsements  since the criteria for membership in classes are flexible  and may be set dynamically ; and since the number of classes is also flexible  ensuring adequate discrimination of alternatives.  the classification scheme was originally devised for a planning program which predicts a planner's next move to be from the class of likely* moves.  
1 discussion 
　　　the h m m m program raises many questions about endorsement-based reasoning. two we did not address in the body of this paper concern the subjectivity and cost of endorsement-based reasoning 
subjectivity of endorsement. endorsement-based reasoning is not normative or prescriptive: there's no 
is determined by endorsement we imply no probability  
 correct  set of endorsements for a domain  no correct method for combining the endorsements of successive pieces of evidence. the endorsements discussed in this paper seem appropriate to the domain of plan recognition. we believe that ambiguity of plan steps reduces certainty in all interpretations of those steps  just as certainty is increased when two or more consecutive steps are interpreted as belonging to the same plan. other people might design a different set based on their perceptions of the domain. the point is that this paper provides a framework for endorsement-based reasoning  but it is not prescriptive. 
how much is required  the simple plan recognition example required few endorsements and only two semantic combining rules. we need more of each to handle other kinds of uncertainty and other relationships between endorsements. the number of endorsements and combining rules required for a domain depends on what you intend to do with them. if you wish to represent the major sources of uncertainty in a domain  eg.  the possibility of mistakes  ambiguity  disruption of an established scheme  etc.   then we believe the number of combining rules will be small. this is the approach we took for plan recognition. we expect that endorsements can constitute a small investment for system-builders with a large payoff in terms of explanatory power and facilitation of knowledge engineering  since the expert can give reasons for uncertainty instead of numbers . 
1 conclusion 
　　　we propose endorsement-based reasoning as an explicit means of recording and combining reasons to believe and disbelieve propositions. the semantics of endorsements are specified by their applicability conditions  combining rules  and ranking rules. this paper addresses judgment - assessment of support for propositions - and thus the first two components of endorsement semantics. decision  for which ranking of endorsements is needed  is a major concern of current work. 
1 