: 
　　qualitative simulation is a key inference process in qualitative causal reasoning  in this paper  we present the qsim algorithm  a new algorithm for qualitative simulation that gener-
alizes the best features of rxisting algorithms  and allows direct comparisons among alternate approaches. qsim is an efficient constraint-satisfaction algorithm that can follow either its standard semantics allowing the creation of new landmarks  or the { +   1  -} semantics where 1 is the only landmark value  by changing a table of legal state-transitions. we argue that the qsim semantics make more appropriate qualitative distinctions since the { +   1   - } semantics can collapse the distinction among in-
creasing  stable  or decreasing oscillation. we also show that  a  qualitative simulation algorithms can be proved to produce every actual behavior of the mechanism being modeled  but  b  existing qualitative simulation algorithms  because of their local points of view  can predict spurious behaviors not produced by any mechanism satisfying the structural description. these observations suggest specific types of care that must be taken in designing applications of qualitative causal reasoning systems  and in constructing and validating a knowledge base of mechanism descriptions. 
1 introduction 
　　an expert system is often a  shallow model  of its application domain  in the sense that conclusions are drawn directly from observable features of the presented situation. many researchers believe that genuinely expert performance must also rest on knowledge of  deep models   in which an underlying mechanism  whose state variables may be not be directly observable  accounts for the observable facts . 
　　one major line of research toward the representation of deep models is the study of qualitative causal models  1 . research on qualitative causal models differs from more general work on deep models in focusing on qualitative descriptions of the deep mechanism  capable of representing incomplete knowledge of the structure and behavior of the mechanism. symbolic manipulation of qualitative descriptions also corresponds well with explanations by human experts  1 . 
this research was supported in pari by the national library of medicine through nih grants lm 1  lm 1  and r1 lm 1  and by the national science foundation through grants mcs-1 and dcr 1. 

figure 1: qualitative simulation and differential equations are both abstractions of actual behavior. 
　　a central inference within this approach is qualitative simulation: derivation of a description of the behavior of a mechanism from a qualitative description of its structure. differential equations provide a useful comparison. a differential equation describes a physical system in terms of a set of state variables and constraints. the solution to the equation may be a function representing the behavior of the system over time. the qualitative structural description is a further abstraction of the same system  and qualitative simulation is intended to yield a corresponding abstraction of its behavior  figure 1 . 
　　all qualitative simulation systems predict multiple possible behaviors given certain structural descriptions and initial conditions. researchers in this area  myself included  have hoped to prove that the predicted behaviors include all and only the possible behaviors of real mechanisms satisfying the given description. half of this is correct: we can prove  that qualitative simulation cannot miss any actual behavior. however  because of the local nature of its decision criteria  qualitative simulation con predict behaviors that are not possible for any real mechanism satisfying the given description  and we construct a counterexample. we discuss the implications of these results for the construction of a qualitative causal reasoning system. 
the qsim algorithm has been implemented in lisp on the 
symbolics 1  and all examples in this paper have been run  as well as numerous others in elementary physics  nephrology  and cardiology. 
　　
1 	o v e r v i e w 
　　this section provides an overview of qualitative simulation and the qsim algorithm. some of these concepts are defined more formally below. the complete formal treatment is presented in . qualitative simulation of a system starts with a description of the known structure of the system and its initial state  and produces a tree consisting of the possible future states of the system. the possible behaviors of the system are the paths from the root of this tree to its leaves. 
　　the structural description consists of a set of symbols representing the physical parameters of the system  continuously differeiitiahle real-valued functions of time   and a set of constraints on how those parameters may be related to each other. the constraints are two- or three-place relations on physical parameters. some specify familiar mathematical relationships: deriv vel acc . add net  out  in . mult  mass  acc  force   minus fwd  rev  others assert qualitatively that there is a functional relationship between two physical parameters  but only specify that the relationship is monotonically increasing or decreasing: m '  price  power  and m  mph.mpg . the constraints are designed to permit a large class of differential equations to be mapped straight-forwardly into structural descriptions. 
　　each physical parameter is a continuously differeiitiahle realvalued function of tnne with only finitely many critical points. its value at any given point in time is specified qualitatively  in terms of its relationship with a totally ordered set of landmark values. every critical value of the function is a landmark value. the landmark values may be described cither numerically  e.g. zero  or symbolically: their ordinal relationships are their essential properties. as the qualitative simulation proceeds  it can discover new critical points and thus add new landmark values to the sequence. the qualitative state of a parameter consists of its ordinal relations with the landmark values and its direction of change. 
　　time  within one possible behavior  is represented as a totally ordered set of symbolic distinguished time-points. the current time is either at or between distinguished time-points. all of the time-points are generated as a result of the qualitative simulation process. 
　　at a distinguished time-point  if several physical parameters linked by a single constraint are equal to landmark values  they are said to have corresponding values which can be represented and used by the qualitative simulation. corresponding values provide additional qualitative constraints on the behavior of structural relationships otherwise described only as m+ or m-. the case of corresponding values  1  is sufficiently common to justify the special notation  m+1 and m1~. when zero is the only landmark  useful corresponding values are seldom discovered. 
　　a set of constraints on the physical parameters of the system is only valid in some operating region  denned by the legal ranges of values that some parameters may take on. the legal range of a parameter is a closed interval whose endpoints are landmark values of that parameter. these endpoints may be associated with transitions to other operating regions where a different set of constraints apply. the operating regions are designed as an interface to forbus'  1  concept of processes  but that topic is beyond the scope of this paper. 
	b. kuipers 	1 
　　the initial state of the system is defined by the operating region and a set of qualitative values for the physical parameters the qualitative simulation proceeds by determining all of the possible changes in qualitative value permitted to each parameter  then filtering the combinations by applying progressively broader constraints. if more than one qualitative change is possible  the current state has multiple successors  and the simulation produces a tree. 
　　two qualitative states in the same operating region are identical if all parameters are equal to the same landmark values  and all the directions of change are the same. if a state is identical to a direct predecessor  a cyclic behavior can be recognized. 
1 qualitative behavior 
　　in this* section  we present a more rigorous definition of qualitative description of continuous behavior  leading up to the qsim algorithm and several theorems characterizing its strengths and limitations. 
　　we reluctantly contribute to the proliferation of notations for qualitative description of continuous functions. the advantages of the notation used here are that it  1  naturally allows for an arbitrary and changing set of landmark values   1  uses a single term for the qualitative description of a function's magnitude and derivative  and  1  emphasizes that the qualitative description of the derivative is of low and fixed resolution  while qualitative description of magnitude is of higher and possibly changing resolution. 

　　
1 	b. kuipers 
definition 1 the qualitative behavior of f on  a  b  is the sequence of qualitative states of f: 

an alternating sequence of qualitative states at distinguished time-
points  and on intervals between distinguished time-points. 
definition 1 a system is a set of functions f : each with its own set of landmarks and distinguished 
time-points. the distinguished time-points of a system f are the union of the distinguished time-points of the individual functions  the qualitative state of a system f of m functions is the m-tuple of individual qualitative states: 

the qualitative behavior of f is the sequence of qualitative states of f: 

　if tt and/or t t + i are not distinguished time-points of a particular fv then tx and the interval distinguished time-points of 
 are defined to be the same as the containing 
　　　　　　　　table 1: the possible transitions a continuously differentiable function  is restricted to the following set of possible transitions from one qualitative state to the next. 
p-transitions 

in cases 1 and 1  / becomes std at   a new landmark value such that in these cases  a previously unknown 
landmark value is discovered because other constraints force f' t  to become zero. 
　　these definitions give us a precise semantics for the qualitative description of continuous functions  and clarifies the concept of the  next state.  every state has a qualitative description qs fj   but that description changes only at discrete distinguished time-points  and remains constant on the open intervals between them. thus the  next state  of a mechanism is more properly called the next distinct qualitative state description of the mechanism. 
1 	qualitative state transitions 
　　the intermediate value theorem and the mean value theorem restrict the way a continuously differentiable function can change from one qualitative state to the next. there are two types of qualitative state transitions: p-transitions  moving from a time-point to a time-interval  and i-transitions  moving from an interval to a point. table 1 specifies the set of possible transitions that can take place in the qualitative behavior of a single function. the table takes into account the possibility that not all landmark values are currently known  so that a new critical point might be discovered  1 and 1   
1 qualitative simulation 
　　the qualitative simulation algorithm determines the possible qualitative behavior descriptions consistent with the initial state and the structural constraints. it is given the following structural description of a mechanism. 
1. a set {f 1 ... f m } of symbols representing the physical parameters in the system. 
1. a set of constraints applied to the parameter symbols: 

ated corresponding values for its parameters. 
1. each parameter is associated with a totally ordered set of symbols representing landmark values. each parameter may have upper and lower range limits  which are landmark values beyond which the current set of constraints no longer apply. a range limit may be associated with a new operating region which has its own constraints and range limits. 
1. an initial time-point symbol  to  and qualitative values for each of the /  at to-
　　the result of the qualitative simulation is one or more qualitative behavior descriptions for the given parameters. each qual-
itative behavior description consists of the following: 
1. a sequence {io...t n } of symbols representing the distinguished time-points of the system's behavior. 
1. for each parameter /   a totally ordered set of landmark values  possibly extending the originally given set. 
1. for each parameter  at each distinguished time-point or interval between adjacent time-points  a qualitative state description expressed in terms of the landmark values of that parameter. 
　　
1 	the qsim algorithm. 
　　the qualitative simulation algorithm. qsim  repeatedly takes an active state and generates all possible successor states  filtering out states that violate a consistency criterion at one of several levels: individual parameter  individual constraint  pairwise constraint  or global state. because the next state may not be determined uniquely  qsim builds a tree of states representing the possible behaviors of the mechanism. 
　　place the initial state on the list active  of states whose successors need to be determined. repeat the following steps until active becomes empty or a resource limit is exceeded. 
1. select a qualitative state from active. 
1. for each parameter in the structural description  determine  from table 1  the set of transitions possible from the current qualitative state. 
1. for each constraint  aggregate the transitions associated with its arguments into 1-tuples and 1-tuples. the tuples can then be checked for consistency according to two criteria local to individual constraints. 
  the tuple of directions of change must be consistent with the constraint in the state resulting from the transition. 
  the result of the transition-tuple can be compared with corresponding values of the arguments to that constraint. reference  demonstrates an efficient and verifiable method for this test  generalizing the transition ordering rules of williams  1 . 
1. perform pair-wise consistency  waltz  filtering on the sets of tuples associated with the constraints in the system  applying the consistency criterion that adjacent constraints must agree on the transition assigned to the shared parameter.  the fact that we filter on transitions rather than states considerably simplifies the algorithm.  
1. generate all possible global interpretations from the remaining tuples by depth-first traversal of the set of assignments of transition tuples to constraints. if there are none  mark the behavior as inconsistent. create new qualitative states from each interpretation  and make them successors of the current state. 
1. apply global filtering rules to the new qualitative states  and place any remaining states on active. 
	b. kuipers 	1 
1 	global filters 
　　the completed qualitative state descriptions are mathematically plausible successors to the current state. however  several global filters arc applied  step 1 above  before a new state is added to active. the mathematically valid filters applied at this stage are the following. 
   no change.  delete the new state if all transitions are in the set {1 /1}  because the new state description would be identical to its immediate predecessor  which therefore already captures its qualitative behavior. in other words  something must reach a limit point for an i-transition to take place. 
   cycle.  if the new state is identical to one of its predeces-sors  all parameters have identical landmark values  and all directions of change are the same   then mark the behavior as cyclic  install a pointer to the identical predecessor  and do not add the new state to active. 
   divergence.  if any parameter takes on the value oo or - oo  the current time-point must be the endpoint of the domain  so the new state does not go onto active. 
　　the first filter does not reduce the number of behaviors described  but only eliminates a redundant description. the second detects when all the consequences of a particular state have already been determined  and need not be explored anew. the third determines when a state must be at the endpoint of the domain  and thus can have no successors. 
　　the pure qsim algorithm includes only these mathematically valid filters. for a particular application  additional heuristic filters may be added. some possible heuristics include: 
   quiescence.  if all parameters have derivative zero  con-clude that the system is quiescent  the new time-point is the endpoint of the domain  possibly t = oo   and do not place the new state on active. 
   no divergence.  in physical systems  eliminate transitions in which any parameter goes to oo or -oo. a more accurate description of the system would include an operating region change corresponding to some component breaking. 
1 	complexity 
　　suppose there are n parameters in the system  m constraints  and the longest behavior has length t. all steps except generating the global interpretations are linear in the number of constraints and/or parameters  in the worst cast  generating the global interpretations can be exponential  but in practice generating the successors of a given state appears to be approximately o mt . on the symbolics 1  the spring example below  1 parameters  1 constraints  takes about 1 seconds  and the starling mechanism  1 parameters  1 constraints   1  takes about 1 second. thus  it is computationally feasible to run several simulations in the course of solving a single problem. 
　　
1 	b. kuipers 
	1 	should simulation create landmarks  
　　the most important semantic difference between qsim and other approaches to qualitative simulation is that qsim ran create new landmark values during the simulation  while the other algorithms require all landmarks to be specified when the structure is defined. the inability to create new landmark values 
makes it impossible to express certain important qualitative distinctions  such as that between increasing  decreasing  and sta-
ble oscillation. the fixed landmark assumption is particularly deeply embedded in de kleer's approach  which depends on arithmetic operators defined over the fixed set of qualitative values   {+ 1  - }   produced by the single landmark 1. a change in landmarks would change the set of qualitative values  and thus require the operators to be redefined. such a redefinition is not always 
possible. 
　　within qsim  it is possible to experiment with the {+ 1  -} semantics for qualitative simulation simply by replacing table 1 
with an alternate table of legal transitions. 
　　the bouncing-ball system is described by the following constraints: 
with an instantaneous bounce simulated by an operating region transition at which  if y = 1 with negative velocity  the sign of the velocity is inverted. if the qualitative description does not specify the relation between the magnitudes of the velocity before and after the bounce  there are three possible behaviors: the second bounce could be higher  lower  or the same as the first. 
　　figures 1 a   1 b . and 1 c  show the way the standard qsim semantics expresses the three possibilities. in these qualitative plots  a point is plotted at  or halfway between  two landmark 
values on the vertical axis and two distinguished time-points on the horizontal axis. at the peak of the first bounce  y has a critical point  so a landmark value  y1  is created. after the bounce  both y and v move toward limiting values. the second peak is higher  lower  or equal to the first according to whether 
y reaches y1 before  after  or at the same time as v reaches 1. qsim gives distinct representations to the three possible behaviors. if further information is available to exclude one or two alternatives  the significance of the remaining ones is clear. 
　　figure 1 d  shows the same mechanism simulated using {+ 1  -} semantics. there is only a single behavior since the peak value is represented by the qualitative value +  which corresponds to the entire interval  1 oo . the description captures the repeated upand-down motion of the bouncing ball  but fails to make the important qualitative distinction between a higher  lower  or equal bounce. thus three qualitatively distinct behaviors are collapsed into a single description. 
　　similarly  de klcer and bobroar  present an example of a spring with frictional damping  wliose actual behavior is a decreasing oscillation. because the maximum amplitude of the oscillation is represented by the qualitative interval +  the behavioral description derived is cyclic. the cyclic description accurately captures the repetitive scries of increase and decrease in the different parameters. however  without being able to assign a symbolic name to the critical values  it does not express the distinction between increasing  decreasing and steady amplitude  and so cannot even ask which qualitative behavior is correct. 
　　
　　a related problem is that de kleer and bobrow  recognize the cycle by matching the qualitative descriptions of states. however  if some parameters are in the intervals between landmarks  then apparently matching states may not be identical  leading decreasing oscillation to be taken as a cycle. 
　　the heart of both problems is the inability to create new landmarks  or equivalently  to give names to newly discovered critical values. without representing the initial value  and subsequent critical values  of a parameter in a way that permits ordinal comparison  it is not possible to ask whether the next repetition of a cycle leaves that parameter increased  decreased  or stable. thus  we argue that the {+ 1  -} semantics  and in fact any semantics with a fixed set of landmarks  can collapse importantly distinct behaviors. the qsim semantics  by providing for discovery and naming of new landmarks  allows more appropriate qualitative distinctions to be made. 

figure 1: simulation of the bouncing ball under the standard 
qsim semantics distinguishes three possible behaviors which are collapsed into a single description under the {+ 1  -} semantics. this figure includes only the qualitative plots for y. 
 a  qsim prediction 1: the second bounce is the same height as the first. 
 b  qsim prediction 1: the second bounce is higher than the first. 
 c  qsim prediction 1: the second bounce is lower than the first. 
 d  {+ 1  -} prediction: the three behaviors are collapsed into a single description. 
	b. kuipers 	1 
1 does qualitative simulation find the real behaviors  
　　ideally  qualitative simulation will find all and only the actual behaviors of a mechanism being simulated. we take as our  gold standard1  the solutions to the ordinary differential equation describing the mechanism. a qualitative structure description is less restrictive than a differential equation  so we can expect multiple behaviors produced by the simulation  varying according to factors not captured in the structure description.  for example  if i throw a ball upward with a velocity described only as  positive   it might hit the ceiling  or it might not.  first  we want to know that all behaviors that are actually possible arc found by the qualitative simulation. second  we want to know that every possibility predicted by the qualitative simulation can actually happen. 
　　in qsim  care has been taken so that the structural description of a mechanism is an abstraction of its differential equation. the algorithm generates the space of all possible next states of the system given its current state  table 1   and each filtering step removes only states which are internally inconsistent. thus  we prove in detail in   
　　theorem 1. each actual behavior of the system is necessarily among those produced by the simulation. 
　　one of the attractive applications of qualitative simulation is to predict possible future states  particularly to warn of surprising or disastrous events. although we can trust qualitative simulation to produce every real behavior  the converse is not true: some predictions can be spurious. it is possible for the qsim algorithm  and local qualitative simulation algorithms in general  to produce behaviors which are not actual behaviors for any physical system satisfying the structural description. 
　　consider a mass on a spring  oscillating on a frictionless burface. the qualitative structural description of this system is 

   starting with x  v  and a equal to 1  vinit and 1  respectively  qsim proceeds straight-forwardly through most of the cycle  predicting a unique successor to each state. finally  all three parameters approach their initial values. x and a must reach zero together  but there is not enough information to determine whether v reaches its limit earlier  later  or at the same time. 

　　
1 	b. kuipers 
　　figure 1 shows how qs1m branches to yield three behaviors corresponding to increasing  decreasing  and stable oscillation. figure 1 shows how  using a translated variable w to simulate the non-zero landmark value vinit  the same indeterminacy exists under the {+ 1  -} semantics. 
　　as we have seen  only the stable periodic behavior is an actual behavior possible for this structural description. thus  
　　theorem 1. there are behaviors predicted by qualitative simulation which do not correspond to the behavior of any system satisfying the qualitative structure description. 
　　the fundamental problem is that simulation  qualitative or quantitative  is inherently local: the successors to the current state arc computed given only the information in the current state. given a descriptive framework consisting of the functions and constraints describing the mechanism  and the states to be linked  there is simply not enough information available to eliminate all spurious behaviors. 
　　an incorrect solution to this problem is to employ a qualitative description so coarse that the alternate behaviors are simply collapsed into a single one. figure 1 shows the single behavior predicted for the spring under the {+ 1  -} semantics without an initial landmark value. precisely like the bouncing ball discussed in the previous section  the three alternative behaviors are collapsed into a single description  so the problem is not solved  simply inexpressible. 

figure 1: the stable  increasing  and decreasing oscillatory behaviors of the spring are collapsed into one by the {+ 1  -} semantics. 
　　
	b. kuipers 	1 
　　changing the problem to be solved  do kleer  personal communication  can sometimes avoid this difficulty in familiar cases. by changing the spring description to take into account the conservation of total energy  an expanded view allows qsim to determine that there is a single  periodic behavior  figure 1 . a 
physicist can look at equation  1  and recognize or derive the fact that it represents an energy conserving system  and therefore that the behavior must be periodic. part of this knowledge is the ability to recognize the physical system described by a structure  and to know that there is a better structural description for it. however  this means that external information is needed to set up the correct problem and reach a useful conclusion in such a case. 
　　these observations yield some important warnings about the proper use of qualitative descriptions of mechanisms  and the result of their simulation. 
  the two theorems above have a corollary that highlights their implications for knowledge engineering. 
corollary. if a structural description is consistent  and if qsim predicts a single behavior  then that behavior represents the actual behavior of the mechanism. 
  the structural description must be shown to be consistent  perhaps by demonstrating that it is an abstraction of an accurate quantitative description  to guarantee that the qualitative simulation will include a genuine behavior. 
  if qualitative simulation yields several possible behaviors  further analysis is required before concluding that each represents a possible future. 
　　in developing a knowledge base of kidney mechanisms  our experience suggests that the most useful knowledge base consists of a collection of first-order views  focusing on a small portion of the overall mechanism. each simulation yields a single behavior  which we therefore know to be correct  modulo the assumptions behind the first-order model . 
　　thus  much as backward-chaining search provides the mathematical underpinnings for search in a rule-based expert system  so qualitative simidation may provide the mathematical underpinnings for theory evaluation in a causal reasoning system. if the underpinnings are solid and well-understood  then the semantics of the knowledge base is clear  a necessary condition for the creation of powerful reasoning systems. 
acknowledgements 
　　the environment of the mit lcs clinical decision making group provides valuable support and stimulation for this research. christopher eliot is responsible for the implementation of the qsim algorithm with a very comfortable interface  and for a number of valuable technical contributions. i am also grateful for helpful discussions and observations on qualitative simulation in general and qsim in particular from daniel bobrow  johan de kleer  ken forbus  walter hamscher  ramesh patil  elisha sacks  mike wellman  and brian williams. 
　　
1 	b. kuipers 
bibliography 
 j. dc kleer. 1. multiple representations of knowledge in a mechanics problem-solver. proceedings of the fifth international joint conference on artificial intelligence. 
 j. de kleer. 1. causal and teleological reasoning in circuit recognition. mit artificial intelligence laboratory tr1. 
 j. de kleer. 1. the origin and resolution of ambiguities in causal arguments. proceedings of the sixth international joint conference on artificial intelligence. tokyo  japan. 
 j. de kleer and d. g. bobrow. 1. qualitative reasoning with higher-order derivatives. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  aaai-1j . los altos  ca: william kaufman. 
 j. de kleer and j. s. brown. 1. the origin  form  and logic of qualitative physical laws. in proceedings of the eighth international joint conference on artificial intelligence. los altos  ca: william kaufman. 
 j. de kleer and j. s. brown. 1. a qualitative physics based on confluences. artificial intelligence 1: 1 - 1. 
 k. d. forbus. 1. qualitative reasoning about physical processes. in proceedings of the seventh international joint conference on artificial intelligence. los altos  ca: william kaufman. 
 k. d. forbus. 1. measurement interpretation in qualitative process theory. in proceedings of the eighth international joint conference on artificial intelligence. los altos  ca: william kaufman. 
 k. d. forbus. 1. qualitative process theory. artificial intelligence 1: 1 - 1. 
 k. d. forbus. 1. qualitative process theory. ph.d. thesis  mit department of electrical engineering and computer science. 
 d. centner and a. stevens   eds. . 1. mental models. 
hillsdale  nj: erlbaum. 
 p. j. hayes. 1. the naive physics manifesto. in d. michie  ed.   expert systems in the micro-electronic age. edinburgh: edinburgh university press  1. 
 b. j. kuipers. 1. getting the envisionment right. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  aaai-1 . pittsburgh  pennsylvania  august 1. 
 b. j. kuipers. 1. commonsense reasoning about causality: deriving behavior from structure. artificial intelligence 1: 1 - 1. 
 b. j. kuipers. 1. qualitative simulation of mechanisms. cambridge  ma: mit laboratory for computer science tm-1. 
 b. j. kuipers and  1. p. kassirer. 1. how to discover a knowledge representation for causal reasoning by studying an expert physician. in proceedings of the eighth international joint conference on artificial intelligence. palo alto: william kaufman. 
 b. j. kuipers and j. p. kassirer. 1. causal reasoning in medicine: analysis of a protocol. cognitive science 1: 1. 
 b. williams. 1a. the use of continuity in a qualitative physics. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  aaai-1 - los altos  ca: william kaufman. 
 b. williams. 1b. qualitative analysis of mos circuits. 
artificial intelligence 1: 1 - 1. 
