 
this paper diacusses a method for learning thematic level structures  i.e. abstract plan/goal combinations  by observing the bad planning behavior of narrative characters. the learning method discussed is a one-trial  schema acquisition method  which is similar to dejong's  dejong  1 . the method uses constraint-based causal reasoning to construct a new schema which characterizes a situation. this work is part of the morris project at ucla  dyer  1b . 
1 introduction 
in the real world  tasks cannot always be accomplished by using simple sub-goal partitioning and recursive problem analysis. both real world agents and narrative characters often must apply plans that require cooperation or information from other agents. a classification of real world plans is found in  schank and abelson  1 . a taxonomy of goal/plan interactions can be found in  wilensky  1 . in addition  successful real world  planners often use adages to guide them in avoiding bad plans. adages warn against both specific and general planning errors. poor richard's almanac  franklin  1  gives many examples of adages  such as  a stitch in time saves nine   error avoidance   and  don't burn your bridges behind you.   error recovery . 
dyer  1a  showed how a class of planning errors could be represented by thematic abstraction units  taus   and how these planning errors might be recognized in stories. this paper will present a representation for planning error recognition that also facilitates the combination of planning descriptions into new thematic structures. the combination method requires an example narrative situation that contains a new planning error. the example is conceptually analyzed to discover whether known planning errors  present in the story  can be combined into new structures. 
in addition to the representations for taus  goals  and plans mentioned above  the examples here also rely on schank's conceptual dependency theory  schank  1 . other relevant work on memory organization 
includes  schank  1    kolodner  1   and  lebowitz  1 . 
1 an example planning situation 
here we will see a planning situation that contains three planning errors whose descriptions are already known to the system. from this situation we will see how we can generate two specializations of planning errors  and one novel planning construct. this situation is an aesop's fable *. 
the fox and the crow 
the crow was sitting in the tree with a piece of cheese in her mouth. 
the fox walked up to the bottom of the tree and said to the crow   crow what a beautiful voice you have; please sing for me.  the crow was very flattered and began to sing. when she did  the cheese dropped out of her mouth. the fox grabbed the cheese and ran away laughing. 
 this work was supported in part by a grant from the hughes aircraft al center and a grant from the keck foundation. this work was also supported in part by the ucla center for experimental computer science. 
 other work dealing with aesop's fables is talespin  meehan  1  a program which generated stories by simulating a character's planning and problem-solving behavior. talespin  however  lacked a theory of planning errors and had no sense of the moral of the story. 
note that this story can be looked at in two ways: 1  as an instance of bad planning on the part of the crow and 1  as an instance of good planning on the part of the fox. the is an instance of planning errors as counter planning as defined in  carbonell  1 . 
the first of the three planning errors we will discuss is the simplest. when the crow sings  she does not realize that she is already using her mouth to hold the cheese. this planning error is characterized at an abstract level by tau-conf-enabl  confused enablement . the full representation for tau-conf-enabl is given below. 
in each tau  the representation of a planning error consists of two parts:  1  the binding-spec: a list of conceptual patterns which occur in the story;  1  the constraints: a list of logical constraints among the patterns occurring in the binding-spac and other concepts from the story. 

the abstract situation this structure characterizes is one where an agent has a goal   standing-goal  which has failed and where the goal was to preserve possession of some object. the cause of the goal failure is an act   miatake  which attempted to accomplish another goal    i n t a r f a r i n g - g o a l . 
the representation presented here enables us to create new taus from existing ones. the processes of recognizing and indexing taus are covered more fully in  dyer 1  and  dolan 1 .  dolan 1  also covers the comprehension process model which allows the recognition of taus in this format when planning errors are encountered in stories. 
as we mentioned above  the fox and the crow instantiates two other taus:  1  tau-vanity is the planning error of allowing personal vanity to dictate plan choice;  1  tau-ulterior is the planning error of not considering another agent's possible motives before acting. both of these taus display an important characteristic of taus as planning heuristics; not only do taus provide admonitions against bad planning  but they can also be turned around and used as plans to try and force other agents into situations where they will make mistakes. 
these taus can be combined to form new planning heuristics. there are two key problems in tau acquisition:  1  how does a program know which taus to select and examine for combination attempts; and  1  once selected  how are taus actually combined to form new planning and indexing structures  

both 1  and  1  are non-trivial. a sophisticated planner will know many stories each indexed by multiple taus. attempting to combine taus arbitrarily would lead to combinatoric problems. fortunately  memorable stories  such as aesop's fables  are designed to give novel planning advice through illustrating planning errors. thus  tau selection can be governed by the following strategy: 
whenever two taus share concepts in an observed planning situation  try to combine them to form a novel planning construct 
this heuristic can only be applied after reading a story. the comprehension of the story thus makes available taus for combination and indicates which concepts are shared. 
there are two ways to combine taus based on the way they share concepts:  1  specialization and  1  combination  chunking . 
recent work in specialization learning includes  dejong  1  and  kolodner  1 . both workers formulate methods for creating new planning knowledge through specialization. most research in learning by chunking has been in domains where there is no counterplanning  laird  1 . however there are some element of chunking in dejong's work and in mitchell's  mitchell  1 . 
1 creating new taua through specialization 
the type of sharing which exists between tau-ulteror and tau-conf-enabl is called containment. in order to see how containment works  examine the representation for tau-ulterior given below  
by looking at the bind-spec for both taus the reader will see that 
tau-ulterior contains all the concepts from tau-conf-enabl. thus we can form a new tau which is a specialization of tau-ulterior. 
the new tau is formed by taking the extra constraints from 
tau-conf-enabl   extra  meaning those not already in tau-ulterior  and conjoining them with those in tau-ulterior. this creates new planning advice specific to possession goals and ulterior motives. for more details on forming taus thourgh specialization the reader is directed to  dolan and dyer  1 . 
	c. dolan and m. dyer 	1 
1 creating new taua through combination 
as we saw above  we can get a non-trivial specialization of a tau by discovering containment in a particular situation. in general  however  neither tau contains the other. in these cases we must examine the relationships or constraints among the concepts not shared between the two taus. for an example  consider tau-vanity. the representation for this tau is given below. 

tau-vanity represents a situation in which  x believes he has a special skill* and is thus motivated to have a goal  of  showing off  in the fox and crow story  which will interfere with pre-existing goals. 
tau-suckered embodies the planning failure of allowing someone else to take advantage of your dormant goals by providing one of the missing enablement conditions on that goal. in the case of the fox and the crow the dormant goal is the crow's goal to show off. the missing enablement condition is a receptive audience. the fox provides that audience and so tricks the crow into defeating her standing goal of keeping the cheese. 
clearly there are many ways  structurally  of combining tau-vanity and 
tau-ulterior. only one  or perhaps a few  will turn into an  interesting  
tau such as tau-suckered. if so  then how is ft that just the right concepts get combined  the process of combining tau la called  justification . there are a sot of heuristics for justification given in next section. 
tha representation for  skil!  presented here ia greatly simplified. 
1 	c. dolan and m. dyer 
in order to dynamically construct tau-suckered  there ara two major 
 taps. the first is to find the concepts which ara common to tha binding-specs of both tau-vanity and tau-ulterior  namaly.  standing-goal   interfaring-goal  and  mistake. 
these concepts ara included in tha binding-spac for the new tau  lines 1 and 1 in tau-suckered. also  constraints that involve only these concepts and free variables are included in the constraint* part of the new tau  lines 1 in tau-suckered. the second step is to take the remaining concepts from the binding-specs and justify them; that is  make sure they are accounted for either in the new binding-spec or in the constraints. 
1 juatlflcatlon 
in this example the concepts which are not shared are  dwsirable-state and  belief from tau-vanity and  mtrans from tau-ulterior. justification takes a concept from one tau and finds out where it fits in the causal structure for the instantiation of the other tau. 
first   d e s i r a b l e - s t a t e is found to be already subsumed by constraint number 1 of tau-suckered. this is so because an act which thwarts a goal may negate a state that previously achieved the goal. in this case  the crow's singing thwarts her goal of keeping the cheese because it negates the state of having her mouth holding the cheese. 
the achievement condition is found in constraint 1 of tau-ulterior. 
the heuristic which is used here is  
if a constraint can possiblly subsume concepts  
try matching the constraints on subsumed concepts against those in the component taus. 
all that is left is to justify  belief and  mtrans. intuitively what we want to see is a causal relation established between  balief  the crow thinking she has a good voice  and  atrans  the fox's flattery of the crow. further we want to see  beiief as an enablement condition on the crow's dormant goal to show-off. 
one thing to note here is that the intention relation is transitive. the rule for intention transitivity is represented as in the figure below. 

the system knows which relations are transitive  and can look up the particular kind of transitivity for a relation  i.e. what the intermediate relations are. thus  another heuristic for justifying concepts is: 
if a transitivity rule waa applied in satisfying a constraint of tau1' 
try opening up the transitive path and look for concepts of tau  that need to be justified 
in this case we see that the transitive path is in constraint  line 1  from tau-vanity which is reproduced as constraint  line 1  in tau-suckered  so a new constraint  line 1  is added to tau-suckered for sub-goal in the story this represents the fact that  in order to show off  a character must believe he haa something to show-off; the fox flattering the crow provides this enablement condition. the satisfaction of this enablement condition is given in lines 1 of tau-suckered. 
the constraints in lines 1 are added because they meet various criteria for relating concepts in the binding-spec. for a detailed discussion of these criteria see  dolan and dyer  1 . 
the result of this constraint analysis is the creation of a new tau  tau-suckered  which represents someone being fooled into having a goal failure by being motivated to satisfy another  currently dormant  goal. this tau serves as a new indexing structure for tha fox and tha crow story and is now available for use in future planning and comprehension tasks. 
1 progress and future work 
a program. cram  is under development as part of this research. currently  cram is able to understand stories that are input as unconnected conceptual dependency  schank 1  structures. cram finds the planning errors in each story and characterizes them in terms of one or more taus. these taus are then used to index the story in memory for later retrtval. 
in the future cram will be able to give advice to correct characters' planning errors. also planned for cram are a natural language parser and generator so that cram can take in stories as verbatim input and later generate english explanation of new taus it has discovered. 
1 conclusions 
the approach presented here allows both specialization learning and chunking learning of planning errors in multiple planning agent domains. the structures learned can be used both for critiquing plans and also for generating counterplanning advice. 
