 
　　　most current artificial intelligence systems require a complete and correct model of their domain of application. however  for any domain of reasonable size  it is not feasible to construct such a model. the main thrust of this project is to build a system that can continuously update its model through a constant monitoring of the real world. the project involves the development of a system that starts with an incomplete and incorrect model of the world. while performing its tasks the system is occasionally confronted by observations which are inconsistent with its current beliefs. it attempts to explain these observations by hypothesizing reasons for the inconsistencies and devising experiments to pinpoint the flawed belief. based on the results of the experiments the system revises its beliefs to accommodate the previously inconsistent observations. 
	i 	introduction 
machine learning is of increasing importance in artificial 
intelligence  carbonell1  michalski1  mitchells1  schanks1  winston1j. in this paper  we shall describe a new form of explanation-based learning which involves designing and conducting experiments in the  rear world to help with the explanation of some observation. when human learning behavior is considered  it seems that there are two classes of explanatory learning to be distinguished. the first is the acquisition of schematic knowledge  u. the high-level learning of plans and scripts  e.g  how to behave at a restaurant . this form of learning does not  in principle  enhance the power of the knowledge that is already there  but makes its application more efficient via chunking with schemata. the second is the acquisition of conceptual knowledge. this form of learning adds new capabilities that the previous knowledge did not provide. 
　　　note that there are marked differences between the two forms. schematic knowledge may be learned from a single observation. for example  the basic structure of a script for kidnapping might be clear from a single observation  provided there is enough knowledge to understand the dependencies between the individual events in that situation. this has been demonstrated in work on explanatory schema acquisition  dejong1l 
acquiring new concepts  on the other hand  is more difficult. 
when people discovered radioactivity  it took them a long time to formulate the proper concept. this is a case where the previous knowledge is not sufficient to explain the observations and thus reasoning has to be replaced by experimentation. another point to observe in this example is that new concepts are not discovered by a search for them  but by noticing discrepancies between the world model predictions and the way the world behaves. new concepts arise out of the necessity to explain these discrepancies while maintaining a knowledge base consistent with the earlier observations. 
　　　this work wis supported in part by the air force office of scientific research under gram f1-k-1 and in part by the national science foundation under gwnt nsf-ist-1. 
  ibm fellow ii the system 
a. 	system overview 
　　　our system has a world model of its domain that drives its reasoning. a number of beliefs are implicit in the structure of the world model. when situations arise that cannot be explained with the current world model thereby leading to a contradiction  the system starts questioning its beliefs. it first questions beliefs directly linked to the contradiction. only if these fail to give a consistent explanation does it question secondary causes of the contradiction  beliefs on which the primary beliefs rested  and the beliefs behind the questioning and investigation process. the underlying assumption is that the number of errors in the model is small. the system performs a series of experiments directed at finding the belief at fault. once the belief has been identified it is revised to give a model consistent with the current observations. 
　　　the planner used by the system predicts the observations the system will make when the plans are executed. the system constantly compares these predictions with the actual observations. whenever it finds changes in the world that were not a consequence of some plan  it tries to explain them as an effect of processes running independently from the system  for example  evaporation . 
　　　one of the system's implicit beliefs is that liquids cannot pass through solids. while carrying out its normal activities  the system inadvertently encounters an example of osmosis  a process unknown to the system. osmosis is a natural phenomenon that occurs when two solutions are separated by a permeable solid. if the concentrations of the two solutions are different then a flow of solvent through the solid takes place in such a way as to minimize the difference in concentrations. 
　　　the system's observation of osmosis cannot be explained with its current knowledge of the world. the information deduced from the contradiction enables the system to devise experiments to determine which of its beliefs is wrong and to discover some characteristics of the osmosis process. 
　　　the observation of the phenomenon of osmosis results in the system revising its world model. it modifies its belief to allow for liquids to pass through solids under special circumstances. in the 
process  it discovers the concept of permeability of solids and a new form of flow which we know as osmosis. 
b. the osmosis example 
　　　the system is given a goal of forming a mixture of specific amounts of solutions  #$solutionl and #$solution1  of known concentrations  concl and conc1  concl   conc1 . in order to achieve this goal it generates a subgoal of temporarily storing the specified amounts of the two solutions in containers  as it happens the only suitable container has two compartments separated by a permeable membrane. the planner  not realizing the significance of the partition  plans to pour the two solutions of differing concentrations into the two compartments. as a part of its monitoring of the real world  it expects a number of observations including a decrease in the amount of solutions in the two original containers  and the appearance of specified amounts of solution in the two compartments of the selected container. 
c. contradiction detection 
　　　the system verifies the predictions made by the planner by comparing the predictions with its input observation stream. immediately alter execution of the plan it finds that all the predictions made by the planner are confirmed however the next time it examines the container it finds that the amounts of the two solutions have changed. this change was not predicted by the planner. 
　　　the explanation module tries to relate the change to an effect of one of the known processes for changing the amount of a solution. the relevant processes are evaporation  condensation  absorption  in which the solid absorbs liquid like a sponge   release  in which the solid releases the absorbed liquid   and flow. the system tries to explain the observations as a result of these processes by activating the corresponding schemata and checking if the change caused by running each process is compatible with the observations. however  it finds that none of the processes can be activated since each of them has preconditions which cannot be satisfied. evaporation and condensation require exposure to the atmosphere and since the compartments are closed by lids they cannot be activated. absorption and release require the container to have an absorbent property. flow requires a free path from the source to the destination. these requirements are not met in the present situation. so the system is left with a contradiction in which it has observations for which its current world model has proven inadequate  figure 
1 . 
d. beliefs tested 
　　　the explanation structure that resulted in the contradiction involves a number of processes. each process seems inapplicable because one or more preconditions are not satisfied in the current situation. the beliefs on which the contradiction rests are obtained from the reasons for the failure of each process to run. the beliefs are : 
 1  the procedure for classifying solids into absorbent and nonabsorbent classes is right  
 1  liquids require a clear  solid-free path to flow  and 
 1  evaporation and condensation require exposure to the atmosphere. 
for the observation to be valid one of these beliefs must be 
	s. rajamoney et al. 	1 
wrong and to find out which one the system performs a series of experiments. note that on the first attempt at finding an explanation the system tests only the immediate causes of failure of the 
primary processes. 
e. 	the experiment designer 
there are two stages of experimentation: 
 1  the first stage involves distinguishing among the five processes that would explain the contradiction  
 1  the second stage involves constructing a series of experiments which are used to generalize the specific instance of the process observed. 
　　　the partially instantiated processes  the failed preconditions  and the unexplained observations form the input to the experiment design module. the ideal experiment would reproduce the setup in the original observation in such a manner that only one of the processes is active and all the other competing processes are eliminated totally. however  it is impossible to eliminate the possibility of some processes  for example  absorption  since one cannot build a container without walls . furthermore  this may be undesirable because the process  which is itself suspect  may continue to influence the observations in some hidden manner. for example  one might think that flow can be eliminated by separating the two compartments and moving one away from the other  but the belief being questioned  namely  liquids cannot flow through solids  is still in effect; this time with a longer path through more solids like tables and floors. 
　　　some means of discriminating all the instantiations of the five processes simultaneously is required note that the basis for distinguishing the processes cannot depend on the preconditions because they are suspected of not activating processes when they should have. one characteristic of a process is that the time rate at which the process progresses depends on geometrical parameters  length  area etc.   state variables  temperature  pressure etc   and the properties of the participants. the system bases its experiments upon the rate at which each process progresses. note that a secondary belief  which forms the basis for the investigation  is that the proportionalities of the rates on the above parameters do not change. 
　　　experiments are designed such that one of the processes is allowed to dominate the rest by having an environment in which its rate is enhanced and the other competing processes' rates inhibited. if the original observations are reproduced in a much shorter time period then the evidence points to the dominating process as the cause of the observation. the flow process rate depends on the 
1 s. rajamoney et al. 
cross-sectional area and the length of the path from the source to the destination  the evaporation and condensation rates depend on the surface area of contact between the liquid and its vapor  and the absorption and release rates depend on the surface area of contact between the absorbing solid and the absorbed liquid. by manipulating the geometry of the containers it is possible to build containers in which everything else remains as in the original setup  but parameters like contact surface area  cross-sectional area and length are maximized or minimized to allow one process to dominate the other competing ones. 
     in our particular example the system comes up with experiment specifications to distinguish each process. the set of specifications to distinguish the process flow is shown in figure 1 and an experiment that meets these specifications relative to the original setup is shown in figure 1. the system requests that the experiments be carried out and the results returned. based on the combined results the system concludes that some form of the process flow caused the original observation. 

hi conclusions 
     we have explored a model for making experiments to explain inconsistencies between the system's knowledge and the real world. in some respects  this is similar to work described in  langley1l  but our approach uses the world model to drive the experimentation. also  some results on testing hypotheses using experiments have been reported in  shapiro1l . shapiro's approach is  however  of a more theoretical nature  and is impractical because it uses a large number of experiments. 
     the project is still in its infancy. the next step is to improve the experiment design  where the project addresses serious philosophical issues about knowledge and the closed world hypothesis. our approach to this so far has been to copy people's behavior and try the simple explanations first. only if these fail are the more basic assumptions that underlie them retracted. 
　　　
f. revising the world model 
     the most specific revision of the world model would be to create a new process that resembles the process flow in most respects. however this process will have preconditions that permit flow when the two specific solutions are separated by the specific partition as in the example above. our current efforts are concentrated on generalizing this specific case using explanation-based learning  dejong1  in conjunction with a further series of experiments aimed at discovering the properties of the participants that played a crucial role in the example. in any case  the important thing to note is that the system no longer believes that liquids cannot pass through solids and has a specific example to disprove it. 
　　　
