 
¡¡¡¡the literature on the nature and representation of time is full of disputes and contradictory theories. this is surprising since the nature of time does not cause any worry for people in their everyday coping with the world. what this suggests is that there is some form of common sense knowledge about time that is rich enough to enable people to deal with the world  and which is universal enough to enable cooperation and communication between people. in this paper  we propose such a theory and defend it in two different ways. we axiomatic a theory of time in terms of intervals and the single relation meet. we then show that this axiomatization subsumes allen's interval-based theory. we then extend the theory by formally defining the beginnings and endings of intervals and show that these have the properties we normally would associate with points. we distinguish between these point-like objects and the concept of moment as hypothesized in discrete time models. finally  we examine the theory in terms of each of several different models. introduction 
¡¡¡¡the literature on the nature and representation of time is full of disputes and contradictory theories. this is surprising since the nature of time does not cause any worry for people in their everyday coping with the world. what this suggests is that there is some form of common sense knowledge about time that is rich enough to enable people to deal with the world  and which is universal enough to enable cooperation and communication between people. in this paper  we propose such a theory and defend it in two different ways. 
¡¡¡¡first the theory is powerful enough to include the distinction between  intervals   i.e.  times corresponding to events with duration   and  points   i.e.. times corresponding to instantaneous events   as well as allowing substantial reasoning about temporal ordenng relations  including the abilities described in  allen  1  . in addition  it includes a formalization of the beginning and ending of events by introducing the corresponding beginning and endings of times. we show that beginnings and endings act in many ways like  points   yet can be distinguished from them. 
this research was supported in part by the office of naval research under grant n1-c-1  the national science foundation under grant dcr-1 and the us army under grant daak1-c-1. ¡¡¡¡second  the theory has as allowable models a number of the temporal models that are suggested in the literature. this includes models that equate time with intervals and points on the real number line  models that hypothesize discrete time  and any model which mixes real points and intervals. our claim is that if our common-sense theory of time excluded any one of these models  then there would be no debate as to whether that model was valid  since in that case our own primitive intuitions on the matter would be extremely clear. we do make one restriction on the models considered: they must allow the possibility that two intervals meet  which is defined as the situation where there is no time between the two intervals  and no time that the intervals share. the importance of this relationship for naive theories of time has been argued elsewhere  e.g.   allen  1; 1    and so will not be defended again here. even with this requirement  we shall see that substantially different models are possible. 
¡¡¡¡one important intuition which guides us is that time is occupied by events. if the universe did not change  there would be no time. any sort of event or happening which can be described or thought of has a corresponding time  and the universe of times consists of these. we will often appeal to this intuition  which notoriously sometimes indicates continuity and sometimes discreteness.  in particular  it is the source of the need to allow time intervals to be able to meet.  
¡¡¡¡in section 1  we axiomatize a theory of time in terms of intervals and the single relation meets. it is then shown in section ii that this axiomatization subsumes the interval-based theory proposed in  allen  1; 1 . 
¡¡¡¡we then extend the theory in section iii by formally defining the beginnings and endings of intervals and show that these have the properties we normally would associate with points. in section iv  a distinction is made between these point-like objects and the concept of moment as hypothesized in discrete time models. finally  in section v  we examine the theory in terms of each of several different models. 
¡¡¡¡this paper is a condensed version of a report   allen & hayes  1   henceforth referred to as the longer paper  which presents additional discussion and the proofs for all the theorems below. 

j. allen and p. hayes 1 
relation inverse definition before  b after  a exists k . i meets k meets j 
exists kj . k meets i meeis i & k meets j meeis! overlaps  o overlapped-by  oi exists a b c d e . a meets i meets d meets c & 
a meetsb melts j meets c& 
b meets c meets d starts  s started-by si exists a.b.c a meets i meets b meets c & a meets j meets c finishes  f finished-by. fi fxis is a.b.c a meets b meets i meets c & a meets j meets c during  d con'i ains  di fx is is a.b.c.d . a meets b meets i meets c meets d & a meets j meets d figure 1: the relationships between i and j in terms ofthe meets relation 

i. an axiomatization of interval time 
¡¡¡¡we start the formal development by positing a class of objects in our ontology that we shall call times. these are intended to correspond to our intuitive notion of when some event occurs. we do not  at this early stage  make any committment as to whether all times are decomposable or not. 
¡¡¡¡the essential requirement of our intuition above is that two time intervals can meet. we will take meet as our primitive relationship between times and show that we can constructively define the complete set of possible relationships between intervals in terms of meets. other reductions to a small set are possible; for example  hamblin  uses a relation we could define as lessthan-or-meets.  
¡¡¡¡for example  we can define a relationship before to hold between intervals only if there exists an interval that spans some time between them. thus 
i before j  = =  exists k . i meets k& 
k meets j. 
as a notational convenience  we shall abbreviate conjunctions such as the above into a chain  i.e.  i meets k meets j. we shall also use the abbreviations used in  allen  1  for disjunctions between pairs of intervals. 
thus  j  o oi s f d  i  is shorthand for the formula 
j overlaps i  or  j overlapped-by i  or  j starts i  or  j finishes i  or  j during i . 
¡¡¡¡all the possible relationships between times are defined in figure 1. by including the inverses of these relations in the obvious way  we have thirteen relationships defined constructively in terms of meet. each entry defines the ordered relation between i and j  i before j  i overlaps j  etc. . the inverses are also between i and j and are equivalent to the original relationship between j and i  e.g.  i before j  = =  j after i. etc. . the small letters listed with each give the abbreviation for the relation that will be used later in some examples. 
¡¡¡¡with this reduction  we can axiomatize the interval logic entirely in terms of the meets relation  as follows. 
¡¡¡¡the first two axioms are based on the intuition that intervals have a unique beginning position and a unique ending position. as a consequence of this  if two intervals both meet a third interval  then any interval that one meets  the other meets as well. 
axioms for uniqueness of  meeting places : 
 ml  all i j . 
 exists k. i meets k & j meets k  =  
 all 1 meets k =   j meets 1   m1  all i j . 
 exists k . k meets i & k meets j  =   
 all 1 meets i  =   i meets j  ¡¡¡¡the third axiom captures the notion of ordering. it simply states that given two  places  where two intervals meet  then these places are either equal or one precedes the other. this is axiomatized without referring to places as follows: 
ordering axiom: 
 m1  	all ij.k.i. 
 i meets j & k meets 1  =  
1   i meets l xor 
1   exists m.i meets m meetsl  xor 
1   exists n.k meets n meets j  

1 j. allen and p. hayes 
in other words  we have exactly three possible cases  shown in figure 1  for any four intervals i  j  k  and 1. 

figure 1: the three possible orderings of i  j  k  and 1 in axiom m1 
   finally  we need some existence axioms. first given any interval  there exists an interval that meets it  and an interval that it meets  i.e.  
 m1  	all i exists j  k . j meets i meets k 

a consequence of this axiom is that no infinite time intervals are allowed in our theory. 
   we need one more existence axiom  guaranteeing the existence of an interval which is the  union  or sum  +  of two adjacent intervals  defined by: 

using the defined relations above  this axiom can be restated as 

we can prove that when i + j exists it is unique  and that + is associative. 
with these five axioms and the definitions given in figure i  the entire transitivity table for interal relationships given in  allen  1  can be derived. thus  this set of five axioms concisely captures that logic. this is not to say  however  that an implementation should not use the expanded set of relations. there are some important efficiency gains from the larger set of primitives  as described in  allen  1j. 
ii. nests: beginnings and endings 
   there are classes of events described in english that cannot be associated with a temporal duration. these are often called  instantaneous  events  or  accomplishments   e.g.   mourelatos  1 . thus  we can say  i closed the door   but if we say  i closed the door for three hours   it means we are repeatedly performing the action  contrast  i sat on the floor.  . similarly  a click  or the flash of a strobe  cannot be qualified by a duration. furthermore  the world after a click  or flash  could be essentially the same as before it  showing that these events cannot be identified with simple changes of state. 
   one common approach to handling the times for such events is to model them as points  real points in the continuous model; integers in the discrete model . in this section and the following one  we shall develop two distinct notions of points from our interval logic. these will be compared in the final section. 
     in this section we shall construct the equivalent of points within the interval logic defined in section ii by adopting a variant of filters  one of the standard mathematical constructions of points from intervals. 
¡¡¡¡in particular  we define the beginning of an interval to be the set of all intervals that  touch the beginning  in any way  and the end similarly. we can define the ending of an interval similarly. 
begin i  = { p | p  o s m fi di e si  i} 
this can be defined solelv in terms of the meets relation if one desires  but the above definition is simplest to understand. for convenience  we can define a nest as a beginning or an ending  and can now define relations over the set of nests which show them to have the properties of points. we shall say a nest n is before a nest m iff there is at least one interval in n that is before some interval in m. 
for any two nests  n and m 
n   m  ==  exists n m . n € n & m € m & n   m 
we show in the longer paper that nests have the important properties of points. the main result is that nests are totally ordered  i.e.  
theorem 1: for any two nests n and m  either n   m  m   n or n = m 
   we can also show that the intuitive definitions of the interval relations in terms of nests are theorems. for example  we have 
begin i    end i  
	i meets j  ==  	end i  = begin j  
i overlaps j  ==  begin i    begin j  & begin j    end i  & 
end i    end j  
the second of these is especially important  as it shows that there is only one  place  where two meeting intervals actually meet this is  perhaps surprisingly  a delicate matter. very small changes in the definitions of begin and end fail to achieve this. it is perilously easy to get a point structure  which distinguishes two  sides  of a single point  and other oddities  as discussed in  van benthem  1 .  we are grateful to professor dana scott for bringing this and hamblin's work to our attention  and emphasizing some of these subtleties.  we discuss this at greater length in the longer paper. 

iv. discrete time and time points 
   we can now show that discrete time models introduce a different kind of  point  than the points that are defined above. in particular  discrete time hypothesizes times that are not decomposable. let us introduce a distinction between true-intervals and moments as follows: 
all i . true-interval i    =   exists a b c d . a meets i meets d 
& a meets b meets c meets d 
all i . moment i    =   ~1 rue-interval i  
thus  a true-interval has at least two sub-intervals  which might in turn be moments or true-intervals --one that starts it and one that finishes. 
¡¡¡¡before we continue  it is important to remember that all of the earlier theorems were proven before any distinction was made between moments and true-intervals  so they all hold for both classes: none of the proofs ever depended on the decomposability of an interval. these definitions allow us to prove that two moments cannot overlap in any way  yet they can meet each other. more precisely  
all ij . moment i  & moment j  =  i    m = mi    j 
¡¡¡¡let us now consider the relationship between nests and moments. the definition of nests did not exclude nests defined at the beginning or ending of moments. in fact  we can show that the beginning of a moment is before the ending of that same moment! thus  although a moment cannot be decomposed  we can distinguish its beginning from its ending. 
¡¡¡¡we can also show that moments and nests cannot be considered to be isomorphic to each other. this is easily seen from the observation that moments can meet each other  whereas nests cannot. intuitively  a moment is a time during which some event  a flash  a bang  occurs  while a nest defines an abstract  position  in the sequence of times. 
v. discussion 
¡¡¡¡it is interesting to interpret these axioms in various possible models. the simplest one is discrete time: intervals are pairs of integers  n m  with n   m  and  n m  meets  m k . then a moment is a nondecomposable interval  n n + l   and nests pick out integers  the places  between  moments. in this model there is a clear distinction between moments and points. we can also define several models based on the real line. for example  time intervals can be mapped into open or closed real intervals: however  then times can never meet. a simpler continuous model  based on the integer model above  
	j. allen and p. hayes 	1 
defines time intervals as pairs of reals  a b . with  a b  meets  b c . following through the axiomatic definitions with this as a basis makes nests define points on the real line  as expected  but now there are no moments at all  since even the smallest interval is decomposable. we might try to extend the model to allow intervals of the form  a a   which would qualify as moments  but now 
consider  a b    b b  and  b c . by our definitions  the first meets the last  yet they have the second between them  so the first is before the last  violating the ordering axiom. we have tried to fit real  substantial-though very small-time intervals into merely mathematical  places   and they don't fit. 
¡¡¡¡however  another possible model is one which mixes these  using the same definitions of interval and meet  from which all else follows  but allowing parts of the time line to be discrete and parts to be continuous. intuitively  if we have only coarse time measuring tools available  then we can treat time as discrete  but the possibility always remains of turning up the temporal magnification arbitrarily far  if we have access to events which can make the finer distinctions  distinctions which can split  moments  into smaller and smaller parts. 
   our axiomatic theory allows all of these models and others; it is uncommitted as to continuity or discreteness of the sequence of times  yet is powerful enough to support a great deal of the temporal reasoning of common sense. 