 
the problem of planning motions of robot manipulators and similar mechanical devices in the presence of obstacles is one of keen interest to the artificial intelligence community. most of the algorithms previously reported for solving such problems have been combinatorial algorithms  which work by partitioning the problem domain 
continuum into a finite set of equivalence classes  and applying combinatorial search algorithms to plan transitions among them. however  the few continuum algorithms that have been reported  which do not rely on such a partitioning  have shown greater promise when applied to problems of complexity equivalent to that of planning a true manipulator motion. this is true even though the heuristics employed in these continuum algorithms have been extremely simple in nature. a significant barrier to the development of more refined heuristics for use in continuum algorithms is the uncertainty over how to characterise the proximal relationship between rigid bodies. in this paper  a new measurement function is reported which permits such characterisation. an introduction is made to a new type of path planning algorithm which this function makes possible  which promises to significantly increase the capabilities of continuum path planning software. 
1 	p r i o r w o r k 
　two early research efforts in this area may be seen as cornerstones of the two basic methods employed. 
　whitney introduced the first combinatorial algorithm for manipulator path planning  whitney 1 . although this algorithm was only concerned with the planning of gripper motions in the plane  and only a few evenly spaced positions and orientations were considered  the algorithm suffered from problems of combinatorial explosion. the algoritlim was formally verified to be correct. 
　peiper's algorithm was not combinatorial  and was applied to the planning of motions for a full six degree of freedom robot manipulator  peiper 1 . although he reported qualitative success  he was unable to verify correctness. 
　this basic tradeoff between vcrifiability and the size of tractable problems remains a fundamental issue among those who study path-planning today. 
　perhaps the most successful combinatorial results have been built on the work of  lozano perez 1   who defined a scheme for exactly partitioning admissible points from inadmissible ones for polyhedral bodies in fixed relative orientation. .jarvis has reported a similar scheme which works for arbitrary classes of objects  and is based on constructing adjacency graphs among uniform sized quanta in 1 space1  jarvis 1 . brooks later extended lozano perez' work to apply to planar objects with variable orientation through the use of a successive approximation technique  brooks 1   but was subsequently unable to extend it to three dimensions.  schwartz 1  reported a generalization of this concept to apply to objects of arbitrary dimension bounded by algebraic surfaces  e. g. planes  cylinders  etc. . although these results confirmed earlier results showing the path planning problem to be p-space complete  reif 1   they were of little practical interest since time complexity for discretization of the problem domain exceeded that of simple subdivision into hyperparallelopipeds of the smallest mesh size reprcsentable by standard computing hardware1  buckley 1 . 
two non combinatorial algorithms stand out as significant. 
loeff and soni reported an algorithm for planning the motions of a planar  line segment manipulator among circular forbidden zones  loeff 1 . khatib has implemented an algorithm in which simulated repulsive forces generated from a restricted set of object models were used to generate commanded positions for certain distinguished points on a manipulator  khatib 1 . another simpler algorithms was reported by myers  myers 1 . although this algorithm was essentially one of hypothesis and test  its computation times for solving a general purpose path planning problem for a puma manipulator were on the same order of magnitude as those reported in  brooks 1  for the planar  free body case. 
　these results suggest that practical algorithms for path planning will be heuristic in nature  and not formally verifiable. however  prior research has only begun to explore the question of what sort of heuristics may be used to best advantage. notably  excepting the algorithms of loeff and soni and that of khatib  heuristics employed for collision avoidance in prior research have really been based only on whether or not a collision was detected in following an hypothesized trajectory. in most cases the direction in which liypothetical impact occurred was not even taken into account. often the occurrence of a collision at one point along an hypothesized trajectory was considered grounds for re-
jection of that entire trajectory. local perturbation of offending portions of trajectories has hardly been explored. 
1 t h e p r o x i m a l relationship of objects in space 
　to a large extent  the simplicity of the heuristics employed in previous algorithms is due the fact that there doesn't really exist 
'this adjacency graph was searched using dynamic programming  which that computations be performed for each quantum in the spare. 
1
c. g. a single precision floating point number on something like a vax 

c. buckley and l. leifer 1 
figure 1: a point set defined by boundary constraints 
a good way of characterizing the proximal relationship between two rigid bodies or models. conceptually  it is easy to determine whether or not an intersection between two such bodies occurs  given their relative position. however  if this information is insufficient  then what  it is often proposed that the actual point set corresponding to the intersection of rigid bodies be computed  but there have been no serious proposals made as to what might be done with all of this information if were it available. 
　practically  the only alternatives to hypothesize and test methods which have enjoyed any success at all are the relaxation methods. these methods were originally conceived to solve con-
strained non linear optimization problems  and have been quite successfully applied. loeff and soni and khatib took advantage of the fact that these algorithms work by continuously perturbing a state vector from some initial guess to a final optimum state to generate trajectories between known endpoints. 
　the main inconvenience with relaxation methods as they are almost always formulated is that all constraints must apply simultaneously. this has to do partially with the formulation of the kuhn-tucker stationarity equations for an extremum  which are used as error equations to drive state perturbations  and partially with long-standing conventions of the discipline. this requirement is fundamentally incompatible with standard solid modelling practice  in which solid objects are represented as point 
sets defined by arbitrary boolean functions of boundary predicates. 
　for example  the set of points contained in the l-shaped planar region shown in figure 1 may be described as those points which satisfy the following boolean expression: 
		to 
where each boolean expression pi corresponds to a point lying on the proper side of the associated line1  as indicated by the direction of the normal arrows drawn in the figure. if gi  *  = 1 were the equation of boundary line p   then the boolean expression pi might be #  x    1. only the constraints in one or the other of the two disjuncts are necessary to qualify a point as being part of the shaded region. further  for points lying in one of the arms of the ''cell'' it is not possible for all of the constraints to apply simultaneously. a similar argument may be made with respect to points outside of the shaded region. the developers of prior algorithms for path-planning in which relaxation methods were used were very aware of this problem  and in fact the limitations which they placed on their algorithms stemmed directly from it. 
1  an instance of a boundary manifold 


figure 1: locus of minimizing points for comba distance function 
d x  bi   the convex distance function1  rockafellar 1   then the function g will be minimized anywhere on the line segment connecting the two closest points of bodies b1 and b1. this segment is shown in figure 1. more important  its value there will correspond to half the distance between these closest points  or in other words  half the minimum distance between bodies b1 and b1 
　this specialized version of the comba function has the advantage that the generating segment corresponding to the locus of minimizing points is a function of only a single point on each of the bodies. this makes it easier to generate a derivative of this specialized comba function than it is for the general case. on the other hand  this specialization effectively reimposes the restrictions that: 
1. each of the convex bodies involved be represented by a single  differentiate manifold. 
1. the bodies in question should not intersect. 
these restrictions correspond almost exactly to those which loeff and soni  and subsequently khatib found it necessary to impose in their algorithms. loeff and soni restricted their attentions to planar problems  in which the manipulator links were modelled as line segments  and the obstacles '' did  not have sharp corners or sides   loeff 1   and in which the influence function used to repel a moving from a fixed body was a decreasing function of the minimum distance between them. khatib restricted his attention to the interaction between obstacles whose surfaces could be modelled as single differentiate manifolds  and selected discrete points on a moving manipulator1. the minimum distance between these points and obstacles was subsequently used in an inverse square potential function to simulate forces between the two bodies generating it. 
　in both of these cases  a clear effort was made to avoid having the two bodies in question intersect. there is good reason for this - if the two bodies intersect  the minimum distance between them drops to 1 identically and abruptly  and remains that way for arbitrary intersections. this means that the gradient of the minimum distance function is identically zero  and can therefore provide no information which might be used to drive a relaxation algorithm. 
figure 1: two paradigms for path planning 
the modified comba algorithm from working if the objects between which constraints are computed intersect. both the loeff/soni and khatib algorithms were subject to this limitation  which is a severe one because it forces an evolutive algorithm for trajectory generation  in which one known state is sequentially perturbed towards another  as shown in figure 1a  and no inadmissible states are ever entered. this approach will only work if the problem in question is free from false local minima. the limitations of this type of algorithm have been aptly demonstrated in mobile base path planning research  e. g.  chatila 1    cahn 1 . 
an alternate paradigm for path planning is shown in figure 
1b  in which an entire trajectory is hypothesized between the two known endpoints  and perturbed into admissibility  if it is not already. such an approach depends on being able to deal effectively with inadmissible states  in this case intersections between the moving body and its obstacles  should they arise. 
1 	a  the m i n i m u m directed distance 
　the function a  called the minimum directed distance between two arbitrary convex bodies  was developed in order to address these two issues. that is  it was developed to: 
  be valid for bodies bounded using more than one boundary predicate. 
  be valid even when the bodies in question intersect. 
a also stems from the distance form of the comba intersection form described earlier  hence its restriction to convex bodies. this restriction does not constitute much of a problem  since convex decomposition can be accomplished  off-line*'. algorithms exist for performing this decomposition automatically in the case of certain classes of objects  such as polyhedra  chazelle 1 . it can also be done by hand if necessary. 
　although the merit of the a function stems in large part from the fact that it is valid between two arbitrary convex bodies  it is simplest to explain for the case in which one of the bodies is a point. extension to the point body case follows from the 

   an even more important limitation than that placed on the same configuration space obstacle transformation described in type of objects which can be modelled is the one which prevents  lozano-perez 1 . corresponding to the minimum distance from a point x to all points in body 
	1 	disjoint case 
 the 1 factor is included so an to make the a term correspond to the inverse of the transformation from g  to vi . it's presence is not essential. consider first the case in which the givens of the problem  a 1which he called  points submitted to a potential   khatib 1  point x1 and a set of points of a rigid  convex body c are fixed in 

c. buckley and l. leifer 1 




c. buckley and l. leifer 1 
1 c o m p u t a t i o n a l issues 
　while a may be attractive theoretically  it is not straightforward to compute for arbitrary convex bodies. however  if the bodies between which it is to be computed are polyhedral sets  then its computation becomes a combinatorial problem. efficient ways of computing this function have been explored extensively  buckley 1 . briefly  the complexity bounds o nlogn  in the planar case  where n i is the combined number of vert ices of the two polyhedral bodies for which a is computed. the corresponding figure for spatial polyhedral bodies is 1 n1logn . 
　lmplementational issues of the a function are currently being studied  and it is being incorporated into a free body pathplanning system. the performance of this system is being assessed relative to a combinatorial system  that of  brooks 1 . 
 avriel 1  
 brooks 1  
 buckley !1f   
 cahn 1  avriel  m.  nonlinear programming: analysts and methods  prentice-hall  inc.  englewood cliffs  1. 
brooks  r. a. and lozano-perez  t.   a subdivision algorithm in configuration space for findpath with rotation   m. i. t. a. i. memo. no. 1  december  1. 
buckley  c. e.   the application of 
continuum methods to path planning   ph. d. dissertation  department of mechanical engineering  stanford univer-
sity   to appear  1. 
cahn  d. f. and phillips  s. r.   rob-
nav: a range-based robot navigation and obstacle avoidance algorithm   ieee transactions on systems  man  and cybernetics  pp. 1  september 1. 1 conclusion 
　a new function for characterizing the proximal relationship between two convex bodies has been developed  and its properties studied. this function makes it possible to implement path planning algorithms significantly different in capability from those heretofore reported. 
1 	acknowledgement 
　the support of the palo alto va hospital in this research is gratefully acknowledged. computational facilities and a super working environment were made available by the fairehild laboratory for artificial intelligence research  now a part of schlumberger . many thanks to rod brooks for providing the code for his combinatorial configuration space planning algorithm to serve as a benchmark. 
 author's address: design division. stanford. cal. 1  
bibliography 

 chatila 1  
 chazelle 1  
 gomba 1  
 khatib 1  
 jarvis 1  
 loeff 1  
 lozano perez 1  
 myers 1  
 peiper 1  
 reif 1  
 rockafellar 1  chatila  r.   systeme de nevigation  schwartz 1  schwartz  j. t. and sharir  m.   on the piano movers' problem ii. general techniques for computing topological 
properties of real algebraic manifolds   courant institute of mathematical sciences report no. 1  new york university  february 1. 
whitney  d. e.   state space models of remote manipulation tasks   ieee transactions on automatic control  vol. ac-1  no. 1  pp. 1  december  1. pour un robot mobile autonome: modelisation et processus decisionnels   doct.-ing. thesis  paul sabatier university  toulouse  france  no. 1  1. 
chazelle  b. m.   computational geometry and convexity   ph. d. dissertation  computer science department  carnegie-mellon university  report no. cmu-cs 1  1. 
comba  p. g.   a procedure for detecting intersections of three-dimensional objects   journal of the association of 
computing machinery  vol. 1  no. 1.  pp. 1  july 1. 
khatib  	o.  
 commande dynamique dans i'espace operationnel des robots manipulateurs en presence d'obstacles   doc.-ing. thesis  french national superior school of aeronautics and astronautics  1. 
jarvis  r. a.   projection derived space cube scene models for robotic vision and collision-free trajectory planning''  1nd international symposium of robotics research  kyoto 1  pp. 1. 
loeft  l. a. and soni  a. h.  ''an algorithm for computer guidance of a ma-
nipulator in between obstacles   asme journal of engineering for industry  pp. 1  august 1. 
lozano-perez  	to 	mas  	 auto-
matic planning of manipulator transfer movements   ieee transactions on systems  man  and cybernetics  vol. smc1  no. 1  pp. 1  october 1. 
myers  j. k.   a supervisory collisionavoidance system for robot con-
trollers   m. s. thesis  carnegie mellon university  december 1. 
peiper  d. l.   the kinematics of manipulators under computer control   ph. d. dissertation  mechanical engineering department  stanford univer-
sity  october 1. 
rjeif  j. h.   complexity of the mover's 
problem and generalizations  extended 
abstract    proceedings of the 1th symposium on the foundations of computer science  pp. 1  1. 
rockafellar  r. t.  convex analysis  
princeton university press  princeton  n. j. 1.  whitney 1  






1 c. buckley and l. leifer 

1 c. buckley and l. leifer 

1 c. buckley and l. leifer 







1 c. buckley and l. leifer 

1 c. buckley and l. leifer 

1 c. buckley and l. leifer 

1 c. buckley and l. leifer 





