 
     this paper proposes a parallel matching algorithm for feature-based stereo vision. features are zero-crossing  zc  points detected with various sizes of laplacian-gaussian filters. in order to obtain candidate intervals of disparity  the disparity histogram is computed all over the image. the image is  then  divided into small areas and the disparity histogram in each local area is computed within the candidate intervals. the local disparity histograms in all the channels are fed to the fusion evaluates and the most probable disparity is detected in each local area. once the most probable disparity is detected  disparities for all the finest zc points arc determined in the local area to obtain a high resolution disparity map. the  matching pairs are removed from a set of zc points. a series of processes are iterated until no more disparities are determined. 
     experiments with a sample scene reveals that the algorithm has advantages in efficiency and performance. 
introduction 
     among various types of range finding methods  stereo vision is worthy of notice since it needs no active media. however  it is so difficult to match corresponding points in the two images that the stereo vision has not been fully established as a computer vision system. 
     there have been many matching algorithms proposed  which may be classified into feature based method and areabased method. 
     in feature-based method. marr and hildreth introduced the convolution operator v1g  where v1 is the laplacian opera tor and g stands for the two-dimensional gaussian distribution  and adopted the zero-crossing  zc  of the v1g-filtered image as the features to be matched  marr and hildreth  1 . a problem with matching the zc is that zc points may appear randomly in the region o ' little intensity change. if we try to match zcs including such random ones  the probability of false matching becomes large. 
     another problem is concerned about how to match corresponding points. marr and poggio proposed the hierarchical matching algorithm  in which matching process is started in the coarsest channel of zc and followed by finer ones  marr and poggio  1 . as was successfully implemented by grimson the algorithm is quite reasonable for a scene where the depth change smoothly  grimson  1 . however  it turns out to be inefficient in certain cases. the first is a case where a scene includes many objects at different positions as observed in usual room scenes. the inheritance of disparity information from a coarser channel to a finer one frequently fails  especially at the discontinuities of depth. the second is a case where the main feature consists of high spatial frequency component alone. a white wall with small scratches is one of the examples. in that case the matching process can not start in the coarsest channel. 
     in order to solve problems mentioned above  we have developed and implemented a parallel matching algorithm. 
ii outline 1f algorithm 
     the general block diagram of the parallel matching algorithm is shown in figure 1. 
features are the zc points detected with various sizes of 
v1g. in order to obtain candidate intervals of disparity  the disparity histogram is computed all over the image. the image is  then  divided into small areas and the disparity histogram in each local area is computed within the candidate intervals. the local disparity histograms in all the channels are fed to the fusion evaluator and the most probable disparity is detected in each local area. once the most probable disparity is detected  disparities for all the finest zc points are determined in the local area to obtain a high resolution disparity map. a senes of processes are iterated until no more disparities are determined. 

     
1 y. nishimoto and y. shirai 
where d f- s . 
     
y. nishimoto and y. shirai 1 
edges of objects  that is  the area of discontinuous depth  while the zc points whose correspondences are detected by a coarser channel lie in the region of little change of depth  or in the periodical pattern on the calendar. 
     the cpu time is about 1 minutes except the calculation of feature extraction which could be quickly executed with special hardware. 
     
1 y nishimoto and y. shirai 

figure 1 finally obtained disparity 
viii conclusion 
     a parallel matching algorithm for feature-based stereo vision is proposed. 
     it has the following features. since the algorithm uses the features in the various resolutions evenly and complementally  it can deal with the correspondence problem according to the way how the depth changes on and between the physical surfaces of objects. for example  if an object has a surface on which the depth changes little  a coarser channel is automatically excited and the disparities over the wide area can be determined at a time. introduction of gdh enables us to limit the search intervals of disparity and to reduce the amount of calculations. in addition  the algorithm is essentially suitable for hardware due to its parallel architecture. 
     however  there is room for improvement in the details of algorithm. especially  the criterion of evaluation of fusion and the procedure of iteration need further refinement through experiments with various types of scenes. 
