 
   a glossy highlight  viewed stereoscopically  can provide information about surface shape. for example  highlights appear to lie behind convex surfaces but in front of concave ones. 
   a highlight is a distorted  reflected image of a light source. a ray equation is developed to predict the stereo disparities generated when a point source of light is reflected in a smooth  curved surface. this equation can be inverted to infer surface curvature properties from observed stereo disparities of the highlight. to obtain full information about surface curvature in the neighbourhood of the highlight  stereo with two different baselines or stereo with motion parallax is required 
   the same ray equation can also be used to predict the monocular appearance of a distributed source. a circular source  for instance  may produce an elliptical specular patch in an image  and the dimensions of the ellipse help to determine surface shape. 
1 introduction 
   when the reflectance of a surface has a specular as well as a diffuse component  the viewer may see highlights. highlights can give extra information about surface shape ikeuchi  uses photometric stereo with specular surfaces to determine surface orientation beck  l  notes that stereo vision might be able to perceive highlights on a convex surface as lying beneath the surface grirnson  incorporated lambertian and specular components of reflectance into stereo but he found that the computation of surface orientation could be numerically unstable. 
   here a computation is proposed that is less ambitious than crimson's  in that it. attempts to determine only local surface geometry  at specular points but it avoids relying on precise assumptions a b o u t surface reflectance 
   instead  the only assumption is that a specularity can be detected in an image  and its position measured for instance a method like that of ulltnan   1  could be used thereafter specularities are matched in the same way as features in conventional stereo  1.1 . the disparity of a stereo-matched specular point is then compared with the disparity of any nearby surface features 
   the basic principle of the surface shape estimation relies on the properties of curved mirrors  fig 1  . 
to interpret  specular stereo  both horizontal and vertical disparities are used. ideally  three noncollinear eyes are needed to obtain full information about local curvature. alternatively  parallax from a known vertical motion of a viewer  combined with conventional stereo geometry  is just as good if only a static  stereo view is available then this still yields partial information this could be combined 

	figure 1: 	viewing 	geometry. 	in 	a 
convex mirror  a  the image of a distant point source appears behind the mirror surface in a 
concave one  1  the image may appear in front study of the ordinary domestic soup spoon should confirm this 
with a priori knowledge or measurements from other sources  stereo  shape-from shading or specular reflection of a distributed source  to fully determine local surface shape 
   finally  observe that the path of a light ray from source to viewer can be reversed analysis developed to show the effect of moving the viewer also serves for movement  of the source the resulting equation is used to predict the appearance in an image of a distributed source under specular reflection in a 
   curved surface. for instance a circular source generally produces an elliptical specularity in the image. the orientation and length of its major and minor axes  in principle  determine local surface shape. 
1. imaging equations 
   equations are given to describe the process of formation of images of specular reflections details of derivations are given in  these predict the dependence of observed stereo disparities on surface and viewing geometry certain assumptions about the geometries are made  for the sake of mathematical simplicity then the equations are inverted so that  given viewing geometry and disparities  local surface geometry can be inferred 

1 a blake 


a. blake 1 
¡¡ mh-l x 	- 	w 	 1  and 	the 	condition 	for 	degeneracy 	is 	that det mh-/ -1. 
   the focusing effect may produce either a line or a blob in the image: 
1 if the rank of  mh-1  is 1 the specularity will appear in the image as a line. or else  there may be no solution for x in  1   and nothing of the specularity will be visible. stevens  observes that  with infinitely distant source and viewer  any line specularity must lie on a plane curve in the surface a special cose of the rank 1 focusing effect. 
1 if the rank of mh i is zero  that is mh-/-1. then either the specular reflection is invisible as above  or it is focussed in 1 dimensions onto the imaging aperture  and appears in the image as a large bright blob 
1 it can be shown that if the surface patch is convex  the effect cannot occur this corresponds to physical intuition only concave mirrors focus distant light sources 
1 a source at a finite distance if the source is at a finite distance l  rather 
than infinite as assumed so far  the imaging equation  1  becomes 
	 mh 	 l+p / x = w 	 1  
the constant p =  d1seeo + v  /l and clearly  as l-   
1 inferring local surface shape 
1 locally cylindrical surface 
           on a surface that is known to be locally cylindrical  equation  1  is sufficient to recover both parameters of local surface shape. for instance  when the source is distributed  a strip shape imagespecularity indicates that the surface may be cylindrical - or at least that one principal curvature may be much larger than the other  this can be figure 1: degenerate imaging of a deduced from  1    specularity. normal imaging of a specularity the parameters to be determined are the 
	 a  	becomes degenerate because of the 	direction of the cylinder axis 1 and the radius r 
focusing action of the curved surface. the 	using  1 : surface may focus onto the viewing aperture  b  to produce a bright blob or line in the image  or away from the aperture  c  in which 
case nothing is visible in the image 
p~*1 which gives the infinite source equation  1  
   suppose the infinite source computation of surface shape is performed  when in fact the source is at a finite distance l  how great is the resulting 
1
error the answer is that the error in the curvature  along a given direction in the xy-plane  is of the order of ¡À /l. the error is negligible if. assuming a not to be close to 1¡ã  either 1 spherical surface 
   the knowledge that the surface is locally spherical could be derived monocularly  from  1   as in the cylindrical case except that rather more must be known about the source for example  that it is circular 
   on a spherical surface there is only one parameter to specify - the radius of curvature r  
1 a. blake 
reference. in the case of a densely textured surface  conventional stereo with surface fitting  1 1 1  would be able to give an accurate estimate of surface shape. but for a smooth surface  stereo features may be relatively sparse  and fitting a surface to disparity measurements may be difficult and inaccurate. then  provided at. least one nearby surface feature is available as a disparity reference  specular stereo  together with monocular analysis of specularity  provides valuable surface shape information 
acknowledgement 
this work was supported by serc grant gr/d 
1 and by the university of edinburgh thanks are due to g brelstaff. a zisserman and r fisher for valuable discussion 
