 
     a general principle is given for detection of the 1d structure and motion from an image sequence without using point-to-point correspondence. the procedure consists of two stages:  i  determination of the  flow parameters  from  features  without using correspondence and  ii  computation of the 1d structure and motion from these flow parameters. the first stage is done by solving equations of functionals  and the second stage is described in analytical expressions. 
i introduction 
     schemes to recovery the 1d structure and motion from a 1d image sequence have been studied by many people  e.g.   1 - 1   but most of them are based on the point-to-point correspondence  which 
requires a large amount of implementation effort. there do exist methods which do not require the correspondence  1 - 1   but they can be used only to trace the motion along time  starting from a given initial information  and the results are obtained only numerically. 
     in 	this 	paper  	we 	present 	a 	general mathematical principle to detect the 	1d 	structure and motion without using correspondence. 	yet  	the solution at particular time is given in 	analytical expressions  giving geometrical interpretations and proving the existence of the spurious solution   etc. 	the procedure consists of two stages. 	first  we extract  without using correspondence  the  flow parameters  which 	completely 	characterize 	the 
viewed motion for each planar region of the object. this is done by measuring  features  of the image. the next stage is the computation of structure and motion from these flow parameters  and the solution 
is given in the form of analytical expressions. 
ii optical flow and flow parameters 
     take a cartesian arzy-coordinate system on the image plane and the z -axis perpendicular to it. consider a plane moving in the scene. let z = px + qy + r be its equation. let  1  1  r   the 
* on leave from the department of computer science  gunma university  kiryu  gunma 1  japan. 

k. kanatani 1 


1 k. kanatani 

