 
　　the question of  1-d shape representation is studied on the fundamental and general level. the two aspects of the problem   i  the reconstuction of a 1-d shape from a given set of contours  and  ii  finding ''natural'' coordinates on a given surface  
are treated by the same theory. we first set a few basic principles that should guide any shape reconstruction mechanism  regardless of its physical implementation. second  we propose a new mathematical procedure that complies with these princi-
ples and offers several advantages over the existing ad hoc treatments. some general results are derived from this procedure  
which conform very well with human visual perception. 
i. 	introduction 
　　a major component of image understanding is associating 1-d shapes with contours first  given a set of contours  such as may be provided by some image processing device  one wants to infer the shape of the surface that they most likely describe. in the complementery problem  given the surface  one seeks its 
 natural parametrization . namely contours that will convey its essential characteristics in the most economical  yet reliable way one known mechanism that performs these tasks well is the human visual system a few drawn lines can create a surprisingly vivid and convincing impression of a 1-d shape  barrow & tannenbaum. 1 
　　in this report  we address this problem on the fundamental and general level of first  finding the principles that must guide any process of representing a surface by contours  regardless of its physical implementator!  and second  we propose a mathematical mechanism that can perform these tasks  conforming with our principles nevertheless  as the eye is the most successful image processing system we have  we shall test the performance of our abstract procedure against its in the following we shall summarize the requirements that we impose on a surface reconstruction mechanism  and their relation to previous work 
　　1  a mechanism should build a surface in accordance with the information it has available about it  like boundary or other contours on it. but it should not add extraneous information of its own it is qualitatively clear that information is closely related to the smoothness of the curve or the surface a straight line can be described by the coordinates of the end points onl . while a more complicated shape will require more informaton thus it is reasonable  and mathematically convenient  to associate minimal information with minimal curvature  and to assume that a surface reconstruction mechanism will look for a surface that will have a minimum overall curvature while fitting the given contours. 
　　1  the reconstruction mechanism should be invariant to rotations and translation  i.e. if the input image is rotated or translated. the output should move by the same amount but not 
　　 now at the center for automation research  university of maryland college park  md 1 

1 i. weiss 





1 i.weiss 

azimuth Φ is  ignorable   fig 1  the coordinate orthogonal to the the ignorable one can be regarded as a local symmotry curve. as the surface stays the same on its sides thus  this curve and the curves in the ignorable direction that intersect it. form a local network of curves that satisfy the condition- of theorem j . and thus it extrermzes a 
　　as we can see from the figures these curves are exactly theones that our visual intuition would expect as natural so that we are justified in calling the curves extremizing 1 the 'natural coordinates' 
　　a further consequence of theorem 1 is the ability to make predictions about surfaces when they are not known in advance  without having to actually extremize a using the el equations it is clear that generally  the greater the number of extremal local sections a surface has  the more  extremal  the global 1dimensional integral a will be  this would be clearer if this  externum  were a  minimum   which it usually is  but as we have not examined here the second derivatives  we shall stick to the term  extremuny'.  thus  a surface that extremizes a will contain as many symmetry curves as are compatible with the initial data as a consequnce  we will tend to obtain surfaces containing planar  spherical or cylindrical parts  exact or approximate  rather than bumpy ones as a particular example  we can use this general result to conclude  without having to solve the el equations  that a circular boundary will give rise to a sphere. this is because a sphere is the most symmetric surface  thus having the greatest amount of symmetry curves more generally  boundary contours such as of fig. 1 will give rise to a surface of revolution  as this surface consists of a collection of local networks  the meridians and parallels  which fits those contours  and similarly for other surfaces 
　　it is reasonable to assume  that when the conditions of the theorem are satisfied only approximately  e.g. when the curve is only approximately symmetric  a similar parametrization will still take place  with the natural coordinates approximately following the quasi-symmetry curves thus our theory is applicable to shapes like generalized cones as long as the flutings vary slowly on the lenth-scale of the cone's radius this also is consistent with human perception. 
vi. 	relation to other work 
　　we have already noted the intrinsic flaws of the energy principle  and its derivatives  such as barrow and tenenbaum's   as surface reconstruction mechanisms the compactness measure of brady and yuille  does not suffer from these deficiencies it has been applied successfully to closed planar curves  but it is hard to see how it can be made a general theory it should be 

references 
barrow  h. g. and j. m. tenenbaum     interpreting line drawings as three-dimensional surfaces'   artif jntrli  1. 1 
brady. michael  j. ponce  a. yuille. h. asada  .  describing surfaces' to be published  
brady. michael  and h. asada   1    smooth local symmetries and their implementation   a. i. memo no. 1. 
brady. michael  and a. yuille     an extremum principle for shape from contour   ieee patt anal & mach. 
int.  paml-1 

specular stereo 
a blake 
computer science department  edinburgh university  scotland. 

abstract 
   a glossy highlight  viewed stereoscopically  can provide information about surface shape. for example  highlights appear to lie behind convex surfaces but in front of concave ones. 
   a highlight is a distorted  reflected image of a light source. a ray equation is developed to predict the stereo disparities generated when a point source of light is reflected in a smooth  curved surface. this equation can be inverted to infer surface curvature properties from observed stereo disparities of the highlight. to obtain full information about surface curvature in the neighbourhood of the highlight  stereo with two different baselines or stereo with motion parallax is required 
   the same ray equation can also be used to predict the monocular appearance of a distributed source. a circular source  for instance  may produce an elliptical specular patch in an image  and the dimensions of the ellipse help to determine surface shape. 
1 introduction 
   when the reflectance of a surface has a specular as well as a diffuse component  the viewer may see highlights. highlights can give extra information about surface shape ikeuchi  uses photometric stereo with specular surfaces to determine surface orientation beck  l  notes that stereo vision might be able to perceive highlights on a convex surface as lying beneath the surface grirnson  incorporated lambertian and specular components of reflectance into stereo but he found that the computation of surface orientation could be numerically unstable. 
   here a computation is proposed that is less ambitious than crimson's  in that it. attempts to determine only local surface geometry  at specular points but it avoids relying on precise assumptions a b o u t surface reflectance 
   instead  the only assumption is that a specularity can be detected in an image  and its position measured for instance a method like that of ulltnan   1  could be used thereafter specularities are matched in the same way as features in conventional stereo  1.1 . the disparity of a stereo-matched specular point is then compared with the disparity of any nearby surface features 
   the basic principle of the surface shape estimation relies on the properties of curved mirrors  fig 1  . 
to interpret  specular stereo  both horizontal and vertical disparities are used. ideally  three noncollinear eyes are needed to obtain full information about local curvature. alternatively  parallax from a known vertical motion of a viewer  combined with conventional stereo geometry  is just as good if only a static  stereo view is available then this still yields partial information this could be combined 

	figure 1: 	viewing 	geometry. 	in 	a 
convex mirror  a  the image of a distant point source appears behind the mirror surface in a concave one  1  the image may appear in front study of the ordinary domestic soup spoon should confirm this 
with a priori knowledge or measurements from other sources  stereo  shape-from shading or specular reflection of a distributed source  to fully determine local surface shape 
   finally  observe that the path of a light ray from source to viewer can be reversed analysis developed to show the effect of moving the viewer also serves for movement  of the source the resulting equation is used to predict the appearance in an image of a distributed source under specular reflection in a curved surface. for instance a circular source generally produces an elliptical specularity in the image. the orientation and length of its major and minor axes  in principle  determine local surface shape. 
1. imaging equations 
   equations are given to describe the process of formation of images of specular reflections details of derivations are given in  these predict the dependence of observed stereo disparities on surface and viewing geometry certain assumptions about the geometries are made  for the sake of mathematical simplicity then the equations are inverted so that  given viewing geometry and disparities  local surface geometry can be inferred 

1 a blake 


a. blake 1 
　 mh-l x 	- 	w 	 1  and 	the 	condition 	for 	degeneracy 	is 	that det mh-/ -1. 
   the focusing effect may produce either a line or a blob in the image: 
1 if the rank of  mh-1  is 1 the specularity will appear in the image as a line. or else  there may be no solution for x in  1   and nothing of the specularity will be visible. stevens  observes that  with infinitely distant source and viewer  any line specularity must lie on a plane curve in the surface a special cose of the rank 1 focusing effect. 
1 if the rank of mh i is zero  that is mh-/-1. then either the specular reflection is invisible as above  or it is focussed in 1 dimensions onto the imaging aperture  and appears in the image as a large bright blob 
1 it can be shown that if the surface patch is convex  the effect cannot occur this corresponds to physical intuition only concave mirrors focus distant light sources 
1 a source at a finite distance if the source is at a finite distance l  rather 
than infinite as assumed so far  the imaging equation  1  becomes 
	 mh 	 l+p / x = w 	 1  
the constant p =  d1seeo + v  /l and clearly  as l-   
1 inferring local surface shape 
1 locally cylindrical surface 
           on a surface that is known to be locally cylindrical  equation  1  is sufficient to recover both parameters of local surface shape. for instance  when the source is distributed  a strip shape imagespecularity indicates that the surface may be cylindrical - or at least that one principal curvature may be much larger than the other  this can be figure 1: degenerate imaging of a deduced from  1    specularity. normal imaging of a specularity the parameters to be determined are the 
	 a  	becomes degenerate because of the 	direction of the cylinder axis 1 and the radius r 
focusing action of the curved surface. the 	using  1 : surface may focus onto the viewing aperture  b  to produce a bright blob or line in the image  or away from the aperture  c  in which 
case nothing is visible in the image 
p~*1 which gives the infinite source equation  1  
   suppose the infinite source computation of surface shape is performed  when in fact the source is at a finite distance l  how great is the resulting 
1
error the answer is that the error in the curvature  along a given direction in the xy-plane  is of the order of ＼ /l. the error is negligible if. assuming a not to be close to 1＜  either 1 spherical surface 
   the knowledge that the surface is locally spherical could be derived monocularly  from  1   as in the cylindrical case except that rather more must be known about the source for example  that it is circular 
   on a spherical surface there is only one parameter to specify - the radius of curvature r  
1 a. blake 
reference. in the case of a densely textured surface  conventional stereo with surface fitting  1 1 1  would be able to give an accurate estimate of surface shape. but for a smooth surface  stereo features may be relatively sparse  and fitting a surface to disparity measurements may be difficult and inaccurate. then  provided at. least one nearby surface feature is available as a disparity reference  specular stereo  together with monocular analysis of specularity  provides valuable surface shape information 
acknowledgement 
this work was supported by serc grant gr/d 
1 and by the university of edinburgh thanks are due to g brelstaff. a zisserman and r fisher for valuable discussion 
