evaluating importance: a step towards text summarization 
danilo fun/ '  giovanni guida*   carlo tasso  lstituto di matematica  informatica e sistemistica 
universita di udinc 
udinc  italy 

   
   the complexity and expanse of knowledge involved in importance evaluation and the multifaceted nature of the processes that underly i t   strongly suggest to resort to the powerful techniques offered by the rule-based system approach. in fact  the concept of importance seems to escape a simple  explicit  algorithmic definition. a procedural  knowledge-based approach comprising a set of rules that can assign relative importance values to the different conceptual units of a text seems more viable. this standpoint can supply the conceptual and computational tools needed for taking into account in a flexible and natural way the variety of knowledge sources and processing activities that are involved in importance evaluation. moreover  it is expected to be well founded from a cognitive point of view  anderson  1   as it allows close and transparent modeling of several processes that occur in human mind. 

   on the basis of the above analysis  a prototype implementation of an experimental system  called importance evaluator  has been developed. this system is a functional module of susy and concentrates on the importance evaluation task only. it receives in input the internal representation of a natural language text  supplied by another susy module  namely the parser  expressed in the elr  extended linear representation  formalism  fum  guida  and tasso  
d. fumetal. 1 
1b   and produces in output a new representation called hpn  hierarchical propositional network . in hpn integer importance values are assigned to the basic conceptual units of the elr  concepts and propositions   in such a way as to account for the different importance of the constituents of the text. moreover  the importance evaluator takes in input an explicit  declarative representation of a goal to be considered for its own activity. 
   the overall architecture of the evaluator is shown in figure 1. it features a core rule-based structure with a forward-chaining control regime that includes a specialized module  namely the goal interpreter  devoted to make it fit the specific task of importance evaluation. 
two main 	knowledge 	bases 	are 	available 	to 	the evaluator: 
1. the importance rule base  that contains knowledge  mostly of empiric nature  on the mechanisms that are supposed to be used by man in evaluating importance  expressed through if-then production rules; 
1. the encyclopedia  that contains specific world knowledge on the subject domain  mostly of structured  taxonomic  descriptive nature   represented through a network of frames. 
the importance rule base includes several classes of rules: 
- referential -structural  rs  rules that 	derive 
importance values from the structure of 