 
  ox is a natural language processor whose knowledge ran be extended by interaction with a user about these objects. the vox analyzer uses information 
obtained in extensibility sessions to analyze novel text. 
1 examples 
vox consists of a text analyzer and an extensibility system that share a knowledge base the extensibility system lets the user add vocabulary  concepts  phrases  events  and scenarios to the knowledge base. the analyzer uses information obtained in this way to understand previously unhandled text 
the underlying knowledge representation of vox. called 
conceptual grammar. has been developed to meet the severe requirements of extensibility  conceptual grammar uniformly represents syntactic and semantic information  and permits modular addition of knowledge. 
1. introduction 
the ability to learn is one of the most important charac teristics of intelligent systems. to approach such an ability  we first must build systems that can accept newknowledge automatically. by continually enhancing the extensibility capability of such systems  we can begin to address the problems of general learning. 
critical to extensibility is the underlying knowledge representation. the more powerful and flexible the knowledge representation  the more easily extensibility 
capabilities can be built and improved. 
vox  vocabulary extension system  is a natural 
language processing system that emphasizes automatic extensibility. in vox  extensibility capabilities are developed hand-in-hand with the knowledge representation the knowledge representation  called  'onceptual grammar   supports a bottom-up study of language  by representing both very general and very specific knowledge. as generalizations about language are liscovered  they are incorporated into the representation. 
currently  vox allows automatic addition of vocabulary and action-oriented events and scenarios. the user may build knowledge hierarchies of scenarios  events  nouns  verbs  adjectives  and other parts of speech  as well as specifying a variety of semantic and syntactic information we will illustrate how vox works by adding the sequence of events for a simple naval  attack  scenario: 
slop searches for ship  ship sights ship  ship approaches ship  ship attacks ship  ship damages ship 
we will add the words  the individual events  and the entire scenario to the system. then  we will show a text analysis example that uses this knowledge  user inputs are in boldface  in the examples below   
macro noun example: 
enter singular form of noun: ship 
pinter plural form of noun: ships enter synonym or more general concept platform 
macro noun is an extensibility capability for adding nouns. the words 'ship1  'ships'  as well as the more abstract concepts ship noun  and ship np  are added to the knowledge base by macro noun. a phrase like  the 1 gre n ships  will be found to be equivalent to ship np   for example. by specifying 'platform1  the user plan's 'ship1 into a conceptual hierarchy of nouns already containing 'platform'.  platform1 is a navy word for anything that a missile can be fired from. thus  a base  a submarine  and an aircraft an-1 all platforms.  macro verb is similar to macro noun. in addition to concepts for words  verb  and verb phrase levels  macro verb creates concepts for the event and frame level. for example  in adding the verb search  the concepts search  event  and search  frame  will be created. 
assume that all the word-level items in the simple attack scenario have been added using macro noun  macro verb  and macros for other parts of speech next  we add an event: 
this work is supported by the naval ocean systems center  under no so c ran i n 1 - 1- c- 1. 

macro event lets the user add standard events to the knowledge base. these events are templates  and will 
match much more than the literal words  ship search location for ship . macro event uses the abstract concepts ship np   search vp   rather than the word-level concepts. the event added is treated not just as a semantic restriction  but as a full-fledged concept. the concept  shipsean h-location-for-ship  is stored in the knowledge base under the entry 'ship-search.'. we can use concepts such as this to add new scenarios  as will be shown below. this specific event-concept is added to a hierarchy of events by suggesting the generic 'search' event 
the user specifies the semantic case  actor  act  location  etc   of each element in the event. the user specifies that the phrase starts with element 1 and ends with  dement f . the syntactic component of vox's grammar handles incomplete forms such as  ship searched the area''  so the user need not specify that element 1 is a possible end of the event phrase. the user specifies that  dement '1 can be skipped over; that is   the ship searched for the submarine'  omitting a location element  is correct fnglish. the user specifies this because it varies on a case-by-case basis for example  in the sentence  ship conducted attack on submarine''   attack'' could not be omitted. 

macro frame is similar in many ways to macro event. in particular  this specific scenario is given full concept status  and is placed under the entry 'ship-attack'  note: the entry 'ship-attack' holds both events and scenarios.  we entered it into a hierarchy of scenarios by having it suggest the generic attack frame  concept. 
optionality information: the user specifies that the description of the scenario could start with any of the events in it and skip over any events. for example  a complete text might read  damaged sub . on the other hand  we require that an attack scenario end with an attack or damage event  event 1 or 1 . 
having entered this scenario into the system  we can make use of it to understand texts that deal with a 'ship attacking ship' scenario. here is an example of the kind of text vox analyzes using the scenario just entered. 
vox text analysis example 
 constellation is message sender.  
type message: 
at 1t had searched area  damaged sub. 
interpretation 1 of 1. 
message features 

when analyzing text  vox builds a frame-based representation of the underlying meaning  which is used for cheeking and correcting syntactic and semantic problems. vox reports errors found and produces a reworded version of the input text. vox's use of extensibility session information in the above example is fairly straightforward. 
1. conceptual grammar 
we 	describe 	the 	conceptual 	grammar 	knowledge 
representation  which forms the foundation of the extensibility and analysis capabilities of vox. 
1 introduction 
conceptual grammar  cg  is a framework for the representation of conceptual information. the unit of knowledge in cg is the concept. a concept is an atomic representation of anything that can be verbalized. in our notation  a concept is depicted by a description of the concept enclosed in angle brackets. for example  
 aircraft carrier  noun   
is an atomic representation of the concept  aircraft carrier . we often omit the angle brackets and hyphenate the description  for simplicity: 
	aircraft-carrier 	or 	 aircraft-carrier  
concepts can be combined to form phrases. most phrases have associated concepts to represent their meaning. concepts and phrases suggest  or reduce to  other con-

figure 1 
in rule  a   a phrase suggests its atomic representation. 
the phrase  aircraft carrier'1 has no corresponding single 
english word  yet it is a well-defined object  so we represent  it with an atomic concept. 
rule  b  is an example of a hierarchical rule. the hierarchy is an important organizing principle of cg. cg has semantic hierarchies of nouns  adjectives  and some other parts of speech  as well as events and scenarios for example.  a scenario where a ship attacks a submarine is a more specific instance of one where a platform attacks a 
platform  which is a more specific version of the generic attack seenario  and so on  platform is a navy word for anything that missiles can be fired from.  
rule  c  illustrates a second organizing principle of cg -conceptual levels when we speak of 'attack'  we may be talking about the word itself  the verb  the action  the event  or an entire scenario. cg treats all of these facets as explicit concepts. the lower-level semantic concepts correspond to the syntactic concepts word  verb  verb phrase  and so on. the higher semantic levels of event and frame  or scenario  have no precise syntactic equivalent. a frame could correspond to a sentence  a paragraph  or even a novel 
the different levels of semantic concepts allow semantic phrases to be represented unambiguously in cc. note how the concept of 'ship' is used in 
 1   ship np   	 attaek vp   	 submarine np   
 1   ship noun   	 ahoy word    t  
 1   ship word   	 hyphen  	 shape word   
phrase  1  would match a text like  the 1 us destroyers will attack the enemy sub . phrase  1  matches only 'ship ahoy'  ''  destroyers ahoy!   etc. phrase  1  matches only ''ship-shape . conceptual levels allow semantic phrases to be represented with a high degree of precision. 
an important class of rules in cg is concerned with the transitions between semantic and syntactic phrases. in figure 1 above  rule  i   shows a semantic concept suggesting a syntactic concept  while rule  e  shows the reverse. rule  e  is an example of a restriction rule  it suggests a specific noun-phrase concept corresponding to the noun on the left-hand-side of the rule we will discuss this kind of rule in more detail in the next section. 

this rule finds the most specific possible semantic instance of the verb  and suggests its corresponding vplevel. 
 1 missiles'' is analyzed similarly to  green ship . 
the detailed analysis of the prepositional phrases  at 1pm  and  at submarine  is omitted for simplicity. both will suggest the concept  adv   which corresponds to prepositional and adverbial phrases. also  we represent such as 
 fire vp    weapon np    at  	--   attack vp   
in our case  it will find and use this rule. having found that  will fire 1 missiles at  corresponds to an 'attack' concept  rule y looks for the most specific possible event of the type 
　　　　　　 ship   attack   submarine  or 
 platform   attack   platform  
and so on. once the most specific possible event is found  
rule y suggests it. note that rule y has to search through the adverbial-list to find possible prepositional particles for the prepositional verb  and that it rejected the time adverbial because the knowledge base has no information about attacks on 'time'. 
rules like y form a critical part of cg. they not only provide a mapping from surface text to underlying concepts  but also handle syntactic ambiguity in a unified and non-cornbinatorially explosive fashion.  using rules a and r instead of y would always result in two interpretations  whereas y chooses the best one.  
another example of such a rule is x np x  vp  passive   x --   specific event  which handles forms like 
the ship was attacked by the submarine 
missiles were fired at ship by submarine 
missiles were fired by submarine at ship 
again  in non-combinatorially explosive fashion. furthermore  this rule is able to search for active-voice events  thus allowing most event knowledge to be stored in active voice. if desired  this rule can transform passive voice sentences to active voice. another critical rule is 
 event-list      specific. frame  
the task of this rule is to find a single frame  or scenario  which will unify a sequence of events  and to try to determine the causal relationship of all the events. this rule 
embodies some of the analyzer's frame-selection mechanisms. 
1. related work 
vox is a revised version of nomad . 
cg developed from our attempt to reconcile the i'll ran approach  with traditional syntax theories  and to system ize the representation of phrasal knowledge. 
we know of several efforts to build automatically extensible nlp systems. the teacher component of uc   
a. meyers 1 
lifer   klaus   team   and others. the success of these efforts depends  ultimately  on the underlying knowledge representation  including both conceptual and linguistic knowledge. we find that cg provides a framework for both productive and nonproductive linguistic knowledge  while the other systems mentioned tend to concentrate on one type or the other. also  cg alone provides for automatic addition of scenarios. 
acknowledgment 
thanks to richard granger for his support and for critiquing this paper  karin klein for proofreading it  and laura yoklavich for formatting it. 
