 
　　wo use some ideas from the theory of lie groups and lie algebras to study the problem of recovering rigid motion from a time varying picture. we are able to avoid the problem of finding corresponding points by considering only what can be determined from picture point values and their time derivative. we do not assume that we can track individual points in the image  nor that we are given any of their velocities  i.e.  the optic  low . among our results arc: 
　　the 1 point df/dt theorem  showing that generically*** the values of df/dt at 1 points of the monochrome image / are necessary and sufficient to specify the motion of a given object. 
　　the 1-color theorem for optic flow  which states that the optic flow vector is uniquely specified at a generic point of the image if there arc 1 or more color dimensions. 
　　also  we get the color version of the 1 point theorem  the 1 colors  1 points corollary  which reduces the number of points required to 1  if there are at least 1 color dimensions. 
i int 	tion 
　　for the past several years  many researchers have been investigating problems of moving objects and observers  see e.g.   tsai and huang 1    iva/dny 1    nagel 1    horn and schnnck 1    bruos and horn 1    ullmau 1  . a conventional paradigm is to consider 1 subproblems: finding the optic  low in the image  then computing 1dimensional motion. finding the optic flow in monochrome images by point tracking is  however  degenerate except for special points  just as for the point matching problem  blichcr 1  hlicher 1 . 1.g. at a single point  the image function and its time derivative tell us nothing about motion perpendicular to the gradient of the image function. 
　　we consider a rigid object undergoing an arbitrary motion in space. our data is a time-varying image  i.e. a map / : i x m1 -  n	1
r   where i is a time interval  ay is some 1-dimensional manifold  specifically the image plane  and u is the number of independent color dimensions; n - | for monochrome pictures. we concern ourselves here with the problem of finding the motion of the object  particularly  how much data is necessary and sufficient. rather than make jissumptions about first finding point correspondences or optic how  we consider the full situation of a map from the rigid motion group to the time-varying image  but only for the interior of a single object   and we develof  the differential theory  based on the data of the picture and its time derivative. 
　　we regret that space limitations preclude defining mathematical terms. a fuller presentation  as well as more extensive references  can be found in  hlicher 1 . 
ii the mathematical structure 
　　the situation is that of fig.  *'   just ;is in  hlicher 1   except now the nature of the transformation g will be paramount. 
we are interested in rigid motions in r1  so f/ g e 1  the 
euclidcan	:1
  rigid motion  group of r . the time evolution of the mo-
*this work was supported in part by darpa contracts n1-c 1 and n1-c-1ii. 
**present address: thinking machines  cambridge  mass. 

　　each such path in the picture has a velocity vector  and each point in the image has a path  so there is a vector field defined on the image. this is usually called the optic flow  but it is more consistent with mathematical terminology to call its integral  i.e. the paths in the image  the optic flow. we will reserve the term optic flow for 
                                             1 this integral  i.e. the map Φ : u -  r which specifies the paths of corresponding points in the picture with initial points in the region u  while using optic velocity field or optic vector field for its instantaneous velocities  the vectors d pt/dt. similarly  the paths in r1 define a vector 
1
field on r   and the path 1 in e' 1  defines a tangent vector at the identity in e 1 . 
　　the available data  however  is not the optic flow or vector field  but the time-varying picture function ft which is just the projection of the intrinsic surface function 1f which we assume is carried along with the motion  i.e. we neglect changes in / due purely to photometric effects  such as specular rellection. since we are considering only the 

***a generic property in one which is true tor n typical element of a space  i.c for a differential theory  we regard our data as telling us only the instanvery dense: subtract of the space. for thin paper  we lake thin to mean an open dense taneous value /o  and all the time derivatives at t -- 1. this ia the subset. see |blicher 1  for a discussions of genericity. same as knowing the taylor series for ft. we will only use the 1st 1 a. blicher and s. omohundro 


　　actually  wc showed more than that. we showed that a generic set of 1 points cannot stay fixed in the image-we didn't even have to consider the whole vector field. the set of vectors at 1 such points in the image: make up a 1 dimensional vector space  so what we showed is that the map e 1  -  vectors at 1 given points in image has no kernel  
i.e. is 1. 
　　that means that to specify a motion  i.e. an element of e 1   we only have to figure out the optic velocity vectors at 1 points. a generic function  via equation  *   tells us 1 component of each of the vectors  hy gencricity  the gradient is nonzero at all 1 points . if we had 1 generic functions  then we could recover both components of each of the 1 vectors by using equation  *  for both functions  generically  the gradients will be: linearly independent  i.e. in different directions at the 
1 points . parenthetically  we have just proved 
　　corollary  1 colors  1 points . for generic / taking values in 1 or more color dimensions  the values of of /c t  1  p  at 1 noncollinear points p e v art' necessary and sufficient to uniquely specify the instantaneous motion of the object. 
　　now we must show that 1 component at each of 1 points is as good as 1 components at each of 1 points. we saw earlier that df defines 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　1 an element of e* 1 . thus the geometry defines a map t*r - e* 1 . what we saw earlier is 
lemma  1 liber lemma . if we choose 1 generic points in r1  and 
1 linearly independent coventors in each fiber over those points  the 1 resulting points of t*r1 are mapped to a spanning set in e* 1 . 
what we will now show is that we can choose any 1 generic points 
1
in t'*r   i.e. 1 generic points in the image  and f  generic values of df at those points  i.e. a generic / . this is pretty easy by making use of the 1 liber lemma. the lemma still applies for any neighborhood of r1  i.e. we can choose the 1 points arbitrarily close together. this gives us 
　　lemma  local spanning . every neighborhood of every point in t'*r1 contains 1 points which are mapped to a spanning set in e* 1 . 
   proof. choose a point and neighborhood in t'*r1. it projects to a neighborhood of r1  in which we can choose 1 generic points. we can then choose 1 points in t*r1  1 to a fiber  by the 1 liber lemma. qic!   local spanning . 
   now we can sec what happens when we choose 1 points in the image  df gives us  i points in t*r1. we can perturb these points to guarantee that df -/-- 1. now since every neighborhood of each point maps to a spanning set of e* 1   local spanning lemma   we can always perturb the nth point so that it is mapped to something outside the span of the first n - i points  at hast through n - 1  anyway . this gives a perturbation of the  i points which maps to a spanning set. since spanning sets are open  these points will still span under sufficiently small perturbation.  in general  one might need a perturbation of both the location of the points and of / to guarantee a spanning set. the degenerate situation occurs when the optic velocity vector is in the direction of constant /.  qed| 
	iil 	afterward 
　　by virtue of the local spanning lemma and the 1 liber lemma  our results are local  i.e. they hold in an arbitrarily small neighborhood- generically every neighborhood has i  points yielding sufficient data. this is significant because it implies that an estimate of the motion can be obtained from any neighborhood. in practice  of course  using a very small neighborhood would lead to a very bad estimate. one would 
a. blicher and s. omohundro 1 
rather use many points over a large region to obtain a least squares estimate. hut the localness means that estimates can be made over a range of scales  and that a procedure for segmentation based on local estimates is well-founded. 
ackno wledg ments 
　　we are grateful to tom hinford for his help and encouragement throughout the period of this work. 
