 
a new approach for proving theorems in first-order predicate calculus is developed based on term rewriting and polynomial simplification methods. a formula is translated into an equivalent set of formulae expressed in terms of 'true'  'false'  'exclusive-or'  and 'and' by analyzing the semantics of its top-level operator. in this representation  formulae are polynomials over atomic formulae with 'and' as multiplication and 'exclusive-or' as addition  and they can be manipulated just like polynomials using familiar rules of multiplication and addition. 
polynomials representing a formula are converted into rewrite rules which are used to simplify polynomials. new rules are generated by overlapping polynomials using a critical-pair completion procedure closely related to the knuth- bendix procedure. this process is repeated until a contradiction is reached or it is no longer possible to generate new rules. it is shown that resolution is subsumed by this method. 
key words: theorem proving  automated reasoning  
equational approach  term rewriting  knuth-bendix completion procedure  polynomial simplification. 
1. introduction 
   a new approach for proving theorems in first-order predicate calculus is presented. the approach is based on term rewriting and polynomial simplification methods  and is simple to understand. a key idea is the observation that formulae can be viewed as polynomials over atomic formulae when they are expressed solely in terms of boolean connectives 'exclusive-or'  'and' and constants 
1 and 1 which stand for truth and falsity  respectively. in this representation  formulae can be manipulated just like polynomials using familier rules of multiplication and addition; the addition  '+'  is 'exclusive-or' and multiplication  '*'  is 'and.' further  the polynomials we encounter are simple because we neither see coefficients other than 1 nor degrees more than 1; these polynomials satisfy the additional properties that for any polynomial p  p +p =1 and p * p = p. the method works well irrespective of whether the input formula has a clausal or a non-clausal representation  chang and lee  1 . for applications of theorem proving in artificial intelligence  program verification and synthesis  specification analysis  etc   an interested reader may wish to look at  chang and lee  1; robinson  1; slagle  1 . 
in our method  if a formula is to be proved valid 
 unsatisfiable  respectively   it is asserted to be 1  1  respectively   and a contradiction is derived. towards this end  an equivalent set of formulae  polynomials  expressed using 'exclusive-or ' and ' and 'true'  are generated from this assertion. this is done using the natural deduction approach by analyzing the semantics of the top-level operator. it is checked whether a contradiction 1 = 1 can be derived from these polynomials. one good way of checking for a contradiction is to use the rewriting concepts to generate a grobner basis of the original set of polynomials by suitably modifying the method developed in  kandri-rody and kapur  1  for computing the grobner basis of an ideal over polynomial rings over the integers. checking whether a contradiction is derivable from a set of polynomials is equivalent to checking whether their grobner basis is trivial in the sense it includes 1. 
partially supported by the national science foundation grant mcs-1. for the propositional calculus  this approach is a straightforward application of the grobner basis  algorithm developed in  kandri-rody and kapur  1 . for 
first-order predicate calculus  additional techniques are developed based on identifying equivalences among formulae using unification. polynomials are first transformed into rewrite rules and the grobner basis is computed by generating critical-pairs among rewrite rules the critical-pair generation is similar to resolution but is more powerful and allows a lot more of flexibility; in fact  it is shown that it subsumes resolution. new polynomials are generated from the critical pairs to augment the basis set of polynomials to obtain a grobner basis. if the grobner basis consists merely of the rule 1 - 1 then we know that the original formula is unsatisfiable or valid depending upon what we were contradicting. 
   this approach is particularly useful for reasoning about domains which can be axiomatized using a finite set of equations  term rewriting approach for developing decision procedures for equational theories can be integrated well with lirst-order predicate calculus as firstorder predicate calculus itself can be handled using rewrite rules. 
   the proposed approach is motivated by hsiang's method for theorem proving in first-order predicate calculus based on term rewriting  ilsiang and dershowitz  1  and the approach for generating a grobner basis of a polynomial ideal over the integers in  kandri-rody and kapur  1 . at the theoretical level  the major distinction between our approach and hsiang's method is that our method is based on the grobner basis computation whereas hsiang's method is based on the extensions of the knuth and bendix completion procedure for handling associative and commutative operators developed in  lankford and ballantyne  1; peterson and stickel  1 . further  we believe our definitions of unification of monomials  rewriting  superposition and critical pairs are conceptually simpler to understand than hsiang's. at the implementation level  our approach seems to be easier to implement than hsiang's  as it does not need to use associative-commutative unification algorithm or its variation  called bn-unification by hsiang  to handle boolean operators. an implementation of our method is underway. at this stage  it is difficult to make any comparison between the running times of hsiang's method and our method; however  initial results seem to suggest that our method is more efficient than hsiang's. further  it is too early to say how our method compares with resolution or other theorem proving methods. however  in case of propositional calculus  preliminary experiments suggest that our method is more efficient than the resolution-based lma theorem prover. 
   in this paper  we give an overview of the approach exhibiting how first-order formulae can be viewed as polynomials and rewrite rules. the method is illustrated using examples. further technical details and proofs of the theorems in this paper are given in  kapur and narendran  1 . 
1. propositional calculus 
   given a formula /   it is asserted to be l or o depending upon whether / is to be shown unsatisfiable or valid  respectively  and it is checked whether a contradiction can be derived. in order to do so  the resulting equation is first translated into an equivalent set of polynomials expressed using 'exclusive-or'   +    'and'  *   'true'  l  and 'false'  1 .  since a + a - 1 as well as a - a = 1  we use ' + ' and '-' interchangably in the paper; we also often omit '*' among atomic formulae.  this can be done by analyzing the outermost operator of the left-hand-side of the equation; see  kapur and narendran  1  for details. in many cases  we may able to generate the contradiction 1 =    in the process of obtaining an equivalent set of polynomials  in which case we are done. if not  then the translation gives a set of polynomial equations  say {p  = 1 | 1   i   n }. 
   to check whether the polynomial equations lead to a contradiction or not  we generate its grobner basis  buchberger and loos  1; kandri-rody and kapur  
1 . informally  a finite set of polynomials constitute a grobner basis if and only if evey polynomial has a unique normal form when simplified or reduced using polynomials in the basis. to generate a grobner basis  each polynomial equation is converted into a rewrite rule. this is done by totally ordering atomic formulae which is always possible in the case of propositional calculus. this ordering is extended to monomials  products of atomic formulae  based on degree  i.e.  size  and lexicographic ordering  cf. buchberger and loos  1; kandri-rody and kapur  1 .  in fact any ordering which satisfies the following properties will do:  a  1   l   m for any monomial m 1 d. kapur and p. narcndran 
different from 1 and for every monomial s.  under a total ordering on monomials  every polynomial has a unique head-monomial  which serves as the left-hand-side of its rule; the rest of the polynomial serves as the right-hand-side of the rule. 
   we also include a rule a' ' ' -  a'  for each propositional variable a   idempotency rules  as well as another rule 1 -+ 1. thus we do not have to deal with any indeterminate of degree more than 1 nor do we have to deal with coefficients other than 1 or 1. there is also a rule p + 1 -- /   but this is taken care of automatically in the grobner basis computation. 
the rules thus obtained are used to rewrite polynomials. from these rules  new rules are generated to look for a contradiction. for each pair of distinct rules  the overlap of their left-hand-sides is generated by taking the least common multiple  1cm  of the left-hand-sides. consider two distinct rules l  -  r x and l1-+ r1. let /. be the icm of lx and ay  so i =- fx l  = f1 l1. 

then  f  ru f1  is a critical pair generated by the two rules  and fxrx f1 is its s-polynomial  buchberger and loos  1; kandri-rody and kapur  1 . if the two polynomials in a critical pair do not reduce to the same normal form  or equivalently  the corresponding s-polj nomial does not reduce to 1   a new rule is added from the normal forms thus obtained. this process is repeated antil no new rules are generated. the resulting basis is a grobner basis of the input polynomials. for proofs of correctness and termination of this algorithm  see  kandri-rody and kapur  1  as this algorithm is a special case of the algorithm for generating the grobner basis of an ideal over polynomial rings over the integers. 
   we would like to point out that in order to deduce a contradiction from a finite set of polynomials  it is not necessary to consider superpositions with the idempotency rules; however  these superpositions are needed if a grobner basis is to be generated. in many cases  generating superpositions with idempotency rules gives rise to simpler rules which perform considerable reduction. 
example: consider the problem of checking whether the following propositional formula / is unsatisfiable. 

to prove the formula to be unsatisfiable  we equate / to 
1. using the semantics of a and translating s into +  we obtain the following polynomials: 

 transforming these into rewrite rules using the ordering  on propositional variables which in-
duces an ordering on products of propositional variables based on size and lexicographic ordering  we get 

we cannot use these rules to reduce each other. so  we generate new rules by superposing these rules on each other. overlapping rules 1 and 1  we obtain a product *! x1 *  on which rules 1 and 1 can be applied. 

if we further reduce these polynomials using the above rules  we obtain *1 on one side and ya on the other side and all other products cancel with each other. this gives us a new polynomial *a+ ys = 1. the new rule for this polynomial is: 1. xs - y1. now rules 1 and 1 give us the contradiction 1 - 1. 
   there is a much simpler way of doing the above example by factoring the above polynomials; see  kapur and narendran  1  for details. formulae involving many equivalence connectives are known to often give a lot of trouble to theorem-provers based on resolution  natural deduction and semantic trees. in the case of propositional calculus  they can be easily taken care of in our approach because 'exclusive-or' is one of the main operators. 
1 theoretical foundations 
   formulae in polynomial form  as stated above  are elements of a polynomial ring over a boolean ring  
b =   {o  l}  +  *  . let b xlf... xn  denote the ring of polynomials over b with the additional property that 
a'  *a  = a  for each a' . thus if a'   ...  a'  are the atomic formulae  propositional variables  in /   then / is an element of b x1.... xn . 
theorem 1: let / be a propositional formula with propositional variables a'l ...  xn. let / be the set of all polynomials in b xlt ...  xn  which evaluate to 1 for all assignments of a'1 ...  a'  on which / evaluates to 1. then / is an ideal of b x1 ...  xn . 
   henceforth we refer to the ideal / mentioned in the above theorem as 'the ideal generated by /   one way to check whether a formula / is valid or unsatisfiable is to analyze the ideal generated by / . 
theorem 1: a propositional formula / is valid if and only if the ideal generated by / over b xx . .x    whete the a s are propositional variables in /   is trivial  i.e.  the whole polynomial ring . 
   an analogous theorem for an unsatisfiable formula / is that the ideal generating by / +1 is trivial. the triviality of an ideal can be checked by generating its grobner basis. if the grobner basis of an ideal contains 1  then it is trivial. the method discussed in the previous subsection for testing validity or unsatisfiability is based on theorem 1 and the grbner-basis-based test for triviality of an ideal. 
1. first-order predicate calculus 
   the approach discussed in the previous section extends to first-order predicate calculus. the following observations are crucial in working out this extension. firstly  the atomic formulae in first-order predicate calculus play the role of propositional variables. secondly  quantifiers can be handled by the method of introducing skolem functions  known as 'skolemization'  chang and lee  1 . thirdly  there are in general infinitely many atomic formulae; however unlike in the case of propositional calculus where propositional variables are independent and unrelated to each other  atomic formulae in first-order predicate calculus are related through the mechanism of substitution for variables. intuitively  this captures the forall rule:  { ix  a x   =  a{t   where appropriate restrictions are placed on the term t which is substituted for an occurrence of x  cf. chang and lee  1 . another technical issue is that in general  it may not be possible to totally order atomic formulae in the case of predicate calculus  again unlike the case of the propositional calculus ; by relaxing this requirement  we also allow more flexibility as well as obtain more general results. the rule corresponding to a polynomial form of a first-order formula thus may have more than one monomial on its left-hand-side. as we show later  if a formula is represented in clausal form  i.e.  cnf   then every polynomial in the set of polynomials equivalent to the formula ha s a unique head-monomial; furthermore  it is also sufficient to consider those critical pairs which lead to polynomials with a unique head-monomial. 
   we first briefly discuss how to handle quantifiers. if the top-level operator of a formula / = 1 is a v quantifier and the associated variable is z   then remove the quantifier. if the top-level operator is a  1 quantifier and associated variable is x   then introduce a skolem function .v   and replace the occurrences of x  bound to this quantifier by 1   x1 **   where xh ...  xk are the free variables in / . similarly  we have the dual case for the equation / -a o  i.e.  we skolemize  f quantifiers and remove e quantifiers. we do not need to bring the formula / into prenex normal form first for skolemization. instead we skolemize the quantifiers in place after performing miniseoping so that each skolem function depends upon as few number of free variables as possible  bledsoe and tyson  1 . this is done by assigning signs with each of the quantifiers and formulae  and giving rules about how the signs change under various boolean connectives; see  bledsoe and tyson  1  for details. 
1 deriving a contradiction 
   assume that we have obtained a set of polynomials following skolemization from the original formula without encountering a contradiction; we call this set a basis of the formula. like in the case of propositional calculus  we generate new polynomials from those in the basis using the method of critical pairs and add them to form a new basis. this completion process  which is related to the knuth-bendix completion procedure  knuth and bendix  1   is continued until it is no longer possible to obtain new rules; in the case of first-order predicate calculus also  we abuse the terminology and call the resulting basis a grobner basis. as discussed in  kapur and narendran  1   the grobner basis of a finite set of first-order formulae has the property that every polynomial in their first-order ideal reduces to 1; however  it 1 d. kapur and p. narendran 
does not satisfy the other property that every first-order polynomial has a unique normal form with respect to the basis. for propositional calculus  this procedure for generating a grobner basis is guaranteed to terminate. however  for first-order polynomials  the process of generation of new polynomials may never terminate in some cases. thus a grobner basis in the first-order case may be infinite. 
   the theoretical basis of the grobner basis approach for first-order predicate calculus is an extension of the results for propositional calculus discussed in section 1; for details  see  kapur and narendran  1 . we introduce there the notion of a first-order ring of polynomials which generalizes the concept of a boolean ring of polynomials  the algebraic structure embodying propositional calculus. we also define a first-order ideal to characterize first-order inference in an equational way. this gives us a new way to study first-order predicate calculus in terms of equational logic. 
   we also show in  kapur and narendran  1  that the cirobner basis approach is refutation-complete  or  in other words  if a formula is unsatisfiable  then the grobner basis computation will terminate with the rule l - o. 
1 first-order formulae as rewrite rules 
   a first-order polynomial p can be represented as a multiset of monomials  which is a conjunction of atomic formulae*  in p; a monomial other than 1 or 1 is assumed not to contain 1 or 1. let saf p  denote the multiset of monomials in p. a monomial is represented as a multiset of atomic formulae.1 given two first-order polynomials 
f	s
'   p*  p  i included in p1  written as /'  c p1  if and only if sm px  is a subset of $af{p1 . 
   two monomials a/  and m1 are said to be unifiable if and only if there is a substitution a such that ct{mj  = o m1  when considered as multisets. monomials a/  and a/1 overlap if and only if there is a substitution a such that cr{mv  and cr{a1  have a non-trivial greatest com-
1 . before a polynomial is rewritten using a rule  it i s always assumed to he flat. the result of rewriting however may produce a polynomial that is not flat. that is the reason for viewing a monomial as a multiset of atomic formulae and a polynomial as a multiset of monomials heneeforth  operations u  fl  etc.  are on multisets. 
moii divisor  gcd ; i.e.  a unifies at least one atomic formula each from mx and a/1  in other words  the intersection of  t m   and  1 a/1   viewed as multisets  is non-empty . 
1.1 partial weil-founded orderings on monomials 
   let   be a well-founded simplification ordering of atomic formulae and terms that is closed under substitutions. an example of a class of such orderings is the 'recursive path ordering' scheme of dershowitz  dershowitz  1 . the ordering   can be extended to a well-founded ordering   on monomials using the multiset ordering given in  dershowitz  1 . the ordering   on monomials extends naturally to a partial ordering on polynomials considered as multisets of monomials. 
   using the ordering   on monomials  we can define head-monomials  denoted by hi  p   of a polynomial /' as the set of maximal monomials in p. in general  hd{p  can have more than one monomial. let 
tl  /'  = p - iii   p  . details of an ordering on atomic formulae are discussed in  kapur and narendran  1 . 
1.1 rewrite relation 
   the rule corresponding to a polynomial /' is hi  p  - tl{p . the rewrite relation -  induced by a rule is defined as follows: a polynomial q can be rewritten using a rule hd -*¡ö tl if and only if there exist a monomial m and substitution b such that m * e{hd c q. we replace m * 1{hd  by m * 1{tl  and get 
q' =*  q m * 1{hd    j m * ${tl  and say that q - q' by the rule hd - tl. 
   as in the case of propositional calculus  the following rules are also used for rewriting in addition to the rules corresponding to polynomials: 
 #   p +1- p  where p is a variable ranging over polynomials; this rule is built into the grobner basis computation. 
 d1  	for 	every 	n-ary 	predicate 	symbol 	p: 
p x1....xn  * 	p xl 	. xn  	- p xlt... xn . 
 b1  1 + 1. 
   the reflexive  transitive closure of - is denoted by -'. as is usually done in the literature  we often say p reduces to q if p -  * q . it should not be hard to see that for any finite set r of polynomials  the rewrite relation induced by h is noetherian  i.e. the rewriting process terminates . 


1 d. kapur and p. narendran 
1 grobner basis to prove this formula to be a theorem  we assert it to 1 and deduce a contradiction. translating the assertion to equivalent set of polynomials gives us the following rewrite rules: the constant symbols c and b are the skolem functions introduced to get rid of quantifiers. 

nomial form of  *  + l can be obtained from an spolynomial of the polynomial form of s + l and the rule 
 b1  
theorem 1 shows that the process of computing factors of clauses  cf. chang and lee  1  p. 1   which is part 
1. 