 
　　a computer vision approach based on skeletonization and hierarchical description of speech patterns is proposed. learniug hierarchical descriptions of phonetic events is discussed. experimental results arc reported showing the power of the approach in the recognition of dipthongs in connected letters and digits. 
1. introduction 
most of the popular techniques used today for 
automatic speech recognition  asr  are based on comparisions between prototypes and speech data . when the recognition task involves simple vocabularies  word prototypes are used. for complicated tasks  syllabic prototypes or centisecond prototypes arc used. in the latter case  a comparision between data and prototypes allows one to assign a label to segments of speech having fixed duration. the label of a speech segment is one of the prototype that best matches that segment. matching 
is usually context-free. 
　　whether knowledge about speech analysis  synthesis and perception should be taken into account or not in asr is still the object of discussions among the researchers in the field. automatic recognition of connectedly spoken letters and of large vocabularies is still an unsolved problem. 
　　as an attempt to solve this problem  a system of plans for extracting and using acoustic properties has been proposed and a general framework for its implementation has been described . 
　　the system allows to segment continuous speech into pseudo-syllabic segments. each segment is not necessarily a syllable  but an acoustic unit to be described. some portions of this unit can act as contextual constraints for the description of other portions. 
　　the purpose of this paper is that of introducing a novel approach for the description of acoustic segments characterized by spectral lines. 
　　a skeletonization algorithm is applied to digital spectrograms. a variable number of lines with different durations inside an acoustic segment are thus obtained avoiding the errors and the difficulties of tracking formants. a pattern of spectral lines is represented by a 
　　hierarchical description. 
　　for the application described in this paper there arc only four levels in the hierarchy taxonomy but the levels as well as the relations at each level can be expanded in order to make the taxonomy reliable enough for a given recognition task. 
　　experimental results on the characterization of dipthongs in connected digits and letters are discusscsd. 
1. a taxonomy for spectral lines 
　　spectral lines are extracted with a skeletonization algorithm from the timc-frequency-cnergy patterns obtained by considering the 1 khz portions of spectra computed with the fast fourier transform  fft  algorithm applied to the precmphasized speech signal. a hierarchical description of spectral lines is then obtained. 
　　the time-frequency-energy pattern for a given pseudo-syllabic segment is processed by a skeletonization algorithm whose details are given in . 
1 the description hierarchy for spectral lines. 
　　the description hierarchy for spectral lines is based on acoustic properties that are known or are expected to be perceptually significant. 
　　the hierarchy follows an open taxonomy that can be expanded to incorporate new items and new classes. 
　　at level-1 of the taxonomy spectral lines are described by vectors v. of triplets  t.  f   e..  j 	ji' ji' ji' 
 j = 1....j; i = 1 ...  	i.  where t.. is a time reference in 
	j 	ji 
centiseconds. fii. is a frequency value in hs and e.. is an 
　　　　　　ji 	ji energy value in db. 
　　at level-1 spectral lines are described by morphology symbols and a sequence of attributes  consisting of time and frequency values.  is an alphabet obtained by concatenating two symbols belonging to alphabets ela and  describes temporal events and is defined as follows: 
 : |a:ascendent  h:horizontal  d.dcsccndent j 
 gives a rough indication of the frequency location of 
the mid-point of the line: 
 : {lo:low  la:low-avcrage  a:avcrage  
all:avcragc-high  lil:high  vh:very-high| 

1 r. de mori and m. palakal 

　　expressions of predicates whose arguments are elements of hierarchical descriptions arc used as preconditions for actions of various types. some actions consider  for example  the concatenation of spectral lines through a low energy transition with possible gaps as in the case of /ju/ as represented in fig. 1. here the detection of an ff followed by a bf is a precondition for searching the above mentioned low energy transition which is circled in fig. 1. once descriptions at all levels have been obtained  then specific parameters relating elements of different descriptions can also be extracted and a-priori probabilities of them can be collected. 
　　the entire descriptor can be seen as an expert system that contains a set of operators. operators are clustered and clusters are ordered so that there will be a cluster of operators for each level of descriptions. possible chains of operators are specified by the expert system knowledge. the specific chain of operators that is applied on a given pattern depends on the matching between knowledge and data. 
　　vector quantization  vq  can be considered as one of the operators making this system more general than the ones junt based on vq. 
　　part of the expert's knowledge is used for hypothesis generation and may contain a-priori probabilities. 
　　let  k  be the hierarchical description of the k-th syllabic segment. hypothesis h k  are generated by matching Φ k  with the system knowledge. 
　　ll k  may contain ambigous hypotheses. for example  a vowel can be identified as a front vowel  but a doubt may remain whether the vowel is / i / or /e/. hypotheses are linked with the descriptions that generated them and a summary about hypotheses and descriptions is kept. 
　　as k increases  the summary is updated and consistencies are evaluated and used for pruning ambigous hypotheses. 
　　for example it is well known that spectral lines are related to formant frequencies and that formant frequencies of vowels are among the acoustic properties mostly affected by speaker variability. in the case of connected pronounciations of letters  it is difficult to distinguish between / i / and /e/ until a dipthong /aci/ is hypothesized. at this point  the system control knows better what are the differences between /e/ and /i/ for a particular speaker and can put this knowledge into the summary and use it for disambiguating hypotheses already considered. the knowledge written into the summary about a speaker or its mood remains in the summary frame until new evidence makes it change. 
　　the idea of using a summary frame for checking consistencies has been applied to the simple example that will be described in section 1. it appears to be promising especially because relaxation methods are applicable inside the summary frame thus allowing to check consistencies among acoustic data of the same speaker collected in a short period of time. 
　　maintaining in time the belief contained into the summary frame is not an easy task because it is difficult to establish when a belief has to be conaidered obsolete. it is certainly worth keeping into the summary frame acoustic information collected in a frame during the pronunciation of a sentence. 
　　a system for inductive learning of discriminent descriptions involving acoustic properties of phonetic events has been developed . this system is based on principles presented in  and can be adapted to the case of heirarchical descriptions. 

r. de mori and m. palakal 1 

