 
　　　equality is an important relation and many theorems can be easily symbolized through i t ' s use. a proposed inference rule called hl-resolution is intended to have the benefits of hyper steps while controlling the application of paramodulation. it generates a resolvent by building a paramodulation and demodulation link between two terms using a pre pro ceased plan as a guide. the rule is complete for e-unsatisfiable horn sets. the linking process makes use of an equality graph which is constructed once at the beginning of the run. once a pair of candidate terms for hl-resolutlon is chosen in the search  potential linkages can be found and tested for compatibility efficiently by looking at the paths in the graph. the method was implemented on an existing theorem-proving system. a number of experiments were conducted on problems in abstract algebra and a comparison with set-of-support paramodulation was made. 
1. introduction 
     equality is an important relation and many theorems can be easily symbolized through it's use. important research with respect to the equality relation has been carried out in several directions by many authors. darlington  used a second-order equality substitution axiom  and robinson and wos  1  proposed demodulation and paramodulation to handle equality. along this line  wos  overbeek and henschen proposed a refinement of paramodulation called 
hyperparamodulation and mccune proposed horn semantic paramodulation. along another line  there is the e-resolution system by morris for the treatment of equality. later  digricoli  1 proposed the rue-nrf rule of inference following the lines of research proposed by morris in e-resolution and by harrison and rubin 1j in generalized resolution. the connection graph procedure introduced by kowalski represents all possible resolution steps by links between the complementary unifiable literals. in   the ideas of the connection graph proof procedure are extended to handle paramodulation. on the other hand  knuth and bendix created a procedure for deriving consequences from equality units using a reduction. 
we remind the reader of the following problems 
  	supported 	in 	part 	by 	the 	national 	science 
foundation under grant number mcs-1 
that occur in handling equality. first  equality of two terms with respect to a given set of equations is in general undeoidable. second  few effective control mechanisms for the search and application of equality derivation steps have been developed. third  equality proof procedures seem not to make use of any high level planning. fourth  heuristic information does not seem to be easily incorporated into existing equality proof procedures. 
	a 	proposed 	inference 	rule 	called 
hl-resolution is intended to have the benefits of hyper steps while controlling the uses of paramodulation. it generates a resolvent by building a paramodulation and demodulation link between two given terms using a preprocessed plan as a guide. this linking process makes use of an equality graph which is constructed once at the beginning of the run. once a pair of candidate terms for hl-resolution is chosen in the search  potential linkages can be found and tested for compatibility efficiently by looking at paths in the graph. furthermore  using the properties of links  pairs of end terms for inner level linking can be found easily. the method was implemented on an existing theorem-proving system and a number of experiments were conducted on problems in abstract algebra. 


y. lim and l. henschen 1 

1 y. lim and l. henschen 
comments: 
1 . we do not allow function/predicate substitution to be used during the formation of the hl-resolvent  but only to the end result. we believe this corresponds to human-like 
approaches to function/predicate stripping. in any case  it severely limits the way in which these rules are allowed to generate new clauses. similarly  transitivity is used only as an 
hl-nucleus and only when two terms have been chosen for linkage. symmetry is built in  so we don't need to include xoy y=x. but note that flipping equalities is allowed only if it will make some larger deduction sequence work. so we have very tight restrictions on the uses of equality axioms. 
1 . as illustrated in the above example  we plan to use hl-resolution with the set-of-support strategy  reasoning from the denial of the theorem. simple paramodulation with set-of-support and without function reflexive axioms is known to be incomplete as the following example shows: 
with only clause 1 supported. because the linkage in hl-resolution is allowed from either a-j or a1  we can often get around this problem  and the reader can verify that there is a supported hl-resolvent 
using a 1-pd link from clause 1 which generates the function substitution link cod. the idea is that we reason from a supported clause and another clause  and the direction of the linkage shouldn't matter. 
1  although the above is a cooked up counterexample  the situation is totally different when demodulation is used. then most normal problems are not refutable by paramodulation using only the denial as support. for example  the first backward reasoning paramodulation step in the x*x=e problem is to generate f e f b a  of a b   which immediately demodulates back to f  b a of  a b . since hl-resolution is a hyper rule  demodulation is blooked on all the intermediate steps. a corallary of this observation is that if a k-pd link starts out with a number of equalities used backwards  somewhere in the linkage a non-demodulator equality must be used or else the target term must rearrange the built-up term. otherwise the entire hl-resolvent will just redemodulate. we believe this feature also matches that of human-style equality reasoning in which people often purposely make complicating substitutions into terms with the 
goal of being able to reassociate  distribute or some other such. 
	1 . 	as with other hyper methods  the idea is 
y. lim and l. henschen 1 
to keep only the end result  which hopefully will be a more meaningful one. for equality we believe this may also lead to the possibility of some high level planning. for example  in the k  g a  problem above  there are several hl-resolvents starting from k  g a . however  only the given one leads to function stripping. thus  one heuristic in choosing a1 and a1 for hl-resolution is to pick terms with the same outer function symbol when possible. further in the given example  we can note that there is 
linkage between the arguments  a and 1  of the two terms that were resolved  further indicating that k  g a  and l=g i  might be a profitable choice. such analysis will be facilitated by the use of the equality connection graph to be described below. we have only begun to consider these ideas  but believe they may lead to interesting results. we believe the idea of choosing two terms and attempting to link them through the graph makes hl-resolution perhaps 
more amenable to such heuristic analyses than other 	equality 	systems. 	in any 	case 	the generation 	of 	paramodulants 	is  	again  controlled and directed by the choice of a1 and a1  which choice could be made by some high level 	planning 	process 	or 	even 	human interaction. 
1 . note that we could pose the rule strictly in terms of paramodulation without recourse to a nucleus and resolution at the last step. however our approach emphasizes the notion that we are looking for outer-level linkages  and especially those that lead to potentially useful function/predicate stripping. furthermore  it provides target terms to be linked. 
1. completeness 
　　　　the basic idea is that  from the existance of an unrestricted paramodulation deduction  we construct an equivalent hl-deduction. proofs of the following lemmas and theorems are found in . 
lemma 1. if s is an e-unsatisfiable set of unit  equality clauses including x=x and functional reflexive axioms  then s has a refutation with a negative clause as top clause by paramodulation and resolution whose paramodulators are unit clauses in s while completeness is important to know 
about  it is more important in our view to develop effective proof procedures. thus  for example  we would not recommend using fr function reflexive  axioms. we have seen in section 1  comment 1 that for some cases where fr is required in simple paramodulation  hl-resolution proofs exist without fr because we are allowed to link either forward or backward. whether hl-resolution is complete without fr  perhaps with some other restrictions relaxed  remains open. however  in practice we do not recommend using them. 
　　　　also we believe that in practice p and d will not be chosen to be both all of s. again  we do not have a theory as to how they may be restricted and still maintain completeness. indeed we are only beginning to consider practical aspects of choosing p and d. this is an area for considerable further study and experimentation. 
　　　　finally  we note that the use of hl-resolution  or any paramodulation rule  with only the negative clause as support eliminates the generation of positive equalities. this may not be advantageous in view of the effective use of new 1 y. lim and l. henschen 



1. implementation and experimentation 
　　　　we have implemented hl-resolution on nuts  northwestern university theorem-proving system . nuts is a programmable  interactive theorem proving system based on lma  logic machine architecture  . the main part of the additions to nuts centers on a pair of algorithms  based directly on the comments in section 1  which generate first the set plan t s  of all plans for the two terms t and s and second the set pdlink t s  of all k-pd links. 
	a 	primary 	purpose 	is 	to 	compare 
hl-resolution and paramodulation  so we didn't try any open problems yet but included problems from group theory and ring theory. 
　　　　in the experiments reported on below  we made several restrictions. in linking process  no paramodulation was allowed from or into variables  as is the standard in most paramodulation experiments. since hl-resolution may generate an hl-resolvent using 1-pd link  in the case that one of from-term or to term happens to be a variable  the hl-resolvent is  in fact  a paramodulant genetated by paramodulation from or into a variable. but that is not a severe problem because it is allowed only from or into outer level term. we placed a bound on k in such a way that we did't allow more than 1 paramodulation at a position. an interesting restriction is to not allow the same paramodulator to be used at the same position more than once in the link. of course  we did not use the functional reflexive axioms. as remarked above  it is an open question as to the effect of these restrictions on completeness. however  they are necessary for effectiveness in both hl and regular paramodulation. 
　　　　in all experiments  we picked the clause with the fewest number of symbols for the next step. in the oase of hl-resolution  we always 
y. lim and l. henschen 1 
worked backward. for the paramodulation runs  we picked some positive olause as set-of-support  usually a clause from the special hypotheses and all paramodulators were applied only from the left to the right side of equalities. the clause used in a particular experiment are indicated in the tables below. 
　　　　an important comment is that in the hl experiments we did not make use of any heuristics or human intervention in ohoosing a target term to link to or in filtering the hl-resolvents for retention except in the ring problems. there we used a very simple heuristic - if the outer function symbol of the hl-resolvent did not also occur as an outer function symbol in some input clause  the resolvent was not kept. this gave extra emphasis to the notion of working on outside terms. the importance of this comment is that the hl format provides first a pair of target terms and second an end result that is much more significant and much more like a human level inference than ordinary paramodulation. we intend that hl-resolution be used with heuristics for better selection of target terms and  interesting  results. it is possible that some problems would admit good heuristics for selecting the target terms; certainly there are more intelligent possibilities than to just take the one with fewest symbols or to take any target for which there is a link as was done in our simple experiments. we also feel that there could be better heuristics developed for deciding to keep a clause or not based on the fact that an hl-resolvent is a larger  more human-like step. in fact  in this last regard  one might even consider using hl-resolution in an interactive mode since the number of clauses presented to the user would be significantly less than in ordinary resolution or paramodulation. a user might be able to digest an analyse the limited number of these clauses and help direct the program's effort. 
legend: in the following report of experiments  the experiment **h** and **p** mean hl-resolution experiment and set-of-support paramodulation experiment  respectively. further  a  p  d  s  and n represent axiom set  paramodulator set  
demodulator 	set  	supported 	clause 	set 	and 
non-supported clause set  respectively. here the axiom set is the set of clauses which can be used as satellite clauses. 


1 y. lim and l. henschen 



we proposed a new inference rule called 
hl-resolution for 	the equality relation that is 
intended to have the benefits of hyper steps and to control the uses of paramodulation. it generates a resolvent by building a paramodulation/demodulation link between two terms using a preprocessed plan as a guide. we proved completeness for horn sets and suggested an efficient method for implementation. a number of experiments were conducted on problems in abstract algebra and the results are encouraging. but many problems remain untouched. completeness without function reflexive axioms possibly with some other restrictions relaxed remains open. and we do not have a theory as to how to restrict the choice of the sets of paramodulators and demodulators and s t i l l maintain completeness or effectiveness. we have not  as yet  considered what strategies for choosing pairs of target terms might be effective nor experimented with different target strategies. equally important is the question of whether or not a program might be able to select only the profitable links from the set pdlink t s . in our experiments  we simply generated all 
hl-resolvents possible within the bound on k. as mentioned earlier  we believe hl-resolvent has more potential for developing effective heuristics because of the format - there could be heuristics for picking target terms  and heuristics for selecting k-pd links. further  an hl step is a larger  potentially more significant step; we feel that it could be easier to predict the utility of 
y. lim and l. henschen 1 
such a larger step than to do the same for a series of shorter steps. whether or not this potential can be really developed remains to be seen. 
1. 