

k. yip 1 
in the following  i shall list the main results of this study: 

1. a better theory of tense with revised primitive tense structures and constraints. 
1. we derive an explanation of hornstein's linear order constraint  an observed formal constraint on linguistic tense  from properties of the constraint propagation algorithm of allen's temporal system. this shows this formal grammatical constraint need not be learned at all. we also show that the rule of r-permanence follows from the hypothesis that only the matrix clause and the subcawgonzable scomp or vcomp can introduce 
distinct s and r points. finally  we prove that certain boundedness condition on the flow of information of a processing system leads directly to the locality property of a constraint on sequences of tense. 
1. a principle of markedness for tense structures based on the computational efficiency of the temporal representation. the principle predicts that  1  of the six basic tenses in english  future perfect is the only marked tense and  1  the notion of a distant future tense  just like the simple future  is also unmarked. 
1. a better account of the state/event/process distinction based on allen's interval based temporal logic and the idea that the progressive aspect specifies the perspective from which the truth of a situation is evaluated. 
1. an account of theoretical constraints on the representation of time at the computational level  e.g.  three distinct time points are necessary to characterize an elementary tensed sentence  and the distinction between instantaneous and non instantaneous time intervals. 
1. tense 
　　we begin by first outlining hornstein's theory of tense. in section 1  we describe the primitives and constraints on tense of his theory. in sections 1 and 1  we show how the primitives and constraints can be derived from computational considerations. 
1 revisions to hornstein's theorv of tense 
hornstem develops a theory of tense within the 
reichenbachian framework which postulates three theoretical entities: s  the moment of speech   r  a reference point   and e  the moment of event . the key idea is that certain linear orderings of the three time points get grammaticalized into the six basic tenses of english.1 the following is the list of basic tense structures: 
　　the notation here demands some explanation. the underscore symbol     is interpreted as the  less than  relation among time points whereas the comma symbol v stands tor the  less-than-or-equal to  relation. as an illustration  the present perfect tense denotes a situation in which the moment of speech is either cotemporaneous or precedes the reference point  while the moment of event is strictly before the other two moments. note that hornstem also uses the term  association  to refer to the comma symbol    . 
　　given the basic tense structure tor a simple tensed sentence  the interpretation of the sentence that arises from the interaction of tense and time adverbs is represented by the modification of the position of the r or e points to form a new tense structure which we call a derived tense structure. in two papers  hornstein1 & hornstein 1   hornstem proposes three formal constraints that limit the class of derived tense structures that can be generated from the basic tense structures in such a way as to capture the acceptability of sentences containing temporal adverbs  e.g.  now  yesterday  tomorrow   temporal connectives  e.g.  when  before  after   and indirect speech in the rest of this section  i shall examine the adequacy of these constraints. 


1 hornstem actually listed nine basic tenses  but i think the progressive belongs to the province of aspect rather than tense 

1. the numberings are hornstem s 

1 k yip 

k yip 1 
rp predicts both 1i and 1ii will be unacceptable  but 1i seems to be good it is examples line 1i and 1ii. i believe  that lead homstem to propose the asymmetrical rule rtc. but i think the data are misleading because it seems to be an idiosyncrasy of english grammar that 1i is acceptable in french  we have to say 

an equivalent of  john will come when we will arrive  with the temporal adverbial explicitly marked with the future tense  jespersen1  p.1 . thus  the acceptability of sentences like 1i can be explained by a principle of economy of speech allowing us to omit the future tense of the temporal adverbial if the matrix clause is already marked with the future tense. 

in the  a  sentence  the temporal interpretation of the embedded sentence is evaluated with respect to the moment of speech. thus  for instance. |1a  means that mary's leaving is 1 days after present moment of speech on the other hand  the  b  sentence has the temporal interpretation of the embedded sentence evaluated with respect to the interpretation of the matrix clause  i.e.  |1b  means that mary's leaving is 1 days before the moment of has only two temporal readings.  1  in 1 ci . mary's leaving is two days after the moment of speech  and     in 1 cii   mary's leaving is two days before the moment of speech. in particular  there is not a temporal reading corresponding to the situation in which mary's leaving 1 five days before the moment of speech. we would obtain the third reading if sot allowed non local linking  e.g.  assigned s1 with e-1. 
1 explanations of the formal constraints 
　　in the previous section  we have examined three formal constraints on the derivation of complex tense structures from the basic tense structures:  1  loc   1  rp  and  1  sot. now. i want to show how the log falls out naturally from the computational properties of a temporal reasoning system along the line suggested by allen  alien1  allen1   and also how the rp and soi constraints have intuitive computational motivation. 
　　the basis of allen's computational system is a temporal logic based on intervals instead of time points the temporal logic consists of seven basic relations and their inverses  allen1  p. 1  figure 1 : 

1 k. yip 
　　when new temporal relationships are added  the system maintains consistency among events by propagating the effects of 
the new relationships via a table of transitivity relationships that tells the system how to deduce the set of admissible relationships between events a and c given the relationships between a and b  and between b and c thus  for instance  from the relationships  a during b  and  b   c   the system can deduce  a   c . 
　　one properly of the constraint propagation algorithm generally is that further information only causes removal of members from the set of admissible labels  i.e.  temporal relationships  between any two old events  allen1  p.1 . no new label can be added to the admissible set once it is created let us call this property of the constraint propagation algorithm the delete label condition  dlc . dlc can be interpreted as a kind of information monotonicity condition on the temporal representation. 
　　let us further restrict allen's temporal logic to instantaneous intervals  i.e.  each event corresponds to a single moment of time. the restricted logic has only one primitive relation     and three other derived relations:       and  . there is a straightforward 
translation of hornstein's sre notation into the network representation  namely  replace each comma symbol     by    or 
  with the event symbols reverse their roles  and each underscore symbol     by    or   with similar adjustment on the event symbols . thus  a tense structure such as: e r s can be represented as: 
in each of these cases  the operation involves the addition of new members to the admissible set this is ruled out by dlc thus  we have the result that if loc is violated  then dlc is violated in other words  dlc -  loc.1 h 
　　the second constraint to be accounted for is the rp which effectively states that  a  the s points of the matrix clause and the temporal adverbial must be identical  and  b  the r points of the matrix clause and the temporal adverbial must be identical. one hypothesis for this rule is that: 
 h1  only the matrix clause introduces distinct s and r points. 
in other words  the non-subcategonzable temporal adjuncts do not add new s and r points. 
　　h1 has to be modified slightly to take the case of embedded sentence into account  namely  
 revised rp : only the matrix clause and the subcategonzable scomp or vcomp can introduce distinct s and r points  where scomp and vcomp stand for sentential complement and verbal complement respectively the interesting point is that both the revised rp and the locality property of sot can be easily 
1 the converse of this theorem is not true 

k. yip 1 


1 k. yip 
network representations  e.g.  the past perfect  e r s  has the following two configurations: 

　　the interesting result is that five out of the six basic tenses have unmarked sre configurations this agrees largely with our pretheoretical intuition that the she configurations that correspond to the basic tenses should be more  unmarked  than other possible sre configurations the fit  however  is not exact because the future perfect tense becomes the marked tense in this classification. 
　　another prediction by this principle of markedness is that both the simple future  s r e  and distant future  s r  e  are unmarked it would be interesting to find out whether there are languages in which the distant future actually gets 
grammaticalized 
1 data 
1.1 tense implications 
1. statives rarely take the progressive aspect   e.g.  i know the answer. 
*l am knowing the answer. 
1 eor verb predications denoting processes  the progressive ot the verb form entails the perfect form  i.e.. x is v-ing -  x has v-ed. 
for instance  
john is walking -  john has walked. 
1 for verb predications denoting events  the progressive of the verb form entails the negation of the perfect form  i.e.  x is v-ing -  x has not v-ed. for instance  
john is building a house -  john has not built the house. 
1.1 sentences containing when 

　　the final point to be made is about the second type of labelings. there are two other possible ways of grouping the labelings  1  given sr and se  those labelings in which re is constrained  and  1  given se arid re those in which sr is constrained but these types of grouping are less likely because they would yield the simple present tense as a marked tense thus  they can be ruled out by relatively few linguistic data. 
1. verb aspect 
　　in considering the problem of tense  we have restricted ourselves to a subset of allen's temporal logic  namely  using a temporal structure  t.   with linear ordering of time points to make use of the full power of allen s temporal logic  we now turn to the problem of verb aspect. 
　　1 he two main problems of the study of verb aspect are the correct characterization of  1  the three fundamental types of verb predication according to the situation types that they signify state  process and event  and     the perspectives from which a situation is viewed  or its truth evaluated - simple or progressive. in the first part of his paper  allen attempts to provide a formal account of the state/process/event distinction using a temporal logic however. i believe that his characterization fails to capture well-known patterns of tense implications  and does not make the distinction between situation types and perspective types fundamental to any adequate account of verb aspect. in the next section  i will present some data that any theory of very aspect must be able to explain. 
　　sentences containing clauses connected by a connective such as  when  have different aspect interpretations depending on the situation types and perspective types involved 
 john laughed when mary drew a circle. 
situation /perspective type: 
x - process/simple; y - event /simple 
interpretation 
x can be before- after or simultaneous with y 
 .john was laughing when mary drew a circle. 
situation /perspe ctive  type: x - process/progressive  y - event/simple interpretation: 
y occurs during x. 
 john was angry when mary drew a circle. situation/perspective type; 
x - state/simple; y = event/simple interpretation 
x can be before  after  simultaneous with or during y. 
 john was laughing when mary was drawing a circle. situation/perspective type-
x - process/progressive; y = event/progressive interpretation: 
x must be simultaneous with y. 
1 	formal 	account of the state/process/event 
distinction 

1 some of the better works are vendler1. comric1. mourelatos.1 

define: 
1 it has often been pointed out mat some statives do take the progressive form e.g.   i am thinking about the exam.    the doctor is seeing a patient   however  a statistical study has. shown that the familiar statives rarely occur with the progressive aspect   less than 1% of the time  ota1  section 1  

k. yip 1 


1 k. yip. 
constraints  such as the linear order constraint on tense  tall out naturally as a consequence of some computational assumptions. the interesting result is that this formal constraint need not be learned at all. 
　　another important role of a representation scheme in explaining phenomena that exist on a entirely different - linguistic - level is illustrated by the formulation of the c-aspect constraint to account for interpretations of sentences containing temporal connectives. 
　　the study of linguistic semantics also sheds light on a representation of time by revealing the fundamental distinctions 
that must be made  e.g.. a tensed sentence involves three distinct time points  and the aspectual interpretations require instantaneous/non-instantaneous interval distinction. 
at knowledgement 
　　i would like to thank prof robert g berwick for his insightful suggestion that the relationship between a cognitive theory of time and a linguistic theory of tense is a fruitful and important area for research he also contributed substantially to the presentation of 
this paper finally  i also thank norbert homstein who provided useful easements during the revision of this paper. 
1. 