 
         in this paper i introduce a contrast between homomorphic and non-homomorphic ascriptions of informational content to representations. in the former case there is a mapping from the parts of the representation onto the constituents of the content. in the latter case  there is not; some of the constituents of the content are settled bj background factors. i contrast this distinction with that between context dependent and context independent ascriptions of content. i note that in cases where the ascriber of content shares the background with the agent  one is inclined to ascribe homomorphic content of a sort that does not have a fixed truth-value to a representation. this leads to the notion of relative information. some uses for relative information are noted. finally  the distinctions developed are used to distinguish three types of self-knowledge and account for their relations. 
i 	homomorphic and non-homomorphic representations 
         philosophers of mind and language and researchers in artificial intelligence must confront the question of the content of representations. philosophers want to understand what it is to know or believe or say something; researchers in ai want to build things that do know  believe and say things. in fact  most researchers in ai also share the philosophers goal; indeed  as far as i can t e l l   most of them are philosophers. but even if this were not so  understanding the nature of knowing  believing and saying ought to be helpful in learning how to construct things that have these capacities. 
　　　　at 	one 	time  	the 	paradigm 	for representations was the utterance of an eternal sentence  with a content fixed by meaning alone. more recently  we have realized the importance of context. the meaning of a representation typically fixes content only relative to context. in this paper i discuss a 
　　　　further factor  background  that interacts with context in interesting ways. 
	consider my utterance 	of 	sam 	was 
sleeping. this utterance has the informational content that sam was sleeping.  i use informational content for that which is information if it gets things right  and call it  content- for short.  this content has  intuitively  three constituents: the individual sam  the past time in question  and the property of being asleep. the sentence i used has a number of constituents: sam  was  sleeping  and was sleeping. among these are three that identify the constituents of the content. so  there is a homomorphism from the constituents of the sentence onto the constituents of the content. 
　　　　this might seem inevitable. 	after a l l   how could constituents 	make their 	way into 	a proposition that an utterance expresses  unless some constituents 	of 	the 	uttered 	expression identified 	them 	 at 	least 	in 	a 	suitably generous 	notion 	of 	consitutents 	of 	an expression   
         but now consider another case. george sticks his left hand out the window of his car  thereby signalling that he will turn left at the next corner. the content has as constituents george  the next corner  and the relation of turning left at. we might reasonably say that the particular way he holds his arm stands for the relational activity of turning left at. but the way he holds his arm does not have constituents or aspects that identify the corner at which he is going to turn. which corner is not  so to speak  a question that the structure of the signal needs to resolve. once the angle of his arm 

identifies right or left  we have all the information we need. the rest of the propoeitional constituents are not supplied by aspects of the signalling movement  but by what i shall call the background. 
         the background is typically determined by the context. we are imagining the signalling to occur in the u.s. in the last half of the twentieth century  where there is an institution of signalling for turns. this institution provides a propositional function for each context. the function takes directions  left  right  as arguments and returns a proposition: that the driver involved will turn  left  right  at the next corner. 
	this suggests 	the 	following 	picture. 
communication takes place against a background  determined by context. a background provides a propositional function  taking some sort of entities as arguments. the job of the representation is to provide the necessary arguments to get from the background to a 
proposition. the case of uttering a complete declarative sentence  in vaccuo   so to speak  is the limiting case. the background is null: it provides only the identity function  from propositions to propositions. the constituents of the proposition are supplied by the background and the representation; homomorphic representation is just a special case  where the background is null. 
         backgrounds of this sort may be established in various ways. in the case of the driver's signal  there is an institution that establishes a background for each driver in the vicinity of a corner. we may think of questions as providing backgrounds. the question  who shot liberty valence   provides a function from individuals and types of individuals to propositions. an answer need only specify an individual  jack palance  say  or a type of individual  some man with a large gun  . 
ii background and context 
　　　　the distinction between homomorphic and non-homomorphic representations cuts across that between eternal and context sensitive representations. 
　　　　for example  if you ask me the square of 1 and i say  four   my answer is eternal.  four- stands for four in any context  or so we 
	j.perry 	1 
may assume . but the representation is non-homomorphic  because the informational content  that the square of two is four  picks up constituents from the background. 
　　　　when 	i 	say 	''i 	am sitting   	the representation 	is 	homomorphic 	but 	context sensitive. 	if i say  john perry is sitting 	on may 	1  	1   	the 	representation 	is homomorphic and  arguably  sternal. 	if you ask 
 who wants a chocolats milkshake   	and i reply  me   my answer is 	both context sensitive 	and non-homomorphic. 
         which background is relevant is generally a matter of context   but it need not be. we can imagine a convention of language  for example  that placing one's hand vigorously over one's heart supplies the answer  yes  to the question  is america the home of the brave and the land of the free   no matter who does it and when. in this case  we imagine the background being supplied by the meaning of the representation  and not its contsxt.  for some purposes  however  it is useful to think of the language being used as a contsxtual fact.  
         thus  the context of a representation is just the larger situation of which its use is a part. the context may contain all sorts of facts relevant to the content of the representation. the background for a representation is not determined by the meaning of any part of the representation  but by the meaning of the whole. the meaning may determine the background  eternally  as in our patriotic example. more commonly the meaning determines the background only relative to context. in the signalling case  the system of signalling determines a relation from contexts to backgrounds. for a signaller a approaching a corner c  the background is the partial function that takes a direction as argument and returns the proposition that a will turn in that direction at c. 
	i l l 	relative information 
         when a background is supplied by context  the background may be more or less sensitive to shifts of context. for example  the statement  it's four o'clock  said by me now  sitting in palo alto  has the informational content that it is four o'clock pacific coast time. we can imagine that  it  refers to a time. then there really is not a property of times  being four o'clock  but only 

1 	j.perry 
a relation between times and zones. so my representation is non-homomorphic. the zone supplied as background does not vary over wide geographical regions  although it changes suddenly when it does. 
　　　　for people in a single time zone talking to one another  there is no point in mentioning the time-zone. indeed  people who grow up in one time-zone and do l i t t l e 
　　　　traveling and don't watch tv  may function perfectly well without ever realizing that there are time-zones  and that being four o'clock is really a relation and not a property. they don't need the concept of a time-zone at all to make use of information about the time of day and to detect and communicate such information themselves. 
         in general  the meaning of a 
         representation  a sentence of english  for example  can be seen as a relation between the sorts of situations in which it occurs and the content of those situations. thus we can take the meaning of i am sitting to be that relation between utterances and contents that obtains if the content requires the speaker to be sitting. given this picture  contents provide an equivalence relation among utterances that employ sentences with different meanings. so  the utterance where i utter i am sitting and the one where you utter you are sitting while talking to me have the same content. this equivalence relation is important in understanding the flow of information  where informational content is preserved across changes of context. it is also important for understanding such psychological notions as continuing to believe the same thing  barwise and perry  1; perry  1; perry. 1 . 
　　　　the 	phenomenon 	of 	non-homomorhic representation suggests that we need to broaden the notion of informational content  to include not just  propositions   that are true or false absolutely  but also various types of 	relative informational content  that are true and 	false relative to a background. 
         consider communication about the time of day. so long as this takes place within a time-zone  there is l i t t l e need to worry about the propositions expressed. if i ask ingrid what time it is and she says  it's four o'clock   i do not need to think  she is in the pacific zone  so that means that it is fou: o'clock pacific coast time.  i just think 
＊it's four 	o'clock . 	we 	can 	say that 	she communicated the information that i t ' s four o'clock  where this is relative information  information that is true or false only relative to a background. the transaction is information-preserving only if the participants share a background. if ingrid is talking to me long-distance from now york city and i don't realize i t   the transaction will not be information preserving. 
         we might suppose  and i did for a long time  that we do not need to recognize relative information  since meanings  relationally conceived  give us entities that are true or false relative to context. but there are transactions in which meanings change systematically to preserve relative information. suppose ingrid says  it's four o'clock by my watch   and i t e l l you  it's four o'clock by ingrid's watch.  meaning has not been preserved  and the shift in meaning does not automatically preserve non-relative information. what is preserved is information relative to a time-zone. we seem to need the notion of relative information to think about this transaction  and to be able to carefully characterize just what goes wrong when she made the original remark long-distance from new 
york  and my remark to you was false 
iv self-knowledge and self-representation 
         i think the notions of non-homomorphic representation and relative information are crucial in a number of areas of epistemology and semantics. for example  jon barwise  barwise. 1  has recently analyzed conditionals as providing relative information about the three place relation among types of situations  t involves t' relative to t   . t  is supplied by the background  and barwise shows how some of the puzzles about conditionals involve inferences that are only valid when the background is kept fixed. i suspect these notions will be important in dealing with subjunctives  unbounded dependencies of various sorts  and other troublesome topics. 
         i want to end the paper by focussing on a particular topic  however  that will suggest a more or less deep reason why relative information and non-homomorphic representations are so important. 
	let's return to 	our time-zone 	bounded 
folk. we saw that they can communicate perfectly well about the time of day without having any words for or even concepts of time-zones. because they live within a certain constant background  they have no need to worry about i t . in particular their thought about the time of day can be keyed to certain perceptions and actions in a perfectly workable way  even though they lack such concepts. they look at the clock and think  it's five o'clock-  and so they close up shop and go home for supper. 
         even those of us with a well-developed conceptual apparatus for dealing with time-zones operate  for the most part  in ways that allow our perceptions of the time of day and the actions we take in virtue of the time of day to ignore time-zones. like the folk above  we go home when the clock shows five o'clock  or so . 
         i think these facts about time-zones are suggestive about certain basic facts of the human condition. the information we pick up through perception is always relative information. when i see a terminal before me  there need be nothing in my perceptual state that is indicative of its being me that the terminal is in front of. not only is there not a constituent of the perception that 
 eternally1 stands for me  there need not even be a constituent that picks me out in context. i am the background for my perceptions  and you are the background for yours. when you are in the very same perceptual state i am now in  you know that there is a terminal in front of you  not that there is one in front of me. 
         imagine now a somewhat simpler organism than myself  perceiving a potato rather than a terminal in front of i t . we can imagine this perception leading to a cognitive state  that in turn leads to the action of seizing the potato and jamming it into one's mouth. we can ascribe content to the action  in terms of its result. each such organism  taking the action in question  will jam the potato into its own mouth  not someone else's. so we can think of actions as having non-homomorphically determined content  or homomorphically determined relative content. these organisms do not need to have any concept of themselves. they surely do not need any  eternal  idea of themselves  but they also do not need any internal indexical either. since they are always in the background of their perceptions 
	j.perry 	1 
and actions  they need not be represented in the cognitions that intervene between them. 
         we can suppose  then  that relative information is systematically connected with types of perception and action equally important  we cannot imagine that non-relative information is systematically tied to them. that elwood has a potato in front of him can't be something that all our l i t t l e organisms know on the basis of being in the potato-in-front percpetual state  and can't be something the cognition of which leads them all to grab and shove. at any rate  if things worked this way  elwood is the only member of the group that wouldn't go hungry. 
         these reflections suggest the following picture of our cognitive make-up. at the  bottom  level  we have cognitions that have no representation of ourselves  or the present moment   which are tied pretty directly to cognition and action. this gives us self-knolwedge of a sort: we know the world from our perspective. at the  top  level we have representations that are not systematically tied to perception and action  or at least not to the same sorts of perception and action   in virtue of which we have relatively context insensitive cognitions that homomorphically determine propositions about ourselves. this is self-knowledge of another sort. i have it if i read a note  john perry must call home   where  john perry  designates me. note that i would have it even if i had forgotten my name  and didn't realize  as i might put i t   that i was to call home. the real purpose of indexicals is to mediate between these levels  yielding full-blown self-knowledge  although not yet socratic self-knowledge . when i read a note   john perry please call home   i think  i must call home  and then go into a state that we might express with  must call home . the step from the top level to the intermediate level varies from person to person; the step from tne intermediate level to the bottom level  and from it to action  modulo procrastination  is universal. the purpose of indexicals is to align the homomorphic representations we get through language and other forms of communication  at some kinds of memory  with a 
more basic  selfless  cognitive system. 
         one who has the bottom and top levels correctly linked knows who he is  where he is  what time it is . this is s t i l l oversimple  in 

1 	j.perry 
a variety of ways. we would need more levels  for example  to get at what happens when one 
realizes that it is four o'clock eastern time  hence one o'clock real time  hence one o'clock here  hence time to go to lunch. but i hope 1 have said enough to suggest that the topics of non-homomorphic representation and relative information are worth careful thought  whether or not the thought 1 have provided is careful enough. 
acknowledgements 
         recognition of the need for something like relative information  and the consequent need to distinguish between non-homomorphic and context dependent representation  was forced on me by joseph almog and bob moore in the course of conversations about the motivation for propositions with truth values relative to times  as are found in david kaplan's work on demonstratives  kaplan  1 . the present approach is the result of conversations with jon barwise. david israel  moore  and others. 
