 
     this paper examines the emerging relationship between the us and japan with respect to artificial intelligence and the significant trend towards us-japan cooperative al research and development. this trend is 
underscored by the increasing investment by both nations to develop massive 1th generation computer technology. the importance of the us and japan's relationship is amplified by these two nations being the world's largest high technology producers and trading partners. one must fully appreciate the future course of events as the two nations open up new markets  estimated at tens of billions of dollars in al hardware  software and related services by the 1's. al has greater implications for collaboration versus ruthless competition  as in other markets  due to the uniqueness of opportunity al offers the us and japan for mutual growth. al will offer unique ways for the us and japan to grow closer with greater understanding of two otherwise extremely different social and economic systems. this does not diminish the importance of other countries growing closer through al in this way  but rather demonstrates the greatest example of cooperation with the greatest total economic rewards. 
changes in us-japan high tech relations 
     japan has demonstrated a most effective competitive strategy in most marketplaces  which has  as some observe  threatened the basic underpinnings of the us economy. more specifically  the great desire by japanese firms to be number one has created an overall uneasiness for most us firms about the future. the last few years has seen a growing discontent from americans towards japan and recently resulted in the strongest post-war trade protection backlash ever witnessed towards japan. 
     thankfully  the leaders in both countries have gone to great lengths to avert a trade war  whose consequences would only prove destructive to each economy. this latest round of measures shows an unprecedented willingness from japan to protect good relations with the us. prime minister nakasone is urging the liberalization of freer trade to benefit the trade imbalance. the risk  however  1s that by the us using threats towards increasing diplomatic and economic relations  trust and stability may be lost in the process. this illustrates the basic need to create more effective tools for the us and japanese government and commercial interests to better interact. the fit for al here is ideal. as our overall markets continue to grow and overlap  there becomes a higher price for failure and a greater reward for successful negotiation and cooperation. this is one of the original concepts for al technology. 
     to gain better insight into the depth of this trend in our changing high technology relations  the last 1 years are revealing. when japan was rebuilding its economy after the war  many us firms licensed technology to their industrial counterparts. the licensing of technology was a natural fit for both sides  but the consequences were unimagined. this period shows in excess of 1 licenses transacted from the us to japan. 
     the chart below illustrates the increase and then leveling-off of us originated technology licenses to japan. the historic curve is in 
direct relation to japan's economic rebuilding and expansion to the gradual decrease in dependence on foreign technology  as internal innovation became more practical and effective. 


1 	h.jacobson 
this change in japan's dependence on us technology is revolutionizing the relations between the world's two largest suppliers of high technology goods and services. the effects of this change will be positive  if the us and japan can find effective ways to work productively with each other in partnerships to advance technology through private market means. it will also ease the trade frictions that have resulted due to the $1 billion trade imbalance. 
     correcting this imbalance  many us firms are now creating joint ventures instead of simply licensing their technology. this is because they began valuing the rewards of selling in japan's market  at least as an equity partner. numerous us and japanese firms in the computer  robotics  hybrid electronics and high technology services sectors have been finding ways to join efforts. 
     currently  japan is changing its role from technology assimilator to technology innovator. this upsets a long-held belief that japan only takes technology and lacks innovation. japan had used this method successfully for many 
generations  but recently a change has taken place. japan recognized the poor reputation created in international markets due to technolgy assimilation. it was felt that further international resistance to this method by developed countries would be expressed against buying japanese products. 

     because the majority of japan's economy is based on international trade  miti  the ministry for international trade and industry  in 1  issued a directive towards japanese innovation and international r&d collaboration. in 1  miti financed $1 million for technology r&d  all japanese government r&d totaled $1 billion and the total government and private r&d of japan exceeded $1 billion. this 1s impressive because it pushed their r&d as a percentage of gnp ahead to challenge the us. 	1 saw the creation of 
icot  the institute for the 1th generation computer technology  which caused a severe sense of threat to the us. 
     since then  that sense of threat may be subsiding. this is a clear indication of a new japanese strategy  which has started to set the course for new era of us japan high technology relations. this increase in japan's r&d innovation does not remove the historical us leadership in innovation. rather  it acts to add 
parity to an otherwise unbalanced relationship. the issue of technology lifespans growing shorter will always equalize any dominance in technology before too long. 
     even though icot's 1-year  several hundred million dollar strategy appears ominous  the fact is that it is not out of line with what the us is investing by individual firms in such ambitious future development. the reason it appears threatening is that the figures are pooled into one sum. if you add all the us firms r&d expenditures on 1th generation computer technology from 1 to 1  you might find it exceeding japan's icot by a healthy margin. we must not get caught in the trap of who gets how much of the ai market alone  but how we can proceed together for optimum benefit. 
the effective us-japan ai blueprint 
　　　assuming that great improvement can be made by joining certain efforts in us-japan ai work  what is an effective method  as an example  japan has created its industry and government consortium  icot  as a 1-year effort to produce a 1th generation computer. the reason was to develop standards and create efficiency by nonduplicated costs of development. some critics view this as a way to upset the balance of power in the world of technology. in reality  collaboration was a wise decision and us firms have recently been finding ways to implement this. as the us antitrust laws were loosened and further r&d incentives created  us firms took advantage of pooling technology efforts to maximize returns for their investors. in a way  this increases us competitiveness far beyond a less productive process. 
　　the next logical step is to combine talents on priority projects for the us and japan using the method on the following page. this us-japan ai r&d limited partnership is patterned after the us department of commerce blueprint for collaboration. the doc office of productivity  technology and innovation has created a system that allows laboratories  partners and the marketplace of end-users to benefit by organized association  similar in some ways to the icot formula. 

	h.jacobson 	1 
     the first and foremost areas of application for us-japan ai cooperative development include: 
telecommunications  international trade  
international finance  manufacturing and international diplomacy and negotiation  these areas have the greatest promise due to the political and economic ramifications being experienced by the two countries. as japan opens 
its markets to us producers  they will need to develop competent ai systems for conducting business smoothly with japan. 	us banks  securities firms  and manufacturers will be testing their skills and luck with the new opportunity to reach a market of 1 million people. 	their expectations will be more easily reached with the enhancement of ai applications to guide their transactions and operations. 
     in reverse fashion  the japanese firms doing business in the us will be able to reach greater efficiency by setting ai declson systems to their advantage. the area of machine translation is one that is more appealing to japan because of their dependence on trade with the us. but  as trade equalizes  more us interest in commercial translation systems will be expressed. 
     the area of ai machine translation has been explored for years and most believe that commercially viable systems are beginning to be released. the wilson center  in washington  dc  recently organized a program called  getting america read for japanese science and technology . this explored the progress between our countries  as more knowledge is gained of the japanese language. an ai translation system for japanese was revealed by bravice international  inc. as technical progress moves ahead  ai voice recognition translation technology will appear. this has tremendous benefit for our countries. 
     this type of merging mutual technological interests is serving to elevate the quality of our lives dramatically  expanding the cumulative marketplaces and ensuring the growth of our free markets' cooperation. 
*this conference was sponsored by the wilson center's asia program and the mit-japan science and technology program. it focused on the japanese language  machine translation technology  us policy on language training and technical japanese. 
acknowledgements 
mr. howard e. jacobson  executive vice president of the jacobson corporation  serves as chair to the ijcai panel on us-japan cooperation 1n ai r&d. his professional background includes the formation and management of us-japan r&d partnerships 1n artificial intelligence  computer hardware  robotics and biotechnology. 
mr. jacobson was the special advisor to the us presidential commission on industrial 
competitiveness regarding us-japan relations and 1s a member of several international scientific associations. mr. jacobson's degree is in economics from claremont mckenna college  cmc . 
