 
　tims has been studied by logicians for a long time and recently it has been modelled in more and more researches in ai. there exists a gap between the logics built by temporal logicians and those used in ai. this paper aims at filing this gap and providing a formal study on temporal logics for ai. in this paper  we present a new axiomatization of allen & hayes' temporal logic and locate their logic in the spectrum of logics built by temporal logicians. we also relate point-  event- and interval-based time structures to one another. 
	i 	introduction 
　temporal logic has been studied by temporal logicians for a long time. the classical approach to temporal logic takes instants and relation of temporal precedence as primitive. recently  interest has been shown in eventbased temporal logics  e.g.  l1  . 
　on the other hand  temporal reasoning is becoming more and more important in ai. it is difficult to reason with time but not to talk about the time structures that we are using. two of the best known models of time are allen a hayes'  and mcdermott's . allen a hayes' logic is based on intervals  we shall argue that they are  events   and mcdermott's logic is based on points. both of them have been demonstrated to be useful for ai  e.g.  l  o  ll  . this gives us motivation to link them to formal temporal logics. 
　event-based logic arises because of the intuition that mental experience is based on events rather than instances - even the shortest event  like switching the light from on to off  has duration. in this paper  we start with allen a hayes' logic  which we shall refer to as a . because it takes intervals  events  as primitives. then we shall present a new time structure. which we shall refer to as e' which is equivalent to a. and relate it with interval-based and point-based structures. 
　by giving allen a hayes' logic a new axiomatization. we hope to have better understanding and control of our systems which are built on it. we are not satisfied with allen a hayes' axiomatization because their axioms are not primitive enough for extensions. for example one might want to remove linearity in order to talk about disjunctive sets of intervals - for applications like planning under uncertainty  which includes the issue of branching time in 
. see  . but it is difficult to see which axiom in allen & hayes' axiom set entails linearity. limited by 
1 	knowledge representation 
space  most of the proofs are omitted from this paper. they can be found in . 
ii allen a hayes' logic  a 
in this section  we shall summarize allen's temporal 
logic. this summary is based on the logic presented in allen and hayes' paper . 
　in  l  allen presents a logic in which there are 1 possible primitive relations between any two intervals. these temporal relations are before     meet m . overlap o . start s . during d . finish f  equal =  and their inverse  see  l  for their detail definition . in . allen and hayes show that all the other 1 relations can be defined in terms of meet  and provide an axiomatization of meet. intuitively  interval a meets interval b means b 
　starts immediately after a ends - a and b have no common subintervals and there is no gap between them. we shall call their interval structure a: 
a -   e. meet   
where e is a nonempty set of intervals and meet is an operator which takes two intervals  of e  as its arguments. there are five axioms which describe the structure a : 
 ml   v i.j    1 k   i meet k a j meet k  -  
 v 1   i meet 1  -  j meet 1   
 m1   v i.j    1 k   k meet i a k meet j  -  
 v 1   1 meet i   -   1 meet j   
 m1   v i.j.k.l   i meet j a k meet 1  -  
 1   i meet 1 : xor 
 1   1 m   i meet m a m meet 1 : xor 
 1   1 n   k meet n a n meet j  
 m1   v i   1 j. k   j meet i a i meet k  
 m1  	 v i.j   i meet j 	-  
 1  i+j    1 a.b   a meet i a i meet j a j meet b a a meet  i+j  a  i+j  meet b   
　axioms  ml  and  m1  state that every interval has a unique start and end point. the meaning of  m1  is a 
　little bit vague. it defines all the possible relations between any two meeting places.  m1  makes every interval have at least one neighbouring interval preceding it. and another succeeding it. interval i+j in  m1  is only defined if i meets j. i+j is the interval which conuins exactly both intervals i and j.  m1  is an axiom on e. which states that for any two neighbouring intervals. one can find an interval in e which contains both of them. 


	tsang 	1 

introduction of  e1 . we can derive  e1  from  e1 .  e1 .  e1  and  e1 . and therefore  e1  can be discarded . 
　to obtain  m1  and  m1 . we need to be able to talk about both intersection and union. we define  e is the union of x and y   e - xuy  as follow  note 1 : 

　allen & hayes' logic implies that given any two intervals  their union always exists. the additional axiom that we need for obtaining  m1  is: 
theorem iii 
 e1  to  ell  of can be derived from axioms  ml  to  m1  in a. 
　the proof of these lemmas and theorems are quite lengthy and therefore will not be presented here  see  . 
	iv 	t  the equivalent point structure 
　as pointed out in . any attempt to model time with an interval-based model must show how the concept of points can be formulated. similarly  we must show how the concept of intervals can be constructed in a pointbased model. therefore it is not only interesting  but important  to see how a point structure can be constructed from  and used to construct  the event structure e*. in this section  we shall explore what such a point-based structure should look like. 


1 	knowledge representation 

also prove that the point structure defined by e*  which we shall call point e*   has all the properties of t. the proof of strict linear order of a point structure constructed from e has been given by   and abstracted in  . the only unproved property is  p1 . which follows  e1  and  e1  of e* trivially. 
　when points are taken as primitive temporal items  one question that we often ask is whether time is discrete or dense. intuitively  a point structure has dense property if given any two points. there exists a third point which lies between them. if a point-structure is discrete  we can name the neighbours of any given point  when they exist . when intervals are taken as primitives  the choice between discrete and dense disappears. it is replaced by the choice between atomicity or endless descent . an atomic interval is defined as an interval which cannot be decomposed. e* has the property of atomicity if we add the following axiom to it: 

　an interval structure has the property of endless descent if every interval has at least one subinterval which is not the same as itself. e* has endless descent if we add the following axiom to it: 

　in our definition of intervals  using  p.q  . atomic intervals exist in int t  only if t is discrete - when q is the point that is following p.  p.q  is an atomic interval. if t is dense  there are infinite number of points between any two distinct points p and q. therefore any interval  p.q  can be decomposed. 
　it must be pointed out that it is also possible to define for a dense point structure an interval structure which has the atomicity property. this can be done by defining intervals as  any convex set of points  instead of our definition above. then for any point q. {q  is an atomic interval. notice that {q} cannot be represented by any  p.q  in a dense time model under our definition. 
　in . allen and hayes suggest different ways to capture the concept of  points  in their interval-based logic. to capture the concept of points in discrete point-based models  they define moments in terms of atomic intervals. to satisfy dense  which they call continuous  point-based models  they define nests. which have the form begin i  or end i  for some interval i. basically. if i. j are intervals where i meets j. then begin j  is the set of all intervals x such that 
 1  x meets j; or 
 1  i meets x: or 
 1  x o i & x o j 
 where o is defined in terms of meet as shown in  . allen & hayes argue that under this definition. nests have the desired feature of having end i  - begin j  for all intervals i and j such that i meets j. nests also have the feature of strict linear ordering. in fact it has all the properties of t. 
	v 	relation between event and interval structures 
　intuitively  intervals are  chunks of time  in which events can occur. if intervals a and b start and end at the same time  they are the same interval. on the other hand  if events x and y start and end at the same time. they need not be the same event. from e* we can 
define an interval structure 

by making i the set  with unique elements  of all equivalent events: 

meet can be defined in terms of   and o as discussed above. 
　as we have said before  all the axioms in e apply to intervals. for example   is irreflexive  asymmetric and transitive  intersections and unions exist  etc. the only difference between an interval structure and an event structure lies in the definition of  - . we define el - e1 in e* if el and e1 are the same element of e. similarly il - i1 in int e*  if i1 and i1 are the same element of 
i. 
　in the event structure  el-e1 implies else1  but not the converse. if we define equivalence in int e*  as: 

　in an interval structure  there exists a unique interval which satisfies the definition of  for all intervals x and y. this can be seen by comparing lemma  1  and the definition of equivalence above. this result also satisfies our intuition. 
　int t  is an interval structure if we define that the elements in its domain are unique. if we consider figure 1 above  we can see why we argue that a is an event structure more than an interval structure. in figure 1. we have 
p meet q & p meet r & q meet s & r meet s 
but a does not insist that q and r be the same  interval   allen & hayes do not explicitly talk about the domain of their structure . 
　however  it is arguable that allen & koomen  l  use an interval-based logic for planning. there if proposition p holds in both intervals tl and t1. then if tl and t1 are not before or after one another  they must be the same interval. 
	vi 	intervals ts points in temporal reasoning 
　whether points  events or intervals are primitive time entities is an ontological question. but since  as we have shown above  that they can be constructed from one another  point-based  event-based and interval-baaed 
	tsang 	1 

structures should be able to represent similar knowledge. 
　we do not agree with the argument that interval-based logics are better than point-based logics because the  dividing instant' puzzle exists in the latter. one instance of this puzzle is: 
the light is switched from on to off. exactly what happened at the intermediate instant between the two successive states of on and off  
　some argue that in a dense point structure  we either have the light both on and off  which is contradictory  or the existence of some time where the light is neither on nor off  which violates the law of excluded middle   e.g.  . in an interval structure  there is no such problem because all we need to say is: interval on meets interval off. where the light is on in on and it is off in off. van benthem has made it clear that  one only has this problem if one insists on having it!    p.1 : in a discrete time model  there is a last point of on and a first point of off. in a dense time model  we can stipulate that  individual event either stops at some definite point  or its aftermath begins at some definite point . the structure t that we have shown above has open begins and closed ends. 
table 1 temporal relations between start/end points and their corresponding subset of temporal relations 


　though point-based and event-based logic can both be used to represent similar knowledge  we argue that allen's formalism in  l  provides an effective way to handle disjunctive temporal relations with his logic. for example  x finishes y or x starts y   where finishes and starts are defined according to allen's logic  l   can be represented by x  f s  y. if we represent this expression by using start and end points of x and y. then we have:  start y  start x  and end x  - end y   or  start x  - start y  and end x    end y   the more disjunctive primitive binary relations are allowed between two events  the more cumbersome this point-based representation would be. as the number of events grows  the number of conjunctive combinations will grow exponentially. for example to represent: x  o f  y & y  m o  z in allen's logic  which means x overlaps or finishes y and y meets or overlaps z  with relation among start and end points  we need to represent each element of the cartesian set: 
x  o  y & y  m  z 
　　　x  o  y & y  o  z x  f  y & y  m  z x  f  y & y  o  z with inequalities. 
　however  we argue that point-based representation can be used to reason certain disjunctive temporal relations without needing to use disjunctive inequalities.  similar view has been expressed in  . the exhaustive set of temporal relations between points is    -   . each of these relations between two start/end points represent a subset of temporal relations in allen's interval-based representation. they are summarized in table 1. 
　from table 1. we can see that a point-based representation can represent limited subsets of temporal relations between intervals. the subsets that they can represent are the sets  represented by lists  on the second 
1 	knowledge representation 
column of table 1. or their conjunctives. for example start a    start b  & start b    end a  
represents the subset of relations a  o fi di  b. this expressive power may be sufficient in applications where we are only informed of the relation between start and end points rather than more complicated temporal relations among intervals. but in a point-based representation  we cannot represent arbitrary relations like a       b without using disjunctive inequalities. therefore it would not be very favourable if we are often told constraints like  a and b must be separate intervals . 
	vii 	summary and discussion 
　recently  interest in modeling time in ai has increased  and so as interest in event-based logics. in this paper  we have studied allen & hayes' logic  which has received great attention in ai. and locate it in the spectrum of the logics developed by logicians. by giving a new set of axioms to allen & hayes' logic  which we call a   we hope to have a better control of the systems built up it. in . we present one interesting development  which is to remove linearity   e1  in e*  in order to talk about planning under uncertainty. 
　we have presented an event-based structure which is equivalent to a. we have also defined a point-based structure t which corresponds to e*. we have shown how point-  event- and interval-based structures can be related to one another. figure 1 below summarizes the relationship among the different time structures mentioned in this paper. we conclude that these structures can all represent similar knowledge  and their fundamental difference is a question of ontology. but as a tool for ai. we argue that allen's formalism in  ll1  allows us to represent disjunctive temporal relations more neatly. 

　in this paper  we have not discussed the trade off between expressive power and complexity of the different representations. one such discussion can be found in . also  we have not suggested how such time structures can be used for ai applications  shoham's work fills part of this gap  . this paper only aims at providing a solid study of different time structures for temporal reasoning. limited by space and our focus in this paper. we have not studied mcdermott's time logic . which also has an important place in ai. 
1. grant. t..  temporal logics for planning . alvey workshop on planning. july 1 
1. kamp. h..  instants and temporal reference''. von stechow  ed.  semantics from different points of view springer series in language and communication 1. springer verlag. 1. 1 
1. kamp  h..  some remarks on the logic of change. part i . ouenthner f  ed. . proc. stuttgart conference on the logic of tense and quantification. north holland. 1. 1 
1. mcdermott. d..  a temporal logic for reasoning about processes and plans . cognitive science 1. plol-1. 1 
1. mcdermott. d..  generalizing problem reduction : a logical analysis . ucai-1. 1 
1. russel. b..  on order in time   in marsh r c  ed  rrussel b: logic and knowledge  essays 1 . london 1 
1. shoham. y..  reified temporal logic. semantical and ontological considerations . 1th ecai. july 1. 1-
1 
1. shoham. y..  chronological ignorance: time  nonmonotonicity. necessity and causal theories . aaai1. 1 


if union is defined in this way. our  ell  will not be strong enough for proving  m1  of a. 
1. allen. j.f. & koomen. j.a..  planning using a temporal world model . ucai-1. 1 
1. allen. j.f..  maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals . cacm vol.1  no.ll. november. 1. 1 
1. allen. j.f..  towards a general theory of actions and time . ai 1  1 
1. allen. j.f. & hayes. p.j..  a common-sense theory of time . ucai-1. 1 
1. van benthem. j..  the logic of time . d reidel publishing co. 1 
1. dean. t..  temporal imagery: an approach to 
reasoning with time for planning and problem 
solving . ph d dissertation  yale university. october 
1 
1. tsang. e.p.k..  the interval structure of allen's logic . technical report cscm-1. university of 
essex. april. 1 
1. turner. r..  logics for ai . ellis horwood series in artificial intelligence. 1 
1. vilain. m. & kautz. h..  constraint propagation algorithms for temporal reasoning . aaai1-1 
1. whitehead. a. n..  process and reality: an essay in cosmology . cambridge 1 
acknowledgements 
professor ray turner  jim doran  sam steel and tony law son have given me valuable opinions on the content and presentation of this paper. anthony cheng helped in preparing the camera copy. this project is supported by the studentship fund of the department of computer science  university of essex  colchester  england. 
	tsang 	1 
