 
     although it has a relatively short history  conceptual clustering is an especially active area of research in machine learning. there are a variety of ways in which conceptual patterns  the al contribution to clustering  play a role in the clustering process. two distinct conceptual clustering paradigms  conceptual sorting of exemplars and concept discovery  are described briefly. then six types of conceptual clustering algorithms are characterized  attempting to cover the present spectrum of mechanisms used to conceptualize the clustering process. 
i conceptuak ckustering: the new frontier 
     ever since michalski wrote about conceptual clustering as a new branch of machine learning  michalski 1  there has been ever increasing attention to that family of machine learning tasks. several researchers have been involved in conceptual clustering research  though early research  the next two citations in particular  was not conducted in the name of conceptual clustering. wolff  1  describes mk1. an agglomerative hierarchical data compression system that is able to generate conjunctive descriptions of clusters based on co-occurrences of feature values kebowitz  1 and 1  describes unimem and ipp systems that use what he calls generalization based memory to incrementally clump exemplars into overlapping conceptual categories based on predictive features. michalski and stepp  1  describe ckuster/1. a conceptual clustering algorithm for building polythetic clusterings  clusterings whose differences depend on discovered conjunctive concepts rather than variations in the value taken by a single attribute . kangley and sage  1  describe discon. an id1-like  quinlan 1  optimal classification tree builder that forms monothetic hierarchical clusterings given a list of  interesting  attributes. fisher  1  describes rummage  a discon-like program that does some generalization over attribute values and uses non-exhaustive search. stepp  1  describes ckuster/s. a conjunctive conceptual clustering algorithm for use on structured exemplars. kangley  zytkow. simon  and bradshaw 
 1  describe giauber  a concept discovery system based partly on mk1. that employs conceptual clumping based on most commonly occurring relations in data. stepp and michalski  1  describe algorithms for incorporating background knowledge and classification goals. mogensen  1  describes ckuster/ca. a program that forms clusters of structured objects in a goal-directed way through the use of goal dependency networks. 
     taken together  there is a large diversity of algorithms that now are described by the term conceptual clustering. fisher and kangley  1  provide two views of conceptual clustering  as extended numerical taxonomy  and as concept formation  and 
this research was supported in part by the national science foundation under grant nsf 1st 1. 
also give an enlightened characterization of several conceptual clustering algorithms. in the following sections  two somewhat different views of conceptual clustering are described. the first view is that of cluster formation per se. whose goal is the determination of extensionally defined clusters. the conceptual part of the process lies in how the exemplars are agglomerated/divided rather than in how the clusters are described  i.e.. the cluster forming mechanism need not maintain any cluster descriptions . the second view is that of concept formation  with exemplars as the catalyst. under this view clusters are formed according to their conceptual descriptions  i.e.  the system must constantly maintain conceptual descriptions of clusters and cluster membership is constrained by the concepts available to describe the results. 
     following the terminology of psychology  the first view will here be called conceptual sorting. the second view will be called concept discovery. each in its own way can be said to involve conceptual clustering. 
ii conceptuak ckustering as concept sorting 
     the process of clustering is to group exemplars in some interesting way  or ways  such as a hierarchy of categories or a tree structure  dendrogram . numerical taxonomy readily provides such groupings  but the groups have little or no conceptual interpretation 
     one view of conceptual clustering proposes to produce interesting groupings and then provide them with a conceptual interpretation. that is. to build extensionally defined categories  by enumerating their members  and then find a conceptual interpretation. naturally  some subpopulations of exemplars are easier to interpret  i.e.. form better conceptual clusters  than others. fisher  1  proposes such a view  and states that the two phases  called the aggregation and characterization problems  respectively  are not independent. 
     that the clustering and characterization phases are not independent  assuming they are separate processes  is precisely one of the facets that distinguishes conceptual clustering from  regular  clustering. indeed  one can perform statistical clustering  take the extensionally defined resulting clusters and then generate conceptual interpretations for them. there are cluster ing problems for which this is an acceptable approach-cluster analysis was done exclusively just this way for a long while  with the analyst doing all the interpretation. but in general  concepts derived from independently rendered clusters have potentially messy conceptual characterizations  involving disjunctive conceptual forms  michalski and stepp 1  but one should note that certain patterns of disjunction can be restated as polymorphic concepts   n of m properties must be present   and some clustering research is directed at finding polymorphic classifications  e.g..  hanson and bauer 1  . 
     a major reason independently rendered clusters can have rather unappealing conceptual interpretations is that they 
	stepp 	1 
practice no concept-related similarity measurement. there are two points to be made here:  1  the similarity metric used defines a gradient over the feature space that possesses none of the conceptual irregularities that underly the domain  the distance from a purple grape to a red apple is not the same as from a green orange to a red apple *  and  1  the similarity metric views all attributes with a fixed relevance to the problem without any way to determine attribute relevancy from patterns in' the data.** 
　　some research in conceptual clustering has tackled this problem by focusing on the attributes- and correlations among attribute values. the system witt  hanson and bauer 1  performs a variation of k-means clustering using both within category and outside category cohesions to measure the quality of the categories. the goal is a balance between high within category cohesion and low outside category cohesion.*** the cobweb system  fisher 1  uses category utility  gluck and corter 1  to determine how to partition exemplars. 
　　the statistical approach to clustering  e.g.. numerical taxonomy  uses a non-gestalt measure of cluster quality that is some function fs of exemplar pairs such as reciprocal euclidian distance. 
fs e1.e1  
the attribute-based approach to clustering uses a gestalt measure of cluster quality that is some function fa of exemplar pairs plus the environment in which they exist. 
fa e1. e1. environment  
the environment consists of exemplars arranged by categories. 
hi conceptual clustering as concept discovery 
　　concept discovery systems focus on the determination of concepts  according to some concept representation system  to describe each category that is formed. indeed  categories are formed such that their descriptions are as desired by the applied biases  including representational constraints  and a conceptbased cluster quality measure. concept discovery systems  such as clustfr/1. cluster/s. clustfr/ca. and glauber  use attribute value patterns in the exemplars to motivate the generation of conceptual descriptions for the categories. it is the category descriptions that are constantly monitored  generalized  specialized  and evaluated by the concept-based quality measure. these systems incorporate mechanisms to propose multi-relation  polythetic  concepts as category descriptions. 
　　michalski  1  describes a conceptual cohesiveness measure of cluster quality that is not the same as the attribute-based quality measure described above. conceptual cohesiveness is a concept-based cluster quality measure that is some function fc of exemplar pairs  their environment  and concepts available to describe categories. 
             fc e1. e1  environment  concepts  the availability of concepts is governed by the biases of the system and the background knowledge that is applied. 
* the grape and apple differ in color and type-of-fruil but are both ripe; the orange and apple differ in color and type and ripeness. 
** much of the time all attributes are assumed equally relevant  and contribute equally to the measure of similarity  such as with reciprocal euclidian distance . that is. if an exemplar is less similar on  apple-ness  then that deficiency can be made up by being more similar on  orange-ness . only certain concepts  like  area  or  physical distance   actually work that way. the universal application of distance measures provides an often unwarranted bias to the classification. 
*** cohesion is defined in terms of joint information content  and is therefore sensitive to patterns of attribute values. 
1 	knowledge acquisition 
　　without background knowledge  the concept-based approach reverts to the attribute-based one. it is background knowledge  definitions of attribute ranges and scale  specificity hierarchies over attribute values  implicative rules of constraints of one attribute on others  construction rules for new attributes  suggestions or derivational rules for ranking attributes by potential relevancy  that makes the feature space and concept space rough and irregular so that the fit of the data to the irregularities can be used to help confirm a candidate conceptual interpretation. 
iv knowledge-based conceptual clustering 
　　discovering concepts by conceptual clustering is not purely an inductive inference process. a portion of the process involves deductive inference to determine from background knowledge latent attributes for exemplars and appropriate concepts to ready as candidate category descriptions. the program cluster/ca  mogensen 1  uses heuristics  including general and specific goal dependency networks  stepp and michalski 1   to propose attributes to be derived from those given in the exemplar data. 
　　a system equipped with sizable background knowledge and a deductive mechanism for accessing and applying it. can make a wide variety of hypothelically appropriate transformations of exemplars that will greatly aid concept formation. for example  an inference rule could suggest the construction of an attribute whose values report the number of other attributes  from a subset of other attributes  having values that differ from the most frequent attribute values. such a derived attribute supports polymorphic concepts like  1 of the 1 attributes a. b. and c have target values of x. y  and z. respectively.  since the system knows the definition of the attribute  from background knowledge  it is able to state polymorphic concepts in easily understood terms. the point is that additional knowledge applied during clustering can have a gteat effect on the types of categories formed. 
v a yardstick for conceptual clustering algorithms 
　　the background knowledge that could be applied to concept discovery conceptual clustering systems does not  grow on trees -there may be no such knowledge available  or it may be rather non-specific. it is appropriate in such cases to make heavy use of attribute-based information  attribute-based quality assessment scores based on information theoretic measures  such as inter-cluster coherence and intra-clusler predictability . the choice of approach is problem/domain determined. 
　　conceptual clustering approaches have previously been classified according to incremental versus batch operation; hierarchical versus flat category structure: and the type of search they do in feature and concept spaces  fisher and langley 1 . here  the topic is the  conceptually  of the algorithm: the way in which cluster quality is measured in a concept-oriented way. the various approaches are given a type number: the higher the number  the more intentional are the categories  and the more search intensive and heuristic intensive are the algorithms. for best performance  problems should be addressed by conceptual clustering approaches of only sufficient type level. 
type-1 
statistic-based quality measure; no conceptual interpretation. 
this category contains traditional numerical taxonomy: there is a similarity metric that treats all attributes equally: the output consists of just clusters  or a dendrogram ; some other system  e.g.. the human analyst  must interpret the results. 
type-1 
statistic-based quality measure; conceptual interpretation after-the-fact. 
this category would include a system that performs numerical taxonomy followed by a system that learns concepts from examples  such as aq  michalski 1  or id1  quinlan 1 . 
type-1 
attribute-based quality measure; no conceptual interpretation. 
this category contains systems that measure gestalt information theoretic patterns over attributes and group exemplars for optimal quality score but without regard for and without reporting the concept the group represents. witt and utility-based clustering in pls  rendell 1  appear to be of this type. 
type-1 
attribute-based quality measure; conceptual interpretation independent of cluster formation. 
this category contains systems that are like type-1 but that follow cluster formation  exemplar aggregation  with a characterization process that is mostly independent from the aggregation process. cobweb. unimem. 1pp. and glauber appear to be in this category. 
type-1 
concept-based quality measure; no background knowledge. this category contains systems that have unified aggregation and characterization processes  i.e.. the concepts derived to describe categories determine the partitioning of the exemplars. no deductive inference is performed; only the most general  built in  clustering goals and heuristics can be used to bias the process. discon. rummage. cluster/1 appear to be of this type. 
type-1 
concept-based quality measure; background knowledge. this category contains systems that operate like type-1 systems  but which can perform deductive inference to derive additional attributes  heuristics  and clustering goals. cluster/s has some deductive capabilities  and thus fits this category and type-1 below. 
type-1 
concept-based quality measure; background knowledge; structured exemplars. 
　　this category contains systems that have the general mechanisms of type-1 systems as extended to operate on structured objects. the system cluster/ca  mogensen 1  has some of these capabilities  although its deductive and heuristic capabilities are still limited. the above range of  conceptuality  of conceptual clustering methods is relevant to conceptual clustering research on two accounts:  1  it may provide yet another way to contrast and understand conceptual clustering algorithms  and  1  it indicates the great breadth of conceptual clustering approaches  hopefully dispelling any notion of intrinsic architectures for conceptual clustering algorithms. 
