 
     due to the difficult nature of machine learning  it has often been looked at in the context of  toy  domains or in more realistic domains with simplifying assumptions. we propose an integrated learning approach that combines explanation-based and similarity-based learning methods to make learning in an inherently complex domain feasible. we discuss the use of explanations for similarity-based 
learning and present an example from a program which applies thee ideas to the domain of terrorist events. 
l introduction 
in this paper we present a novel approach to machine 
learning that integrates explanation-based and similaritybased methods to make learning in a complex domain feasible. 
     we consider learning by observation in the domain of acts of international terrorism. the learning mechanism itself will be a component of a system that has the following task: given information from a series of newspaper accounts of terrorist events  suggest an action that a law enforcement agency might take in response to those events. 
the domain of terrorist events is realistic and complex. 
furthermore  since the input to the learning mechanism is limited to information from newspaper stories  we cannot assume that  in general  this information will be correct  complete  and consistent a typical description of a terrorist incident taken from the new york times is: 
paris  feb 1. - an explosion  apparently caused by a bomb  ripped through a crowded shopping arcade on the champs-elysees tonight eight people were wounded  three of them seriously... witnesses said that damage was extensive. 
i i . system overview 
     the world provides our system with descriptions of terrorist incidents in the form of newspaper articles. as we are concentrating on learning rather than natural language at this point  each newspaper account is transcribed by hand into a hierarchical frame representation. before planning may be done in response to an incident  the incident description passes through a learning and analysis module. this module has access to a rule base  a hierarchy of general concepts  and a hierarchy of previously categorized terrorist events. after a new event is analyzed  it is placed in the incident hierarchy. 
the learning and analysis module provides the planner 
*this research was supported in part by the defense advanced research projects agency under contract 
n1-c-1. discussions with michael lebowitz were quite useful as were his comments on earlier drafts of this paper. 
1 	knowledge acquisition 
with a generalized version of the terrorist incident as well as a detailed explanation of the event at this time  the learning and analysis module  figure 1  is the focus of our research and will be described in the remainder of this paper. 

     two machine learning methods have received a great deal of attention recently: similarity-based learning and explanation-based learning. 
similarity-based learning  sbl   e.g.   winston 1; 
michalski 1; lebowitz 1a   involves the comparison of several instances of a concept in order to find features shared among them and differences between them. common features are assumed to define a useful concept. 
     explanation-based learning  ebl   e.g.   dejong 1; mitchell 1; mitchell 1   involves a knowledgeintensive analysis of a single instance of a concept the learner attempts to explain the instance and then creates a general concept consistent with the explanation. 
     both sbl and ebl have been shown to adequately handle learning in a variety of domains. however  sbl methods are often influenced by coincidence. furthermore  one could argue that a system cannot gain any real understanding by simple feature comparison. these shortcomings are not shared by ebl methods. however  the generation of detailed causal explanations is problematic if our domain model is neither complete nor necessarily consistent and becomes computationally infeasible as the complexity of the problem domain increases. 
iv. combining ebl and sbl 
     we have found that  despite their respective weaknesses  ebl and sbl may be combined to make learning in a complex domain feasible. figure 1 describes some of the information exchange that will be necessary in a system integrating the two methods. 
     an explanation of a terrorist event provides clues as to the features of the event that might be relevant to it if a feature of the event actually plays a role in the explanation  we can consider it more  important  than those that do not. when attempting to match instances for common features  the sbl module can constrain its search to those features that the ebl module finds to be  more important''. 
     the ebl module also provides the sbl module with contextual clues for matching. a feature of an event appears  not in isolation  but with other features. the way a 
     feature value should be viewed may be determined from the context in which it appears  i.e.  considering the other features that exist.  
the sbl module  in turn  provides information to the 
ebl module. it provides causality clues that help the ebl module choose rules to explain an event  lebowitz 1b . it also controls the range of hypothetical generalizations of an event that an ebl module might consider. 
     the research described here differs from previous work in integrated learning  lebowitz 1b; pazzani 1  in a number of ways. although we rely on sbl to guide the explanation process as lebowitz does  our sbl phase is first provided with a surface understanding of the events under consideration. as a result  our sbl phase is not as succeptible to the influence of coincidence. pazzani makes generalizations based upon justification provided by an explanation. recognition of a similarity between instances of a concept may cause an explanation to be attempted in order to justify the similarity. coincidental similarities may result in unnecessary explanatory work. finally  our sbl phase allows for inexact match  which neither of the previously mentioned systems does. 
     in the remainder of this paper we will discuss the upper half of the cycle shown in figure 1. we will show our system's simple explanation-based  eb  phase and then how it is used by the similarity-based  sb  phase. 
v. the explanation-based phase 
     in this section we describe the initial eb phase of our system that analyzes a terrorist event. this phase borrows many ideas from other ebl models  especially  dejong 1  . it has access to a knowledge base of general rules about terrorism. this initial phase uses an abridged version of the set used by subsequent eb phases. to derive an actual explanation  causal description  of a terrorist incident  it uses backchaining. we have chosen the following explanation goal for this domain: explain why this incident is a terrorist event. 
     consider the newspaper story given in section i. the system is given a hierarchical frame-based representation of this incident. it uses a set of  possibly inconsistent  rules to develop a simple causal explanation of those factors which cause the incident to be considered a terrorist event the explanation generated by the system is shown in figure 1. 
     we claim that finding a simple causal explanation of an event is computationally feasible and  despite its simplicity  useful in providing information for the sb phase of the system. 
the simple explanation provides clues as to the relative 

importance of features of the incident. in the above example  the eb phase used information about the location of the event in explaining it. as a result  the sb phase concentrates on this feature. 
     the explanation also provides clues as to the contexts in which some of the features might be viewed. for example  the fact that the incident occurred in a public place at a time when it was open to the public indicates that the hour of the event's occurrence should be viewed as a time when public places are generally open  rather than  say  as a time when a given television show is on. when considering other events  the sb phase considers their times of occurrence in the same context. 
vi  the similarity-based phase 
     once we have a simple explanation of an event  we compare the event to incidents previously seen by the system. the comparison provides us with a hierarchical frame structure representing a more general terrorist event scenario. 
     earlier work on sbl in the terrorism domain was done by lebowitz  lebowitz 1; lebowitz 1a . in that work  however  only exact matches on features were allowed. the quality of match between two incidents was determined only by the number of features they had in common. 
     we have improved upon this earlier work in a number of ways. we represent events as hierarchically organized sets of frames rather than as simple feature lists. our system allows for inexact matches between feature values and 
estimates the quality of the match. the match takes into account the explanation of the event by using the information about feature relevance and context determined earlier by the eb phase. 
     to illustrate these points we consider the match of the event described above and the following incident as described in the new york times: 
paris  feb. 1 - a bomb ripped through a crowded bookstore in the latin quarter tonight  wounding four people. the bomb was planted in the basement record section of the gibert jeune bookstore on the place stmichel. the blast occurred at 1 p.m. with scores of customers in the store. 
     an abridged version of the representations of these two events as given to the system appear in figure 1. the representation of the first event includes information about feature importance and context provided earlier by the eb phase as indicated by *efact* and *ctext*  
	danyluk 	1 
explanation to guide sbl in the domain of international terrorist events. applying earlier machine learning      the sb matcher docs frame-based matching. first an exact match on corresponding slot values is attempted. 
     in addition to exact matches we would like the system to recognize that two different values might be similar enough to constitute a match. for example  the first incident took place in a shopping arcade while the second took place in a store. a comparison of these events based on exact matching would consider these places different. our matcher looks for some link between the values. recall from section ii that the matcher has access to a hierarchy of general concepts. figure 1 shows a fragment of the hierarchy. the matcher  given two values  climbs the 
hierarchy to find a general concept that classifies both. given the values store and shop arcade  the system finds that they are both shop areas. the system also gives a measure of how similar tee values are. 

     the concept hierarchy is not strictly a tree  so there may be more than one generalization under which a concept falls. here the context information provided by the eb phase is most valuable. it is used to constrain which parents the matcher looks at in the absence of context information  the system chooses the generalization with smallest matching distance. 
     figure 1 shows the frame hierarchy for the composite incident based upon a match of the two events described above. dist specifies the quality of match  1 indicating exact match. this structure is used to build a generalizationbased memory  lebowitz 1c . 
     to summarize  the sb matching phase does a framebased match using general information about the world and context clues provided by the earlier eb phase. it creates a composite event scenario based on an understanding of the events considered. 
vii. conclusion 
we have described a program that uses a simple 
1 	knowledge acquisition 
techniques to a complex domain such as this one introduces new problems. it becomes feasible to look at such domains by integrating ebl and sbl. simple explanations focus the attention of the sb matcher which will in turn provide causality clues that make the derivation of complex explanations feasible. 
