 
　previous research on machine discovery has focused on limited parts of the empirical discovery task. in this paper we describe ids  an integrated system that addresses both qualitative and quantitative discovery. the program represents its knowledge in terms of qualitative schema*  which it discovers by interacting with a simulated physical environment. once ids has formulated a qualitative schema  it uses that schema to design experiments and to constrain the search for quantitative laws. we have carried out preliminary tests in the domain of heat phenomena. in this context the system has discovered both intrinsic properties  such as the melting point of substances  and numeric laws  such as the conservation of mass for objects going through a phase change. 
i i n t r o d u c t i o n 
　in recent years  ai researchers have developed a number of systems that operate in the domain of scientific discovery. for instance  bacon  discovers numerical laws  e.g.  the ideal gas law  and postulates intrinsic properties of object classes  e.g.  atomic weight . abacus  is similar to bacon  but employs an improved search mechanism to find numeric laws in a more efficient manner. it also improves upon bacon by identifying qualitative preconditions on quantitative laws. glauber  addresses a different aspect of empirical discovery - the formation of qualitative laws and object taxonomies. 
　although each of these systems is successful at its task  each addresses only part of the overall problem of empirical discovery   we are developing an integrated discovery system  ids  that deals with a variety of empirical discovery tasks  including the formation of qualitative and numeric laws. historically  qualitative discoveries have tended to lay the foundation for quantitative discoveries  but the latter can in turn lead to higher level qualitative discoveries. our system operates in the same basic manner  first finding qualitative laws and then using them to aid in discovering quantitative relations. 
　ids operates in a simulated world of simple physics and chemistry  thus overcoming one deficiency of previous discovery systems. previous systems were provided with data* and could not perform their own experiments. in contrast  ids interacts with the simulated world through a set of effectors and sensors. using an effector  the system can actively alter certain attributes of an object  e.g.  by changing its location or heating it. sensors let the program inspect certain attributes  such as the temperature and mass of an object. to carry out an experiment  the system applies effectors to a set of objects and uses its sensors to observe the manner in which those objects change over time. 
　in the following section  we introduce the representation that ids employs to state qualitative laws. after this  we examine the mechanisms by which the system discovers qualitative laws and then consider how it uses the resulting schemas to aid its discovery of numeric laws. we close with some proposals for extending the system. 
ii representing qualitative schemas 
　before one can discover qualitative knowledge about the world  one must first have some way to represent that knowledge. let us consider an example from the domain of heat phenomena. we might begin with a simple view of what happens when we heat an object  e.g.  we expect the temperature of the object to increase. if we actually heat a solid  we will see that this occurs  but after some time we may also observe the appearance of a new liquid object. at this point the temperature increase stops and the mass of the liquid increases while the mass of the solid decreases. when the solid has disappeared  the temperature of the liquid begins to increase. this process continues until a new gaseous object appears. as before the mass of the gas increases while the mass of the liquid decreases  the temperature of both objects remains constant during this period. finally  the liquid vanishes and the temperature of the gas increases  but so does its pressure. 
　ids represents qualitative knowledge of this type in qualitative schemas. our representation has been influenced by forbus'  qualitative process  qp  theory  with qualitative schemas corresponding to envisionments in qp theory. 
　* lenat's am  is an exception  since it collected its own data and designs its own experiments. but the mathematical domain of am 
　
allowed methods not easily extendable to  real world  domains. 
1 	knowledge acquisition 
　

description: 
solid a  v liquid a  quant.cond.: temp. a    c1 weight a    1 weight  a  = c1 process: atemp. a    1 description: 
 olid b   liquid c  v liquid b   gas c  quant.cond.: temp. b  = c weight b    1 weight b    c1 weight c    1 weight c    c1 process: 
aweight b    1 
awcight c    1 description: 
gas d  quant.cond.: 
wcight d  = c1 process: atemp. d    1 
apressure d    1 figure 1: qualitative schema for heating an object 
the schemas can be viewed as finite state diagrams that describe the behavior of objects over time. states correspond to intervals of time during which objects exhibit some constant behavior. links specify connections between states  along with the conditions that must be satisfied to enter a successor state. 
ids represents each state as a frame with three slots. 
the description slot includes one or more classifications of the objects present in the state  e.g.  solid or acid . this slot also includes structural descriptions  e.g  heater h touches object a  container a is connected to container b . the quantity-conditions slot contains statements about attributes of the objects in the state. these statements are expressed as equalities or inequalities between the quantities of attributes and limit-points  see below . the process slot is a list of zero or more changes that are occurring dur-
ing the state. like forbus  we express a change in terms of the derivative of the changing attribute. for example  an increase in mass of object a is denoted amass a    1. 
　a state ends only if the process reaches a limit-point  such as the melting-point  or if the agent intervenes  e.g.  by turning off the heat. limit-points are important because they are used in the quantity-conditions  and also because they form the basis for quantitative discoveries. figure 1 presents a graphical illustration of a heat schema with the object description  the quantity-conditions  and the process for each state. 
　although qualitative schemas are structurally similar to the envisionments of de kleer  and forbus  there is a major difference. envisionments are deduced from structural or process descriptions  while qualitative schemas are induced from observations. in the following section we describe this discovery process. 
i l l inducing qualitative schemas 
　ids begins with a simple qualitative schema for each of its effectors. for example  the initial schema of the heat effector consists of two states: so  with one object and no active process  and sl  with an object touched by a heater and with the temperature of the object increasing. this represents ids' initial knowledge of the results of applying the heat effector to an object. 
　the system carries out experiments to improve its schemas  which can be refined in several ways. first  if ids encounters unfamiliar behavior  it adds a new state to the schema along with a link connecting it to the existing states. second  the system may discover that an existing state can follow another known state; in this case it simply adds a new link connecting the states. furthermore  any time new limit-points are found  the system adds quantityconditions to the states. 
　consider again the heat example and the initial heat schema. ids experiments by applying the heat effector to a block of ice. at first  the temperature of the ice increases  satisfying all conditions of state s1. eventually  a new ob-
ject  liquid water  appears; after this point the mass of this new object increases  while the mass of the ice decreases. ids' heat schema does not yet contain a state for this behavior  so the system creates a new state  st  and adds it to the schema. this state has a heater and two objects  b and c. the process slot describes the qualitative behavior of the system - that the mass of object 1 decreases and the mass of object c increases. since a new limit-point has been found  quantity-conditions are added to states s1 and s1. these conditions specify that the temperature of the object in state s1 is less than some limit-point c1 and that the temperatures of the objects in state st are equal to c1. 
　after the ice disappears  state s1 again accurately describes the current behavior. when the temperature of the liquid reaches the limit-point c1  state st adequately describes the current behavior  so the system does not change the schema at this point. when the liquid disappears  ids encounters unseen behavior; not only does the temperature of the object increase  but so does its pressure. thus the system creates a new state  ss  and adds it to the schema. after further experimentation using different objects  ids discovers that the object in ss is always a gas  while the object in si is either a solid or a liquid. the object description for st is found in a similar way. this information is added  giving the final schema shown in figure 1. 
　one can think of this schema-building process as a datadriven search through the space of possible schemas. in these terms  adding states and links make schemas more general  while augmenting the state description and adding quantity-conditions makes them more specific. 
i v discovering quantitative laws 
　once ids has formulated a qualitative schema  it uses that knowledge to constrain the search for numeric laws.** 
　 in addition  schemas provide a context for numeric laws. they describe not only the applicability of laws but also specify their pre-
	nordhausen and langley 	1 
returning to our heat example  the system would use the schema in figure 1 to run different experiments. the schema was discovered using a block of ice  so one experiment would examine the effect of varying the initial mass of the ice. other experiments would vary the class of ob-
ject used; for instance  ids might see if the schema still holds when the heated object is hydrogen chloride or some other acid. 
　most of the data used in discovering numeric laws are not directly observable  but are gathered in the form of limitpoints and state durations. this information is recorded as attribute-value pairs during the matching of a schema to an experimental run. thus  the system records the values of the limit-point c1 for different objects and uses these attribute-value pairs as data in its search for numeric laws. like bacon  the system formulates a quantitative law upon finding some numeric term with a constant value. 
　ids discovers two basically different forms of numeric laws. first it finds numeric terms that are constant for all objects of a given class. langley et al.  have called such terms intrinsic properties. for example  the system notices that all instances of the class of ice have the same value for the limit-point c . thus it stores an intrinsic value for the property c  and associates this value with the ice class. in fact  this value corresponds to the melting point of water. ids also discovers that the zero mass is a critical value for all objects  since this is the point when object appear and disappear. this can be viewed as an intrinsic value associated with all objects. 
　ids also discovers numeric laws that relate the attributes of different objects within the same instance of a schema. for example  the system notices that the masses of the solid  the liquid  and the gas within the same instance of the heat schema are always equal. based on this regularity  it postulates a conservation law stating that the mass of an object remains constant as it goes through a phase change. 
v concluding remarks 
　in this paper we have described ids  a system that integrates the process of qualitative and quantitative discovery. we have focused on a single example - involving heat phenomena - to illustrate the acquisition of qualitative schemas and their role in discovering numeric laws. however  the qualitative schema representation and ids' discovery methods are general enough to cover a wide range of physical and chemical phenomena. for instance  the system has also induced a schema that describes simple chemical reactions and another that describes black's law of specific heat. we have also used qualitative schemas to represent the fluid-flow of two connected containers filled with liquids  and the osmosis of two liquids with different concentrations   though ids has not yet generated this knowledge itself. 
　we are extending the discovery system on several fronts. our next step is to incorporate a more robust search mechand post-conditions. 
1 	knowledge acquisition 
anism  such as those used in bacon and abacus  to support the discovery of more complex numeric laws. in addition  we must currently supply the system with a concept hierarchy  and are actively extending the system to construct taxonomies on its own initiative. in forming these taxonomies  the next version of ids will use symbolic attributes  numeric attributes  and information de-
rived from qualitative schemas. as the capabilities of ids grow  so will the need for an improved agenda mechanism  that directs not only the discovery process but also the design of experiments. even though the ids project is still in an early phase  it has already led to promising results that have improved our understanding of the complex process of scientific discovery. 
acknowledgments 
　this work was supported in part by contract n1-k-1 from the information sciences division  office of naval research. 
　we would like to thank randy jones and don rose for their help on this work along with others from the uci machine learning group who gave us valuable comments on earlier drafts. 
