 	we use the label  the commonsense view  to describe the 
body of knowledge and belief which the people of a sub-
	kt encodes commonsense knowledge  ck  about en-	culture hold of concepts associated with lexical items. 
tities and relations in a cross-classified ontology and a 
database of generic  prototypical and inherent  informa-	1. the ontology of verb concepts 
tion. 	the verb ontology combines linguistic and 
psycholinguistic classification. the generic information 	nouns in utterances refer to real-world entities and in 
for verbs encodes typical associations with actions and 	the lexicon name classes of entities. verbs describe relations 
events. 	this knowledge base is useful for word-sense 	between entities. in using verbs  speakers refer to real-
disambiguation  inferencing without scripts  discourse rea-	world situations  barwise & perry 1 . the entire verbal 
soning  and post-verbal pp attachment. 	ontology attaches to the node temporal which is a 
subnode of real in the main ontology. 
1. introduction 
the temporal ontology superimposes the vendler 
	this paper describes adding verbs to the kt system 	 1  classification over a psycholinguistically justified 
 dahlgren and mcdowell  1a  1b . kt encodes ck 	classification scheme of the commonsense view of actions 
 hayes 1  as ontological classifications and generic de-	and events. the ontology and examples of attachments 
scriptions of entities and relations. the ontology is a 
hierarchy with cross-classification possible at any node. 
natural social mental emotional nonmental mental emotional nonmental nongoal 
achievement 
nongoal 
accomplishment 
nongoal 
activity 
goal 
achievement 
goal 
accomplishment 
goal activity 
stative forget 
understand
dream 
memorize 
explain 
think 
know panic 
 soothe 
suffer 
surprise
inspire 
hope 
fear die 
recover 
sleep 
 arrive 
consume 
run 
be confess 
learn 
theorize 
say 
teach 
study 
advocate disgrace 
fall in 
love 
grieve 
ostracize 
entertain 
gloat 
mourn forfeit 
succeed 
play 
marry 
build 
explore 
own table 1. the verb ont ology 1 	knowledge representation 

are shown in table 1. a verb is social iff the relation exists within the domain of a social  institution   understood in the broadest sense  for instance family  government  education  warfare  organized religion  etc. 
   the division of temporal concepts into stative and nonstative types is standard. all non-states are crossclassified as goal-oriented or not by the distinction goal  
nongoal. 	the 	mental  	emotional  
nonmental distinction is made at the highest level because people divide the objects and relations in the world into those which have to do with thinking and those which do not  gelman & spelke 1  strawson 1 . the ontology completely covers the 1 verbs in our pilot study. 
1. generic descriptions of verb concepts 
for generic descriptions of verbs  we relied heavily on 
graesser and clark  1 . we do not directly encode their representation system but instead have adapted their findings as feature types in generic descriptions for verbs. these are accessible in kt via the following set of questions  where x is some situation. what caused x  what enabled x  what was the goal of x  what happened next  after x   what was the consequence of x  what does x imply  when did x happen  where did x happen  how did x happen  these are not primitives  but are a framework for representing what people know about some of the implications of relations described by verbs. trabasso and van den broek  1  find that events are best recalled which feature goal states and consequences of goals and that events categorize around settings  initiating events  internal responses  attempts  consequences  and reactions. huttenlocher and lui  1  find that the mental representation of verbs is less hierarchical than that of nouns and uncorrelated with the semantic fields to which the verbs belong. trabasso and sperry  1  find that the salient features of events are goals  antecedents  consequences  implications  enablement  causality  motivation and temporal succession and coexistence. suppose kt reads sentence  1 . kt can then answer questions as in  1 . 
 1  john bought a book. 
 1  where did john buy the book  
-typically in a store. 
if john bought a book  what resulted  -inherently  john owns the book. 
selectional restrictions  srs  are also encoded for each sense of a verb. this information is divided into two lists associated with each verb in the lexicon. one list encodes typical features of relations and the other inherent features  those features which the relation has in virtue of being that relation . the richest such description for a particular verb would include a full set of answers in each list. 
1. reasoning with verbs 
   the temporal ontology and generic information can be used for  1  word sense disambiguation   1  inferencing without resort to scripts   1  supplying discourse elements not referred to directly in the text  and  1  guiding post-verbal prepositional phrase attachment  dahlgren & mcdowell 1b . 
   word-sense disambiguation. we assume that each set of srs for subject  object  and oblique case identifies one unique sense of a n-ambiguous verb. while this is not true all the time  it is a good working hypothesis. kt has direct access to sr information  which can be used to select among the senses of run  for example  as in  1 . 
 1  john ran for an hour.  living & sentient  run 
the car ran roughly. 
 nonliving & selfmoving  run 
john ran the machine expertly. 
sentient run artifact 
akers runs ibm. 
sentient run institution 
	mcdowell and dahlgren 	1 

in  1  the subject is a vehicle and kt chooses the 
 change location  sense of move. in  b  the subject is an institution and kt chooses the  progress  sense of move. when srs fail  kt uses generic information. kt uses the fact that cities are typical domiciles to choose the  change domicile  sense of move in  c  but the  change location  sense in  d . 
 1  a. the truck is moving forward. 
b. the economy is moving forward. 
c. john moved to new york. 
d. john moved to the infield. 
the same holds for nouns. in  1a  kt chooses the artifact sense of crane required by the sr on operate. but in  b  kt chooses the  bird  sense because things that fly are typically birds  airplanes  or people. 
 1  a. john operated the crane. 
b. the crane flew over the rooftop. 
table 1 shows more examples and see dahlgren  1 . 
   inferencing without scripts. some inferences can be made directly. suppose we have the following information on goals coded for the verbs shoot and kill. 
 1  shoot: goal  kill subj obj  kill : goal  eliminate subj obj  kill : goal  eat subj obj  kill : goal  inherit subj money  kill : goal  protect subj subj  
it is now possible to infer that if a shoots b  then as goal is to eliminate  eat  inherit from  or defend against b. selectional restrictions then guide the choice among these possible goals for sentences such as  1 . 
 1  the firing squad shot the prisoner 
the hunter shot the deer the husband shot the heiress 
the man shot the burglar 
   other inferences will require specific routines to extract  such as the relationship between owning  having  using  and function  a feature type . consider  1  again. the typical function of a book is to read it. a typical sequel to owning something is using it for its function. kt reasons that john reads the book after he buys it. 
   discourse. much of the information needed to understand text is not explicitly mentioned in a text. in order to understand the sentence many kinds of products come to the markets of paris  the system must supply the missing information that the products are shipped by an agent in some kind of conveyance. agentivity of the subject is required by the ontological classification of the verb and the srs on the verb require that its subject be selfmoving. the problem is that the subject of come  the np many kinds of 
1 	knowledge representation 
products  is neither an agent with a goal nor selfmoving. we can exploit this situation rather than view it as a liability if the system has access to ck. kt supplies an agentive entity and a selfmoving entity to the discourse for later identification from the text or from the generic information. 
