 
     default logic and the various forms of circumscription were developed to deal with similar problems. in this paper  we consider what is known about the relationships between the two approaches and present several new results extending this knowledge. we show that there are interesting cases in which the two formalisms do not correspond  as well as cases where default logic subsumes circumscription. we also consider positive and negative results on translating between defaults and circumscription  and develop a context in which they can be evaluated. 
1. introduction 
     circumscription  mccarthy 1  1; lifschitz 1  and default logic  reiter 1  are both formalisms for reasoning in the absence of complete information. often  the available knowledge about the state of the world  problem domain  task  is incomplete  in the sense that required details are unknown. certain plausible assumptions can sometimes be made - to fill in some of these missing details - that may further the goals of the reasoning system. these assumptions may or may not prove correct when further information becomes available  for example through further observation. the availability of additional information may thus lead to the retraction of certain conclusions. this property is called nonmonotonicity. 
     both default logic and circumscription can be used to enforce  policies   defaults  preferences  ...  that  ideally  lead to highly plausible conjectures in the absence of definite information. the actual world is assumed to be among some restricted subset of those worlds that meet the criteria of what is known. this selection of  preferred  worlds may be externally justified by convention  probabilities  etc  but these external justifications do not play a direct role in the theory. beyond these intuitive similarities  the two 
1
      parts of this work were done at the university of british columbia  and supported in part by an i. w. killam predoctoral scholarship and nserc grant a1. approaches are different on both the syntactic and semantic levels. 
     default logic and circumscription were developed at approximately the same time as attempts to formalize nonmonotonic inference  which was recognized as an important facet of intelligent behaviour. in the intervening years  there has been considerable activity in this area. both formalisms have been extensively studied  and several new paradigms have been proposed. these two  however  have had remarkable staying power  and applications and refinements continue to surface. since both attempt to capture similar phenomena  the natural question is whether either subsumes the other. 
     is there a direct mapping by which default theories subsume circumscription  or vice versa ! there is  as yet  no definitive answer to this question. in what follows  we draw together results that begin to provide answers. because there are many criteria that can be used to determine  subsumption   a plurality of  answers  is perhaps the best that can be provided. as we proceed we outline the assumptions that underlie the partial answers that can be provided to date. 
     we generally refer to lifschitz'  generalization of circumscription  which we simply call  circumscription . this version allows the denotations of terms  as well as of predicates  to be varied. where appropriate in what follows  we draw attention to the effect of the presence or absence of variable terms. 
     in what follows  we present very brief sketches of semantic underpinnings for the two formalisms. these sketches are then contrasted and compared to help determine some of the relationships between the techniques. 
1. circumscription 
     one form of preference is the  closed-world assumption   or cwa. this is the assumption that all the facts about the world have been stated  reiter 1 . those facts that do not follow from the given facts can thus be assumed to be false. the assumption of complete knowledge about the world can be problematic if applied indiscriminately  but it is sometimes 
	etherington 	1 
reasonable to assume complete information  especially about particular predicates. if such an assumption is warranted  the world can be characterized by its being among those models having the smallest possible extension for the predicates in question  given the constraints of what is known. syntactically  this amounts to assuming the negation of every atomic fact  over the predicates for which complete information is assumed  not entailed by the original theory. 
　　in general  this idea can be extended to predicates about which only incomplete information is available  so long as it is reasonable to assume that they cover as few individuals as necessary. in such cases  the models satisfying this  generalized  cwa  minker 1  need not agree on the extensions of the predicates concerned  only on the minimality  with respect to the original theory  of those extensions. 
　　the idea of minimization can be generalized from subset minimality of predicates' extensions to minimality according some arbitrary pre-order on models. circumscription is a syntactic device that characterizes what is true in a theory's minimal models.1 the theory is augmented by a second-order axiom that can be obtained deterministically  given a particular choice of an ordering on models. this axiom represents the assumption that the world is among the theory's minimal models. the conjectures of interest then follow from this extended theory by normal deduction. 
　　a typical application would be to axiomatize the  normal  state of the world and then circumscriptively minimize the set of abnormalities. conjecturing that things are as normal as possible  mccarthy 1 . this approach allows circumscription to be used for some forms of default reasoning  although the full details remain to be worked out. 
1. default logic 
　　default logic sanctions conjectures based on inference rules  called defaults. these have the form 
　p   and can be read  if a is believed  and p is not y 
disbelieved  then y can be assumed . because of p's role  defaults allow conjectures based on both what is known and what is not known. intuitively  the defaults provide criteria for preferring worlddescriptions over one another. roughly speaking  each default.     sanctions a conjecture  y  that specializes a world-description provided certain  prerequisites   a  are believed  so long as it remains 
　　　1  for simplicity's sake  we ignore the issue of incompleteness. see  perlis & minker 1  or  etherington 1a  for a discussion. 
1 	knowledge representation 
consistent to believe certain  gating facts  or  justifications   ♀ . a default theory consists of a set of defaults and a set of first-order axioms. ideally  the defaults induce  possibly several  stable  maximal  specializations - called extensions- of the theory given by the axioms. 
　　in spite of the apparent simplicity and naturalness of defaults  the semantics of default logic is more complex than that of circumscription. there are two reasons for this. first  defaults are by nature global: each refers to everything that is believed or not believed. this means that the semantics must be based on sets of models  which we call world-descriptions   rather than individual models  to allow the concepts of belief and unbelief to be represented. second  since the justification  p  and consequent  y  of a default need not coincide  defaults can predicate conjectures on the continuing lack of belief in certain propositions without asserting or otherwise enforcing this lack of belief. thus  although local comparisons between world-descriptions can be used to partially represent the preference relation  information not inherent in the world-descriptions must be considered in the final determination of preference. the semantics must somehow make this information available. 
     given these caveats  we can define a semantics for default logic analogous to the minimal model semantics of circumscription. the defaults define a preference ordering that  in turn  determines a set of minimal world-descriptions. these must be further restricted to exclude those that violate the lack-ofbelief constraints that implicitly gave them rise. each of the remaining world-descriptions consists of all the models of some extension of the default theory  and each extension can be so characterized.1 
1. default logic as subsuming 
circumscription 
　　since circumscription's proof-theory avoids the consistency checking  in general not semidecidable  associated with default logic proofs  it would be nice if circumscription subsumed default logic. this would allow us to deal only with circumscriptive theories. unfortunately  this is not the case. 
theorem 1 
default logic can make conjectures that cannot be obtained by generalized circumscription without variable terms. | 
　　　1  this semantics is developed in detail elsewhere  etherington 1 a b . 


	etherlngton 	1 

     the reasons that only prerequisite-free defaults have modular translations become clear if we contrast the semantics we have sketched for default logic and the minimal-model semantics of circumscription. the former is based on orderings over sets of models  the latter on orderings over individual models. sets of models are necessary to capture the proof-theoretic notion of provability. since the prerequisites of a default must be provable for the default to have any effect  default logics semantics must be based on sets of models. circumscription's submodel relation  however  only considers pairs of models. prerequisite-free defaults fit nicely into circumscription precisely because they are prerequisite-free. such defaults impose no  global  provability requirements  only consistency requirements. consistency can be determined by the existence of a single model  and so can be locally determined. this model-theoretic perspective yields a much simpler  more direct  proof that circumscription can provide a modular translation of default theories - even in the propositional case - only for prerequisite free defaults. 
     it is arguable that the requirement that a theory and its  translation  have identical sets of theorems is too strong. for example  we have noted that default logic is a  brave  reasoner while circumscription is  cautious . it seems reasonable to expect that a circumscriptive translation of default theories would reflect this cautious nature  perhaps returning those facts true in all extensions. conversely  circumscriptive conjectures apply to all individuals  whereas those resulting from open defaults apply only to individuals having names in the language. it might  therefore  be reasonable to expect circumscriptive versions of default theories with open defaults to prove certain stronger conjectures  at least for theories without domain closure axioms . perhaps such side-effects of translation are sufficiently benign that they can be accepted. 
　　these considerations suggest that imielinski's results might be taken as a  worst case  scenario  leaving open the possibility of acceptable translation schemes for defaults with prerequisites  given a weaker notion of  acceptable . the question remains open  and we do not further consider this possibility here. 
1. translations from circumscription to 
default logic 
　　the dual of the question we have been examining is whether default logic can be used to circumscribe  in any but the trivial sense mentioned at the beginning of this paper . the previous section outlined some of the different capabilities of the two formalisms: brave vs cautious  effects on equality  global 
1 	knowledge representation 
 provability  vs local  consistency  comparisons in the model-theory  proof-theory   and statements about  unnamed  individuals. in all but the last of these categories  default logic is stronger. this suggests that the search for a direct embedding of circumscription in default logic might be more successful than the converse attempt. the answer to this is   yes  and no. . 
　　one facet of generalized circumscription is completely absent from default logic. circumscription may hold some predicates constant  while others are allowed to vary. in default logic  there is no way to restrict the repercussions of the defaults to some particular set of predicates  and/or individuals . because predicates can be richly interconnected  the effects of a default inference may be arbitrarily far-reaching. this seems to preclude a completely-general  direct embedding. 
　　in restricted cases  better results obtain. we can rule out unnamed individuals by requiring the domain to be closed  and decide the equality theory to prevent defaults from affecting equality. if we then consider circumscription  with all predicates required to be variable  we get the correspondence outlined in theorem 1. 



	etherlngton 	1 

theorem 1 
if there are no variable predicates  then ecwa t  augments t with every instance of the circumscription schema. 
　　we have seen that - if such a thing exists - any general translation from circumscription to default logic  short of adding defaults for each instance of the circumscription schema  requires more power than the closed-world default provides. the existence of an appropriate translation remains open. 
1. autoepistemic logic 
     in light of recent developments  we should mention moore's  autoepistemic logic in this context. autoepistemic logic is a modal language allowing nonmonotonic reasoning  based on agents' introspection on their knowledge. default reasoning is achieved by explicitly predicating conjectures on the absence of knowledge. any fact not a consequence of what is known is explicitly marked as unknown. 
     konolige  has shown that autoepistemic logic and default logic - though superficially dissimilar - are formally equivalent. from this it is possible to infer that the statements we have made - and the theorems we have proven - on the relationship between default logic and circumscription apply equally to that between autoepistemic logic and circumscription. 
1. conclusions 
　　we have considered the relationship between default logic and circumscription. we showed that the closed-world default sometimes coincides with circumscription; that  in a particularly useless way  default logic subsumes circumscription; and that default logic is capable of affecting the equality theory while generalized circumscription  without variable terms  is not. 
     for particular classes of theories  we have provided a translation from circumscription to default logic. this translation applies only to theories with domain-closure axioms  and then only when the circumscriptive theory specifies all predicates as variable. we showed that the introduction of fixed predicates and applications to open domains each provide circumscription with capabilities not available using simple closed-world default theories. 
　　finally  we used semantic comparisons to highlight some of the essential differences between the two approaches. this allowed us to suggest that some of the work on translations between the two formalisms may not have noticed the essential characteristics 
1 	knowledge representation 
that should be carefully considered in determining adequacy conditions for translations. 
