 
　　a method for heuristically generating nested beliefs  what some agent believes that another agentbelieves ... about a topic  is described. such nested beliefs  points of view  are esential to many processes such as discourse processing and reasoning about other agents' reasoning processes. particular interest is paid to the class of beliefs known as atypical beliefs and to intensional descriptions. the heuristic methods described are emboddied in a program called viewgen that generates nested viewpoints from a set of beliefs held by the system. 
1. introduction 
     we describe a computational model of beliefs for natural language understanding  planning and reasoning. in particular we are interested in generating complex belief structures known as points of view  what an agent believes about some topic . the model is based upon prior work reported in wilks and bien  1; 1 . 
     a prolog program   viewgen  for generating points of view is discussed  that ascribes belief using default reasoning. 
1. background 
     a point of view is a set of beliefs held about some topic by an agent. a nested point of view is a set of beliefs about some topic that one agent believes another agent believes ... another agent holds. for example agent a may believe that agent b believes that agent c has some set of beliefs about world hunger. we use a shorthand  as in figure 1  to represent a nested point of view. 

1. relationship to other work 
     the aim of this work has been  since that of wilks & bien  1  1   to construct a formalism and programs that capture the heuristic belief ascriptions that individuals actually perform in the process of understanding and participating in dialogue: that is to say  contentful  concrete beliefs and not merely metabeliefs about the reasoning architecture of others  activities we suspect are rarely  if ever  undertaken in fact. our concern has been less with the powers of particular notations and proofs of their adequacy  as has been the central feature of the work of creary 1  moore & hendrix 1  konolige 1  and attardi & si mi 1   than with the content of belief ascription. 
　　in that sense  our work has been closer in spirit to that of perrault and his colleagues  e.g. perrault & allen 1   though without their  then  commitment to the language of speech act theory and  most importantly  without their key assumption that the partitions within nested beliefs are all present at the beginning of the belief ascription procedures. our work makes no such assumption: nested beliefs are not merely accessed but constructed and maintained in real time  a position we find both computationally and psychologically more plausible. the gedanken kxperiment here is to ask yourself if you already know what mr reagan believes the ayatollah believes about col.gaddafi. how plausible is it that you have already pre-computed such nested belief spaces  
　　the work of maida  1  clearly shares many of the concerns of the current work: his diagramatic representation of nested beliefs are isomorphic to those of wilks & bien  1  and shadbolt  1 . he shares  for example  our concern with intensional rather than explicitly cxtensional representations  as 

1 	cognitive modeling 

does the sneps group  shapiro  fe rapaport  1 . however  his concern is still the problem of shared 
reasoning strategies between believers and how  for example  you could establish that a dialogue partner also used modus ponens. we argue  on the contrary  that this phenomenon is best handled by general default assumptions  as are the concrete contents of belief. 

1. heuristics for constructing points of view: a contextual focus of beliefs. 
     the question arises of how to select the initial beliefs about a topic. our solution to this problem is essentially simple. the system's belief space is divided into a number of topic specific sub-spaces. these subspaces may be thought of as a less permanent version of frames  minsky  1  or more suitably in terms of  wilks  1  as pseudo-texts  henceforth pts . in effect  a pt is a set of unsorted  unrefined items of knowledge. 
     these pts are general items and are not only stored for individual human beings  but also for groups of humans  objects  and abstract ideas. their hierarchial and inheritance relations are discussed in wilks  ibid . 
     our method of restricting the initial set of beliefs is to form this set from a very small number of pts; for example if the system is a medical diagnostician  being used to advise a patient on thalassemia  then the initial set of beliefs may be just those concerning thalassemia. we term the initial belief set the contextual focus. we now turn to the process of constructing a 
point of view from a given contextual focus. 
1. generation of points of view 
     points of view are represented by structures known as environments; environments are structures that consist of a sequence of agents and a set of beliefs  e.g.   a b  b  represents that a believes b believes the set of beliefs b . 
     the process of generating an environment may be regarded as a decision mechanism that ascribes beliefs from one environment to another. 
assume that our contextual focus is as follows: 

figure 1. a contextual focus of belief. 
     this represents the beliefs held by the sytem that an agent known as the user dislikes another agent known as frank; that the system likes frank; that the earth is round; and that the system believes that frank believes the earth is flat. given this set of beliefs how do we generate what the system believes frank believes about the contextual focus  
     the proposal  wilks & bien  1  is that a nesting should be generated by a form of default reasoning  using a default rule for ascription of beliefs. the default ascriptional rule is to assume that one's view of another person's view is the same as one's own except where there is explicit evidence to the contrary. applying this rule to  figure 1  we get the system's view of frank's view  figure 1 . 

figure $. the result of applying the default rule to figure 1. 
     let us examine this example closely. the belief of the system in  figure 1  that the system likes frank has been ascribed into the pt for frank  i.e. it is now a belief of the system that frank believes that the system likes him. the same is true of the system's belief that the user dislikes frank. however the system's belief that the earth is round has been superceded by the already existent belief  that the system believes frank holds  that the earth is flat. the result is  figure 1  and we may now reason with the environment of the system's views of frank's views1   that we shall call sy temfni k  . 
     nested points of view are generated using a 
     method called pushing down environments1  that recursively ascribes beliefs from one environment to another to achieve the nesting. 
　　suppose that we wish to construct the system's view of the user's view of frank's view about some context   we shall write this as sy1temumtliv   'context  as a shorthand . to construct this we firstly construct the system's view of the user's view and push the system's view of frank's view down into this. for example presume that we have the contextual focus shown in  figure 1 . 

figure 1- a contextual focus about the shape of earth. 
     we construct the system's view of the user's view according to our default rule of ascription to get  figure 1 . 
figure 1. the system's view of the user's view of the shape of earth. 
	wilks and balllm 	1 

     we have available the system's view of frank's view that is shown in  figure 1 . 

figure 1. the system's view of frank's view of the shape of earth. 
     now  pushing the environment of  figure 1  down into the environment of  figure 1  results in the environment shown in  figure 1 . 

figure 1. the system's view of the user's 
view of frank's view of the shape of the earth. 
     to construct a deeper nesting we continually apply this method. so to construct systemv er we push the system's view down into the user  push the result of that down into frank  and finally push the result of that operation down into the system. the mechanism is described in more detail in  ballim  1 . 
1. counter evidence to the default ascription of 
belief 
     thus far we have shown how the default rule can ascribe belief to an agent if there is no further information  as in ascribing the belief that sally dislikes frank  to sally in figures 1  and how the rule can be overridden by an a priori belief that contradicts the belief that we are attempting to ascribe  as in figures 1 . we now consider more complex cases. 
1. atypical beliefs 
　　we identify a special class of belief  known as atypical belief  that requires a rule opposite to that of default ascription. 
     an atypical belief is a belief that is held by an agent but would not be held generally by other agents. the class of atypical beliefs covers such areas as self knowledge  secrets  expertise and knowledge of uncommon domains  such as the believer's hobbies  skills  etc. . 
     so  for example  the belief that the earth is flat is atypical. an important point must be made here. in terms of a specific agent the foregoing definition is insufficient. for a belief to be considered atypical  with respect to an agent  the agent must believe the belief to be atypical  i.e.  1 may believe you to have an atypical belief  however  i may also believe that you think it is a typically held belief. so while i believe it to be atypical  you believe it to be typical. 
     for the class of atypical beliefs the rule should be not to ascribe unless one has explicit evidence to justify ascribing the belief. the problem is one of represent ing and handling a wide range of types of atypical beliefs. the introduction of meta-beliefs is one possible solution  because meta-beliefs enable explicit representation of atypical beliefs  i.e.  for atypical belief p  have the meta-belief atypical p  . due to the wide range of atypical beliefs  and to the problems that they pose  we use a special representation to handle them. 
1. intensional descriptions and atypical belief 
     mccarthy and others have suggested that lambda expressions be used to represent knowledge of values. in  wilks  1  it is proposed that expertise may be expressed within a system by use of lambda expressions with restrictions on the capable evaluators of each such lambda expression. knowing or having the belief represented by the lambda expression means that the agent is capable of evaluating the expression. so the representation for a cure for tuberculosis is: 
 cure-for tuberculosis  be 
        x ar  {cure-for- tb x   md*  where the only capable evaluators are those known to be mds  medical doctors . these lambda expressions can be viewed as intensional expressions  i.e. expressions that return the value of some intensional description  cf. barnden 1; maida  1 . beliefs involving such intensional expressions are generally atypical as shown by the problems of iterated propositional attitudes that involve intensional descriptions  creary  1; maida  1 . 
     we feel that the problems of expressing beliefs about intensional descriptions are so closely aligned with those of atypical beliefs in general that a representation for differing beliefs about the referent of intensional descriptions can be used for atypical beliefs. 
1.1. a taxonomy of meta-beliefs about values 
the form of representation suggested in  wilks  
1  allows expressions that can only be evaluated by specific agents or classes of agents. this is a first step towards representing atypical belief  however  it is insufficient. 
     consider the major factor that makes a belief atypical; some agent believes that a belief held by another agent is not commonly held. a belief about another belief is known as a meta-belief. it is the meta-beliefs about a belief that mark a belief as atypical. an atypical belief can have a large number of meta-beliefs associated with it. 
     these meta-beliefs can often be classified according to the relation that they define between an agent and the belief with which they are concerned. we propose a taxonomy of meta-beliefs  beliefs about what agents believe is the value of some expression  as shown in  figure 1 . 


figure 1. a taxonomy of meta-beliefs about 
values 
     consider the standard belief about an agent's phone number  call this belief p   i.e.  the belief is that the agent's phone number is some value. an agent  a  may have a number of meta-beliefs concerning this belief p. in figure 1 we see that agent a may believe 
another agent  1  1 to be either aware or else unaware of the belief  p . somebody who does not know of john can hardly have beliefs about john's phone number  and so that person should be unaware of any beliefs about john's phone number. 
     further types of meta-belief are possible if a believes b is aware of p. a may believe that b is unaware of the value of p. for example  i may believe that you know that john has a phone number but that you do not know what his phone number is. 
     if agent a believes that agent b does know the value of p  then a may either know what b believes is the value  or else a may not know what b believes is the value of p. i may know that you believe john's phone number to be  1-1   or i may simply not know what you believe is his phone number. 
if a knows what b believes is the value of p  then 
a may decide whether b is correct or incorrect in his belief  according to what a believes is the correct value  i.e.  if i believe that john's phone number is 1  and i believe that you believe it's 1-1  then 1 believe that you are incorrect in your belief about john's phone number. 
if a does not know what b believes is the value of 
p  it is possible that a can use other information to determine whether b is correct or incorrect in his belief about the value of p. for example  if you have not seen john in years  and he has moved house since you last saw him  but you do not know that he has moved house  although you believe that you know his phone number  i believe that you have his phone number wrong. i can believe this even if i do not know what his previous phone number was. 
     the ability to represent meta-beliefs  of the type described above  is crucial to. the process of ascribing belief. lambda formulas are an extension of lambda expressions that allow the meta-beliefs of a belief to be represented with their associated belief. 
1. lambda formulas 
　　lambda expressions are finite partial functions. they are computable and map into a finite range of values. we extend the lambda expression representar tion to a lambda formula so we can represent opposing views on the value of such an expression1. for 
example  
 phone- no- of john  be 
     {  z {phone- no- of x  john    john   represents an expression that evaluates to john's phone number for john  but is unevaluable to any other agent. the imposition of john as a capable evaluator of the lambda expression  henceforth xexpression  is equivalent to adding an extra parameter to the expression; the extra parameter being the agent performing the evaluation. 
　　the list of capable evaluators is not necessarily a constant because our beliefs may vary regarding who are the capable evaluators of an expression. also different evaluators may evaluate the expression to different values  that is also subject to each individual's beliefs. 
     we want to express different agents as being capable of evaluating such an expression but to different values. we propose a more complex form of the capable evaluators list proposed in  wilks  1 . a typical expression in the augmented representation is shown in  figure 1 . 
  
figure 1. augmented lambda expression for the cure for tuberculosis 
     figure 1 contains n sets of capable evaluators and the values to which they evaluate the expression. the basic set of capable evaluators has been replaced by a set of pairs  consisting of a set of capable evaluators and the value that they return. a typical entry  for example    {sally  paul}  v    is called a 
	wilks and ballim 	1 

capable jevaluators-value pair  abbreviated to cev pair . it is stipulated that each value    must be of the same structure and that the x-expression returns this structure. 
　　the set of cev pairs is a function table representation of the x-expression. we refer to the x-expression and its function table as a x-formula. 
1. unknown values 
　　in the original representation  values that are unknown to an agent are represented by the agent not being a capable evaluator. in other words  awareness of the value of a x-expression is represented by being able to evaluate the x-expression. in figure 1 this would be equivalent to replacing the section below  aware of the value of p  by  the correct value.  the original representation does not handle problems of awareness of p with sufficient power. 
     being capable of evaluating the expression is still the criterion for knowing what the expression represents. now  however  by the introduction of what we call uncertain values and uncertain but jncorrect values  we are able to express more with the representation. 
　　an uncertain value is a value  of a cev pair  that is unknown to an agent  i.e.  the agent is aware that the value exists but not what the value is. this uncertain value may or may not be equal to a known value or some other uncertain value. thus  the agent can represent the value that another agent believes is the value of a x-expression without knowing what the value is. 
     uncertain biit jncorrect values are known by the agent to be different from the value that the agent believes to be correct. in other words the value  while unknown to the agent  is believed by the agent to be wrong  the meta-beliefs that a believes that what b believes is the value of p is wrong  even though a does not know what b believes is the value of p . 
     we have demonstrated representations of all cases where agent b  figure 1  is believed to be aware of p. next  we consider the case where b is unaware of p. 
1. awareness  and explicit & implicit mention of agents 
     a question is  how to represent an agent being aware of the proposition represented by a  -formula   our 
solution is this: an agent is said to be aware of the proposition represented by a x-formula if and only if that agent is either explicitly or implicitly mentioned in the set of all agents that appear in the table for the formula; otherwise the agent is said to be unaware of the proposition. 
     an agent is explicitly mentioned if the agent is a member of one of the sets in the table and is implicitly mentioned if the agent is a member of a class of agents1 that is explicitly mentioned in the table. this may be seen in example 1 where mds are capable evaluators. hence  any agent who is an md is capable of evaluating example 1. mds are explicitly mentioned in this example  someone who is an md is implicitly mentioned. 
     an agent who is neither explicitly nor implicitly mentioned is deemed to be unaware of the proposition that the formula represents. in the case where an agent is implicitly mentioned in more than one class of agent  the most specific class is chosen to determine that agent's view. 
1. function transformations 
     the use of x-formulas poses a question  what affect does ascribing a x-formula to an agent have upon the x-formula  
     ascribing a x-formula often requires altering the formula. for example  ascribing a formula to an agent  who does not know the value it returns for any agent  will require changing the formula to reflect this situation. ascribing a x-formula to an agent thus involves changing the function table for the formula. this is equivalent to saying that ascribing a x-formula to an agent involves changing the function that the formula represents. 
     function transformations on x-formulas are discussed in more detail in  ballim  1 . 
1. x-expressions and meta-beliefs 
     we can see how x-formulas solve the problems that were discussed in section 1. lack of awareness is realised within x-formulas by an agent being neither an explicit nor implicit agent of the formula's capable evaluators set. atypical beliefs are characterised by their associated meta-beliefs. x-formulas are very effective at representing meta-beliefs of atypical beliefs. 
1. a description of viewgen and a medical example 
     vicwgen is a prolog program that generates nested points of view. the program has a set of beliefs that are considered held by an agent known as the system. these beliefs are partitioned into topics  held in labelled pts . an example call to the program is shown in  figure 1 . 
| - viewgen   system   thalassemia    j. 
viewpoint of  system  is 
  
thalassemia isjtype pf 
lambda type pf thalassemia  genetic disorder  
	figure 	1. 	the 	system's 	view 	about 
thalassemia1 
     the point of view represented in  figure 1  is the system's view about thalassemia. this view consists of one belief  namely that it is a genetic disorder. 
     viewgcn operates by forming a contextual focus from the pts of the terms in the list that forms the second argument to the program. the first argument is a list of agents. this list represents the nesting that is required. the third argument is a variable that is instantiated to the structure that the program returns. 
     in the following example assume that the system is a medical expert conducting a dialogue with a married couple who are seeking advice about thalassemia. the system has a lambda formula for the intensional description   type of thalassemia    shown in  figure 1 . 
lambda type of thalassemia   d  
  
   system  medicallyjnformed person   genetic disorder    
   avg man   disease   
   
figure 1. lambda formula for the type of thing that thalassemia is 
     with the information that thalassemia is a type of genetic disorder the system is able to generate what it believes about them both. this point of view is shown in  figure 1 . 
| - viewgen  system   thalasscmia genetic disorder     . 
viewpoint of  system  about 
 thalassemia genetic disorder  is 
  
   d is  type of genetic disorder and 
 al suffers from d and 
 a1 suffersjyom d and 
      al married to a1 and a1 child of  a1 a1      implies a1 suffersjyom d   
thalassemia is type pf 
lambda  type  of  thalassemia   genetic disorder  
  
yes 
i -
figure 1. the system's view of thalassemia and genetic  disorder s  
     the point of view in  figure 1  contains the belief that thalassemia is a genetic disorder. in addition it contains a complex belief the child of two people  who both have a genetic disorder  will suffer from the same genetic disorder from them1. 
suppose that the couple in question are called 
paul and sally  and that the system has the beliefs about them shown in  figure 1 . 
|  - viewgen   system   sally paul   j. 
viewpoint of  system  about  sally paul  is 
i 
sally is type  of medically jnformed person sally married to paul paul suffersjyom thalassemia sally suffersjyom thalassemia 
yes 
i * -
figure is. the system's view of sally and paul 
     the important beliefs here are that the system believes that sally is a medically informed person  and that they both suffer from thalassemia. we presume that we have reasoning mechanisms that allow us to reason with the viewpoints in figures 1 and 1 to hypothesise that any offspring of the pair will also suffer from thalassemia  something that they need to be warned about . if we presume that the system follows gricean maxims then we need to generate what the system believes each of them believes about thalassemia. these points of view are shown in figures 1 and 1. 
| - viewgen   system sally    thalassemia    . 
viewpoint of  system sally  about  thalassemia  is 
  
th al asse m i a is ty pe  p f lam bda  type of  thalassemia   gene tic disorder  
i 
yes 
i -
figure 1. the system's view of sally's view of thalassemia 
| - viewgen  system paul   thalassemia    . 
viewpoint of  system paul  about  thalassemia  is 
  
thalassemia is type of lam bda  type jof  thalassem ia   disease  
yes i -
figure 1. the system's view of paul's view of thalassemia 
	wilksandballim 	1 

     in  figure 1  the belief that thalassemia is a type of genetic disorder has been ascribed to sally. this is because the system believes that sally is a medically informed person  and the system believes that 
medically informed people know that thalassemia is a genetic disorder  see figure 1 . paul  however  is not believed to be a medically informed person. he is simply an average man1. the average man view of thalassemia is that it is a disease. this is just the view that the system believes paul has about thalassemia  figure 1 . 
　　in a dialogue between three agents it can be necessary for one agent to model what the second believes the third believes  or what the third believes the second believes about the topic. so we generate what the system believes sally believes paul believes about thalassemia  and what the system believes paul believes sally believes about thalassemia. 
　　using the beliefs about sally and paul the system generates that sally believes that paul believes that thalassemia is a disease. however  the system has generated that paul believes that sally believes thalassemia is some kind of complex thing that he doesn't know about  represented by t 1  u l   which is an uncertain value. in other words  according to the default rule paul believes that sally is a medically informed person  since there is no evidence to contradict this  and hence paul believes that sally has a more complex belief about thalassemia than he does. 
1. conclusions 
　　this work claims only to be a first implementation of a  belief engine   maida  1  that contains plausible heuristics or th  default ascription of concrete  contentful beliefs. such a process will be needed by any project that proposes  e.g. pollack  1  to model the interaction of agents planning on the basis of differing beliefs and plans. we believe no other system has yet tackled this problem in a practical way. many extensions will be required to the current work  particularly in the treatment of the identication of intensionally distinct but extensionally identical individuals and classes. reference* 
attardi  g. and simi  m.  1  metalanguage and reasoning 
across viewpointe. proc. of ecai-1  1. 
ballim  a.  1  generating points of view. memoranda in computer and. cognitive science  mccs-1  computing 
research laboratory  new mexico state university  las cruces  nm 1  usa. 
ballim  a.  1  the subjective ascription of belief to agente. 
in aisb-1 conference proceedings  j. hallam & c. mellish  eds   john wiley & sons: chichester  england. 
barn den  j.  1  intensions as such: an outline. in proceedings of the 1th international joint conference on artificial intelligence  1. 
creary  l.  1  propositional attitudes: fregean representation and simulative reasoning. in proceedings of ijcai-1q  tokyo. 
konolige  k.  1  a computational theory of belief introspection. in proceedings of ijcai-1  los angeles  1. 
maida  a. s.  1  introspection and reasoning about the beliefs of other agents. in proceedings of cognitive science society  1. 
minsky  m.  1  a framework for representing knowledge. in the psychology of computer vision  winston  p.h.  ed. . mcgraw-hill  new york. 
moore  r. and hendrix  g.  1  computational models of belief and the semantics of belief sentences. sri technical note no. 1. 
perrault  r. k allen  j.  1  a plan-based analysis of indirect speech acts. in amer. jnl. of computational linguistics  1  1. 
pollack  m.e.  1  a model of plan inference that distinguishes between the beliefs of actors and observers. in proceedings of the association for computational linguistics  1. 
shadbolt  n.  1  processing reference. in jnl. of semantics  vol. 1  no. 1  1. 
shapiro  s.c. and rapaport  w.j.  1  sneps considered as a fully intensional propositional semantic network. in proceedings of aaai1  1 . 
wilks  y.a.  1  making p