 
　　this research describes the formalization of statements of the form fact f is irrelevant to fact g given theory m. we motivate the need for representing and reasoning with such statements in problem-solving systems  and outline the semantics and properties of statements about irrelevance. we then describe a logic irrelevance that serves as a language for specifying irrelevance claims in the world  and present an associated calculus that allows us to draw new irrelevance conclusions from given ones. the utility of the formalization and the types of inferences it sanctions are demonstrated with examples from data interpretation  representation reformulation and experiment design. 
i introduction 
　　often  wisdom is knowing what to ignore. a resourcelimited agent with a very detailed theory of the world needs to construct a simpler theory that allows it to make predictions at the required level of accuracy within the given resource constraints. such an agent has to identify parts of its theory that are irrelevant to the class of predictions it is designed to make  and weaken its theory to make it computationally tractable. 
　　this paper introduces a class of statements called irrelevance statements and identifies their special role in problem solving  both in representing certain types of knowledge  and in the construction of weaker theories with better computational properties. we present a theoretical framework for irrelevance and develop a hierarchy of logics that capture different senses of irrelevance. an axiom system for one member of this class is presented along with an irrelevance proof that uses it. efficient graph-theoretic methods of detecting irrelevance in special cases are indicated. 
　　informally  a fact f is irrelevant to the fact g in a theory m  written as i f g m   if there exists a weakening of m that allows us to establish the truth of g without committing ourselves on f. a system of logics can be developed by imposing different restrictions on the constructions of these weakenings. these logics permit the specification of domain-specific claims about irrelevance and their axioms allow the deduction of new claims. an irrelevance statement is a fact about the relationship between two facts in the theory m. reasoning about irrelevance is thus a mode of meta-theoretic reasoning. 
　　the paper is organized as follows. section ii motivates the problem of representing and reasoning with statements about irrelevance. the relationships to the notion of relevance are also outlined here. section iii presents some properties of irrelevance. section iv formalizes an intuitive notion of irrelevance. we present the propositional version of two specializations of this definition and indicate extensions to the first-order case. the utility of this formalization is demonstrated with examples in section v. section vi briefly discusses issues in the acquisition of facts about irrelevance. section vii concludes with a summary of the main points and lists future directions for this research. 
ii motivations 
　　informally  we address the what is relevant question by considering the complementary question  since in some cases it is far easier to determine and specify what is irrelevant. also useful classes of such statements focus the construction of weaker and often more computationally tractable theories. both these points are discussed in some detail below. 
　　an important reason for building the ability to reason about irrelevance into systems is that we would like to give advice to a problem-solving system  or bias to a learning system  in terms of irrelevance. for the missionaries and cannibals problem  we would like to tell the problemsolver that the names of the missionaries and cannibals are irrelevant  and have the system clump the missionaries and cannibals into sets and deal with the cardinalities of these sets. amarel indicates this sort of reasoning in his well-known 1 paper amarel 1 . removing irrelevant facts and objects from a formulation is an important method of changing representations. 
　　explicitly identifying what to ignore is easier in some frameworks than in others. for instance  in dendral  there are two classes of mass spectrograph points that are ig-


figure 1: logics of relevance and irrelevance 
nored for the purposes of the structure interpretation task. scientists have much sharper criteria for the data points to ignore rather than the data points to include. specification of irrelevance claims is then a valuable complementary mode of expressing knowledge about a domain. 
　　yet another motivation for reasoning about irrelevance is the need for problem-solving systems to reason flexibly at varying grain sizes  hobbs 1 . these systems require the ability to recognize and ignore detail irrelevant to their current goals in order to shift to a bigger grain size where 
those goals can be achieved more efficiently. 
　　reasoning about irrelevance can thus be used as a basis for focusing attention in both inductive and deductive tasks. in induction  certain irrelevance claims bias the learner towards the construction of approximate  simpler theories. in deductive tasks  irrelevance statements help focus search by identifying unfruitful or redundant paths. they also help restructure the search space by collapsing primitives in a formulation. 
　　a formal study of irrelevance reveals that there is interesting substructure in the space of useful irrelevance inferences. there is a hierarchy of irrelevance logics that is similar to the hierarchy of logics that capture the notion of relevance  anderson and belnap 1   davies and russell 1 . see figure 1. these logics are not exact duals of each other; many aspects of the relationship between them remain to be investigated. the statement that f is relevant to g in m conveys the information that knowing f in m restricts the space of possibilities for g. the statement that f is irrelevant to g in m indicates that the value of g is insensitive to the value off  in that even if f were changed in m  g would not. in the missionaries and cannibals puzzle  the names of the missionaries are irrelevant to the scheduling of the boat trips. this means that even if the names were changed*  the solution  which does not refer to the missionaries by name  would not. this irrelevance statement gives us the justification to modify the formulation 

 as long as they remain distinct from each other! 
in which missionaries are named  to the more abstract one that uses the cardinality of the set of missionaries. 
　　the two notions of relevance and irrelevance are complementary; one expresses a dependence between two facts and the other captures a one-sided lack of dependence  g being not dependent on f . however  the normal use of an irrelevance statement is to modify m while preserving g  the normal use of a relevance statement is to infer restrictions on g given f: thus the inferences they sanction are not duals. 
	i l l 	p r o p e r t i e s o f i r r e l e v a n c e 
　　our notion of irrelevance has the properties of nonmonotonicity  intransitivity and asymmetry. 
a . 	n o n - m o n o t o n i c i t y 
　　irrelevance is non-monotonic in general. if the addition of a fact to m causes the truth of g to become contingent on f  then the irrelevance statement ceases to hold. before descartes  facts about algebra would have been irrelevant for proving a theorem in plane geometry. descartes' discovery of analytic geometry connected these two theories together and each has since become relevant to the other. 
b. 	i n t r a n s i t i v i t y 
　　irrelevance is not transitive. an example brings this out: 
the blight on the tea crop in china is irrelevant to my writing this paper. my writing this paper is irrelevant to the price of tea in china. 
had irrelevance been transitive  we could deduce that: the blight on the tea crop in china is irrelevant to the price of tea in china. 
this makes it difficult to propagate irrelevance conclusions and derive useful irrelevance claims from given ones  except in special cases in section iv.a. 
c . 	a s y m m e t r y 
irrelevance is also not symmetric in the general case. 
however  it is symmetric for a certain class of irrelevance statements i p q m  where p and q are logically independent. thus knowing p does not help in constraining the possible values of q in the context of m  and knowing q does not help in constraining the possible values of p. the statement my writing this paper is irrelevant to the price of tea in china is an example of a symmetric irrelevance 
statement. these statements capture independence between facts and thus provide a natural way of factoring a formulation. thus p and q could be put in different parts 
subramanian and geneaerath 

of the formulation: a change in one part will not have repercussions in the other for any use of the formulation. 

1. m' entails g. 

	i v 	t h e o r e t i c a l a s p e c t s o f 
i r r e l e v a n c e 
　　we say that fact f is irrelevant to fact g modulo the set of sentences m  written as i f g m   if f is inessential to the truth of g in m  that is  changing the truth value of f in m would not affect the truth of g. one possibility for a formal definition is: 
properties: definition 1: f is irrelevant to g modulo m if and we can construct a set m' of sentences with the following if there are multiple maximal subsets of m then g must hold in at least one of them. now  / is no longer irrelevant to t in m1 because we cannot construct the set m1' with these properties. the judgement of irrelevance can be made without imposing the requirement that the subset m' be maximal. however  the maximality condition ensures that the weakening of m constructed is the most conservative one; i.e. we weaken m minimally so that it becomes non-committal on f and then show that g still holds in this set. definition 1 is a specialization of the counterfactual construction proposed in  ginsberg 1 . this is because irrelevance statements are special cases of counterfactuals. 

　　axioms 1 through 1 are straightforward consequences of our definition. axioms 1 through 1 identify four special cases of redundancy. axiom 1 says that if g is present in m  then everything except itself is redundant to it. axiom 1 states that if all facts that are derivable from f are redundant to g  then f itself is redundant to g in m  unless f directly implies g. axiom 1 is the dual axiom that shows that f is redundant to g if f is redundant to all facts that derive g  unless g directly implies f. axiom 1 is a generalization of axiom 1: if p is already in m  then any f that only derives p is redundant to g in m. to complete this axiomatization we need to identify all the base cases for proving redundancy. since detection of redundancy is semi-decidable  there is good reason to believe that we cannot construct a complete axiomatization of wi. observation 1: one benefit of proving redundancy of some facts in a theory  is that we can optimize space requirements by simply removing the redundant facts. an example of this is in section vlb. a proof of redundancy using the lemmas of wi in the meta-theory of m captures an important property of the proofs of g in m  without exhaustively enumerating them. a problem solver that can prove this redundancy claim at the meta-level can prune a large class of inferences this way. also if the redundancy statements were made available to the problem solver  it could compile it into the base level formulation by simply throwing away those facts that cause the redundancy. this leads to savings in space. to ensure that savings in time in proving g result from this pruning  we need to show that the proofs of g that fail as a result are derivation ally more complex than the ones that are retained. this is captured in our definition of computational irrelevance. in either case  the deliberation time for the problem solver will be reduced because the search space of proofs of g in m is reduced by the removal of redundancy. 

m1 is the required weakening of m. this definition extends to the first order case straightforwardly. given the information that g is the only class of queries that need to be answered or the only predicate that needs to be considered for a certain problem solving task  an agent can restrict its attention to m1 alone. an example where this leads to significant computational gain is in section v.c. 

when the set m can be factored into subsets m1 and m1 as above  the models of m have the cartesian factorability property. unfortunately  the converse doesn't hold. we now describe some properties of this definition. 
observation 1: si is a special case of definition 1  i.e. 

observation 1: the syntactic characterization of si captures a strict subset of the cases covered by the modeltheoretic definition. 
this is because the construction is strongly dependent on the form of m. in order to make the two definitions correspond  we have to rewrite m in a normalized form. observation 1: si can be detected efficiently by representing the sentences of m in an inference graph and checking that f and g belong to different forests of this graph. observation 1: m1 and m1 are computationally better than the combination m for processes whose computational complexity is a function f of the size of the set they work on  where 
one such function is the exponential function. section v.c. presents an example. 
c. 	c o m p u t a t i o n a l irrelevance 
　　this is a refinement of weak irrelevance where the derivations of g in m are ordered by some measure of complexity. we say f is computationally irrelevant to g if we can prove g in m without the use of f  and also show that the proof has better complexity characteristics  it might be shorter or be easier to find . this version of irrelevance leads to the construction of weaker theories with better computational properties. 
syntactic characterization of computational irrelevance 
f is ci with respect to g modulo m if we can split m into subsets m1 and m1 such that 
subramanian and genesereth 
  m = m1 u m1 
  mi is the maximal set such that mi and 

  deriv-complexity g m1  better-than deriv-complexity g mj  
m1 is the required weakening of m. this definition extends to the first order case straightforwardly. 
some properties of this definition are: 
observation 1: ci f g m  wi f g m  observation 1: si f g m  ci f g m  
the proof uses the fact that the derivational complexity of g in m when m does not entail g is oo. observation 1: ci is non-symmetric on its first two arguments. 
observation 1: ci leads to the construction of computationally better subtheories for the class of queries g. in the missionaries and cannibals problem in which both the individuals and the sets of individuals are present in the formulation  we can show that the existence of the individuals is ci with respect to the construction of the schedule  since the proof that uses the individuals  as opposed to the set of individuals  is derivationally more complex 
	v 	a p p l i c a t i o n s 
we show how the data filtering procedure in dendral 
 buchanan 1  can be declaratively formulated in our logic. our logic thus serves as a specification language for the data selection component of a theory formation system. the reasoning required to capture two types of representation reformulation are then presented. the first is an abstraction reformulation for space efficiency in which we identify and minimize redundancy in a problem formulation. we present a proof of the redundancy of a class of statements in the formulation and show how this can be used as a justification for jettisoning that class of facts from the formulation. the next example formalizes quine's quine 1  notion of indisctrnibility of identicals and shows how our irrelevance logic can be modified to sanction inferences that lead to the construction of theories of coarser granularity. our last example explores the role of reasoning about irrelevance in factoring theories and automatic experiment design in learners  subramanian and feigenbaum 1 . 
a . 	d a t a selection i n d e n d r a l 
　　in data interpretation problems  it is useful to declaratively represent heuristics for pruning data points. these heuristics are statements about the computational irrelevance of a certain class of data points with respect to the particular interpretation task at hand. in dendral they have the following form: 
clclass of data points  structural theory  background theory  
the background theory is the theory of covalent bonding in chemistry as well as the theory of operation of the spectrometer. isotopic peaks in the mass spectrum are considered irrelevant because even if they were taken into account in the construction of the structural theory of the molecule  the predictions obtained from it would not be significantly different from the theory that didn't take these peaks into account. the irrelevance statement is a control heuristic in the search space of all structural theories of the molecule. these theories are ordered by the data points they cover and this heuristic identifies important data points by exclusion and thus focuses the search in the direction of weaker and simpler theories. 
　　the advantage of specifying these irrelevance claims explicitly is that they have a clearly understood semantics. they can then be derived from other background knowledge. we can reason about the filtering criteria explicitly and do a comparative sensitivity analysis on them. we can use them in conjunction with other background knowledge to derive new computational irrelevance claims. 
b . 	r e f o r m u l a t i o n : r e m o v i n g r e d u n d a n c y 
　　the formulation of a problem has critical impact on its efficiency. the following example shows how we can use irrelevance reasoning to reformulate a kinship problem to obtain computational efficiency. figure 1 shows a simplified family tree representing a set of father relations. the ancestor relation is defined as the transitive closure of the father relation. the goal is to determine whether two people belong to the same family. the defined relation same-family is used for this: two people belong to the same family if they have a common ancestor. the time required to compute same-family in this formulation is proportional to the height of the family tree. if we are given the extra information that same-family is the only relation that will be queried  we could rewrite the family tree information in terms of the founding-father relation as in figure 1. the founding-father of an individual is his maximal ancestor in the family tree. the time needed to solve a same-family question in the new formulation is a constant: we need to check if the two individuals have the same maximal common ancestor! 
　　formulation 1 is constructed from formulation 1 by discarding information that was irrelevant to the computation of same-family. this is achieved by eliminating the father relation on grounds of redundancy  captured by weak irrelevance  and then eliminating the intermediate ancestor links by a computational irrelevance argument. what remains after this theory weakening process are the maximal ancestor links in the family tree. 
the redundancy claim can be formally proved: 

m shape colour   si shape colour m  
　　providing the above irrelevance fact to a blocks-world learner allows it to factor the learning problem into two independent subproblems: one for learning shape and one for learning colour. the task of devising informative instances is exponential in the size of m  so that a learner that acquires information by active experimentation obtains significant computational advantages by this split  subramanian and feigenbaum 1 . 
	d. 	r e f o r m u l a t i o n : quine's principle 
　　quine'1 maxim of the identification of indiscemibles states that objects indistinguishable from one another in the context of a discourse should be construed as identical for that discourse. that is  the 