 
an expressive first-order temporal logic using the method of temporal arguments is developed and provided with a non-standard semantics that explicates its underlying temporal structure. objections from the ai literature against the adequacy of temporal argument theories are answered in the course of discussing representational issues for the developed logic. this logic  accords a special status to time '' distinguishes the temporal features of event occurrences from ordinary facts  and supports changing ontologies. we conclude that the method of temporal arguments remains a viable candidate for temporal reasoning in al. 
i introduction 
     the  method of temporal arguments''  mta  is our name for the approach to representing temporal information in which every ordinary predicate of a logic is supplemented by a special argument  or arguments  for time  e.g.  on a  b  time 1  . this approach has been used for many years in database applications as the dominant means of representing the temporal aspects of database relations  e.g.  ann  1 . here  we show how to develop versions of this approach that have a more explicit temporal semantics and are capable of meeting the greater demands made on temporal representation and reasoning by ai systems. previous criticisms of the suitability of the mta approach are addressed in the course of discussing representational issues for such logics. 
temporal representation in ai  e.g.  mcdermott  
1 and allen  1  has been dominated by  reified temporal logics   in which terms referring to facts or propositions appear as arguments to truth predicates  e.g.  true  on a  b   time l  . an interesting recent development in formalizations of these reified temporal logics has been the introduction of non-standard formal semantics for them  shoham  1  and reichgelt  1 . these new formalizations provide special semantic foundations for explicitly identified temporal components of such logics  imparting greater clarity to their interpretation as well as a basis for meaningful proofs of soundness and completeness. accompanying these developments have been several different arguments against the general suitability of the temporal arguments approach for ai systems. here  we show how a non-standard semantics similar to those developed for reified temporal logics can provide clear foundations for a variety of different versions of the mta approach  and how the objections against this approach may be answered  leaving it a viable candidate for temporal reasoning in ai. we begin by looking at reified temporal logics  and discuss the significance of their recent semantic developments. 
ii reified temporal logics 
     reified temporal logics have recently been defined  shoham  1  as temporal logics in which propositions are made into objects  reified  by providing special propositional terms to refer to them. temporal aspects of propositions are then indicated by asserting proposition types to be true  or to hold  at particular times. thus  truth or holding predicates are used  taking propositional terms and temporal terms as arguments  to assert that the propositions hold during the specified times  e.g.  true  on a b   tl  . the best known examples of reified temporal logics  developed by james allen  1  1  and by drew mcdermott  1   were formulated in ordinary typed first-order logics with no special formal semantics provided for their temporal features. truth predicates were treated like any other predicate  and their temporal arguments  while distinguished by typing  were not given any special semantic treatment. as a consequence  no significant soundness or completeness results could be provided for the temporal aspects of the logic. although the use of standard first-order logic provides formal assurance of soundness and completeness  it does not ensure that absurd temporal consequences cannot be derived  or that all of the genuine temporal consequences will be derived. a set of temporal postulates that allowed deduction of  b before a  from  a before b  would not affect formal soundness. neither would an inability to deduce the transitive closure of simple temporal ordering relations affect the formal completeness of such a logic. without a model theory that includes a distinctiy temporal component  any soundness or completeness 
	haugh 	1 
results are inconsequential with respect to temporal reasoning. 
　　while there have been clear temporal model theories for years for modal tense logics  e.g.  prior  1   difficulties in theorem-proving have hampered their implementation. theorem-proving techniques with the elegance and completeness of resolution-based methods in first-order logic have not yet appeared for any quantified modal logics. thus  the appearance of special temporal semantics for first-order theories offers the promise of the best of both worlds: a semantics as clear and explicit as that of the tense logics  with proof procedures as simple and elegant as those in ordinary first-order logic. 
　　it should be noted  however  that  as yet  this promise remains unfulfilled  since soundness and completeness results have not yet been presented for these new logics. the absence of such results can be attributed largely to the novelty of this approach  but  may also be due  in part  to difficulties inherent in the reified temporal logics in which all such work has hitherto been pursued. there are special challenges in fully formalizing the propositional terms of reified temporal logics and the truth  or holding  predicates that take them as arguments  such as the well-known risks of inconsistency when using truth predicates in a first-order theory  tarski  1 . similar risks are encountered in other uses of reified propositions  such as first-order theories of belief and knowledge  montague  1 and thomason  1 . only recently has it been shown that inconsistency may be avoided in such  self-referential  theories by careful restrictions on the propositional terms admitted by truth or belief predicates  perlis  1  1 . 
     other difficulties arise for reified temporal logics in providing a satisfactory semantics for quantification into propositional terms  and in determining their scope  e.g.  whether to allow embedding of truth predicates  temporal references  variables  logical connectives  or quantifiers in these terms . early systems of reified temporal logics   e.g.  allen's and mcdermott's  provided no special formal syntax and semantics for their propositional terms. mcdermott provided some axioms explicating his interpretation of propositions  but his formal semantics was standard fol. development of explicit syntactic restrictions on propositional terms and of special model-theoretic constructions for their semantics is one of the contributions of shoham's pioneering work in providing better foundations for first-order temporal theories. shoham's early reports of this work  shoham  1  minimize the difficulties of handling propositional terms by restricting them to atomic predications. reichgelt's subsequent work  reichgelt  1  admits quantifiers and logical connectives to his terms  which provide greater expressive power  but at an unavoidable cost in complexity of syntax  semantics  and axiomatization. a significant body of work on 
1 	knowledge representation 
representing propositional terms has also been pursued in association with investigations of logics for truth  knowledge  and belief  e.g.  perlis  1  1; des rivieres and levesque  1 . 
　　eventually  the most capable knowledge representation systems will benefit from full capabilities for complex propositional terms  and quantification over and into them. cause-effect relations with complex factual effects will require complex propositional terms to refer to them. representation of belief and knowledge will also benefit from an ability to use belief predicates with arbitrarily complex propostional arguments. however  less ambitious systems may do well to avoid such complexity  and in such cases  the method of temporal arguments can provide a simpler alternative to reified temporal logics. an mta approach is especially valuable for integration of knowledge bases with large temporal databases  since most  if not all  database applications of temporal representation involve some version of mta. furthermore  even when the fullest capabilities of propositional terms are required  the truth predicates of a reified temporal logic are unnecessary  since an mta approach may be supplemented with propositional terms without recourse to truth predicates. 
h i the method o f temporal arguments 
     the essence of the method of temporal arguments has already been defined as the use of a temporal argument  or arguments  in every predicate to establish temporal references. to distinguish it from the reified approach  we should note that it admits  as predicates  ordinary properties and relations  e.g.  isred  isheavierthan  that are excluded by the reified approach. even so qualified  this essence remains so minimal that it leaves room for enormous variety in particular versions. the basic logic is restrained only by the need for multi-place predicates  leaving many choices  such as: full  standard first-order logic  fol   all sorts of restrictions on fol  higher order logics  or any of a variety of non-standard logics. temporal predicates for expression of temporal properties and relations  such as duration and ordering  can come in many types and combinations in a mta logic. the basic temporal entities referred to by temporal arguments may be either points or intervals  and may be ordered in many different ways  dense  discrete  beginning  non-beginning  branching  ... . the most prominent alternatives for these choices are listed in table 1. the more expressive alternatives are listed in boldface  when a clear advantage is present. 
　　much of the temporal representation in databases can be categorized under this approach  see  e.g.  ann  1   although database environments impose strong restrictions on logical capabilities  e.g.  no disjunctions  no rules . the mta approach can be very expressive when the more expressive features are chosen and supported by a full set of temporal predicates  e.g.  date tl  dtl   duration t1 d1   start tl  t1   before tl  t1   ... . 

1 rule-based kb model 
variables & quantifiers 
full first-order logic 
dating 
ordering relations branching order 
dense order beginning 
ending 
durations 
interval times 
1 point times relational db model 
no variables 
horn clause logic 
no dating no ordering 
no branching 
discrete order 
no beginning 
no ending no durations 
no intervals 
no points table 1. alternative mta logics. 
here  we use a full first-order version  with a minimal set of ordering predicates  to illustrate the ease with which an explicit temporal semantics can be provided for a temporal arguments approach 
	iv 	temporal representation issues 
　　a variety of criticisms have been raised on the suitability of the temporal arguments approach. one broad criticism has been that it does not give any special status to time  shoham  1 . while this is true of standard fol versions  the semantics provided below demonstrates that this special status can be easily achieved using techniques strongly analogous to those used by the new reified temporal logics. other criticisms have involved the expressive advantages of reified propositions in causal relations  and problems in temporally dependent quantification. these criticisms are addressed below in the course of examining more general expressive issues that strongly influence the choice of crucial features of such logics. discussion of these issues explains the motivation for many of the representational features chosen for our example mta logic  in addition to answering the related criticisms. 
a. representing times of events 
　　it is widely recognized that representing the times of occurrences of events requires a different sort of semantics than the times of the holding of ordinary facts. according to common usage  when a specific event occurs over a time interval t  it cannot properly be said to occur over any of the subintervals of t  or indeed  over any other interval. there is good reason for this convention as well. it supports the association of a unique time interval with each particular event  facilitating the identification and distinction of events as well as their countability. we may ask of event types  such as the throwing of a ball  how many times it has occurred  but it is not so reasonable to ask over how many time intervals an ordinary type of fact  such as a ball being red  holds. ordinary durative facts typically hold over an uncountable number of time intervals since they hold over every subinterval of any interval over which they hold. 
　　the generally recognized temporal nature of durative events requires that any logic capable of representing their times of occurrence be capable of representing temporal intervals  as well as distinguishing between facts and events. thus  no traditional point-based tense logics  e.g.  rescher and urquhart  1  can be used to reason properly about the times of event occurrences. 
and  any fully expressive version of mta will require a semantics capable of referring to intervals and of distinguishing between occurrences of events and the holding of ordinary facts. 
　　intervals may be represented in an mta logic by a single temporal argument  e.g.  p  t  xl  ...xn   taking interval constants and variables  by dual arguments representing the endpoints of an interval  e.g.  p tl  t1  xl  ..xn    or by a single complex term  a function from two points into an interval  e.g.  p  f tl  t1   xl  ...  xn  . the last alternative was chosen here because it allows the use of different temporal functions to distinguish between intervals that are open on one end  open on both  or closed on both. the importance of this capability is discussed in the next section. 
　　the time of occurrence of events in mta can be expressed by an occurrence predicate  e.g.  occurs f tl  t1   event1    or simply by the times during which the case roles of an event hold  e.g.  agent  f tl  t1   eventl  
john  . this latter approach is a natural temporal extension of a case frame representation of events  based on case grammars  fillmore  1 . the mta approach is particularly well-suited for a temporal extension to case frames since the case frame roles  e.g.  agent  activity  object  instrument  ...  can appear directly as top-level predicates relating the events to their case-role values at the time of event occurrence. such predications about the case roles of events are clearly distinguished from the use of truth predicates and complex propositional functions  e.g.  true  tl  t1  stack john  a  b   found in reified propositional treatments  such as shoham's  1 . 
　　case frame representations of events also have much to recommend them in addition to their ease of extension to temporal reasoning in mta: modularization of event descriptions  davidson  1 ; usefulness in natural language understanding and generation; elimination of rules required to determine case roles from functional representations; support of event tokens as well as event types; and efficiency of information retrieval via indexing of predicates and constant arguments in database systems and logic programming environments. a frame-based prototype of an mta approach  haugh  et.al.  1  has been implemented using case frame representations of events within the timls multi-representational knowledge engineering environment  lewis  1   and used effectively for natural language generation of situation reports in a planning domain  sekine  1 . the logic presented here  however  will support either case frames or func-
	haugh 	1 

tions for representing events. a class of predicates is supported with the appropriate temporal features for event occurrences  and may be used in a variety of ways. 
　　some explanation on the advantages of terms referring to event tokens may be helpful here. using names of specific events  rather than the event types typically used in reified temporal logics  allows asserting mat two events of the same type occur at the same time or overlapping times  and provides more direct support to the individuation and counting of events of a particular type. exclusive use of event types would also create difficulties in determining that two different descriptions are descriptions of the same event  since individual events could not be named. 
　　despite these expressive advantages of using event tokens  exclusive use of event types would be no disadvantage in domains in which all the event descriptions were uniquely referring. in such circumstances  event types could be used exclusively in an mta approach as easily as within reified temporal logics. such an approach could be implemented in mta within a caseframe formalism or using functional representations of event types. a functional representation of events within mta would require the use of occurrence assertions  e.g.  occurs  f tl t1   throws john  ball-1    whose forms might be indistinguishable from those of reified temporal logics. however  such a choice of representations would still be distinguished from a reified temporal logic  provided that events were clearly distinguished from propositions. thus  we have shown several ways that an mta approach may represent the time of occurrence and features of events without recourse to a reified temporal logic. a case-grammarbased representation supporting individual event names was chosen for its representational power  as well as its many general advantages. 
b. representing points and intervals 
　　besides the importance of representing time intervals  argued above  representation of time points is also very useful  especially for representing continuous variation of parameters over time. although alternatives may be developed using discrete time or average values  the mathematics of continuous variation over points is much more straightforward and better understood. it is also convenient to be able to tie genuinely instantaneous events  e.g.  electron orbital transitions   to a time point time points also enable distinguishing between open and closed ends on intervals. if time points are to be represented for these reasons  and our earlier formulation of temporal references as intervals is to be used uniformly  then interval functions must be capable of 
representing points. this is easily done using an interval function that takes the same two points as arguments  returning the closed interval on them both  e.g.  closed t1  t1  . however  using closed intervals uniformly in our logic would create problems for represent-
1 	knowledge representation 
ing certain kinds of relations between events. we could not have two events directly ''meeting  one another  in allen's terminology  allen  1   if their times could be represented only by closed intervals. for events to meet  they must be defined over intervals that are open on one end and closed upon the other. this is the approach taken by thomas dean in his time map manager  dean  1   although genuine points cannot be represented thereby if it is used uniformly  hence  he makes use of infinitesimal intervals . to use interval functions to represent both time points and intervals supporting the meeting of events  two types of interval functions are needed  one closed on both ends and one half-closed. these capabilities are supported in the example logic by temporal functions  open  closed  open l  open r  that define all the endpoint variations on temporal intervals. 
c. distinguishing  solid  and   l i q u i d   facts 
　　we have already argued the importance of distinguishing the temporal aspects of event occurrences from those of ordinary holdings of facts. this distinction closely parallels one from a set of such temporal distinctions developed by shoham  1 . predications of event occurrences are solid in shoham's terminology because they are not true over any overlapping intervals. we use a bit stronger version of solidity here  in which solid predications are true only at a single unique time interval  since this is characteristic of event tokens. shoham's liquid facts are the same as our predication class for ordinary facts wherein they hold over all subintervals. our logic supports the typing of predicates according to their solidity  while shoham reserves that distinction for axioms. 
　　although the capabilities we have described so far are adequate for events and ordinary facts  there are  arguably  predicates that cannot fit either category. most action verbs seem to be of this type  e.g.  solves t  x  y   paints t  x  y    since they describe action types that may or may not be uniquely instantiated for any particular set of non-temporal arguments. thus  a third category of predicates  used below for such relations  is not restricted to be wholly liquid or solid. other categories could be defined analogously  if needed. 
d. representing causation 
　　causation is one of those relations - like belief  knowledge  possibility and necessity - that can make good use of reified propositions when it is represented using predicates in a first-order logic. expression of some event causing a fact to hold using causal predicates  e.g.  pcause  open r tl  tl   eventl  factl   requires terms referring to facts. thus  since reified temporal logics have already tackled the difficulties of referring to propositions  they are at some advantage. however  contrary to shoham's suggestions  shoham  
1   it doesn't follow that a temporal arguments approach cannot achieve the same causal representation 

capabilities. terms for propositions may be added to an mta logic without adding any truth predicates  i.e.  without converting to a reified temporal logic. 
　　the simplest way to add propositional references to an mta logic is to use a case-frame approach  analogous to that advocated for events above. case grammars have a category for stative information that can represent simple atomic predications quite easily  with many of the same advantages noted above for case frame representations of events. with this approach  the logic may use ordinary individual constants and variables to refer to facts  and simple predicates for representing their case roles  e.g.  verb  object  complement . this approach would provide much of the expressive power of shohanvs logic  since his propositional terms are restricted to atomic predications. 
　　more expressive fact causation  such as that developed by reichgelt  1   would require a more capable formalism  since case grammars were not designed to handle logical connectives and quantification. an embedded object language  such as reichgelt's  appears the best approach to achieve the fullest generality  which will be required if belief or knowledge predicates are used in any case. 
　　thus  we can add abilities for representing causation and other relations involving simple reified propositions to our logic simply by providing predicates in the appropriate categories. a three-place causation predicate in the solid predicates category can represent causation  and a three-place belief predicate in the liquid category can represent belief. more complex propositions would require additional formal apparatus. 
e. representing universal and time-specific 
existence 
　　an important fact about what exists  an ontology  is that it changes over time. this creates a problem for quantification in temporal logics  since we must be able to refer to everything that ever exists  as well as everything that exists at particular times. a shortcoming of many temporal theories has been the absence of support in the formal semantics for changing ontologies over time. most versions of tense logics  for example  do not support this capability  nor do formulations of the method of temporal arguments. and  recently  it has been argued that the temporal arguments approach is inherently incapable of making this distinction  reichgelt  1 . 
　　it would seem that the existence of an object at a certain time could be verified merely by determining if there are any predications that hold of it during that time. however  this test is inadequate  since many properties  like  is deceased '' and relations  like  is the widow of   may hold at times at which the values of their arguments do not exist. thus  rescher and urquhart  in discussing modal tense logics  have shown 
 chapter xx  1  that they require either an additional quantifier or an existence predicate before they can express both kinds of existence. the method of temporal arguments can also achieve this expressive power when provided with such additional apparatus. in the mta example below  a temporal existence predicate is used to formalize the existence of objects at particular times  and a single type of quantifier ranges over all objects existing at any time. together  these features allow reference to just those objects that exist at all  or some  times during any identified time period. 
	v 	special semantics for m t a 
　　the following example demonstrates an mtabased logic whose special semantics satisfies the representational needs discussed in depth above. for simplicity of exposition  however  we have left out special predicates for dating  durations  and distances  since their needs are well-understood and their axiomatization is awkward. 
a. syntax 
　　the primitive symbols consist of the elements of the following sets: 

	haugh 	1 

1  if t1 and t1 are each temporal point terms  then  t1 = t1  is a wff  and  t1   t1  is a wff. 
1  if tl is a temporal interval term  and x is an individual term in x or c  then exists t  x  is a wff. 
b. semantics 
　　a model-structure  times  now  order  domain  time domain  for the logic is defined as follows: 
times is a non-empty set of time points. now is a distinguished member of times. order is a binary ordering relation on the elements of time. domain is a non-empty set of individual objects  disjoint from times. timedomain is a binary relation between subsets of times and sets of elements of domain the ordering relationship for any specific logic would be furthur specified by meta-level axioms defining its characteristics  e.g.  dense or discrete  branching or linear . a model is defined as a model-structure supplemented with an assignment function v that assigns: a member of domain to every constant in c a member of times to every constant in t the element now to the constant  now  the equality relation on times to   =   the order relation to the predicate       
	the 	timedomain 	relation 	to 	the 	predicate 
 exists  to the temporal function names  open    closed    open 1   and  openr   functions mapping from pairs of time points to sets of all the elements of times between them  with  open  excluding both endpoints   closed  including both endpoints  
 open 1  excluding only the left  earlier   and 
 openr  excluding only the right endpoint 

member of domain. for ease of exposition  we consider g to extend the valuation v  when an interpretation is considered under a variable assignment. truth under a variable assignment can be defined by further extending the assignment function  v  as follows: 1  for an atomic wff  where p is the predicate  exists   or in r1  r1  or r1: 

　　informally  atomic predicates of the form p t  x1  x1  ... x n-1  assert that some relation p holds between the objects x1  x1  ... xn-1 during the time interval t. predicates in r1 represent  liquid  relations  such as the colors of objects  those in r1 represent  solid  relations  such as event occurrences and causal relations  while those in rl may be variable depending on their arguments. the existence predicate identifies the times at which objects exist. the distinguished constant 

1 	knowledge representation 

 now  designates the present moment  allowing the past  present  and future to be distinguished. 
	v i 	summary 
we have shown how a clear semantics for the 
mta approach can be created that  accords a special status to time.  in the course of developing an mta logic capable of representing the times of facts  events  continuous variation  and meeting of events  we have shown that at least two types of temporal intervals  closed and half-open  must be represented if interval functions based on points are used as temporal arguments. the use of event tokens instead of event types for representing the occurrence of events has been shown to be advantageous for individuating and counting events. a limited support of factual causation was 

shown to be supported by the basic formalism by use of a case-frame representation  without embedding the object language. complete support of causation of arbitrary facts was shown possible without recourse to the truth predicates of reified temporal logic. support of changing ontologies over time was incorporated into our example logic. full axiomatization and soundness and completeness proofs have yet to be generated. 
　　the central thesis supported by this exposition is the vitality of the method of temporal arguments as a clear foundation for temporal reasoning in ai. the explicit temporal semantics developed here provides the foundation for meaningful soundness and completeness results that were not available under the standard fol interpretation. such results  thus  establish a basis of confidence in temporal reasoning systems based on the mta approach. in some contexts  the ease of implementation of efficient temporal reasoning systems using simpler versions of this approach  especially the ease of integration with temporal databases  provides advantages that no longer need be offset by an inadequate semantics. more complex representation systems  including embedded object language propositional terms  temporal persistence and clipping  and alternative possibility representations may be added to this firm foundation in a variety of ways. while the viability of the mta approach has  thus  been vindicated  no decisive advantages have been found either for it or for reified temporal logics in their most expressive versions. 
acknowledgements 
i would like to thank john lewis  stuart pearlman  
donald perlis  han reichgelt  yukiko sekine  and frederick suppe for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. 
