 
we propose a environment model for the evaluation of both function and relation applications; as an illustration  simple extensions of scheme are introduced  together with their interpreter. 
1. introduction 
early attempts   l    toward the goal of integrating logic and functional programming typically led to the introduction into lisp of a collection of primitives allowing to return  as a list data object  all  or any number of  the tuples satisfying a given predicate. these proposals actually provide an interface between two different computational models  and therefore have been characterized as embedding one programming language into another. further works  were more theoretic in nature  and dealt with the fundamental issue of providing a unified semantics for languages of both types. 
our own approach is of the embedding kind outlined above. it bears strong similarities with the recent works of both srivastava and alii  and haynes   in the sense that it leads to an extension of scheme  a lexically scoped dialect of lisp   allowing logic and functional expressions  represented by first class data objects  to be freely mixed  passed as arguments  returned as results  and so on. we thus achieve a functional embedding of logic programming within scheme. following haynes's taxonomy  this embedding can be further described as an environment embedding  in the sense that the embedded and embedding languages share a common environment. it fails however to be a complete environment embedding  in the sense that it does not allow to access and/or modify control information. 
with regard to these previous works  our contribution can be described as follows: 
- instead of taking care of our extensions by macro expansions  we redefine the semantics of scheme by modifying the meta-interpreter given in ; we are thus led to a new computational model based on two types of environments 
this work was done while the author was visiting at the university of california at santa cruz. 
1 	architectures and languages 
- building upon this  we incorporate into scheme the query language introduced in . 
in the resulting model  the concatenation of two lists can be the result of either a function or a relation application: 
 define append  lambda  x y  
 cond   null x  y  
 t  cons  car x  
 append  cdr x  y  
-  append 
 append  a  '  b c   
-   a b c  
 define appendr  clause  nil  x  x    
-  appendr 
 define appendr  clause 
  cons  a  x   y  cons  a  z   
 appendr  x  y  z    
-  appendr 
 appendr ' a  ' b c   x  
 -    appendr  a   b c   abc     appendr  x  y  abc   
-    appendr     abc   abc   
 appendr  a   b c   abc    appendr  a b   c   abc   
 appendr  abc      abc    
in the following sections  we first consider a simple subset of scheme  called core scheme. next  we introduce a variant of core senear which can be used to define and apply relations  cr predicates  rather than functions. by combining these two models  we then obtain a logical extension of core scheme  allowing the application of both functions and relations. we conclude by showing how a query language can be fitted into this extension. 
1. a model for a functional subset of scheme 
let us consider a simple subset of scheme  thereafter called core scheme  whose expressions have the following syntax: 

expression 
sequence 
following the lisp terminology  we .shall call an identifier an atom  the expression     the empty list  and all other expressions  non-atomic lists. the semantics of core scheme will be defined by a function eval of two arguments  i.e. an expression and an environment. this interpreter  similar to the metacircular interpreter given in   will be given in pascal  and rely on the implementation of an abstract data type called s-expression. this implementation will be viewed through a type list  operators newlist  nowatom  cons and append  selectors car and cdr  predicates atom  eq  null  and mutators rpiaca and rplacd. all of these operators correspond to the usual lisp functions  except for the constructors newlist and newatom which return a empty list and a symbolic atom. 
taking into account the conventions given below for representing expressions  function eval is: 
function eval expr  env:list : list; b gin case typpofexpr expr  of 
s lfexpr:eval:= expr  
varexpr:eval:=evalvar expr env ; quoteexpr:eval . =car cdr expr    
condexpr:eva i :=evalcond cdr expr  env  . 
defexpr:eval:= evaldef car cdr expr    
eval car cdr cdr expr   .env . 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡env ; ; lambda expr :eval : =;eval lambda  expr   env     callexpr:eval:=apply eval car expr  env . 
evalllbt cdr expr .env   
end 
end ; 
the expressions recognized by the interpreter are: 
1 self-evaluating expressions 
self-evaluating expressions are expressions which evaluate to themselves. in core scheme  they are 
- the self-evaluating atom nil and the expression    standing both for the empty list 
- the self-evaluating atom t   standing for the boolean value true  the boolean value false being represented by the empty list  
- the self evaluating atoms car  cdr  cons  atom  eq and null  standing for the corresponding primitive operators  or functions . 
1 variables 
all atomic expressions which are not self evaluating are treated like variables: the value returned by the interpreter is looked up in the environment supplied as second argument. the pair formed by an atom and its associated value being called a binding  a list of bindings defines a partial environment  called frame in  . environments are lists of partial environments. it should be noted that environments are not scheme objects  and are introduced for describing the computational model. 
1 quoted expressions 
quoted expressions  prefixed with a quote  are encoded as lists with the atom quote as first element: the value returned is their second element. 
1 laabda expressions 
they represent functions  and have the general form 
 lambda   arguments    body   
where  arguments' is a possibly empty sequence of atoms representing the function formal argument list  and  body  is a sequence of call expressions  see 1 below  representing its body. 
the value returned by the interpreter is a function closure  called a procedure in  o    i.e. the association of the expression and its current environment. a closure will be viewed as an instance of an extended abstract data type  called s-closure  implemented as a non atomic list variant  with additional constructor newclosure  predicate closure and selector environment. it will be represented as  lambda  arguments    body    environment    
stressing the fact that the associated environment  accessible through the selector environment  is not  consed  with the lambda expression. 
1 conditional expressions 
the general form of conditional expressions is 
 cond  easel  ...  casen   
they 	have their usual lisp interpretation. 
1 	define expressions 
define expressions are used to assign a permanent value to an atom they have the form  define  atom   expression   with the value of  atom  to be that of expression . 
the value returned by the interpreter is the atom. as a side effect  a new binding is introduced in the head of the current environment. 
1 call expressions 
they are all the remaining expressions  and are interpreted as function applications handled by 

function apply. to be legal  their head must be an atom or a lambda expression  and must evaluate to a primitive operator or a function closure. actual arguments come from a sequential evaluation of their queue. whereas primitive operators can be applied directly  the expressions contained in the body of function closures are evaluated in sequence  the application receiving the value of the last expression. the environment is taken from the closure and augmented with a partial environment build by function bindlist  which takes the list of formal arguments from the closure and bind them with the list of actual arguments. 
function apply can be defined as follows: 
function apply op ary:list :llat; bag in caaa typaofop op  of 
carop: apply: car car arg  ; cdrop: apply:=cdr car iarg  ; 
conaop: apply: constcar arg .car cdr arg   ; 
atoaiop: if atom  car  arg    than apply; nawatoml't '  
alae apply:snawllat; 
eqop: if eq car arg  car cdr arg    than apply:*newaton  t '  alae apply:snawliat; 
nullop: if nulkcar arg    than apply:=nawaton  t '  
¡¡¡¡¡¡alaa apply::nawliat; prooop: apply::evalsaquance cdr cdr op    cona bindliat car cdr op  . 
arg    
environment op    
and 
and; 
1. a logical variant of core scheme: a simple model of logical programming 
let us now introduce a variant of core scheme  allowing to define and evaluate relations  or predicates  rather than functions. its interpreter  which uses two types of environments  is as follows: 
function eval expr funenv logenv:list :li at; bag in caaa typaofexpr expr  of 
logvarexpr:eval:=evallogvar expr logenv ; 
varexpr:eval:=evalvar expr funenv logenv ; 
quoteexpr:eval:*car cdr expr  ; dafexpr:eval: evaldaf car cdr expr  . 
eval car cdr cdr expr     funenv logenv   
funenv ; 
clauaaexpr.eval: evalclauae expr funenv logenv ; 
callexpr:eval: saarch evalquary expr funenv logenv   
eva1ca1a expr funenv logenv   
and 
and; 
the expressions recognized by the interpreter are: 
1 	logical variables 
these are all identifiers prefixed with a question mark. as they can be bound by predicate application  the value returned by the interpreter is looked up in the current logical environment  since clause definitions cannot be block structured  each logical environment is simply a list of bindings  i.e contains just one partial environment . if no associated value is found  a variable closure is returned  associating the logical variable and the current logical environment. whenever the associated 
1 	architectures and languages 
value is   logical variable  possibly in closure form  it gets evaluated again. logical variables in closure form are evaluated in their own environment  which overrides the current environment. they are implemented as atom variants  with selector logenv accessing the associated logical environment. note that there is no need  in this particular model  to rename variables having the same name in different clauses  since they are distinguished by the environment they are associated with. 
1 	functional variables 
all other atoms are treated as functional variables  and their values looked up in the current functional environment. if no value is found  then the value of the logical variable of the same name  i.e. prefixed with a question mark  is returned. 
1 quoted expressions 
quoted expressions are defined and treated in the same way as in core scheme. they can be used to represent the equivalent of prolog terms build with functors  e.g. '  f a  represents f a   . 
1 	clauae expressions 
they represent logical clauses and have the form 
 clause   arguments    body   
where  arguments  is a possibly empty sequence of terms representing the clause formal argument list  and  body  is a possibly empty sequence of call expressions  see 1  representing its body. the value returned is a predicate  defined as a list of clause closures  and containing in this case just one closure  associating the given expression and the two current environments. as before  closures are implemented as non atomic list variants  with selectors funenv and logenv accessing the associated functional and logical environments. 
examples 
 clause   x  z   father  x  y   father  y  z   will be returned as 
  clause   x  z   father  x  y  father  y  z   
  environments    
1 define expreaalons 
define expressions are represented and treated much in the same way as in core scheme  except for the case when the value is a predicate: if the atom already evaluates to a predicate  then these two predicates are appended  a fucility for the definition of multiple clause predicates. 
1 	call expressions 
call expressions are all other expressions. they are interpreted here as predicate applications. to be legal  their head must be an atom or a clause expression  and must evaluate to a predicate or a variable closure. in the first case  the value returned is the list of all instances of the call expression that can be deduced from the predicates defined in the current functional environment. in the second  an empty list is returned. predicate applications are handled by function search  which  following most prolog interpreters  performs a depth-first  left-to-right search for the list of appropriate instances  and uses the unification algorithm without the occur check. the arguments of function search are: 
- a query closure  associating a call expression whose arguments have been evaluated  and two environments 
example 
if variables x and  x are unbound in their current environment  the call expression 
- if there is no calls  i.e the query has been reduced to a fact   then function search returns a list containing the query with its arguments instantiated in their associated logical environment 
- otherwise  if it is not undefined  the first call is passed to function tryeach  together with a continuation containing the remaining calls. 
function instance returns a copy of its first argument with all its logical variables evaluated and their associated values instantiated in turn. function tryeach constructs the list of all deducible instances by trying in turn each of the clause closures contained in the predicate: 
function tryeach query pred callarg cont:list  .list; begin if null pred  then tryeach:=newlist 
elss tryeach: append try query cartpred  callarg cont   
tryeach query cdr pred  cal1arg  
cont   

¡¡ gdfather x jim  will produce the query closure 
 gdfather  x jim   environments   
- a list of calls  each of them formed by the association of a predicate and an argument closure  this closure associating itself an unevaluated list of arguments and a pair of environments. 
example 
the call expression 
¡¡ gdfather x jim  could produce a list of just one call  defined as 
    clause   x  z   father  x  y   father  y  z     environments   
 clause   x  z   father  x  y   mother  y  z   
	  environments   . x 	jim   environments     
function search is defined as follows: 
function search query calla:liat  :llst; begin if null call*  then search:*cona cona car query   
instance cdr query   logenvlquery     
newllat  
elae oaae typoofop car car calle    of 
predop:search: tryeach query  
car car calle    cdr car calla    
cdr call.  ; 
¡¡undefop:search: newllat end 
end; 
function search works as follows: 
function try attempts to unify the current call arguments in their associated logical environment  with the candidate clause argument.** in a new environment. in case of success  function search is entered recursively after adding to the continuation the calls from the candidate clause body. all arguments are evaluated before unification: 
function try query clause callarg cont:liat :liat; var clauaelogenv.tralj:list; begin clauaelogenv:*newenv; trail: newlist; if unify evalliet callarg funenv callarg    
logenvfcallarg    
logenv ca1arg   
evalllst car cdr clause   funenv clause   
clauselogenv   
clauaelogenv  
trail  
then try: 1earch query  
append  evalbody  cdr  cdr  clauae   .  funenv clauae   * 
clauselogenv   
cont   
elae try:=newlist; 
reetaureftrall  
end; 
function evalbody returns the list of calls from the candidate clause body. 
in the unification process  when a free variable is unified with a term  the environment associated with this variable gets a new binding associating the variable and the term instance in its current logical environment. in order to allow backtracking  i.e. to be able to restaure logical environments in the state they were before trying a particular candidate clause   a trail is used to keep track of the chronological order of bindings. 
1. logical scheaie: the integration of core scheme and its logical variant 
logical scheme  the integration of core scheme and its logical variant  allows to define and apply functions and predicates. furthermore  expressions 

of both kinds can be freely mixed. 
exaaple 
for illustration purposes  we shall rely on an extended core scheme  where numeric atoms  as well as arithmetic operators  are self-evaluating expressions. the following expressions are then meaningful expressions of logical scheme: 
 define age  clause i'jim 1    
 define young  clause   x   age  x  y  l   y 1    
 define and  lambda ip q   clause   x   p  x  y  
 q  x     
 define youngfather  and father young   
while the clause expression assigned to atom young contains a function application  the body of the lambda expression assigned to atom and is a clause expression. finally  atom youngfather is defined as a clause expression resulting from a function application whose arguments evaluate to predicates. 
the interpreter for logical scheme is the union of the two previous interpreters  with its last case element modified as follows: 
callexpr: 
case typeofcall  eval  car  expr     furienv  logenv     of 
funcall:eval:=apply eval car expr  funenv logenv   
evalliat cdr expr  funenv logenv   
logenv ; 
predcall:eval:=search evalquery expr funenv logenv   
eva 1ca1s expr funenv logenv   
end 
in order to allow predicate applications within function applications  function apply has an additional argument. conversely  in order to allow function applications within predicate applications  function search has now the following form: 
function search query.calls:ltst :list; 
begin if null calls  then search:=con* cons car query   
ins tance cdr query  logenv query     
newlist  
else case typeofcal1 car car calls    of 
funcall:if nul1 apply car car calls    
evalli t cdr car callb    
funenv cdr car calla     
logenv cdr car calla      
logenv cdr car calla      
then search:=newlist 
else search: s c arch query cdr calls  ; 
predcall case typeofop car car calls    of 
predop:search: tryeach query  
car car calls    
cdrfcar calls    
cdr calls  ; 
undefop:search:*newlist 
end 
end 
end; 
this new function definition reflects the interpretation given  in a predicate body  to a function application: if this function evaluates to false  the predicate fails; otherwise the predicate evaluation goes on. furthermore  since clause 
arguments 	are 	evaluated before 	unification  	it 
1 	architectures and languages 
follows that arguments of clauses can be function applications  as shown in the introductory example defining the rappend relation   and vice-versa. 
1. query scheie: a query language within scheae in the previous example  the predicate application 
 youngfather  x  
follows the definition of a function and returning the conjunction of two predicates of respectively two and one arguments. a query language is a facility for applying the disjunction and/or the conjunction  as well as the negation  of any number of predicates of any number of arguments. 
example 
in the query language introduced in   predicate youngfather could be defined by 
 rule  youngfather  x   and  father  x  y  
 age  x  z  
    z 1    
while  in query scheme  it would be is defined by 
 define youngfather  clause   xj  and 
 father  x  y  
 age  x  z  
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡{   z 1     in both  this application would also be legal: 
 and  father  x  y   age  x  z      z 1   
it must be noted however that  in   the query language is not a part of scheme. the syntax of query scheme being the same as that of logical scheme  the new types of expressions are: 
1 self-evaluating expressions 
in addition to the self-evaluating atoms introduced earlier  the self-evaluating atoms and  or and not stand for the usual operators defined on predicates. 
1 negative clause expressions 
negative clause expressions have the form:  negation   arguments    body   
where body is a single call expression. the value returned by the interpreter is a predicate containing a negative clause closure. negative clauses are used to represent negative call expressions  i.e. expressions prefixed with the not operator. 
exaaple 
the negative call expression 

 not  youngfather 'bill   will become the negative clause application 
  negation   x   youngfather  xjj bill  
1 	predicate expressions 
predicate expressions have the following form: 
 predicate clause expr.  ... 	clause expr.   
the value returned by the interpreter is a predicate. predicate expressions are thr non-closure representation of multiple clause predicates. they will be used to represent disjunctive calls expressions  see 1 . 
1 	call expressions 
call expressions now include conjunctive  disjunctive as well as negative calj expressions  
i.e. expressions whose head is equal to the atom and  or or not  respectively. these particular call expressions are treated as predicate applications whith a list of calls containing: 
- for each conjunction  a clause expression - for each disjunction  a predicate expression - for each negation  a negative clause expression. 
example 
 and  father  x  yj 
 not  young  x   
      or  healthy  x   young  y   j will be regarded as €;quivalent to 
  clause   x   father  x  y  
  negation   x   young  x j  x  
  predicate 
 clause   x  y   healthy  x   
	 clause   x  y  	 young  y    
 x  y   
 xj 
while a predicate call reduces to a predicate application  negative clause call.'.  are handled as in most prolog implementations  using the closed world assumption: a negative clause succeeds if its calls cannot be satisfied  and fails otherwise. this is reflected in an extension of function tryeach: 
function tryeach query pred callarg cont:ptr  :ptr ; begin 
if null pred  then tryeach: newlist else 
cat* typeofexpr car pred   of 
clauseexpr:tryeach: append try query car pred     
cailarg cont    
tryeach query cdr pr d    
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡callarg cont  ; negexprtif null trytquery car prad  callarg newli t   than tryeach:*append search query cont  . 
tryeach query.cdr pred   
callarg.cont   
else tryeach:*tryeach query cdr pred   callarg.cont  
 nd 
end; 
1. conclusions 
the interpretation of expressions involving function and predicate applications  as given above  mirrors the traditional use of both function applications within logic programming languages such an prolog  and predicate applications within query languages. it is by no means the only possible way to evaluate such expressions  but not until a clear denotational semantics is agreed upon will an operational semantics possibly be called correct. 
1. 