 
     in spite of the importance of well-understood semantics for knowledge representation systems  proponents of default logic have tended to ignore the lack of a general model-theoretic semantics for the formalism. this shortcoming is addressed by the presentation of such a model-theory. this characterization differs in some ways from traditional semantics. these differences are explained and motivated  and some applications of the semantics are discussed. 
1. introduction 
     in his development of default logic  reiter  provides a fixed-point characterization of the extensions of a default theory  but no model-theoretic semantics. default logic has attracted attention as a formal system for nonmonotonic reasoning. this is due  in part  to the intuitive clarity with which default information can be expressed. this clarity has ameliorated the delayed development of a semantics for the formalism; people have tended to be satisfied with intuitive characterizations of the extensions of default theories  together with the tarskian semantics of the individual extensions. 
     while this transition to model-theory may be relatively painless  there is still a need for a semantic characterization of default logic as a whole. etherington  1  1  loosely characterized the semantics of default logic  observing that defaults  can be viewed as extending the first-order knowledge about an incompletely-specified world.  they  select restricted subsets of the models of the underlying first-order theory . lukaszewicz  recently formalized this idea for a restricted class of default theories. in this 
paper  we generalize this work to cover the entire class of default theories. we also recast the semantics in a more intuitive and familiar form  making it more useful and accessible. proofs of the results quoted here may be found in  etherington 1 . 
     in what follows  we present a semantics for default logic. this is subsequently evaluated and shown to provide useful insight into the formalism. we begin by providing the briefest of introductions to default logic. more details can be found in  reiter 1 . 
1  parts of this work were done at the university of british 
columbia  and supported in part by an i.w. killam predoctoral 1 we omit the  m  preceding each 1   since they are redun scholarship and by nserc grant a1. dant in the positional notation. 
	etherington 	1 

1. a semantics for default theories 
     as mentioned earlier  default logic's semantics can be viewed in terms of restrictions of the set of models of the underlying theory. the first-order theory partially specifies a world  which is further specified by the defaults. each default can be viewed as extending the world-description by restricting the set of possible worlds assumed to contain the  rear  world  at the same time constraining how other defaults may further extend the world-description. lukaszewicz  1j formalizes this intuition for normal default theories. because of the well-behaved nature of these theories  this is straightforward. the resulting semantics amounts to considering the tarskian semantics of each of the partial extensions constructed by proceeding monotonically from w toward an extension by repeatedly satisfying the next  according to some arbitrary ordering of the defaults  applicable normal default by making its consequent true. if ever no more defaults from d are applicable  the resulting set of models characterizes an extension. since each step affirms a formula consistent with those affirmed previously  the set of models contracts monotonically. the intersection of the sets of models from each stage  or the last set  if there are only finitely many  is precisely the set of models of the extension. 
furthermore - for whatever purpose they may serve - the scheme does not apply to defaults with multiple justifications. thus  while lukaszewicz' semantics covers many cases  there are reasons to want a semantics that covers more than normal defaults. to this we now turn. 
     because of the failure of semi-monotonicity for nonnormal theories  simply applying one default after another does not  in general  lead to extensions. it is necessary to ensure that the application of each default does not violate the justifications of already-applied defaults. in the semantic domain  this means that lukaszewicz' simple approach of sequentially restricting the set of models of the firstorder theory  to satisfy each default in turn  will not necessarily lead to the set of models of an extension. etherington  develops extra machinery that  essentially  introduces a backtracking  or pruning  mechanism to the semantics to deal with this problem. while this extension is not particularly difficult conceptually  the technical details are somewhat formidable and the result appears  superficially  cially ad hoc. this is partly because the resulting semantics looks radically different from familiar tarskian or kripkean  or even circumscriptive  model-theories. we present an equivalent semantics below  in a very different guise. this new presentation makes the salient features of the 

semantics more apparent  as well as easing comparisons with the semantic theories of other nonmonotonic systems. 
1 	knowledge representation 

identified a property of sets of models  which we call stability  that provides such an account. 

　　in other words  a set of models is stable for a default theory   d.vv . if it is a maximal specialization of the set of models of w. and does not refute the justifications of any of the defaults used in the specialization. this notion of stability is related  but not directly analogous  to stability in autoepistemic theories  moore 1 . in particular  it incorporates elements of what moore calls  groundedness . for a detailed discussion of the relationship between default logic and autoepistemic logic  see  konolige 1 . 
　　the stable sets of models for a default theory provide a semantic interpretation for the theory. the soundness and completeness results for this semantics are given by theorems 1 and 1. respectively. 
1. discussion 
　　we are now faced with the question of how well motivated this semantics is. it is clearly different from traditional semantic theories. for example  in tarskian semantics the truth values of the atomic formulae determine those of every other formula. similarly  in kripke semantics  a set of worlds  an accessibility relation  and an assignment of truth values to the atomic formulae determine what is true in the structure. it is common to have some notion of a structure  and of what it means for any primitive construct of the language to be satisfied by a structure. logical operators and connectives are also given interpretations  allowing the truth of any construct of the language to be determined vis-a-vis any structure. finally  validity and satisfiability are defined in terms of these other notions. 
　　because of the indexical nature of defaults  it does not seem possible to provide them with such static interpretations. the proof-theory of default logic places upper-  as well as lower-  bounds on the states of knowledge that can be taken as satisfying the theory. these bounds  however  are determined by the nay knowledge is extended. this requires information that is not inherent in typical semantic structures. 
for example  imagine the defaults: 
　　another justification for a model-theory such as this comes from viewing defaults as operators that transform theories. on this view  the sets of models that make up each world-description correspond to particular theories  in the usual tarskian sense . the partial-orders associated with the defaults encode the transformations that the defaults induce on these theories. this view helps explain both why individual world-descriptions alone are insufficient to determine the satisfaction of defaults and why the semantics deals with satisfaction of default theories as a whole  rather than of individual defaults in isolation. 
　　there are related semantic characterizations in the literature. for example  there are the minimal-model semantics of circumscription  mccarthy 1  and of various other forms of closed-world reasoning  etherington 1 . these characterize the semantics of certain nonmonotonic formalisms in terms of the minimal elements of an ordered set of structures. the presentation above goes beyond this in the complexity of the structures concerned and in the  post-filtering  of the set of minimal models  but is closely related in spirit. this topic is taken up in detail in  etherington 1  1   but some of the flavour can be given in the space available here. 
　　the semantics of a theory under the various forms of  closed-world  assumption can be defined in terms of a restriction of the set of models of the underlying theory. according to some principle of minimization  typically according to the subset inclusion partial-order over the extensions of some predicates . the above model-theory for default logic similarly provides a principle for determining which models of a first-order theory characterize acceptable belief-sets  in this case based on maximal satisfaction of the set of defaults. there are several significant differences  however. first  rather than an ordering on individual 
	etherington 	1 
models  an ordering is imposed on sets of models. second  the ordering is defined in terms of accessibility via a default  rather than strictly in terms of general criteria and intrinsic features of the models themselves. finally  each extension is determined by a single extremum of the ordering  rather than by the set of all extrema. 
　　the first of these differences  as mentioned previously  is necessary to encode the constraints of the theory. it allows a distinction between what is believed and what is merely consistent with what is believed. it also allows a natural representation of the incompleteness of default theories  which - unlike the models of a first-order theory - do not decide every formula. 
　　the second deviation arises because defaults are general  non-homogeneous  inference rules. consequently  the partial-order relation is potentially more complex for default logic. lifschitz   1. 1  recent work allowing more general orderings may void this difference  but the question remains open. 
     individual extrema determine extensions as a result of the  brave   in mcdermott's  terminology  character of default logic default logic treats each extension as an acceptable set of beliefs  with the intention that a reasoner will somehow  choose  a single extension within which to reason about the world. other nonmonotonic formalisms  such as circumscription  mccarthy 1. 1   are based on  cautious** approaches that accept a default conclusion only if it occurs in all acceptable sets of beliefs. one can easily construct a variant of default logic that pursues a  cautious  course.  the converse is not obviously true for all  cautious  systems: see  etherington 1 .  such a system would define the theorems of a default theory to be those formulae true in all extensions  with the obvious change to the semantics: the theorems would then be defined as those formulae true in all models of all stable world-descriptions. 
1. conclusions 
　　default logic has occasionally been criticized for its lack of a general model-theoretic semantics. to answer this criticism we have presented such a semantics. we have also tried to show the appropriateness and utility of this semantics. we showed that it has merits that justify its use  and suggested it is a useful tool for comparing default logic with other nonmonotonic formalisms. 
　　our semantics differs from traditional  tarskian  model-theoretic semantics in two respects: it is global  and it is not structure-oriented. by  global  we mean that there is no notion of satisfaction of individual defaults independently of the theory in which they occur  and hence no notion of satisfaction of a theory as incremental satisfaction of its components . the  non-structure-oriented  nature corresponds to the observation that defaults serve less as components of theories than as operators taking theories into other  more complete  theories. we argue that these facets of the semantics are not only justifiable  but serve to highlight important features of the operation of the syntactic mechanisms of default logic. 
1 	knowledge representation 
