 domain model and pedagogical goals defined within that model. 
a . 	t h e decision-making m o d e l 
decision-making is a complex process involving the interaction between advisors and decision-makers  opponents and proponents  planners and executers  neus1 . we have made a number of approximations to actual timepressured  multi-agent decision-making  aimed at discretizing the actual continuous process of assessing information and arriving at decisions: 
  only one decision-maker  the dm  
  decisions occur at a single decision point 
  the dm's goals and priorities are encoded in the dm goal tree and are known before the decision point 
  decisions are made independently 
  the decision variables are known at the decision point 
  several plans are known at the decision point  only one of which  the choice  is executed 
  outcomes can be predicted from the decision variables and plan 
  goals are achieved or failed when a plan is executed 
b. pedagogical goals 
with these simplifications  we can define learning decisionmaking as learning 1 things: 
  what goals should be considered 
  what plans are available 
  what plans are appropriate for which goals 
  which goals are less important and should be sacrificed 
  which goals are more important and should be pursued 
c. pedagogical techniques 
our pedagogical techniques can be easily derived from our pedagogical goals: 
  introduce new goals  e.g. 'establish good relations with a country'  
  introduce that a goal is a subgoal of another goal or goals  e.g. 'give aid to a country' is a subgoal of 'acquire good relations'  
  introduce new plans  e.g. 'covert action'  
  introduce that a plan is instrumental to accomplishing a goal or goals  e.g 'covert action' is instrumental to 'establish control over another government'  
  introduce a relative importance relationship between 1 goals  e.g. 'establish good relations' is more important than 'communicate military superiority'  
　　these concepts must be acquired by the student through experience because our aim is not to establish a given ideology for the student  but to have them discover their own ideology. we only want to make that ideology more consistent and more detailed as the student experiences more and more cases. 
	i i . 	t h e 	s t u d e n t 	m o d e l 
for our student model representation we use carbonell's goal-trees  carb1 . we view goal trees as compiled hindsight: they summarize what decision variables were examined and what priorities were attached to achieving  avoiding  or preserving various states of the world in past cases. more formally  a goal tree  gt  is an abstract data structure that is a set of goals and two associated graphs: a goal/subgoal graph  gs-graph  and a relative-importance graph  rl-graph . the gs-graph is a directed acyclic graph with subgoal links  s-links  as arcs while the rigraph is a directed acyclic graph with transitive relativeimportance links  rl-links  as arcs. both graphs share the same goals as nodes. 
　　there are only 1 operations that can be performed on a gt  thereby limiting how the student goal tree  sgt  can grow: 
  add a new goal 
  add an rmink between 1 goals 
  add a subgoal link between 1 goals 
　　decider assumes students become aware of goals when they pick a plan where those goals succeed or fail. it assumes they prioritize two goals  with an rmink  when they pick a plan that sacrifices one goal and pursues the other. finally  it assumes they know a subgoal relationship when they pick a plan designed to achieve a subgoal of some goal in the dm goal tree. 
	i i i . 	c a s e s e l e c t i o n a n d 
p r e s e n t a t i o n 
there are a large number of choices of which concepts to introduce at any one time. the system has 1 methods for making the process more effective and efficient: building a pedagogical memory organization and using heuristics for determining which student model expansion opportunities are most important. 
a . 	m e m o r y 	organization 
the main factor that differentiates historians  students of history  and teachers is their memory organization. an expert historian organizes cases by political issues  goals of participants  and other functionally-useful categories. novices organize cases by extreme outcomes  emotional import  and personal relevance. good teachers organize cases around their pedagogical goals so they can quickly index to a group of cases to illustrate a point. 
　　we tried to capture aspects of both good teachers and good historians by organizing cases around pedagogically and functionally useful categories. we index cases on types 
of plans and the failures and successes of using those plans in different time eras  e.g. 'military attack' failures in the reagan administration due to violation of 'limit civilian casualties' . 
b. 	relative importance heuristics 
good teachers know how to introduce material appropriately so that students are not overwhelmed or bored. a system mirroring this expertise must know a priori what kinds of deficiencies in the student model are most important. for decider  this knowledge is captured in 1 relative importance heuristics: 
  introduce goals you think the student should find more important first 
  introduce a goal before introducing how that goal can be achieved 
  introduce goals before introducing their relative impor-tance 
  introduce the relative importance of two goals before in-troducing how those goals can be achieved 
　　history teachers often introduce points that they feel strongly about before points they feel undecided upon. heuristic #1 biases the student to learning the ideology of the teacher. heuristic #1 gives the student a chance to learn a whole range of issues before specializing. this is a special case of iower order factors before higher order factors'  coll1 . heuristic #1 gives the student a chance to learn the issues separately before learning how they interact. this is a form of the 'separate goals before goal interactions' heuristic found in some machine learning systems  suss1  hamm1 . heuristic #1 gives the student a chance to relate important issues before learning minor variants of them. 
decider picks goals and relationships to add to the 
sgt from the possible goal tree  pgt   guided by its relative importance heuristics. the pgt is a set of goals to be introduced  with any number of suggested s-links and rl-links between these goals. the pgt is meant to model the teacher's ideological biases. if the pgt has its links completely specified  decider will try to make the sgt look more and more like the pgt by giving a onesided presentation of the cases. if the pgt has no links  
	farrell 	1 
decider will try to show both sides of all issues. the system finds opportunities to expand the student model by comparing the sgt and the pgt and then uses those opportunities to index to cases. 
c. 	pedagogical opportunities 
there are 1 information sources that are consulted when assessing the pedagogically useful information in a case: 
  the dm goal tree 
  the choice taken 
  the list of sacrificed goals and pursued goals for the choice taken 
  the list of achieved goals and failed goals associated with each actual outcome of choice 
　　based on these knowledge sources  the system can derive a set of pedagogical opportunities for a case and index it in the database. the system knows it can introduce a goal when it succeeds or fails  a plan when it is the choice  and priorities between goals when two goals are active and the choice sacrifices one goal and pursues another. later  when the system needs to teach these concepts  it will retrieve the case according these indices. 
d. 	pedagogical u t i l i t y 
the final 'teacher-initiative algorithm' tries to introduce the cases in the database that are most pedagogically useful by consulting the student goal tree and possible goal tree according to the relative importance heuristics. 
　　the algorithm consists of 1 rules run serially; the first 1 rules embellish relationships between existing goals  the next 1 rules introduce new goals. each rule does 1 operations:  a  collect goals in the sgt or pgt   b  index to cases based on those goals. if there are cases found by indexing   c  choose the best case and  d  display parts of the case relevant to the goals. if one rule doesn't index to any cases  the next rule is tried. if all rules don't index to any cases  there are no pedagogically-useful cases left. 
1. introduce new rl-links 
 a. collect highest pairs of goals in gs-graph of the sgt with no rl-links between them. 
 b. index to cases based on relative importance of those goals 
 c. choose case with greatest number of ri-hnks used in deciding on choice. 
 d. display decision variables and outcomes relevant to both goals of the rl-links 
1. introduce new sub goal links 
 a. collect highest goals in rl-graph of sgt with missing subgoal-of links to higher goals 
 b. index based on failure and success of these goals 
 c. choose the case with the greatest number of subgoal-of links used in choice. 
 d. display only decision variables and outcomes relevant to the subgoal relationship. 
1. introduce important new goals 
a. collect highest unintroduced goals in the rl-graph of the pgt. b. index based on failure and success of these goals 
c. choose the case with the greatest number of unintroduced goals d. display only decision variables and outcomes relevant to unin-
1 	cognitive modeling 
troduced goals 
1. introduce next most specific goals 
 a. collect highest unintroduced goals in the gs-graph of the pgt. 
 b. index based on failure and success of these goals 
 c. choose the case with the greatest number of unintroduced goals 
 d. display only decision variables and outcomes relevant to those goals 
　　in each round  the teacher-initiative algorithm finds and displays a case. the student then picks from the list of plan options and observes the outcome. based on the student's choice  the sgt is updated. with each round  the sgt expands  the algorithm indexes on more specific goals  and the student must confront more difficult decision problems. 
	i v . 	c o n c l u s i o n 
the future of ai in education depends on making programs that understand the students they are teaching and tailor their presentation to the student's background. the ideal educational system will carefully monitor interactions with students and change the environment to make it more challenging without the student ever knowing they are being taught. when this happens  students will learn more than they would from teachers or textbooks  and ai systems will become an integral part of modern education. 
a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
thanks to drs. moon  etheridge  and westerfield for their detailed knowledge of history  gilles bloch for ideas  code  and the multi-media interface  and roger schank  for his guidance  maxims  and teaching expertise. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 carb1  carbonell  j.g. subjective understanding: computer models of belief systems. technical report 
#1  yale university dept. of c.s.  1 
 coll1  collins  a. and stevens  a.l. goals and strategies of interactive teachers. technical report #1  bolt barnek and newman  inc.  march 1 
 hamm1j hammond  k. case-based planning: an integrated theory. technical report #1  yale university dept. of c.s.  october 1 
 neus1  neustadt  r. and may  e. thinking in time. harvard univeristy press  1 
 scha1  schank  r.c. explanation patterns. lawrence erlbaum associates  hillsdale  new jersey  1. 
 suss1  sussman  g.j. a computer model of skill acquisition. american elsevier  new york  1. 
