 
default theories are a formal means of reasoning about defaults: what normally is the case  in the absence of contradicting information. autoepistemic theories  on the other hand  are meant to describe the consequences of reasoning about ignorance: what must be true if a certain fact is not known. although the motivation and formal character of these systems are different  a closer analysis shows that they bear a common trait  which is the indexical nature of certain elements in the theory. in this paper we compare the expressive power of the two systems. first  we give an effective translation of default theories into autoepistemic logic; default theories can thus be embedded into autoepistemic logic. a more suprising result is that the reverse translation is also possible: every set of sentences in autoepistemic logic can be effectively rewritten as a default theory. the formal equivalence of these two differing systems is thus established. some benefits of this analysis are that it gives an interpretive semantics to default theories  and yields insight into the nature of defaults in autoepistemic reasoning. 
1 introduction 
default reasoning can be informally described as jumping to conclusions based on what is normally the case. to say that ''power corrupts   for example  is to say that for typical x  in typical situations  x will be corrupted by the exercise of authority. 
default logic  is a formalization of default reasoning. 
an agent's knowledge base  kb   its collection of facts about the world  is taken to be a first-order theory. default reasoning is expressed by default rules of the form which can be read as  roughly   if a is provable from the k b   and b is consistent with it  then assume w as a default.  
unlike ordinary first-order inference rules  default rules are 
　　'this research was supported in part by contract n1-c1 from the office of naval research  and in part by a gift from the system development foundation. 
1 	knowledge representation 
defeasible: given kb containing just a  for example  the rule above would allow the inference of a;  but if -b is added to the k b   then the default rule is no longer applicable. default rules are thus nonmonotonic inference rules. 
   in default logic  the default rules operate at a metatheoretic level  as they are not expressed in the language of the k b   and are not inference rules within the k b . rather  they can be thought of as a means of taking a kb and transforming it into another one by the addition of sentences which are not logically derivable from the original. the transformation is defined in terms of a fix-point operator. this formulation of default reasoning leads us to ask several questions  which do not have readily apparent answers. the first concerns the expressiveness of the logic. certain simple types of defaults can be readily stated; for example   power corrupts  could be expressed as 
	powerful 	 x  	: 	mcorrupt x  
corrupt x  
but it is not clear that more complicated constructs could be accommodated. a case in point is conditional defaults  where a default rule is the conclusion of an implication; or defaults whose consequent is itself a default. because the default rules are not part of the logical language  there is no obvious  straightforward expression of these concepts. 
   the second question  related to the first  concerns the semantics of default theories. because defaults are expressed as inference rules operating in conjunction with a fixedpoint construction  it is not clear what the meaning of such objects as mb is. in some recent work  there have been proposals for a semantics for a restricted class of default theories  and for default theories in general . in both cases  the  semantics  is a reformulation of the k b transformation induced by the defaults in terms of restrictions on the models of the k b . although such a reformulation can provide an alternative view of the construction of default theories  it does not provide a semantics in the sense of providing an interpretation for default rules in a model structure  an interpretive semantics . indeed  because defaults are expressed as inference rules  they are not amenable to interpretation in this fashion. 
   our idea in this paper is to define default reasoning within the theory of the kb itself  rather than as a transformation of the k b . if we take the sentences of a kb to be 


	konollge 	1 



1 

1 	strongly grounded extensions 
one way of looking at the equation of proposition  1  is to see what type of reasoning it sanctions for reflective agents. an agent is justified in believing at least the consequences  under of her base set a  together with the assumptions lto and moore has called belief sets defined in this way grounded in a  because they are derived from a and assumptions about self-belief.1 however  this notion of groundedness is a fairly weak one  and we may wish to strengthen it. consider  for example  the base set 
 a has two ae extensions  which we call t and t'  see example 1 . t contains p and lp  while v does not contain p  but has  the difference between these is precisely whether lp is introduced as an assumption in the fixed-point equation  1 . for the belief set t  the agent's belief in p is grounded in her assumption that she believes p. if she chooses to believe p  she is justified in believing it precisely because she made it one of her beliefs. this certainly seems to be an anomolous situation  since the agent can  simply by choosing to assume that a fact about the world is true  be justified in that assumption without any objective information. 
　we would like to define a stronger notion of groundedness to eliminate this circularity of justifications. now consider the belief set definition'given in proposition 1: 

the set of ordinary sentences in the belief set is to. lto is the assumption that the agent believes all of these sentences. there would be no circular justifications if we replace lto by la in the fixed-point definition: we are assured that the derivation of facts about the world does not depend on the assumption of belief in those facts. the inclusion of la is necessary because an ideally reflective agent should at least believe that her base beliefs are beliefs. 
　from this discussion  we define the following notion of strongly grounded. 
definition 1 a set of sentences t is strongly grounded in a if it obeys the constraint: 

　a certain natural class of ae extensions is strongly grounded  as we will shorty show. but not every ae extension is strongly grounded. 
example 1 the base set has two extensions  only one of which is strongly grounded. the extension containing p cannot be strongly grounded  because p cannot be derived without the assumption of lp. 
   1 moore actually used a different but equivalent definition of groundedness; in his version  a set t is grounded in a if it satisfies: 

a more complicated case is the base set q  lq p}. again there are two extensions  one containing the ordinary formulas p and q  and one without them. for the former  lp and lq must be assumed together in order to justify p and q. because they cannot be derived without this assumption  this extension is not strongly grounded. 
the extension of a set of ordinary formulas a is strongly grounded  because every is in the first-order closure of a  and so in the stable set containing la. 
　strongly grounded extensions are conservative in what they assume about the world  given the base beliefs. as shown in example 1  the base set  has only one strongly grounded extension  for which p is not a belief. in fact  strong groundedness is closely related to another concept  the minimality of ordinary sentences in an extension. 
definition 1 an ae extension t of a is minimal for a if there is no other extension  of a such that 
　minimal extensions always exist for a base set a that has extensions. note that there can be more than one minimal 
extension for a given base set  e.g.  
p} has two extensions  both of which are minimal for a. 
the base set  has a single minimal exten-
sion  the one which doesn't contain p. minimal extensions have a natural appeal as candidates for ideal reflective belief sets  because they limit the assumptions an agent makes about the world. 
we now prove that  in fact  the minimal ae extensions of 
a are exactly the extensions strongly grounded in a. thus we have two independent motivations for choosing these extensions as ideal belief sets. 
proposition 1 an ae extension of a is strongly grounded in a if and only if it is minimal. stronglygrounded extensions obey the equation: 

1 	n o r m a l f o r m 
the base sentences a of an ae extension can be put into a normal form that will be useful in the next section. we will use the following two facts about sentences of c in establishing a normal form. 
1. every ae sentence is equivalent to a sentence containing modal atoms only of the form lo/  or -lo  where 
s an ordinary sentence. 
1. is equivalent to 
　these equivalences hold when considering interpretations whose modal indices are stable sets; see konolige . 

　the first of these facts enables us to consider only base sets a with no nesting of modal operators. as we hinted in the last section  the nesting of l-operators lends no extra expressive power to the language. 
　in deriving a normal form for a set of sentences a  we first convert a to an equivalent set without nesting of modal operators  and then  using first-order valid operations  extract all modal atoms from the scope of quantifiers. 
proposition 1 every set of l-scntcnces is equivalent  under   to a set in which each sentence is of the form: 
 1  
with and w all being ordinary sentences. any of the disjunct*  except for may be absent. 
1 d e f a u l t a n d a e e x t e n s i o n s 
in this section we briefly review default theories  and then present an effective syntactic translation of an arbitrary default theory w into a set of sentences w of ae logic. the main results of this paper are:  1  every default theory has a corresponding ae logic base set a whose minimal extensions are exactly the extensions of the default theory; and  1  every ae logic base set a has a corresponding default theory whose extensions are the minimal ae extensions of a. the translation between the two systems is effective and local  that is  each sentence or default rule is translated in isolation from the others.1 
1 	default extensions 
as defined by reiter   a default theory is a pair  tv  d   where tv is a set of first-order sentences  and d is a set of defaults  each of which has the form: 

a default d is satisfied by a set of sentences t if either  1  a is not in t or some is in t  the premisses of the rule are not satisfied   or  1  is in t  the conclusion is satisfied . a default extension of  tv  .d   informally  is a minimal set of sentences containing tv  closed under firstorder consequence  and satisfying all the defaults d. 
　if none of orcontain free variables  then the default is called closed. an open default is treated as a schema for the set of closed defaults that are its substitution instances. we thus need only consider closed defaults  as long as we allow default theories to contain a denumberably infinite set of them. 
default extensions have many of the same properties as 
ae extensions. there may be one  no  or many extensions of a default theory. the following examples are analogous to the ae extensions in example 1. 
example 1 the default extension for the theory  {p}   no defaults  is exactly the first-order consequences of p. 
the theory  has one extension  the set of all firstorder valid sentences. p is not an element of this extension. this differs from the case of ae extensions for there is an extension which contains p. 
the theory  has two extensions; in one of them  p is true and q is not  and in the other the reverse. 
　these examples are instructive by comparison to ae extensions. if the theory  w d  contains no defaults  d empty   then there is exactly one extension  which is the first-order part of the ae extension of w. in general  a default of the form corresponds to the ae sentence thus  in the third default theory of 
the example  there are two default extensions  corresponding to the first-order parts of the two ae extensions of 
 however  note the difference in 
the case of the second default theory of this example. the default p : has only one extension  in which p does not appear. the ae set has two extensions; the 
one in which p appears arises from the ability of ae extensions to support circular justifications  assuming lp  the sentence lp  p gives a derivation of p . so although it appears that default extensions have corresponding ae extensions for a suitable transformation of the defaults  not all ae extensions will have corresponding default extensions. 
in fact  as we show below  default extensions correspond to minimal ae extensions. 
1 	defaults as self-belief 
we now define a simple transformation from a default theory  tv  d  to a set of ae sentences a  such that the default extensions of  tv  d  are exactly the kernels  the first-order part  of the minimal ae extensions of a. thus  as we prove   there is an exact correspondence between default extensions for  tv  d  and minimal ae extensions for a. the transformation is: 

as we mentioned in the introduction  this is the natural interpretation of defaults in terms of introspective knowledge. a paraphrase of the ae sentence for agent would be something like the following:  if i know that a is true  and i have no knowledge that any of the  are false  then must be true.  the key phrase has been emphasized; it is in reasoning about what is not known that the nonmonotonic character of ae logic appears. however  the role of the other parts of the sentence  also deserves closer scrutiny; for example  why does w appear as the consequent  and not  as it stands  this is the transformation that yields the correspondence between default 
1 

and ae extensions. we will comment more extensively on the form transformation later  after the basic results are presented. 
　in a default  we allow either  or any of the  to be missing; the corresponding ae sentence just deletes the appropriate conjunct in the antecedent. the conclusion of the default must always be present  defaults with no conclusion are senseless . let  be the set of sentences formed by taking the transforms of defaults p; we call the set {w d'} the ae transform of w d . 
　default extensions are the fixed points of an operator r v . this operator is meant to formalize the informal criteria given above for the extensions of  w  d   namely  it should contain w  be closed under first-order consequence  and satisfy all of d. let v be an arbitrary set of firstorder sentences. then t v  is the smallest set satisfying the following properties: 
dl. 
d1. t v  is closed under first-order consequence.1 
d1. if t v . 
extensions are fixed-points of t  i.e.  any set e satisfying 
e - t e . as a fixed-point definition  it is similar to the fixed-point account of minimal ae extensions  proposition 1 . the parameter of t  v  essentially fills the role of the assumptions since -b must not be present in order for the default to be satisfied. minimality is part of the definition of t v   the least set satisfying the conditions d1-d1 ; if it were excluded  then default extensions corresponding to non-minimal ae extensions would be present. 
　now consider a particular default theory  w  d} and an associated extension e = t e . e is closed under firstorder consequence  and hence is the kernel of a unique stable set. this stable set is closely related to the ae transform of  w d : it is a minimal stable set containing the ae transform. we prove this result as the following proposition. 
proposition 1 let  w d  be a default theory  with a = {w  d'} its ae transform. suppose e is an extension of the default theory. then e is the kernel of a minimal stable set containing a and 
　using this result  we can show that a default theory and its ae transform have the same extensions. 
theorem 1 let a be the ae transform of a default theory  a set e is a default extension of  if and only if it is the kernel of a minimal ae extension of a. 

　*in the original definition  this is stated in terms of deduction rather than logical consequence. 
1 	semantics 
the semantics of ae sentences is an interpretive semantics  in the sense that a sentence is true or false in an interpretation  the interpretation of modal atoms is given by the modal index t according to equation 1. the interpretations themselves are straightforward augmentations of standard first-order interpretations. the problematic characteristics of ae logic  from semantical point of view  occur in the fixed-point definition of extensions  1   in which only interpretations containing a certain modal index are considered. so  although it is hard to construct and analyze extensions  all of our ordinary intuitions about the meaning of the language ♀  its semantics with respect to individual interpretations  is still available. 
　to give an example of this sort: consider the difference between the two default sentences 
   lbird{tweety  and 
bird tweety  
the first of these states that in any interpretation in which 
bird tweety  is a belief  and -fly  tweety  is not a belief  fly  tweety  will be true. the antecedent of the second default is less strict: it states only that bird tweety  must be true. the second default permits case analysis of a type not sanctioned by the first. for example  suppose it is known that either tweety is a bird  or that tweety is housebroken  houseb tweety  . in every interpretation in which  is not a belief  and the second default sen-
tence is true  houseb  tweety  fly  tweety  is true. on the other hand  nothing can be concluded by assuming the first default sentence is true  because bird tweety  may not be a belief. as etherington  1  p. 1  has noted  the second sentence seems more in accord with our intuitions about the way defaults should work. 
　another example of the utility of interpretive semantics is in the concepts of equivalence and substitution. two formulas and of are equivalent if they have the same truthvalue in all models. because the definition of ae extensions is framed in terms of the interpretive semantics   can be substituted anywhere occurs in a base set a  
without changing the ae extensions of a. we used this fact extensively in arriving at the normal form for ae sentences in section 1. 
1 	expressiveness 
the question of expressiveness can be phrased as follows: is it the case that default sentences of the type  1   or perhaps other ae sentences involving complicated constructions such as embedded l-operators  have no counterpart in default theories  on the face of it this would seem a plausible conjecture  since the l-operator is part of the language  while default rules are not. however  it turns out that ae logic is no more expressive than default logic: there is an effective transformation of any base set of ae sentences into a default theory  such that the default extensions are exactly the kernels of the minimal ae extensions. to show this  we rely on the fact  see proposition 1  that every set of sentences of c has an equivalent normal form in which every sentence looks like: 
		 1  
where all of  and w are ordinary sentences  is always present  and any of the modal atoms may be missing . 
　given any set of l-sentences a in normal form  it is possible to effectively construct a corresponding default theory  w  d   in the following way. any  that appears without other disjuncts is put into w. all other sentences are transformed into defaults  in the manner indicated by equation 1. it is easy to see that a is the ae transform of {w  d ; by theorem 1  these two have essentially the same extensions. more precisely  we have proven the following theorem: 
theorem 1 for any set of sentences a of c  there is an effectively constructable default theory  w  d  such that e is a default extension of  w  d  if and only if it is the kernel of a minimal extension of a. 
　so  suprisingly  default theories have precisely the same expressiveness as ae logic over the modal language c. however  two caveats should be noted. 
　the first is that the expression of various statements about defaults or autoepistemic reasoning may be much more natural in l  because the form of sentences is much less constrained than that of the default inference rules. for example  the second type of default  equation 1  is translated into the default rule: 
		 1  
the atom bird tweety  does not appear in the antecedent of the default  but somewhat unnaturally in the consequent. 
　the second caveat is that  if we extend c by allowing quantifying-in  i.e.  expressions such as  in all likelihood theorem 1 will no longer hold. there are a number of reasons to think this; perhaps the most compelling is levesque's observation  that in the presence of quantifying-in  there are sentences with nested belief operators that cannot be reduced to sentences without them. 
1 c o n c l u s i o n 
given the current proliferation of nonmonotonic formalisms  it seems wise to establish comparisons among them  especially regarding expressiveness. the results presented here show that there is an exact correspondence between ae logic over c and default theories. there is an effective  local translation between the two that preserves theoremhood  in that the default extensions are the firstorder part of the minimal ae extensions. 
1 a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
many thanks to david etherington  joseph halpern  hector levesque  karen myers  and raymond reiter for reading and commenting on drafts of this paper. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 etherington  d. w. reasoning with incomplete information: investigations of non-monotonic reasoning. phd thesis  university of british columbia  vancouver  british columbia  1. 
 hintikka  j. impossible possible worlds vindicated. journal of philosophical logic  1-1  1. 
 imielinski  t. results on translating defaults to circumscription. in proceedings of the international joint conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  los angeles  1. 
 konolige  k. on the relation between default logic and autoepistemic theories  forthcoming technical note  sri artificial intelligence center  menlo park  california  1. 
 levesque  h. j. a formal treatment of incomplete knowledge bases. technical report 1  fairchild artificial intelligence laboratory  palo alto  california  1. 
 lukaszewicz  w. two results on default logic. in proceedings of the american association of artificial intelligence  pages 1  university of california at los angeles  1. 
 mccarthy  j. circumscription - a form of nonmonotonic reasoning. artificial intelligence  1-1   1. 
 moore  r. c. semantical considerations on nonmonotonic logic. artificial intelligence  1   1. 
 reiter  r. a logic for default reasoning. artificial intelligence  1-1   1. 
 stalnaker  r. c. a note on nonmonotonic modal logic. 1. department of philosophy  cornell university. 
1 
     1 imielinski  defines the weaker notion of a modular translation: the defaults and first-order parts must be translated independently. obviously  any local translation is modular. 
　---------------

　------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

1 	knowledge representation 





1 	knowledge representation 

konolige 

konolige 

konolige 

konolige 

konolige 

	1 	knowledge representation 

konolige 

	1 	knowledge representation 

