 
the outline of a unified theory of local pragmatics phenomena is presented  including an approach to the problems of reference resolution  metonymy  and interpreting nominal compounds  and the tacitus system embodying this theory is described. the theory and system are based on the use of a theorem prover to draw the appropriate inferences from a large knowledge base of commonsense and technical knowledge. issues of control and minimality are discussed. 
1 	the problems 
in the messages about breakdowns in machinery that are being processed by the tacitus system at sri international  we find the following sentence: 
we disengaged the compressor after the lube oil alarm. 
this sentence  like virtually every sentence in natural language discourse  confronts us with difficult problems of interpretation. first  there are the reference problems; what do  the compressor  and  the lube oil alarm  refer to. then there is the problem of interpreting the implicit relation between the two nouns  lube oil   considered as a multiword  and  alarm  in the nominal compound  lube oil alarm . there is also a metonymy that needs to be expanded. an alarm is a physical object  but  after  requires events for its arguments. we need to coerce  the lube oil alarm  into  the sounding of the lube oil alarm . there is the syntactic ambiguity problem of whether to attach the prepositional phrase  after the lube oil alarm  to  the compressor  or to  disengaged . all of these problems we have come to call problems in  local pragmatics . they seem to be specifically linguistic problems  but the traditional linguistic methods in syntax and semantics have not yielded solutions of any generality. 
　the difficulty  as is well-known  is that to solve these problems we need to use a great deal of arbitrarily detailed general commonsense and domain-specific technical knowledge. a theory of local pragmatics phenomena must therefore be r. theory about how knowledge is used. the aim of our research has been to develop a unified theory of local 
1 	knowledge representation 
pragmatics  encompassing reference resolution  metonymy  the interpretation of nominal compounds and other implicit and vague predicates  and the resolution of syntactic  lexical  and quantifier scope ambiguities  based on the drawing of appropriate inferences from a large knowledge base. 
the tacitus system is intended to embody that the-
ory. its specific aim is the interpretation of casualty reports  casreps   which are messages in free-flowing text about breakdowns in mechanical devices. more broadly  however  our aim is to develop general procedures  together with the underlying theory  for using commonsense and technical knowledge in the interpretation of written  and spoken  discourse regardless of domain. 
　the tacitus system has four principal components. first  a syntactic front-end  the dialogic system  translates sentences of a text into a logical form in first-order predicate calculus  described in section 1. second  we are building a knowledge base  specifying large portions of potentially relevant knowledge encoded as predicate calculus axioms  hobbs et al.  1 . third  the tacitus system makes use of the kads theorem prover  developed by mark stickel  stickel  1 . finally  there is a pragmatics module  including a local pragmatics component  which uses the theorem prover to draw appropriate inferences from the knowledge base  thereby constructing an interpretation of the text. 
　to interpret a sentence  the local pragmatics component determines from the logical form of the sentence what interpretation problems need to be solved. logical expressions are constructed for each local pragmatics phenomenon the sentence exhibits  and the proofs of these expressions constitute the interpretation of the sentence. where there is more than one interpretation  it is because there is more than one proof for the expressions. interpretation is thus viewed as crucially involving deduction. 
　in section 1  we describe the three of the phenomena we are addressing-reference  metonymy  and nominal compounds. for each  we describe the expression that needs to be proved  and for the last two  we describe how current standard techniques can be seen as special cases of our general approach. 

1 	local pragmatics phenomena 
1 	reference 
entities are referred to in discourse in many guises-proper nouns  definite  indefinite  and bare noun phrases of varying specificity  pronouns  and omitted or implicit arguments. moreover  verbs  adverbs  and adjectives can refer to events  conditions  or situations. the problem in all of these cases is to determine what is being referred to. here we confine ourselves to definite noun phrases  although tacitus handles the other cases in a manner described briefly in section 1. in the sentence 
the alarm sounded. 
the noun phrase  the alarm  is definite  and the hearer is therefore expected to be able to identify a unique entity that the speaker intends to refer to. restating this in theorem-proving terminology  the natural language system should be able to prove constructively the expression 

it must find an x which is an alarm in the domain model. 
if it succeeds  it has solved the reference problem.1 
1 	metonymy 
metonymy is very common in discourse; few sentences lack examples. certain functions frequently provide the required coercions. wholes are used for parts  tokens for types  and objects for their names. nunberg  1   however  has shown that there is no finite set of possible coercion functions. the relation between the explicit and implicit referents can be virtually anything. 
　every morpheme in a sentence conveys information that corresponds to a predication  and every predicate imposes selectional constraints on its arguments. since entities in the text are generally the arguments of more than one predicate  there could well be inconsistent constraints imposed on them. to eliminate this inconsistency  we interpose  as a matter of course  another entity and another relation between any two predications. thus  when we encounter in the logical form of a sentence 

　　1 in this paper we ignore the problem of the uniqueness of the entity referred to. a hint of our approach is this: if the search for a proof is heuristically ordered by salience  then the entity found will be the uniquely most salient. 
for some entity z and some relation q. the predication q z  a  functions as a kind of buffer  or impedence match  between the explicit predications with their possibly inconsistent constraints. in many cases  of course  there is no inconsistency. the argument satisfies the selectional constraints imposed by the predicate. in this case  z is a and q is identity. this is the first possibility tried in the implemented system. where this fails  however  the problem is to find what z and q refer to  subject to the constraint  imposed by the predicate after  that z is an event. tacitus thus modifies the logical form to 

find an event z bearing some relation q to the alarm. 
　the most common current method for dealing with metonymy  e.g.  in the team system  grosz et al.  1   is to specify a small set of possible coercion functions  such as narne-of. this method can be captured in the present framework by treating q not as a predicate variable  but as a predicate constant  and expressing the possible coercions in axioms like the following: 

that is  if x is the name of y  then y can be coerced to x. this is the method we have implemented in our initial version of the tacitus system. 
1 	nominal compounds 
to interpret a nominal compound  like  lube oil alarm   it is necessay to discover the implicit relation between the nouns.1 some relations occur quite frequently in nominal compounds-part-of'  location  purpose. moreover  when the head noun is relational  the modifier noun is often one of the arguments of the relation. levi  1  argued that these two cases encompassed virtually all nominal compounds. however  downing  1  and others have shown that virtually any relation can occur. a lube oil alarm  for example  is an alarm that sounds when the pressure of the lube oil drops too low. 
　to discover the implicit relation  one must prove constructively from the knowledge base the existence of some possible relation  which we may call nn  between the entities referred to by the nouns: 

　in our framework  we can implement the approach that hypothesiszes a small set of possible relations  by taking nn to be not a predicate variable but a predicate constant  and encoding the possibilities in axioms like 


1 	knowledge representation 


1 	o t h e r i s s u e s 
　syntactic ambiguity: within this framework we have also implemented a treatment of the most common syntactic ambiguities. attachment ambiguity problems are translated into constrained reference problems by introducing an existentially quantified variable representing  say  the subject of the prepositional phrase  constrained by a disjunction listing the possible attachment sites. 
　given and new: a problem that arises in the casreps in a severe form  since determiners are often omitted  is the problem of determining whether an entity referred to is definite or indefinite  that is  given or new. in 
metal particles in oil sample and strainer. 
 oil sample  is indefinite  or new  while  oil strainer  is definite  or given . this problem occurs in general discourse as well  especially for nonnominal reference. our approach is to assert the existence of each entity  but with a cost determined by the type of reference-in increasing order  indefinite  nonnominal  bare  or definite. if this assertion  called a referential implicature  is required in the proof that constitutes the interpretation  the entity is new; if not  it is given. 
　minimality: axioms can be assigned a cost  depending upon their salience. high salience  low cost axioms would then be tried first. short proofs are naturally tried before long proofs. thus  a cost depending on salience and length is associated with each proof  and hence with each interpretation. where  as usually happens  there is more than one possible interpretation  the better interpretations are supported by less expensive proofs. a second criterion for good interpretations is to favor the minimal solution in the sense that the fewest new entities and relations needed to be hypothesized. for example  the argument-relation pattern in nominal compounds  as in  oil sample   is minimal in that no new implicit relation need be hypothesized; the one already given by the head noun will do. in metonymy  the identity coercion is favored for the same reason  and 
1 this technique is due to mark stickel. shorter coercions are favored over longer ones. these ideas at least give us a start on the very difficult problem of choosing the best interpretation. 
a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
the authors have profited from discussions with mark 
stickel  doug edwards  bill croft  fernando pereira  ray perrault  stu shieber  and mabry tyson about this work. the research was funded by the defense advanced research projects agency under office of naval research contract n1-c-1  as part of the strategic computing program. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 downing  pamela  1.  on the creation and use of english compound nouns   language  vol. 1  no. 1  pp. 1. 
 finin  timothy  1.  the semantic interpretation of nominal compounds   report t-1  coordinated science laboratory  university of illinois  urbana  illinois  june 1. 
 crosz  barbara j.  douglas e. appelt  paul martin  fernando c. n. pereira and lorna shinkle  1.  the team natural-language interface system   final report  project 1  artificial intelligence center  sri international  menlo park  california. 
 hobbs  jerry r.  1.  an improper treatment of 
quantification in ordinary english   proceedings  1st annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics  cambridge  massachusetts  pp. 1. 
 hobbs  jerry r.  william croft  todd davies  douglas edwards  and kenneth laws  1.  commonsense metaphysics and lexical semantics   proceedings  1th 
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics  new york  june 1.  pp. 1. 
 levi  judith  1. the syntax and semantics of complex nominals  academic press  new york. 
 nunberg  geoffery  1.  the pragmatics of reference   ph. d. thesis  city university of new york  new york. 
 stickel  mark e.  1.  a nonclausal connectiongraph theorem-proving program   proceedings  aaai-
1 national conference on artificial intelligence  pittsburgh  pennsylvania  pp. 1. 
	hobbs and martin 	1 
　　　1 some nominal compounds can of course be treated as single lexical items. this case is not interesting and is not considered here. 
	hobbs and martin 	1 
　---------------

　------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

