 
   any gantral model-based vision system must somehow select a few serious candidates from its model base before applying model-directed processing. this is necessary for both efficiency and recognising 'similar* models  i.e. handling data errors  generic models and previously unseen objects . this paper shows how one can integrate knowledge of object properties  structural and generic relations to create a network computation that performs model invocation. the paper demonstrates successful invocation in a scene containing a self and externally obscured puma robot. 
1 in trod net ion 
one important and difficult task for a general model based vision system is invoking the correct model. because of the potentially huge number of possible objects  it is imperative that only a few serious candidates are selected for detailed consideration. visual understanding must also include a pre-attentive element  because all models need be considered  yet active  direct comparison is computationally infeasible. further  previously unseen objects  flexible objects seen in new configurations  incompletely visible objects  e.g. occlusion  and object variants  e.g. flaws  generics  new exemplars  etc.  require selecting models that are  close  to the data. 
   model invocation is not just a visual problem  e.g. integrating cues while doing crossword pussies or invoking situation schemas   but here only the visual problem is considered. invocation associates clues that suggest rather than verify. it may support the  seeing* of nonexistent  but highly plausible objects  as in surrealist art. 
   to date  little work has been done on sophisticated model invocation in the context of 1d vision. using easily measured properties to select potential models fails in large model bases  because many objects share similar properties. further  data errors  generic objects  object substructure and occlusion complicate indexing. 
   arbib  l  proposed a schema-based invocation process with activation levels based on evidence  competition and cooperation from related activity. marr  1  considered direct search in a model-base linked using specificity  adjunct and parent relations. hinton and lang  evaluated a connectionist model of invocation for 1d models  treating both model and data feature evidence identically. feldman and ballard  proposed a detailed computational model integrating evidence from spatially coincident property pairings. 
   this paper describes a solution that builds on these  embodying ideas on parallel networks  object description and representation in the context of 1d models and 1d visual information. the result is a plausibility calculation in a network structured according constraints defined by the structural  generic and context relationships. 
acknowledgements 
   portions of this work were supported by a university of edinburgh studentship. thanks go to r. beattie  j. hallam  d. hogg  j. howe  m. orr and many others. 
1 	problem context 
these results are from the imagine project  which investigated recognising 1d objects starting from 1d scene information. earlier stages of processing include: 
1. exploiting 1d feature continuity to overcome occlusion  
1. grouping individual surfaces to form primitive and depth aggre-gated surface clusters . 
1. describing the significant scene features  curves  surfaces and volumes  by their 1d properties. 
model invocation happens at this point. after invocation  modeldirected processes orient and verify the hypotheses. 
   recognition starts from 1/1d sketch -like data segmented into surface patches of nearly uniform shape and separated by various shape or obscuring boundaries. as no well-developed processes produce this data yet  the program input is from computer augmented  handsegmented test images. the paper illustrates the invocation process using a test image of a puma robot with its gripper obscured  using the surfaces shown in figure 1. the scene has flexibly connected rigid solids  has a variety of curved surfaces and the robot is both externally and self-obscured. 
   object models are primarily structural  with features attached by reference frame transformations. the main primitives are the surface patch  surface   characterised by consistent surface shape and polycurve boundary  and hierarchical groupings of surfaces  assembly . 
four additional representations are added for invocation: 
1. generic relationships between models  
1. major features of each assembly grouped according to viewpoint  1. relevant properties with typical values for each structure  and 
1. weighting factors modifying the importances of the properties and relationships. 

figure 1: test scene surface regions 
	fisher 	1 

1 	theory: evidence and association 
model invocation is based on a plausibility value  in the range  -1   measuring how well an object model explains an image structure. models are invoked when the plausibility is positive and sero is treated as a distinguished value. plausibility is used because: 
  some measure of similarity between objects is needed  
  it allows weak evidence support from associated hypotheses  
  it supports accumulating unrelated evidence types  and 
  it degrades gracefully as data descriptions fail because of noise  occlusion or algorithmic limits. 
   the basic structural unit of invocation is the model instance   a given model in a given image context. contexts are important because object features are usually connected or nearby. they define where image data can come from and what structures can provide supporting evidence. here  the two types of contexts are the surface hypothesis and the surface cluster  which localise evidence for surface and assembly models respectively. 
the inputs to invocation are: 
  a set {c } of image contexts. 
  a set {{d; v  ct } of image descriptions of type  d  with value  v  for the features in these contexts. 
  a database {   - m mkfwtjk } of model-to-model  af  associations of different types  t  with weights  w/ . 
  a database {  m{ d y /   tt t i  w u  } } of desired description constraints for each model  where d is the description type   / u  is the range of acceptable values and w is a weight. 
the output of invocation is a set {{m tcttpt  } of plausibility measures for each model instance in each image context. 
   the plausibility of a hypothesis is a function of direct evidence from observed features and indirect evidence from associated hypotheses. for example  a toroidal shape is direct evidence for a bicycle wheel  whereas a nearby bicycle frame is indirect evidence. 
   direct evidence is acquired from image data  e.g. 1d properties such as surface curvatures  axis orientations  etc. . indirect evidence comes from associations  of which six types have been analysed here. the four distinguished types are supertype  subtype  supercomponent and subcomponent  the fifth is the competing identity relation and the sixth is the default association category. the nature of the influence depends on the type of the relationship. for example  an object necessarily requires most of its subcomponents to be present  whereas the reverse does not hold. finally  a computation that integrates the seven evidence types to produce a single plausibility value is given. 
   when defining the different evidence computations below  a set of constraints and a satisfying function is given. unfortunately  the constraints are never sufficient to implicate a unique function. 
1 	direct evidence 
direct evidence is calculated by comparing data properties  from within the appropriate image context  with model requirements. some constraints on this computation are: 
  the contribution of a datum should be a function of its salience and the degree to which it meets its requirements. 
  each datum is considered only for the best requirement. 
  not all requirements need data  e.g. because of occlusion . 
  every datum must satisfy a constraint  if any of the appropriate type exist. 
   based on these requirements  the following function evaluates a datum according to a requirement: 
let: 
n = nominal value  from model   r = nominal range  from model   w m importance weight  from model   d = data value 
1 perception 
e as evaluation 
a description's evaluation is given by the requirement it fits best. 
   because many models are likely to share some properties  any negative evidence should seriously reduce the plausibility  when integrating the individual evaluations. however  it should not cause immediate rejection  because the evidence may have arisen from  e.g.  partially obscured structures. here  integration uses a weighted average that incorporates negative evidence doubly. 
   this algorithm defines a network fragment linking observed properties to model instances. the main processing elements are the property match evaluation   max    sum  and  weight  functions  with interconnections as defined by the above algorithm. the other algorithms below also have this property. 
1 	supercomponent associations 
this association gives indirect evidence for a subcomponent  given the possible existence of an object of which it is a part. it is only suggestive  because the presence of the supercomponent implies that all subcomponents arc present  though not necessarily visible   but not that an image structure is any particular component. other constraints on the relation are: 
  the more plausible the object  the more plausible its subcom-ponents. 
  there is only one true superobject of any subcomponent. 
  the object context must contain the subcomponent contexts. 
   one function meeting these constraints chooses the largest plausibility of any supercomponent in this or any larger context. 
1 	subcomponent associations 
this association supports the presence of an object  given only the presence of its subcomponents  but not requiring any geometrical relationship . for a 1d object  only some of its subcomponents are typically visible from any particular viewpoint  implicating key feature groupings for integrating evidence. 
some constraints on this computation are: 
  the more subcomponents present and the more plausible each subcomponent is  the more plausible the object is. 
  subcomponents are seen in viewpoint dependent groups  listing visible components according to salient viewpoint . 
  the subcomponent context must lie within the object context. the subcomponent computation occurs in three stages: 
1. find the most plausible candidate for each subcomponent in the given context and subcontexts. 
1. integrate the plausibilities of all subcomponents seen in each viewpoint grouping  weighted to express relative importance . 
1. pick the viewpoint grouping with the highest plausibility 1 identity inhibition 
a structure seldom has more than one likely identity  unless the identities are generically related. hence  an identity is inhibited by unrelated identities having high plausibilities in the same context. inhibition also comes from the same identity in subcontexts  to force invocation to occur only in the smallest containing context. other constraints on the inhibition computation are: 
  only positive evidence for other identities inhibits. 
  inhibition varies with the plausibility of competing identities. 
these constraints suggest the following computation: 
  pick the largest plausibility of all generically un-related hypothe-ses in the same context and all hypotheses of ths same type in sub-contexts. call this p. 
  if p   1  then the inhibitory plausibility is -p; otherwise no inhibition is applied. 

1 	evidence integration 
the seven evidence types are integrated to give the plausibility value for the model hypothesis. some constraints on this computation are: 
  directly related evidence  direct  subcomponent and subtype  should have greater weight. 
  other indirect evidence should be somewhat incremental. 
  only types with evidence are used. 
  if there is no direct  subtype or subcomponent evidence  then evidence integration produces no result. 
  direct and subcomponent evidence are equivalent and the weaker of the two should be taken. 
  strong supercomponent or association evidence supports. 
  the plausibility of a type must be at least that of the subtype and at most that of the supertype. 
  if other identities are competing  they inhibit the plausibility. 
one function meeting these constraints is: 
let: 
then: 	

status 
e - invocation in exact context 
l - invocation in larger context than necessary 
	i - 	invalid invocation 
notes 
1 - because trashcan outer surface very similar 
1 - similarity with upper arm model 
1 - assembly with single surface has poor discrimination 
1 - not large enough context to contain all components 

1 	evaluation 
ideally  invocation should select all correct models in only the correct context and the only false invocations are those  similar  to the true ones. further the computation should converge. as the network structure is scene dependent and non-linear  only minor mathematical results have been found so far  concerning: 
  relative ranking between the same model in different contexts  
  correct direct  subcomponent and generic evidence always im-plies invocation  and 
  the number of direct evidence properties to use. 
   so  a performance demonstration is presented  using a network created from the test scene  showing that  here  invocation is effective. 
   table 1 lists all invoked assembly models and the associated image regions  ranked by plausibility.  invoked surface models are not listed.  these were computed in a network containing 1 model-data pairing nodes for 1 assembly models in 1 surface clusters  and 1 nodes for 1 surface models in 1 data surfaces. 
   invocation was selective with 1 assembly invocations of a possible 1  where 1 of the 1 invocations were correct and 1 were in the smallest appropriate context. all appropriate invocations occurred. of the incorrect  only 1 were unjustified  notes 1 and 1 in table 1 . 
from the surface model invocations  not shown   1 invocations were made out of 1 possible. of these  1 were correct  1 were justifiably incorrect because of similarity and 1 were inappropriate invocations. clearly  invocation worked well here. 
the chief causes for improper invocation were: 
  not large enough context to contain all subcomponents while having structures not contained in the successful context  and 
  superficial similarity between features. 
1 discussion 
the invocation process discussed here integrates the major evidence types and eliminates the need for exhaustive model-directed testing while still maintaining access to all models. by basing invocation on propagated plausibility values  the data to model comparison computation has been regularised  and is amenable to parallelism. to summarise  this paper has: 
  defined a formal basis for visual model invocation. 
  proposed constraints on the effect of different evidence types. 
  proposed surfaces and surface clusters as the contexts in which to consider invocation. 
  demonstrated a successful implementation of the theory in a simplified 1d context. 
1 bibliography 
1. arbib  m. a.  local organising processes and motion schemas in visual perception  in hayes  et.al.  machine intelligence 1  
pp1  1. 
1. feldman  j. a.  ballard  d. h.  computing with connections  in human and machine vision  beck  hope and rosenfeld  eds   academic press  pp 1  1. 
1. fisher  r. b.  from surfaces to objects: recognising objects using surface information and object models  phd thesis  dept. of artificial intelligence  univ. of edinburgh  1. 
1. fisher  r. b.  identity independent object segmentation in 1/1d sketch data  proc. 1 european conference on artificial intelligence  july 1. 
1. hinton  g. e.  lang  k. j.  shape recognition and illusory connections  ijcai 1  pp1  1. 
1. marr  d.  vision  w.h. freeman and co.  pub   1. 
	fisher 	1 
