 
　　this paper briefly reports on the current architecture and status of edison  a computer model being designed to. l  understand natural language descriptions of mechanical devices and  1  generate novel device representations through heuristic strategies of mutation and analogy. the representational constructs in edison must support both of these tasks and include: goal/plan information  spatial relationships  forces  motion  contact  regions  constraints on  and principles of  device operation  levels of abstraction  and naive mechanics dependencies and inferences. 
1. introduction 
　　the edison research project was created to explore processes of comprehension  dyer  flowers & hodges in press  and invention  dyer. flowers & hodges 1  in the naive mechanics domain  dyer & flowers 1 . these tasks require basic research in areas of: memory organization. disambiguation  inference  learning  problem solving and representation of knowledge. our approach has been to build a prototype process model and to test the limitations of various comprehension and invention heuristics  along with the representational constructs over which they operate. 
1. edison architecture 
　　the current edison system is composed of eleven elements  shown in figure 1 below. in this figure  thin lines with arrows indicate the flow of input/information through the system: thin  dotted  lines without arrows indicate semantic links between knowledge structures; thick lines indicate knowledge access between knowledge bases  squares  and interpretation subsystems  squares with rounded corners . 

　　* this research is supported in part by an onr grant  n1-k1  to the first two authors. eariy exploratory research in this area was supported in part by an ibm faculty development award to the first author  and by a grant from the hughes ai center. 
1 	natural language 
　　edison accepts three types of natural language input:  a  the description of a mechanical device  possibly novel to edison and possibly including information concerning device principles of operation  structural arrangment  and/or mode of operation   b  a question  concerning causal relationships involved in device structure  function  and operation  or  c  a goal specification  which requests the creation of a novel device  possibly satisfying one or more constraints. 
　　if a question is input to edison  it is passed to the conceptual analyzer   1  in figure 1 . the conceptual analyzer  ca  is a variant of mcdypar  a demon-based ca first used in the boris story understanding system  dyer 1 . as each input word  or phrase  is encountered  the ca accesses its corresponding entry in the lexicon  1 . the lexicon contains mappings between words/phrases and representational fragments  implemented as frames  minksy 1 . attached to each frame are zero or more demon templates  along with parameters supplied to these demon templates by the lexicon. once supplied  demon instances are spawned . representing delayed  active rules/processes within edison. active demons are maintained in a demon agenda  1  and are polled to simulate concurrent rule application and testing. demons seek to connect up conceptual fragments into large conceptual structures. each conceptual fragment anavor demon may access knowledge of a mechanical device  device component  device motion  device force  device region  etc. this knowledge is stored in episodic/semantic memory  1 . active conceptual fragments are stored and manipulated in a working memory 
   once a completed conceptual representation has been formed  c-rep   if it represents the conceptual content of a question   b  in figure l   then it is passed to the memory management subsystem  where retrieval heuristics  1  are applied. an answer to the question is then sought by accessing episodic/semantic memory  1 . semantic memory  semmem  holds general mechanics knowledge while episodic memory  ep-mem  holds knowledge of instances of specific mechanical devices. these specific device exemplars may exist in ep-mem for any one of three reasons:  1  the programmer handcoded the device into memory   1  edison read about the device  or  1  the device came about as the result of edison's invention heuristics. a question may concern eneral mechanical relationships  in this case sem-mem will e searched  or a specific device edison has just read about  then ep-mem will be searched . if a conceptual answer  cans  is retrieved  then it is passed to a conceptual generator 
  1  in figure 1   which accesses lexical information to produce a naturallanguage answer. 
　　when a device description is input to edison  the result of conceptual analysis  c-rep  is also passed to the memory management subsystem. the integrator  1  must determine where in ep-mem the device representation belongs. 
integration into memory involves:  a  determining if the device alreadly exists in memory  i.e. is not novel to edison    b  constructing an instantiation of the correct internal format for integration into memory  and  c  building the necessary indexing structures for future access. this last step may include processes of generalization  so that the device is available at various levels of abstraction . 
　　
　　when a design goal specification is input  the c-rep is passed to the invention management sybsystem. if the goal is to create a novel device of a given type  then the c-rep is handed directly to the brainstorming component  1 . brainstorming consists of heuristics which attempt to create novel devices  by two general strategies:  1  mutation  where a given device representation is altered or combined with other device components  or  1  analogy  where a device representation is generalized and another mechanism is recalled  from a different context  which shares features at an abstract level with the given device. the recalled device is then adapted to the target context. 
　　if the goal specification includes a number of constraints  the c-rep is passed first to the problem-solving component of the invention management subsystem   1  figure 1 . the problem-solver attempts to apply mechanics rules and principles to satisfy mechanics constraints. when the problem solver cannot recall a solution from memory  it calls upon the brainstorming heuristics to invent a device. for each device invented  constraint satisfaction is applied. 
　　all novel devices  whether from comprehension or invention  are placed in ep-mem. although edison currently cannot generate natural language descriptions of arbitrary devices  the graphics interface  1  does display a graphical representation of the semantic relationships constructed to represent a device in memory. 
1. naive mechanics representation 
　　a naive mechanics representation  nmr  must support comprehension  problem solving  learning  and invention. the nmr used by edison is not finalized  but the general approach is that of representing mechanical areas  forces  motions  objects  and relations in terms of conceptual dependencies  along with associated inference rules. 
1. nmr requires goals/plans for problem solving 
　　consider the nail clipper in figure 1. most people  after looking at this figure for a moment  realize that this particular nail clipper simpiy will not work. it then takes them a moment longer to realize  in exact detail  why it will fail. this comprehension process often requires that they re-examine' exactly how a bug-free nail clipper actually functions. 
　　edison must be able  1  to receive a conceptual representation of a nail clipper   1  recognize it as a nail clipper  either from a label; or by comparing the input representation with knowledge in memory  and  1  realize that this representation has a 'bug' and understand now the bug interferes with the function of the device. 
　　in order to spot device errors  edison must be able to analyze each component in terms of the goals its use accomplishes. in story understanding and invention domains  the relevant goals are those of the characters and include hunger  health preservation  achievement of social status  finding an agent etc. in the naive mechanics domain  goals involve physical transformations  such as connection and separation. for instance  the nail clipper achieves the goal of separating a nail into two objects: the remaining nail and the nail clipping. in story domains  goals are achieved through the execution o  plans and a number of plans may exist which are able to achieve a single goal. likewise  in the naive mechanics domain  goals are also achieved through abstract plans  but here realized though the operation of physical devices. for example  the goal of separation can be realized  e.g.  by shearing  slicing  ripping  or cutting. the cutting performed by a nail clipper involves forcing two wedge-shaped objects against both sides of the object to be cut. there are many problems to be solved here  including: where separation is to occur and how the cutting edges are to be attached  i.e. alignment   and how the cutting edges are to be removed after cutting has occurred  answer: use a spring . but the main problem is how enough force is to be accessed  i.e. the goal of attaining mechanical advantage  weiss 1   which can be realized by a number of plans  involving the use of various devices. in figure 1  a lever is selected. here  however  the lever has been attached incorrectly  so that force is being applied only to part 1  rather than to both parts 1 and 1. the solution of the modern nail clipper  figure 1  h actually rather elegant  since it involves attaching the lever to a post that is sunk through the center of part 1 and attached to part 1. 

	figure 1 	figure 1 
in addition  in the modern nail clipper solves one other 
1
bug*  i.e. that the lever must be pulled upward in the buggy 
case  by modifying the lever to have a protrusion on the same side. 
　　notice that one can understand the function of the modern nail clipper and detect mistakes within the buggy nail clipper  all without having to understand the principle behind the mechanical advantage of the lever. one need only know that levers realize mechanical advantage. the principle behind this advantage  simply stated  is that one moves a greater distance with a constant force f to produce a greater force f' over a shorter distance  i.e. the same principle of the inclined plane . although the principle behind a device may not be necessary to understand the device's operation  it can be important during invention. thus  a complete representation of a nail clipper must include the following information: 
goal: separation  plan: cut 
device: wedges forced against obi. oal: mechanical advantage  plan: lever 
evice: post w/ one-sided lever 
1. nmr 	requires spatial 	'gestalt' 	structures 	for comprehension 
in addition to the functional relations described above  a 
nmr must include the spatial orientation of each component in the device and its connectivity and orientation  lehnert 1  with respect to other components. consider the following text: 
turn the screw to apply force and deform the object. 
　　when mechanical engineers read this text  they tend to form a mental image of the spatial relation of the object to the screw. furthermore  they fill in missing information in the text to make the text coherent. as a result  they can answer questions about information not directly supplied in the text: 
where is the object in relation to the screw  
what holds the screw  
what holds the object as the screw moves  
　　the supplied information comes from their general knowledge of what a screw looks like and how it is used to apply force or form a connection. in the case of applying force  one spatial gestalt is depicted in figure 1. notice that the object is placed at one end of the screw  instead  say. along a side of the screw . in addition  there is a framework for holding both the object and the screw  along the direction the screw will move if turned clockwise. 

figure 1 
	dyer  flowers  and hodges 	1 
　　
　　for the nail clipper  this spatial/configurational information consists of the parts of the nail clipper  their relative orientations  regions of parts where connectivity or other constraints hold  and the nature of those constraints. 
1. nmr requires process information for prediction 
mechanical devices move and their components move. 
the movement of each component is a function of the connection of one component to another  the nature of the component materials/shapes  and the nature of the forces between them  forbus 1 . for example  if a string: s is attached to a free object o and the string is pulled  then d will move in the direction of the pull once the string is taut; however  one cannot push on a string and expect o to move. in contrast if a rigid rod is connected to o  then pushing on the rod will transmit motion to o. 
　　in the nail clipper case  process information consists of a sequence of the motions performed by the nail clipper  as a 
　　result of the connectivity of the parts of the nail clipper and forces applied to those parts. 
1. limits of nmr in edison 
　　currently edison does not have any capability of examining visual or iconic device representations. thus  any spatial or connectivity information is hand-coded into memory. probably the most difficult representational and reasoning tasks in mechanics involve kinematics  forbus 1   especially the interrelations among forces and 1-dimensional object shapes. in general  we are avoiding this very difficult class of problems. we want to see what comprehension and invention tasks edison can perform without a serious theory of kinematics. we believe the remaining  simpler world of basic connectors and motions is still extremely challenging. 
1. status of nl comprehension in edison 
　　currently  the natural language subsystem of edison can handle just a few. single-sentence length texts. a sample text  dyer  flowers  hodges in press  reaefby edison is: 
toy gun: an object is pushed into a barrel  against a spring  compressing the spring until it catches on a trigger. 
　　the edison lexicon contains mappings from words  such as  push  and  pull   to expectations  demons  for the direction and source of the force  along with the object to be moved. objects  such as  barrel   are represented in terms of containment and constraints on motion. the term  against  is represented in terms of both spatial proximity  e.g.  the painting against the wall   and force  e.g. x  propel o against  y . some objects  such as springs  are represented as primitive devices   with attached inference rules. e. g. if one pushes on a spring  the spring will push back  trigger  serves as an enabling/disabling device for release of a force. note that  it  in toy gun could refer to the spring  barrel  object  or entire gun. however  syntactic constraints prefer  spring  while semantic constraints disallow both the barrel ana the entire device as the referent of  it . in some toy guns the trigger catches on the spring; in others  on the object  e.g. 
where the object is a plastic dart with a notch at the end . 
　　the ability for edison to build a complete representation of the text depends on  1  what edison already knows in memory about toy guns   1  what edison already knows about barrels  springs  triggers and objects in general and  1  what edison already knows the top-level goal of the device to be  in this case  to propel the object in a given direction . in general  mechanical device descriptions are difficult for people to read unless they already know something about the device under discussion  or know how to read  and have access to  a visual drawing containing the gestalt configuration of known iconic elements making up the device. in edison's case  the drawing is representee as a hand-coded conceptual representation already present in memory. 
1. status of invention in edison 
　　currently  edison is capable of  re inventing the swinging bar room door  figure 1a  through the process of applying operations to  and altering features of  a standard 
1 	natural language 
door. in this case  one way of arriving at a bar room door is to apply the cut operation to the door slab to alter the number of slabs and then apply problem solving to attach the freestanding slab via hinges to the other side of the door frame. 

	as suoming sar from boor 	it possible cuts to product 1 slabs 
figure 1 
　　even in this simple invention scenario the possibility space is huge; e.g. the slab can be cut in numerous ways and the position of a hinge can conceivably be anywhere on the surface of the slab  figure 1b . however  ninge constraints reduce this space to positions along the edge of the slab. still  various strange bar room doors result if the hinges are placed at the top or bottom of the free-standing slab  figure 1 . in addition  an 'accordian' door can result if ninges are used to attach the freestanding slab to the other slab  figure 1: left . 

　　at this point edison is incapable of making use of this serendipitous invention to realize that  1  the cut operation can be used several times to reduce the size of each slab while increasing the number of slabs  and thus cover the same open area while reducing the width of the door when open  figure 1: right  and  1  the slabs can be attached to a runner so that the door effectively slides open rather than swings open. 

figure 1 
1. ingenuity  problem solving and experience 
　　two issues of importance for invention are  1  recognition of ingenuity in a vast search space of uninteresting and/or useless devices and  1  tradeoffs between efficient problem solving through effective use of memory and role of experience in 'brainstorming' for novel  or possibly overlooked  patterns. 
　　change in the fundamental motion of an object is one heuristic in edison for recognizing that a truly novel design has been discovered. thus  the invention of a sliding door through mutation of a swinging door should be recognized by edison as an event of significance. 
　　edison maintains devices in episodic memory. if the problem solver solves each new problem by simply recalling a past solution  then inventiveness will dimmish as the number of devices grows. however  with human inventors  such as thomas edison  the acquisition of a novel device serves as a 
　　platform for coming up with more devices. such inventors use processes of analogy and adaptation to apply knowledge in one domain to create a device in another domain. in this way. growth in episodic memory increases the potential of inventiveness rather than diminishes it a simple example is that of inventing a new nut cracker by adapting the mechanism of the nail clipper  figure 1a . 

figure 1 
　　the issue of ingenuity is illustrated in figure 1b  where the nail clipper mechanism has been pointlessly complicated. however  cascaded operations can result in novel and useful devices. consider the rose clipper in figure 1b. this design allows one to cut at a greater distance without having to greatly increase the movement of the handles  figure 1c . 
r 
　　what is the role of failure in memory  schank  1  has argued that failures are important because learning occurs at failure points. dyer  1  has shown that plan failures represented at an abstract level serve as an indexing structure to cross-contextual memories. if every trivially baa design is stored in edison's episodic memory  then problem-soiving efficiency may suffer  as a result of recall of bad designs. however  if failures are never stored in memory  then edison will be doomed to repeat its mistakes. therefore  along with design successes edison must store design failures. this means that edison must generalize specific failures wherever possible and store the abstracted negative design experiences in episodic memory. however  sometimes it is incorrect  from a brainstorming point of view  to avoid exploring a possibility space because of past failure. why would an area blocked by past failure be worth re-exploration  often  new mechanical devices  principles  materials  etc. become available since the time that design area or approach was abandoned. so a robust invention system must know when to re-explore an area because of new invention in potentially related area. these tradeoffs  between efficient problem solving and invention  are topics of current research. 
　　as with the cascaded clippers  a mutation which fails to satisfy a goal in current focus may end up serving another design goal. consider the last cut snown in figure 1b  which produces a lopsided bar room door and appears to be a design of little value. however  such doors do exist in refrigerators  the freezer door is often of less width in comparison to the food door. thus  an invention may not achieve an active design goal  but turn out to be of use for another design context an inventor can only make use of serendipitous effects if a large number of design goals are concurrently active in memory. 
1. relation to work of others 
　　the overall approach toward naive physics in edison is inspired by hayes e.g.  hayes 1 . the need and utility of an episodic memory or device exemplars is taken from  schank 1  and  kolodner 1  and their general work on episodic memory organization. the use of heuristics of invention and heuristics to assess interestingness of concepts  here  device ingenuity  are inspired from lenat's work on invention in mathematics and geometry  lenat 1 . 
　　the representation constructs in edison share features with those of lehnert's object primitives for comprehension of stories involving the use of objects  described in  lehnert 1 ; rieger's csa representational scheme to represent such objects as flush toillettes and light bulbs  rieger 1} and the work of forbus on qualitative processes  forbus 1  1 . the natural language comprehension component shares representational similarities with the representations of physical objects read by the patent abstract conceptual analyzer of wasserman and lebowitz  1 . 
1. conclusions 
　　naive mechanics comprehension and invention can be modeled in terms of symbolic manipulations on representational constructs. device comprehension consists of accessing conceptually dependent representations and combining them to form larger coherent structures. device invention consists of altering device representations through goal/plan analysis  constraint satisfaction  feature mutation  and processes of abstraction and analogy. while the resulting approach lacks the detailed numerical/simulation capabilities or mathematical models typically used in mechanical engineering  it provides the potential capability of modeling the engineer's cognitive processes of comprehension and invention. 
