 
   this paper describes a new approach to representing space and time for practical reasoning. unlike rn  the new models can represent a bounded region of space using only finitely many cells  so they can be manipulated directly. unlike zn  they have useful notions of function continuity and region connectedness. finally  the topology of space is allowed to depend on the situation being represented  accounting for sharp changes in function values and lack of connectedness across object boundaries. 
i introduction 
   in their daily lives  people frequently reason about the shapes and arrangements of objects in space. this practical reasoning goes on at a variety of levels  from lowlevel visual processing  through identifying objects  up to reasoning about how an object could be manipulated. all these types of reasoning depend on representations of 
1d and 1d space. similarly  a representation for time is needed for reasoning about the relative ordering of events. there has been much discussion recently about the proper representations for time and space in fields including ai  computer vision and robotics  linguistics  and philosophy 
 van benthem 1  dowty 1  allen and hayes 1  hayes 1a  lee and rosenfeld 1 . 
   a reasoner will need to construct for himself various models or descriptions of the world. it is useful to distinguish symbolic descriptions  such as  there is a desk against the wall   from concrete models of these descriptions  e.g. the sets of points of r1 which comprise the desk and the wall. concrete models can be inferred from sensory input  such as camera images  or produced by the reasoner  in his mind's eye  from symbolic descriptions. symbolic descriptions can be derived from natural language input or from parsing concrete models. 
   both symbolic descriptions and concrete models are useful in practical reasoning. symbolic descriptions can consisely capture the relevant facts about a situation. this consiseness is important for remembering situations  identifying objects  describing situations which are too complicated to visualize all at once  and communicating in natural language. however  it is often simpler to use a concrete model for geometric reasoning tasks such as checking topological connectivity or measuring distances between features. robot path planning can done us-
   the research described in this paper was done at the artificial intelligence laboratory of the massachusetts institute of technology and at the department of engineering science  oxford university. the author is supported by the fannie and john hertz foundation and by the bell laboratories graduate research program for women. 
1 	perception 
ing digitized representations of space  e.g. brooks and lozano-perez 1 . finally  it is almost impossible to verify the consistency of a symbolic description except by exhibiting a concrete model which satisfies it. 
   in this paper  i will concentrate on the form of the concrete models. standard models of time and space  such as . and   do not account for the way people do practical reasoning. subsets of rn must be manipulated symbolically because they typically contain infinite numbers of points. they cannot be directly stored by a reasoner. secondly  it is difficult to represent two regions which are touching  because it is unclear which region contains the points along the common boundary of the two regions. the objects must overlap along the boundary  or the boundary points must belong to neither object  or else the boundary must be assigned arbitrarily to one of the objects  allen 1  allen and hayes 1 . 
   models based on the integers avoid these problems with rn  but at the cost of having no useful notion of function continuity or region connectedness. all functions from the integers are continuous and no subsets of the integers are connected. most integer-based models handle only regular arrangements of points. a good concrete model for practical reasoning should use a finite density of samples  like integer-based models  but it should allow irregular arrangements of samples and it should provide notions of region connectedness and function smoothness like rn. this paper develops such a model  derived from work by poston  1 . my forthcoming thesis will supply technical details omitted in this paper  as well as algorithms for deriving concrete models from visual input  parsing concrete models into symbolic descriptions  and generating concrete models from symbolic descriptions. 
ii adjacency spaces 
   the first task in developing a finite-resolution concrete model is to set up the topological structure of empty space. consider the set of cells in figure 1. if the cells are packed against one another  they completely fill a section of space  the physical realization of the set of cells. if the cells do not fill the space  we can grow them so that they do fill it. we cannot  however  assume that these cells are arranged in a perfectly regular pattern. the cells in the human retina are not. however  even for irregularly spaced cells  the pattern of how the cells touch one another completely determines the topological structure of the region of space that they cover. 
¡¡more specifically  the set of cells which touch at a point  such as a  b  c  and d   an edge  such as a and b   or a lace will be called an adjacency set in an n-dimenaional situation  the dimension of an adjacency set is  n-m  if its cells touch along an m-dimensional face. for example  


{a  b} has dimension 1. for formal convenience  there is an adjacency set {x} of dimension 1 for each cell x. a set of cells with adjacency sets and associated dimensions  will be called an adjacency structure  a modified form of poston's local matroid structure . a pair of cells which belong to some common adjacency set  not necessarily one with two elements  are called adjacent. a path from x to 
y or connecting x and y is a finite ordered set of cells 
x 1  such that w  and wx+x are adjacent for every i a set of cells a is connected if any two cells in a can be connected with a path. 
   in practical reasoning  it is necessary to represent objects and situations at more than one scale of resolution  i.e. using different densities of sample points. when the reasoner constructs a coarse-scale sampling from a finerscale sampling  this can be done so that the coarse-scale cells are a subset of the fine-scale cells. in this case  the two adjacency structures can straightforwardly be related to one another. when two arbitrary samplings of the same object are created  e.g. when an object moves across the visual field  they are more easily related via a symbolic representation of the object. 
   each situation used in practical reasoning has an intended dimension  e.g. a visual image is 1d. subsets of the situation should have the same dimension as the original situation and the dimension of an object should not be altered by changes in the number of cells used to represent it. thus  a ribbon one cell wide in a 1d situation is 1d. in such cases  the dimension of an adjacency set can be larger than or equal to the number of points in the set and the dimension of the adjacency set may be a range of non-negative integers  rather than just a single integer. for example  a one-cell subset of a 1d adjacency structure has a single adjacency set with dimensions 
   in order to be well-behaved  adjacency structures must meet some additional formal conditions. if x is an adjacency set with dimensions  and the adjacency set y  with dimensions  c  d  is a proper subset of x  then d if there is no adjacency set w distinct from x and y with 
 dimension 1 is restricted 
to singleton adjacency sets and dimension 1 to sets of no more than two elements. since sampling should be at a finite resolution  a cell can belong to only finitely many adjacency sets and each adjacency set can contain only a finite number of cells. i also require that it be possible to embed in rn the set of cells adjacent to any cell in an ndimensional adjacency structure. under these conditions  the adjacency structures are topologically equivalent to a 
subclass of regular cell complexes  munkres 1  which are also manifolds. each cell of the adjacency space corresponds to a vertex in the cell complex. the cell complex is a deformation retract of the physical realization of the adjacency space. thus the adjacency structure  unlike the pairwise adjacencies  lee and rosenfeld 1   completely determines the topological structure of the space 
in the usual mathematical sense. 
ill function smoothness 
   many algorithms in practical reasoning  such as interpretation of motion sequences  surface reconstruction  and reasoning about the behavior of physical objects  depend on the assumption that functions are  smooth.  the idea behind function smoothness is that the value of a property should not change  too fast  as one moves through space or time. for  there are a number of mathematical 
definitions corresponding to this intuitive concept  including continuity  smoothness  and bounded derivatives. the definition of function smoothness for adjacency spaces depends not only on the adjacency structure  but also on which cells overlap  i.e. sample overlapping patches of space. for example  in a ccd camera  the area sampled by a element overlaps areas sampled by elements which are several elements away  because of blurring and/or diffraction in the camera optics. similar facts hold for the foveal area of the human visual system. this blurring before sampling reduces aliasing effects. in robot motion planning  it is essential that adjacent cells overlap  so that the entire area of space is covered by the cells and small objects cannot disappear from the representation. 
   following poston  1   i call the overlap relation on a set of cells the fuzzy. an adjacency space with a fuzzy is called a fuzzy space. this relation is symmetric and reflexive  but not transitive. for a cell x in a fuzzy space  the fuzzy neighborhood of x is the set of cells overlapping x  including x itself. each fuzzy neighborhood must be connected and have a finite number of cells. these definitions can be applied both to physical spaces and to abstract spaces  such as light intensities  temperatures  and distances. two cells which overlap represent ranges of values which cannot reliably be distinguished. for example  i may have trouble distinguishing ioc and 1c  or 1c and 1c  but ioc and 1c are clearly different. 
   if and y are two fuzzy spaces  such as the visual field and grey-scale intensities  a function / :  is smooth if f a  overlaps f b  in y whenever a ana b overlap in x. that is  in a region of smooth change  two overlapping cells in the visual field must have indistinguishable  overlapping  intensity values. if  for some overlapping a and b in x  f a  and f b  do not overlap  f has an abrupt change in value between a and b. this notion of smoothness depends on the fuzzies for the two spaces: if we extend the fuzzy on x so that more cells overlap  fewer functions are smooth. in reasoning about processes of change  forbus 1   it is necessary to consider the slope of a id function. for example  if the set of cells  represents time and t the temperature of a room  we can define 
to be . we can now consider whether this new tunction dt is smooth  relative to appropriate fuzzies. 
iv topological boundaries 
   function smoothness and region connectedness are very important in practical reasoning. however  at a lim-
ited set of natural boundaries in a situation  such as at the edges of objects  functions can change abruptly and ad-
jacent objects may not be  intuitively  connected. these locations of abrupt change are exactly the most interesting 
	fleck 	1 
   
parts of the situation for practical reasoning. for example  computer vision programs extract locations of abrupt changes in intensity and the reason using only descriptions of these boundaries. in analyzing processes such as heating liquids  properties and rates of change of properties can change abruptly when processes stop or when a substance undergoes a phase transition. these locations of abrupt change  along with summaries of behavior within regions of smooth change  can be used to predict the behavior of these systems  forbus 1 . 
   not only can functions have abrupt changes in value at natural boundaries  but the objects to either side of the boundary are not perceived as connected to one another. for example  it is necessary to distinguish whether two adjacent metal bars are physically connected in order to determine whether one bar will move if one pulls on the other. pieces of metal do not merge on contact  although other substances  e.g. water  do. connectedness can also be used to  limit causality   hayes 1b . for example  if one can surround the situation of interest with boundaries across with nothing of interest is likely to flow  then reasoning can be limited to the region thus surrounded. similarly  an event can only cause another event if the two are connected by a sequence of events. 
   boundaries can be characterized by which types of functions change at them. for example  changes in lighting are important for reading but not for motion planning. two pieces of metal can be physically but not electrically connected. however  in a particular situation  boundaries relevant to different practical tasks tend to cluster. in other words  the world  at any fixed scale of resolution  exhibits natural boundaries which are separated by large regions with no sharp changes. connectivity boundaries and locations of abrupt changes in function values tend to coincide. this suggests that these natural boundaries are topological boundaries in situations. the usual explanation  that each function is discontinuous at a small number of places  fails to account for the clustering of boundaries ana for the connectivity facts. 
   a program to detect boundaries in 1d camera images has been implemented  based on the model described in this paper. if there is a sharp change in intensity or in the slope of intensity between two adjacent cells  a boundary is marked between them. each of the two cells is an edge of the region on its side of the boundary and a border of the region on the other side. an extended boundary creates two connected sets of edge/border cells. boundaries should also be marked where there is reason to suspect lack of physical connection. 
   these pairwise boundaries define a new adjacency structure relative to the boundaries  rttb   in which an adjacency set is removed if it contains two cells separated by a boundary. in an n -dimensional situation  if some adjacency set of dimension less than n is no longer a subset of any other adjacency set  its set of dimensions is extended to include n. for example  in figure 1  if boundaries are added between c and f  and between e and f  the adjacency sets {c f   {e f}  and {c e f} are removed and {f} is given dimensions  1 . if a boundary is added between a and e  b and d cease to be adjacent as a sideeffect of removing the adjacency set  a b d e . thus  adjacency structures avoid problems raced by representations based on pairwise adjacencies in adding boundaries where too many cells are adjacent  lee and rosenfeld 
1 . from these new adjacencies  we can define paths  rttb  and region connectedness  rttb . the original fuzzy induces a fuzzy  rttb  in which each fuzzy neighborhood is restricted so as to be connected  rttb  and these fuzzies de-
1 	perception 
fine function smoothness  rttb . distances between cells  however  do not change when doundaries are added. 
   the natural boundaries in a situation can be used to define regions such as those people would use in describing the situation. for example  a local symmetry shape analysis  brady and asada 1  fleck 1  1  connell 1  picks out sets of edge cells as the borders of elongatea or round regions. these regions are typically connected relative to the boundaries which define them  hayes 1a . a region can be defined by boundaries which do not fully enclose it  e.g. the sides of an elongated region. a boundary can separate two parts of the same object  e.g. two adjacent fingers on the same hand. thus  regions depend on locations of natural boundaries and not vice versa. pairs of regions can be related using analogues of james allen's  1  interval primitives. for example  a region a touches a region b if a and b are disjoint and there are two adjacent cells a and b such that a is an edge of a and a border of 1  and b is an edge of b and a border of a. this relation corresponds to allen's meets. analogues of his other primitives can be defined 
similarly  using also an order for id spaces. 
   in doing practical reasoning  a reasoner must choose which boundaries are active during a particular piece of topological reasoning. certain boundaries may not be relevant to the task at hand. it may be necessary to consider several different models  e.g. in deciding which of several electrical connections is broken. there may be more than one way to parse a situation. for example  the region occupied by a marble inside a cup can be seen as overlapping the interior of the cup  or as disjoint from the free space inside the cup. in other words  the topology of space can 
be manipulated dynamically during reasoning. 
