 
　　we present a general sequent-based proof method for first-order modal logics in which the barcan formula holds. the most important feature of our system is the fact that it has identical inference rules for every modal logic; different modal logics can be obtained by changing the conditions under which two formulas are allowed to resolve against each other it is argued that the proof method is very natural because these conditions correspond to the conditions on the accessibility relation in kripke semantics. 
i introduction 
　　in this paper we present a sequent-based proof method for first-order modal logic that is both general and natural. the inference rules are identical for all modal logics; different modal logics differ only in the conditions under which two formulas in sequents can be resolved against each other. the conditions for a particular modal logic are closely related to the restrictions on the accessibility relation in the underlying kripke semantics in this paper  we will restrict ourselves to first-order modal logics with the barcan-formula   as a 
　　consequence  the set of individuals in the different possible worlds are identical. in jackson and reichgelt  1   we present a generalised version of the proof method in which the restriction does not hold. 
　　one aim of this work is the desire efficient proof methods that are sufficiently flexible to support experimentation with different logics of knowledge and belief  jackson  1 . the emphasis is on the design of modal meta-interpreters which endow a knowledge base management system with varying degrees of introspective capability  jackson  in press . another motivation is an interest in temporal logic; in particular the comparison of modal temporal logics with other approaches  e.g. a reified approach  reichgelt  1 . 
　　the outline of the paper is as follows. first  we present the notion of m-unification; intuitively  two formulas can unify only in the same world then we present the axioms and inference rules of the proof theory  together with sample proofs. finally  we discuss related work. 
ii m-unification 
　our logical language is defined in the normal way. we use the connectives and   the universal quantifier v and the necessity operator ~~. the other connectives  the existential quantifier and the possibility operator are introduced as abbreviations. 
　　in our proof theory  a sentence has an index associated with it  which represents the world in which it is true or false. an index is defined as an arbitrary sequence of world-symbols 
1 	reasoning 
separated by colons. the set of world-symbols is defined as the union of the set of integers  the set of variables w1  w1  etc  called world variables and the set of skolemised world symbols which are formed out of new function symbols plus sequences of world variables and individual variables. 
　　a world symbol that is not a world variable is called ground  as is an index that contains no world variables if a1....an is an index  than we call a1 the end symbol and an the start symbol. we write 
and a1 its parent symbol. 

that is accessible from world w  which is itself accessible from world 1. however  whereas w represents any world accessible from 1  represents a particular world whose choice depends on the choice for 
　　in order to define the proof theory for first-order modal logic  we first define the notion of m-unification. the intuition behind this notion is that formulas can only be resolved if they can be proven to have the opposite truth value in the same possible world. 
two formulas with associated indices p; and qj m-unify iff 
 i  the formulas p and q unify with unification 1  and 
 ii  the indices iandy w-unify  with unification n  and 
 iii  1 and r  are compatible  i.e. the union of  and rj is itself a unification 
　　in the above definition  we introduced the term w-unification. two indices w-unify if it is possible for their end symbols to represent the same possible world; the definition follows in a relatively natural way from the intuition. we distinguish between three cases depending on whether the end-symbols are ground or not. 
　　the first case is when both end symbols are ground. in that case  the indices w-unify only if their end symbols are identical. if two worlds are either explicitly named  or are dependent on other worlds  they can be assumed to be identical if and only if they have the same name or depend on the same worlds. 
　　the second case arises when both end symbols are not ground. in this case  we are dealing with two arbitrary worlds accessible from their respective parent symbols. but we can only assume that two arbitrary worlds are identical if their two parent worlds are identical. the corresponding clause in the definition applies only if we can be sure that world variables always represent non-empty sets of accessible worlds. we therefore insist that the accessibility relation for the logic in question is serial  i.e. if for every possible world there is an 
　　

	jackson and ralchgalt 	1 
　　

　　abadi and manna  1  present a resolution proof system for several modal logics  which has different inference rules for different modal logics. some of the inference rules in their system are rewrite rules that can be applied to any sub-formula and can introduce new modal operators the system must therefore suffer from serious combinatorial problems 
　　konolige  1  calls the theorem prover recursively in order to determine whether two formulas can be resolved against each other. the various epistemic logics he considers then differ in the set of propositions that are given as premises to the theorem prover when it is so called. because determining whether an inference rule can be applied to two formulas involves a recursive call to the theorem prover  it is potentially very expensive. 
　　wallen  1  generalises bibel's connection-method to modal logic. his system is the most closely related to our system 
1 	natural language 
since it uses machinery that is similar to the indexing of formulas. although his system is less natural than ours for doing proofs by hand  it has the advantage of having been implemented. 
vi. conclusion 
　　in this paper we presented a proof method for first-order modal logics with the barcan formula. we believe that it is possible to implement a relatively efficient theorem prover for the following reasons. first  the number of applicable rules at any given time is small and therefore there is no combinatorial explosion of the proof tree. second  unlike the abadi and manna system  the inference rules are all elimination rules and they never introduce new connectives or operators. third  the cost of determining whether a rule is applicable is low  ir1 - ir1  are applicable only if a formula is dominated by a particular connective  whereas we can use unification and efficient graph traversing algorithms for determining whether  ir1  is applicable. 
acknowledgements 
we would like to thank frank van harmelen and lincoln 
wallen for useful discussions 
