 
we describe a new method of formalizing commonsense reasoning : instead of minimizing extensions of predicates we formalize common sense as  truth in intended models   and we give a mathematical formulation of the proposed method by defining a class of intended models based on preferences in interpretations. 
　we propose to use problem independent natural language constraints to exclude interpretations that contradict common sense. for this reason we augment the usual  two-part formal structures consisting of a metalevel and an object level  with a third level - a referential level. we show that such a model is an adequate tool for generating intended interpretations  and also for problems that cannot be satisfactorily solved by circumscription. 
we argue that the criticism of hanks and mcdermott 
 1  does not apply to the formalization of commonsense reasoning by intended models. namely  it is not necessary to know the consequences of the intended theory to find the right interpretation  neither needed are complex and problem specific policy axioms  which exclude some possible interpretations. 
section 1. introduction : commonsense reasoning in ai 
　we will use the term  commonsense reasoning  in a technical sense  meaning  the drawing of  some  sound inferences that are not logicauy valid . this means we will not talk about  real  understanding  or of  intelligence of the degree conventionally expected of adult persons in practical affairs . 
　there were a few attempts to formalize commonsense reasoning by extending the set of inference rules of classical logic: nonmonotonic logic of d.mcdermott and j.doyle  1   default reasoning of r.reiter  1   and circumscription of j.mccarthy  1 . 
　the idea behind circumscription  and - similarly - behind the other formalisms  can be expressed as follows: 
  commonsense reasoning means ruling out possibilities not corresponding to normal situations  
  typicality is the absence of abnormality  
  formalization of common sense can be achieved by minimizing a class of abnormal objects  
  this minimization can be formally expressed as a  second order  logical formula. 
all this sounds reasonable  but: 
 a  the number  of types  of examples that can be handled by different circumscriptions is about the same as the number of circumscriptions themselves  predicate  formula  pointwise  variable  prioritized  protected . 
 b  the paradox of hanks and mcdermott  1  shows  the impossibility of expressing all commonsense in one type of circumscription ; moreover we have to take into account the inconvenience of describing all commonsense inferences that can be handled by circumscription as resulting from minimization. 
 c  certain types of commonsense inferences do not involve minimization at all  e.g. the first example in the next section   or even require an open world assumption   cf. zadrozny  1b . and there is little hope that circumscription can be extended to cover such cases. hence typicality is not always a simple absence of abnormality; we will argue in this paper  it can be better characterized as resulting from selection of a most plausible interpretation from a range of  not equally reasonable  possibilities. 
　on the other hand the above formalisms represent well at least one aspect of commonsense reasoning - its nonmonotonicity. therefore we will show how this phenomenon can be captured in the alternative framework we propose. 
　we will not discuss the frame problem. whether the formalism we propose can contribute to an analysis of this issue is an open question. it can   if there is indeed a homomorphism between the qualification problem and the frame problem. 
	zadrozny 	1 

section 1. intended models and principles of reference 
1. 	natural 	language 	and 	common sense 	rea-
soning 
example  cf.haugeland  1  p. 1  : 
we bought the boys apples  because they were so hungry. 
we bought the boys apples  because they were so cheap. 
 native speakers  however  understand such sentences so quickly that they usually don't even notice any ambiguity. one question is: how do they do that   
obviously  it's just common sense.  
　there is little hope  we think  to find a natural relationship between this example and circumscription. but  almost certainly  non-logical inferences show up in finding references of the pronouns. 
　the example obviously suggests a connection between natural language   nl   and commonsense reasoning. we intend to prove that there is a formalization of commonsense reasoning based on natural language. of course  nl has something to do with common sense; we have however to find a formal and computational content of this truism. since  as j.mccarthy  1  pointed out  nl lacks an independent reasoning process  logic has to play a role in reasoning. 
we need then a method of linking language with de-
duction  and we introduce it in this paper: nl  or nl programs  like grammars and dictionaries on-line  should be treated as a referential model for a logical formalization. this means that information contained in grammars  dictionaries  webster's  longman dictionary of contemporary english ...  etc. should be used to constrain possible interpretations of logical predicates. 
　but we will not discuss transformations of parsing trees into logical formulae. neither  are we presenting a formal semantics or a theory of meaning of english sentences. this is not our aim. rather  a program with  some  common sense should be able to make inferences not warranted by classical logic  and we propose to use linguistic constraints to ensure their soundness. 
　notice that this is a way to reject certain possibilities  which   as j.doyle  1  has pointed out  is an attribute of commonsense inferences  whereas in logical reasoning impossibilities are eliminated. 
　our approach differs from circumscription because we do not  compile from a slightly higher level non-monotonic language into mathematical logic    mccarthy  1   but we force logical inferences to conform to the references of predicates  instead. 
	1. 	principles 	of 	reference 
we now introduce the notion of intended interpretation: 
1 	reasoning 
definition. assume that a theory t is a formal description of a situation an agent is to reason about. an intended theory of t is the set of all formulae true in all intended models of t : 

we identify the commonsense consequences of t with ith t    for which the set of intended models satisfies the following two principles of reference : 
/. predicates  of the theory t   do not admit arbitrary interpretations: there exists a separate logical level - the referential level - which constrains 
possible interpretations of the predicates. 
ii. natural language is the most important referential level for commonsense reasoning. 
　these principles express our conviction that there is a certain body of knowledge underlying the common sense  and this knowledge creates restrictions on possible interpretations. natural language is the most significant part of this body  but certainly not unique. we can illustrate this with a simple example explaining the notion of referential level  and how language can be used as such. 
example. 
　consider two hypothetical expert systems  one dealing with a zoo management and the other one about a hospital management. if any of them would give information * is dead t  & is alive t  where the individual t is either tweety the ostrich or f.j. strauss  we would rightly suspect that something is wrong with this expert system. 
this would not be the case if we used predicates 

of course   in this case we can simply add a constraint 

and such an absurd  *  is prevented. however a better solution is to make use of the fact that ** is true in all the models where  dead  and  alive  mean dead and alive  and add a rule saying that two predicates about the same object should not be true at the same time if they are antonyms. the knowledge which words are antonyms does not change. it is problem independent; for that reason - we argue - it should be treated as a referential level  constraining possible interpretations  i.e. preventing it. it follows also that a program does not have to know the  real  meanings of  dead  and  alive  in order to make sound conclusions. 
　we hope the example renders our intuitions. a formal definition of intended models and referential models will appear in section 1. 

	1. 	levels 	of 	reasoning 
from the logical standpoint we have then three levels of reasoning : 
* metalevel : specifies type of intended models  like : minimize  abnormal x     use cwa   use mental models for syllogisms 
 johnson-laird  1 . 
* object level : describes given situation/problem  
  referential level : provides situation independent interpretation s  of symbols. 
　there are known ai programs  which can be treated as examples of the division of levels of reasoning into the three levels  although they do not deal with commonsense deductions. for instance: 
  	h.gelernter's  1  geometry theorem prover 
metalevel :  like the human mathematician  the geometry machine makes use of the potent heuristic properties of a diagram to help it distinguish the true from the false sequences . implementation:  heuristie computer . 
object level : axioms + theorems in a well defined formal system - geometry . 
referential level : diagrams. 
the most notable feature of the program  however  was an additional part of the problem statement used to avoid attempting proofs by blind syntactic manipulation alone.  ...  whenever a subgoal was generated  it was checked for consistency with the diagram. if false in the diagram  the subgoal could not be possibly a theorem and therefore could be 
pruned from the search tree. 
 handbook of ai  vol.1.  p. 1  1 . 
  	b.v.funt s 1  	whisper 
　other examples of referential levels may be : a procedure for a primitive robot preventing it from falling from a table  and other procedures for using mental models  johnson-laird  1 ; a procedure for interpreting predicates left xfy  and right x  y     in a dictionary  left  is defined as opposite to  right  . notice that  in cases like these  the truth of predicates on the referential level may be established by non-logical means  for instance by a numerical procedure. 
　we should point out that a referential level does not exist in cwa  clark's completion or circumscription. we think this is precisely why circumscription fails to capture certain aspects of commonsense reasoning. 
　j. mccarthy  1  uses meta theory to obtain the right class of models for his theories of abnormality. a meta theory provides constraints coming from knowledge about knowledge ; referential models constrain possible interpretations in a completely different way : reference means that names of predicates do matter  we cannot change names and preserve meaning  grammatical form reflects semantics. 
　dictionaries and grammar will be used by us as a referential level for commonsense reasoning. 
section 1. a comparison of circumscription and intended interpretations 
in this section we want to examine two solutions to the problem of reasoning about tweety the canary : 
* we know that tweety is a canary. we ask 	: 	can 
tweety fly   
	1. 	circumscription 
j. mccarthy 1  introduces three kinds of abnormalities and then formalizes the problem . as follows: 

these sentences mean: 
usually tilings don't fly. 
birds are not usual things  in this aspect. 
birds usually fly  unless something prevents it. 
the normal meaning of 'canary* is 'a kind of bird'. 
tweety is a canary. 
in the above logical theory it is not possible to prove that 
tweety flies. however when the abnormality predicates are minimized in a right order  the remaining minimal model contains the right conclusion. the correct sequence in this case is : 
　in this case circumscription works. although the question remains : what is the source of the priorities. must it always be a human   
1. an alternative solution - an interaction of an object level and a referential level 
　we show how the same conclusion can be achieved as a result of interaction of an object level and a referential level within the framework we propose. 
the object level theory is  in this case  very simple: 
  	canary tweety   i.e. 	 tweety is a canary . 
	+flies tweety    	i.e.  can tweety fly    
　we assume that the information about birds and flying belongs to the referential level. in this case we take the 
 * we write three abnormality predicates instead of one  with two arguments  to facilitate the exposition. 
	zadrozny 	1 

longman dictionary of contemporary english. thus the referential level contains among thousands of facts the following information: 
  	bird is a creature with wings and feathers  
  feather is one of the many parts of the covering which grows on a bird's body   ...  
  wing is one of the 1 feathered limbs by which a bird flies   ...  
  canary is a type of small yellow bird usually kept as a pet. 
　this information is sufficient to deduce that tweety can fly  provided we have a method of parsing the dictionary definitions and transforming them into logical formulae. such tools begin to appear  and some of them have been used in a similar context: k.jensen and j.- l. binot  1  suggest that the disambiguation of prepositional phrases  like these in the sentences i ate a fish with a fork. 
i ate a fish with bones. 
is possible using on-line dictionaries and grammar. they have built tools to parse dictionary entries  and to extract semantically relevant information from these definitions and example sentences. 
　in our example  a dictionary has been used as a referential model in finding a plausible interpretation. in the next section we describe how an on-line grammar can suggest a non-classical interpretation of negation in the solution of a paradox of circumscription. in section 1 we reexamine the above example in order to show how the nonmonotonicity of commonsense deductions can be expressed using intended models based on preferences. we explain there how to deal with situations when tweety is a chicken  or a 
canary without wings. 
section 1. the paradox of hanks and mcdermott 
　s.hanks and d.mcdermott  1  recently criticized circumscription and other formal methods of nonmonotonic reasoning as inherently incapable of representing a certain  commonsense case of temporal reasoning. one of their arguments is based on the facts that these methods cannot choose the right conclusion in an instance of only one type of abnormality. 
this is the set of axioms that results in the paradox. 
1. 1. 1. 
1. 
in english  these axioms say: 
1 	reasoning 
e l . at the moment s1 a person is alive. 
e1. a gun is loaded  as a result of loading  in any situation . 
e1. people die as a result of being shot with a loaded gun  moreover being shot with a loaded gun is abnormal with respect to staying alive. 
e1. a fact does not change  unless it is abnormal with respect to an event. 
and this is the sequence of actions: 

possible interpretations: 
1. without circumscription we have 
 t   loaded  result  load  s       and nothing else can be proven. 

hence there are two models minimizing abnormality. but circumscription fails to choose the correct one  in which the person dies as the result of being shot. 
　this forms a basis for the critique of circumscription by hanks and mcdermott: 
1. even a single default rule can have multiple extensions  and circumscription  or default reasoning  is not able to choose the right one. 
1. there is no benefit from new  more complex versions of circumscription. 
 the problem is that the original idea behind circumscription  that a simple  problem independent extension to a first order theory would minimize predicates in just the right way has been lost along the way.  
1. 
 ...  it can be very hard to characterize the consequences of the circumscription axioms for a reasonably large and complex theory  and when the consequences are understood they may not be what we intended. the upshot is that no one really wants to know what follows from circumscription axioms; they usually wind up as hopefully harmless decoration to the actual theory. 
a solution of the paradox 
　to find a solution of the paradox let us compare first the following sentences: 
facts do not change every moment  unless something is unusual. 
either something is unusual or facts don't change. 
it is clear that these sentences do not have the same meaning. hence the logical formulae 

which correspond to these sentences should not be treated as equivalent either.  but in classical logic  they are.  
　a computational grammar of english - the plnlp english grammar of k.jensen et al. 1   for instance - can be used to pick up the grammatical differences between  or  and  unless . for example  the first sentence is  a complex declarative with an embedded subordinate clause   while the second one is  a compound declarative . these grammatical differences can be then reflected in semantics: 
since it is not known that  loaded  is abnormal with respect to waiting  one can assume 
- ab  loaded  wait  s  . then ab{alive hoot    and t deady s   can be deduced. 
thus the natural interpretation of  unless  is the negation under the closed world assumption. * and this way we obtain the correct extension in the case of the problem of hanks and mcdermott. 
　this solution is based on the claim that grammatical differences express semantical ones. it is obviously a plausible assertion in the context of commonsense reasoning. notice that the interpretation of negation in - ab f.e s  as a negation under cwa   is not the main issue here  although this is the way the unique model is chosen. the crux of the approach we propose is to use the linguistic constraints to decide what is the right interpretation of this negation. thus the formulation of the rule in english suggests both: its logical form and the interpretation of symbols appearing in this logical form.of course  it often happens that the formulation of a rule in english does not have an obvious and unambiguous translation into a logical formula. but then  if the english form of the rule is also given  as it is for instance the case with many expert systems  it might help in interpreting logical symbols. 
section 1 . mathematics of intended interpretations - elements of a theory 
　we define first the notion of a referential model and the logical structure of models of commonsense reasoning we consider. then we formally describe a particular class of 
* since we do not exclude indefinite conclusions  the cwa here is the generalized cwa  minker 1   i.e. the theory of all minimal models of a given theory. 
referential models - the ones expressing preferences in interpretations. also  we reexamine the example of tweety the canary  to account for the nonmonotonicity of commonsense reasoning. finally  we make some remarks about interaction of a referential level and a metalevel in the context of the problem of hanks and mcdermott. 
	1. 	the formal 	structures 
　a referential model can be any model that constrains interpretations of predicates of a theory  i.e. there is a formula p c  whose truth is undecided by a theory t   but which is either true or false in the model. for instance only  can be provable in an object 
theory but a referential model may allow to conclude and -y. 
definition. let t be a theory. n is a referential model for t   if there is a f o r m u l a s u c h that t does not prove p    or but 
stands for a logical value of the formula  ♀ 
in the m o d e l s  . 
　we already explained in section 1 that we assume the existence of three levels of reasoning: a metalevel  an object level  and a referential level. thus we do not discuss formal structures of the form where m is a collection of metarules  formula 
circumscription  }    t is a collection of object theories to which m are applicable  and  is a provability relation that possibly extends the classical provability by making use of the rules in m. instead  we 
want 	to 	analyze 	the 	quadruples 
	where r 	is a referential 
uses r  and possibly m . in par-
ticular  we are interested in the case  described below   when  contains partial orderings that express preferences in interpretations of terms. 
	1. 	preferred 	interpretations 
r. jackendoff  1   discusses the importance of preference rule systems for the theory of word meaning. he also points to the ubiquity of preference rule systems  cf. also rock  1 . jackendoffs insights justify our claim that preferred interpretation is a right formalism for the reasoning which uses language as its referential model. we show then in section 1 how preferences can be used to capture the non-monotonicity of commonsense reasoning. 
it is now time to introduce definitions that are needed to formalize the notion of an intended theory . 
definitions. 	models and intended theories 
   we assume we have a lexicon   a set of symbols   and a grammar  which decides which sequences of elements of sb constitute valid terms and formulae. 
	zadrozny 	1 

for instance  a computer grammar  like the already mentioned peg  and a list of english words can be such a pair 
 then terms would be words  phrases  np's   vp's  pfs etc.   and sentences. 
  the formulae can be identified with indicative sentences.   a theory is a collection of formulae. 
  in particular  logical formulae can be treated as a subclass of formulae. similarly for logical theories . 
  with each term we associate a list of its possible interpretations - other terms -  partially  ordered by a relation of preference. in particular  with some terms there will be associated sequences of theories ordered by preferences: 

  since the partial order will be often a linear order  so  in order not to complicate the notation  we assume it . 
we can also assume that the empty interpretation least preferred  for all terms. 
  a referential model based on preferences is a collection of such pairs. 
  an intended interpretation of a term consisting of a sequence of subterms  possibly one element  is a union of their most preferable interpreutions. we require however such an interpretation  i.e. this union  to be consistent . 
 more formally  let be the partial order induced on 
orderings of associated interpretations. 
  the partial models 	pm t  	of a the sequence of terms 

the partial models pick up from the referential level the most obvious information about /. this immediate information may be insufficient to decide the truth of the formulae of /. for instance  if 


pm t  is a collection of many models that interpret t. it is infinite even if all pm  /  are one element. clearly  we are interested in these elements of pm t  which contain maximum of information. 
  we define the intended models of t 

  the intended theory of t is defined  as before  as the set of formulae which are true in all intended models. 
1. 	nonmonotonic 	reasoning 	and 	changed 
preferences 
we illustrate now these notions with an example which also points to the source 	of nonmonotonicity 	in our formalization of commonsense reasoning. namely  changed preferences  	not 	very 	strong 	inference 	rules 	like circumscription  produce modifications in intended theories. we will use a very simple  prolog-like notation to make the inferences and changes transparent. 
tweety the canary - revisited.   	a fragment of the referential model: bird 
wing 
fly 
canary 

1 	reasoning 

note: in this example  the logical formulae are based on dictionary definitions  longman 1    but the information on the referential level may come from other sources too  thus a  bird  may also contain 

　inacross 
	zadrozny 	1 

1. prioritized circumscription deals with orderings on different kinds of abnormalities; priorities in our framework are about interpretation of any terms. thus prioritized circumscription has nothing to say about examples like the one from the beginning of section 1  while our model can capture also some aspects of pronominal reference and of the disambiguation of prepositional phrases  as presented in k.jensen & j.- l.binot  1 . 
1. interaction of a referential level and a metalevel 
　a referential level should provide situation independent interpretations of symbols. in the above example these interpretations were interacting with an object theory. but our analysis of the  yale shooting problem  in section 1 indicates that the referential level may contain specifications of relationships between terms and and their metalevel interpretations. for instance  the term  unless  may be associated on the referential level with the metalevel formula 
    if  should be interpreted under cwa  . 
section 1. conclusions 
　the most significant novelty presented here is the separation of the referential level from the object level and the metalevel  and the suggestion that natural language is the most important reference for common sense. 
　we've proven that priorities in interpretation of predicates and constants on the logical level of reference can be the source of nonmonotonicity in reasoning. we have shown that nl in the form of  on-line  dictionaries  grammars etc  can be taken as the referential level for commonsense reasoning. moreover  the three-level logical framework can be applied to semantics of natural languages   zadrozny and jensen  1 . 
　since more types of problems can be solved using the division into the three logical levels than by minimization alone  this approach is superior to circumscription. but it is clearly an open problem what are the limits of the proposed method  how much of common sense can be captured by referring to language  and how one could measure the common sense. 
acknowledgements. i want to thank j.l.lassez  k.jensen  j.l.binot  k.skandalis and t.wetter for useful discussions. part of this paper was written in october 1 during my stay in germany  which was supported by the alexander von humboldt stiftung. 
1 	reasoning 
