 basic principles of these two approaches were presented in 	this paper describes a system 	for the 	analysis of two 	papers 	by the current author  yang  1  1 . 	the chinese language that incorporates several heuristic tech- emphasis here is on incorporating these approaches into an niques for reducing ambiguities. effective analysis system.      heuristic knowledge about  characteristic  words is used 	to predict a partial syntactic structure of sentence 	1 	p r o c e s s i n g f l o w a n d c o n t r o l m e t h o d before doing global analysis. more than one prediction may 	t h l s s y s t e m 	c o n s i s t s of four mapr components which exist  the system chooses the best combination of compati- 	perform 	segmentation  	preprocessing  	phrase 	structure ble partial predictions. backtracking is evoked if acontradic- analysis  and case structure analysis these are illustrated in tion is later detected  producing a different choice of predic- figure 1 and explained below tions. 
     semantic constraints are used for translating phrase structure into case structure rules are written to independent modules for word classes. an object-oriented scheme organizes the rules into layers  according to their priorities of application. 
     a preference score is calculated at each step of processing  giving a synthetic evaluation of both syntactic plausibil- ity and semantic plausibility. the scores of partial results 
steer a priority-driven parser towards the most plausible sentence structure  instead of generating all the possible results and afterwards making the choice. 
     an experimental system based on these techniques has been built and tested on over one hundred sentences 
selected from published material. the results were very successful. the number of trees required to be produced in order to obtain a correct analysis was typically reduced from several hundred to under ten. 
1 introduction figure 1 the basic configuration of the system 	the 	studies 	concerned 	with 	automatic 	analysis 	of the segmentation component translates the input string chinese language have been done mostly in the 1's. a 	of characters to a string of words 	 this is not trivial number of systems have been built. for example  fan and 	because 	it is customary to write chinese words without xu  used an a t n grammar in a prototype chinese spaces between them  but this is not the focus of this understanding system. 	feng 	 	experimented 	with paper.  translation of chinese text on the geta system. 	huang the preprocessing makes a partial prediction of the  1  built a system that performed a bidirectional transla- phrase structure according to the appearance of characteristic tion between english and chinese. in these studies  how- words in the sentence. more than one prediction  of partial ever  the emphasis was not on resolving ambiguities. structures  may be obtained  a preference scheme is used to phrase structure analysis of chinese runs immediately choose the best combination of compatible predictions  into an explosive growth of possible structures because there 	the 	phrase structure is built by a context free  cf  are very few morphological variations of word roots to indi- parser  following the prediction from preprocessing. the cate category or sentence structure. we must find a way to parser first does local analysis on the parts where partial introduce both syntactic and semantic constraints as early as structures are predicted to be exist  then composes the par-possible in order to restrict the growth of ambiguities. tial results into a global structures. in case there is no struc-the chinese analysis system presented here is charac- ture is found as predicted  backtracking  to preprocessing  terized 	by 	two 	heuristic 	approaches 	to 	disambiguation: 	occurs for the 	next prediction. 	since 	the 	context free predicting syntactic structure from the presence of charac- analysis is restricted on the partial structures  the combina-teristic words  and evaluating the plausibility of possible torial growth of possible results is effectively reduced. 
     the case structure is derived from the phrase structure  according to the semantic constraints associated with words. the relationship between words or component structures is identified by case labels on the case structure  and the semantic consistency between the components is measured by preference scores. 
　　　the phrase structure analysis and the case structure analysis work in an interactive way. the phrase structure is built bottom-up. the semantic analysis is evoked each time when a partial syntactic structure  a phrase  is obtained  giving the corresponding case structure. the partial result in such an approach is a combination of a phrase structure  partial   its case structure  and a preference score which is a synthetic evaluation of both the syntactic and the semantic plausibility. for each cycle of the syntactic and semantic analysis in the bottom-up process  the parser looks at the set of partial results  chooses the one with highest preference score  and expands further analysis from this piece. the other partial results are saved  so the searching direction can be adjusted each time the preference of partial results is changed during the analysis. the above process continues until a complete parse is found. the priority-driven parsing arrives directly more plausible structures first  without trying all the possibilities and then comparing them 
	1 . 	u s a g e o f h e u r i s t i c k n o w l e d g e 
1  handling prediction rules in preprocessing 
     the characteristic words used in preprocessing are a subset  about 1 words  of chinese functional words  such as prepositions  locative particles  auxiliary words  modifier verbs  etc. they are frequently used and give hints of the sentence structure when they appear  but their use is often optional 
     knowledge about the appearance of characteristic words is written to prediction rules of partial syntactic structures there are sets of rules for groups of characteristic words with similar functions. approximately 1 atns were writr ten  each expressing the rules for a group of related characteristic words. 
the preprocessing is done in the following steps. 
  extract fragments  partial predictions  by applying the rules of the characteristic words which appear in the sentence  and calculate the plausibility score for each fragment  according to its type  length  or the number of the recognizable characteristic words it contains  
  detect the conflict between fragments by checking their types and locations  to see if they overlap   
  construct the  most likely  combination of compatible fragments  according to the scores of fragments  
  backtrack for the next combination when a prediction is rejected in the subsequent analysis. 
1  semantic processing 
     semantic processing is used to analyze the roles of component phrases  and represent the relationship on a case structure. more than one case structure may be derived from a phrase structure. the semantic analysis gives each of the case structures a preference score by checking the semantic consistency between components. 
1 	natural language 
	consider  	as 	an 	example  	a 	sentence 
	  small child laugh he be 
one big fatso   which means that  small children laugh at him for being a big fatso.  this sentence shows a sequence np1-v-np1-v-np1 which is a compound sentence pattern called  serial verb construction   svc  in chinese grammar. syntactic analysis can not recognize which verb in the svc string is the predicate of the sentence  the  laugh  or the   b e   ; or where the embedded clause should be located on  the np1-v-np1  the np1-v-np1  or the v-np1  that is because there is no morphological variation  like the  for  or the  -tny  in english  to indicate the structure of such a sentence. this ambiguity can be resolved only when the meaning of words is considered 
     this system does not distinguish svc sequences by phrase structures  but maps them to different case structures 
 seven types  according to the semantic consistency 	figure 
1 shows two possible case structures for the above sentence 


     in calculating the semantic plausibility of the two case structures  constraints between verbs and their subject  object and/or the subordinate clause are checked. in the first structure  the predicate   s h i 1    be  has a embedded clause   small children laugh at him   as its subject. this structure is semantic unlikely because the subject  a clause  does not match the complement  fatso   a h u m a n . the preference for this matching is a negative score of   - 1   . in the second structure  the main clause  small children laugh at h i m   is modified by subordinate clause  he is a big fatso  which causes the previous event to happen. the semantic constraint for such a structure is that the predicate of the caused event should be an emotional verb   laugh  is such a verb  and so a positive score of  1- 1  is added for this evaluation. on the other hand  the semantic checking for the subordinate clause brings another   - h i   because both the subject   h e   and the complement  fatso  belong to the semantic category h u m a n . the partial scores are added together and the correct structure  the second one  has higher score 
     semantic constraints used are written into separate modules of rules for different word groups. different sets of semantic groups are chosen according to the linguistic phenomena where the ambiguities occur. seven verb classes  for example  are used for analyzing svc sentences. 
they are 	named causative  	emotional  	posses-
sive  narrative  spec1al-1  special-ii and norm a l   and each of them corresponds to one type of case structures about sixty classes are used for nouns. 
     the modules of semantic rules are organized into a hierarchy according to their operational properties. in semantic processing  an objectroriented scheme applies these modules  called objects  by searching along the hierarchy. word specific rules are tried first if they are given; otherwise  their parent objects are applied  and so on. 
     object-oriented systems usually work by sending a 
     message to an object which returns one message as its result. in a natural language analysis system  we need to deal with multiple possibilities during parsing. this system supports a mechanism to send a message to more than one object and then return all of the possible results of objects. also  more than one parent object is allowed for an object  for nondeterministic search 
1. experimental results 
　　　a experimental system  written in lisp  was built to test the above methods. the system contained an 1 word dictionary for the syntactic analysis  1 atns  for preprocessing  about 1 cfg rules of the phrase structure grammar  and about 1  objects   including word specific objects  for the semantic analysis.  the priority-driven mechanism is designed but not coded in yet  because it is not absolutely necessary in the stage of testing the main methods  and there should be no technical difficulty in 
implementing such a search  when necessary.  
     over one hundred sentences taken from a chinese physics textbook  scientific papers  grammar books  etc.  were chosen for testing the components of the system. the preprocessing gave the correct result as its first choice 1% of the time. the syntactic analysis subsystem was separately tested with the same set of sentences  the preprocessing was not used to restrict the syntactic possibilities   and the correct phrase structure was obtained for 1% of the time. a subset of these sentences was used to test the whole system  the correct result was the first choice for 1 out of 1 
sentences and the second choice for the remaining 1. 
     a typical example shows the parsing efficiency of this system. in analyzing the following sentence: 

   in the perfect situation with out friction the object will keep moving at a constant speed.'   preprocessing reduced the syntactic ambiguities from 1 possibilities  trees  into 1. these 1 syntactic structures were interpreted into 1 case structures. using their preference scores  the correct result was obtained as the first choice. 
1. s u m m a r y 
     this paper described the technique for buiding a chinese analysis system which combines segmentation  preprocessing  phrase structure analysis and case structure analysis. 
     this system applies two heuristic approaches for ambiguity resolution: predicting partial syntactic structure by characteristic words and introducing semantic constraints in translating the phrase structure to the case structure. knowledge needed for this analysis is formalized in independent modules for each approach and managed as an integrated process. interactions between the preprocessing  the syntactic analysis and the semantic analysis  make it easy to introduce constraints as early as possible  and thus efficiently reduce the growth of ambiguities the preference scheme makes it possible to use incomplete knowledge in partial analyses  and make a synthetic evaluation for the global structure by summing the partial scores. 
     in conclusion  these methods should be useful for natural language analysis  where ambiguity raises a serious problem  and complex linguistic information must be managed efficiently. 
acknowledgements 
     i would like to thank the members of doshita's laboratory at kyoto university and the computing research laboratory at new mexico state university for their help and fruitful discussions. 
