 	b boundary of the patch. it is usually assumed that the reflectance 
map r n   which specifies the radiance of a surface patch as n a function of its orientation  is known. for the canonical case 
we propose an algorithm to recover three-dimensional shape i.e. a of lambertian surfaces illuminated by a point light source  this 
surface orientation and relative depth from a single segmented ＜ implies knowing the light source direction. three-dimensional 
image of scenes containing opaque curved objects bounded by i: shape recovery is possible if the patch happens to be bounded by 
piecewise smooth surfaces. it is assumed that the surfaces have s limbs  called occluding contours by some authors  which makes 
no markings or texture and that the reflectance map e = r   n   is l the boundary surface normal calculation easy. no use is made 
known. solutions for simpler versions of this problem have been t of other kinds of lines e.g. projections of edges tangent plane 
presented by sugihara for polyhedra  and by horn et al for smooth c discontinuities . consequently the approach cannot be directly 
surface 	patches. 	d employed on images of general piecewise smooth curved objects. 
we first analyze the constraints from the line drawing and e 
the question which can then be posed is-are there any schemes 
the image brightness values on the faces  edges and vertices in the which try to exploit all the information in a segmented image  i.e.  
scene. for a face this is done by horn's image irradiance equation. w both line drawing and shading constraints  in order to recover 
to set up the other constraints we need to know line labels-which b quantitative 1-d shape. this has been done for the special case 
can be found using the algorithm developed in  malik '1 . at a c of polyhedra by sugihara . for scenes containing curved ob-
limb  the direction of the surface normal is known directly. we c 
jects  the problem is significantly harder and sugihara's approach 
develop a variational formulation of the constraints at an edge- j does not have a natural generalization. to the best of our knowl-
both from the known direction of the image curve correspond-   edge there was no method for 1-d shape recovery for the class of 
ing to the edge and the shading. the associated euler-lagrange e curved objects bounded by piecewise smooth surfaces. 
equation completely captures the local information. at a vertex    
                                                                       in this paper  we develop such a method. the scheme builds the constraints are modelled by a set of non-linear equations. an upon  and exploits  past work on line drawing interpretation- algorithm has been developed to solve this system of constraints  i 
specifically the line labelling work of malik    -and the work ♀ 
	 	c of horn and his colleagues on shape-from-shading. a more de-

1 introduction
1 	perception in this paper  we study the problem of recovering the threedimensional shape of the visible surfaces in a scene from a single two-dimensional image. we restrict our attention to scenes composed of opaque solid objects bounded by piecewise smooth surfaces with no markings or texture on them. by three-dimensional shape we mean a map of surface normal vectors-or equivalently relative depth-along the lines of marr's 1/1d sketch  horn's needle diagram  or barrow and tennenbaum's intrinsic images. 
　　the two sources of information about 1-d shape in a segmented image of the class of scenes permitted by us are  a  the line drawing  and  b  the pixel brightness values. both have been the subject of considerable research in computational vision. work on line drawing interpretation of scenes containing curved objects has been most successful in qualitative characterization  e.g.  in terms of line labels  or sign of gaussian curvature . attempts  have also been made to obtain numerical surface orientation information by making additional assumptions. 
　　use of pixel brightness values in a single smooth surface patch has been the theme of the shape-from-shading work of horn and his colleagues   . here the goal has been to solve the image irradiance equation-an equation relating surface orientation to brightness-by supplying the surface normal direction along the tailed account of this scheme can be found in . 
1 constraints from a line drawing 
in order to study the constraints imposed by a line drawing on the shape of the scene  it is convenient first to obtain a qualitative characterization of each line. this is done by associating with it a label from the set {+ -  - -   - - -*- }. the first four of these labels denote edges which correspond in the scene to the intersections of surfaces with distinct tangent planes. these labels have the usual significance as in the huffman-clowes label set for polyhedra. the { - - -*- } labels denote limbs which correspond to curves along which the surface curves smoothly around to occlude itself. as one walks in the direction of the twin arrows the surface lies to the right. see figure 1 for an example. 
　　for curved objects the label can change along a line as can be seen on edge ab in figure 1  section 1 . we therefore need to distinguish between two different senses of line labelling. a dense labelling is a function which maps the set of all points on curves in the drawing into the set of labels. the dense labelling problem is to find all the dense labellings of a drawing which can correspond to a projection of some scene. currently no algorithm is known for finding the dense labelling of a line drawing of curved objects using only the information available in a line drawing. in the context of 

figure 1  it means that there is no algorithm for exactly locating x  the point of transition from convex to occluding. 
　　alternatively  we could restrict our attention to sufficiently small neighborhoods of the junctions of the line drawing. for each line segment  between junctions  we now have to specify only two labels-one at each end. of the 1n combinatorially possible label assignments to the n lines in a drawing only a small subset correspond to physically possible scenes. we refer to these as legal sparse labelltngs. the determination of all legal sparse labellings of a particular line drawing is the sparse labelling problem. noto that the 1et of legal sparse labellings is always a finite set  usually small . 
the sparse labelling problem has been tackled successfully- by 
hurfman and clowes  for trihedral objects  by mackworth  and sugihara  for arbitrary polyhedra  and by malik    for curved objects. 
　　line labelling is important precisely because lines with different labels correspond to different types of constraints. at limbs one can determine the surface orientation uniquely. it can be shown  l    that n  the unit surface normal  lies in the image plane and is in the direction of  the outward pointing unit vector in the image plane drawn perpendicular to the projection of the limb. see figure 1. 
　　at an edge  the constraint is weaker. let e be the unit tangent vector to the edge at a point  and let n1 and n1 be the unit surface normals to the tangent planes to the two faces and at the point. let e be oriented such that when one walks on the edge in the direction of   the face  is to the left  see figure 1 . now e is perpendicular to n1 because e lies in the tangent plane to the f a c e s i m i l a r l y e is perpendicular to n1. therefore e is parallel to similarly. we do not know the vector e  but from a line drawing we can determine its orthographic projection into the image plane. we thus have the constraint 
here the notation vproj is used for the orthographic projection of v into the image plane  is a positive scalar if the edge is convex  negative if the edge is concave. note that this constraint is equally valid for occluding convex edges  where one of the surface normals corresponds to a hidden face. 
　　for later use  it is convenient to develop an alternative version of the orientation constraint. let nc be a unit vector in the image plane perpendicular to eproj. as that  as nc has no component in the z 
direction  this is equivalent to saying that using the vector triple product notation 

figure 1: orientation constraints at limbs and edges 
1 image constraints on 1-d shape 
if the dense labelling of a line drawing is known  the problem of three-dimensional shape recovery can be formulated as that of finding a piecewise smooth function n x y  which minimizes the following functional 

　　here i is the entire image  e the edges  l the limbs  and b the set of all curves  edges and limbs . in the two line integrals s is the arc length parameter along the curve. n1  and n1  are the two limits of the discontinuous function n x y  when a point on an edge is approached on its two faces. 
　　the first term measures the error in satisfying the image irradiance equation  and the second and third terms measure the errors in trying to satisfy the line drawing constraints. the last term is a 'regularization term' intended to select a particularly smooth solution. 
　　note that we have not ensured that the position constraints corresponding to the line labelling are satisfied nor that the resulting n x y  is integrable. how this can be done is discussed in 
. 
　　one could find the euler equation and develop a numerical scheme for minimizing this functional-however that would be a futile exercise as there is no available algorithm for determining the dense labelling in advance. of course  we could seek to recover the dense labelling as part of the process of finding the shape n x y . this leads to a difficult global minimization problem  which is discussed in . 
　　in this paper we develop an alternative approach. while we do not know how to precompute the dense labelling  the set of legal sparse labellings of the drawing can in fact be precomputed using the line labelling algorithm developed in malik . to exploit this knowledge  we need to formulate the image constraints in a 
　　slightly different way. 
　　it is convenient to partition the constraints into the following three classes:  a  constraints in the interior of an im ge area   b  constraints in the neighborhood of an image curve   c  constraints in the neighborhood of a junction. surface continuity requirements provide the cross-coupling among the solutions of these constraint sets. in the next three subsections we analyze each of these and develop schemes for local shape recovery. 
1 	shape constraints inside an area 
the only source of constraint is the shading and we wish to find the 'smoothest' surface consistent with the pixel brightness values. this is exactly the shape from shading problem which has been studied by horn and his colleagues and we can adopt their analyses and algorithms unchanged. specifically  we use the relaxation scheme suggested by drooks and horn   section 1. 
　　the horn-brooks relaxation scheme  just like the other algorithms for this problem  requires knowledge of the direction of the surface normal along the boundary of the patch. empirical evidence suggests that knowing the surface normal along a significant fraction of the boundary is adequate in practice. 
	malik 	1 

1 	shape constraints along an image curve 
at a limb  the surface normal is uniquely determined by the direction of the projected curve. so the interesting case is that of an edge  where there are both shading and line drawing constraints. we want to use these to determine the surface normals  and   on the two faces and as a function of the arc length parameter $ along the edge. to do this  we have to measure the brightness values on the two sides of the edge in the line drawing. 
　　to determine n1 and n1 one has to solve for 1 independent parameters.  while there are 1 components of n  the unit length constraint means that only two are independent.  if the edge is connect  convex or concave   there are two equations due to shading:  and e1- the direction of the edge gives us one more equation  n1 n1  still leaving us one equa-
tion short. it is not possible to solve for n1 n1 by just looking at the neighborhood of a point on an edge  just as in the standard shape-from-shading problem it is not possible to compute n locally. we need to make use of boundary conditions  and maximize smoothness-points which are physically close should have similar surface normals . to do this  we incorporate a ' regularization term' where i are the derivatives of n1 s  and n1 s  with respect to arc length. we thus have the following composite functional 
 1  
u1 
　　minimizing this functional is an exercise in the calculus of variations. we have to find the euler equations  eliminate the lagrange multipliers and come up with a suitable finite difference scheme. these calculations  result in the following scheme for computing 

these schemes tell us how to 'grow' the solution. the iteration can in fact be started just given the values of n1  n1 at the initial point. as  and n1 are both equal to 1 at the initial point  natural boundary conditions   we assume 
　　it should be pointed out that the analysis in this section has been for connect edges-if the edge is occluding  we do not know the brightness values for the occluded face and thus have one less constraint. for curved objects  an edge can change its label from convex to occluding between junctions e.g. at point x in figure 1. however we know  that such points correspond to 
1 	perception 

figure 1: dealing with edge label transitions 
invisible limbs  and therefore can be detected by checking if n  is sufficiently small. in figure 1  . the iterations in  1  and  1  should be stopped at this point. 
　　when n1  s is known along the edge  it is possible to recover n  s  even when n1 unknown at initial point. use newton's method to compute n1 at initial point. this can be done because we now have two constraints on n1 viz.  and 
 as these constraints are non-linear  there is no guarantee of a unique solution. however it can be proved that for a reflectance map arising from a lambertian surface illuminated with a point light source  there can only be one or two solutions. we use the iterative scheme in  1  above to propagate each of the 

figure 1: shape recovery at a vertex 
solutions  and pick the one which corresponds to the smaller error as measured by the functional in  1 . 
1 	shape constraints at a vertex 
at a vertex we have  a  shading constraints from the brightness values on the faces which meet at the vertex  and  b  line drawing constraints from the projections of the edges incident at a vertex. under certain conditions  there are enough constraints to uniquely determine the surface normals on each of the faces purely from the local information. 
　　consider vertex a in figure 1 and enumerate the constraints on n1  n1  and n1. there are 1 independent parameters  1 for each surface normal  and 1 independent equations  1 from brightness values on the faces  1 from the directions of the projections of the edges . there are as many independent equations as unknowns. as the equations are nonlinear  we are not guaranteed a unique solution. however  pruning using our additional knowledge about the three edges being convex or concave typically leaves us with only one solution. 

   it can be seen that the method described above works for any vertex with n  1 faces if and only if they are all visible. if any of the faces at the vertex is hidden  the constraint due 

figure 1: sequence of steps in global shape recovery 
to the brightness value on that face is missing  and there are fewer equations than unknowns. however if there is exactly one hidden face  and the surface normal on one of the faces at the vertex is known  perhaps by propagation of information on one of the faces/edges that it lies on   then the number of independent equations again becomes equal to the number of unknowns and one can solve for the rest of the surface normals. in figure 1  once 
n1 is known  n1 and n1 can be determined. 
1 global shape recovery 
in sections 1-1 we studied the constraint sets for image areas  curves and junctions  and developed numerical schemes for local shape recovery. in   we show how these combine to form a global shape recovery algorithm. here we will illustrate this algorithm on two examples. 
　　the hatched parts of the figures denote what has been freshly computed in a particular iteration. in figure 1  the computation starts with determination of the surface normals to the three faces at a  using the vertex shape recovery procedure  followed by the computation of the surface normals along ab  ac and ad using the edge shape recovery procedure described by the equations  1  and  1 . this generates the boundary conditions needed for 

figure 1: sequence of steps in global shape recovery 
 applying the horn-brooks shape from shading algorithm to each face. in figure 1  the first two stages are self-evident  and the third stage makes use of the procedure for computing n1 s  given  along the edge described in the last paragraph of section 1. finally the horn-brooks shape from shading algorithm is applied to the top face. 

'in the sense that it corresponds to the particular scene being imaged. 
they are all consistent with the line drawing information. 
　　in the examples just considered  we started from the correct labelling. what is actually available to us are a set of sparse labellings among which only one is correct1. when we start from an incorrect sparse labelling  the 1-d shape computed will be incorrect and hence will not satisfy the line drawing and shading constraints within the margin of error permitted by the inaccuracies in the data   i.e. noise in pixel brightness values  errors in estimates of edge direction etc.  . this gives us a way to prune away the shapes resulting from incorrect labellings. we refer the reader to  for the complete algorithm and a study of the effects of noise. 
