 
the common distinction between probabilities that can be based on frequencies known to hold in a sequence of repeatable events  and probabilities that concern unique events  and that therefore must be based on subjective opinion  is argued to be misguided. all events are in some relevant sense  unique   and  more importantly  all events can in a relevant sense be placed in classes of similar events. a formal calculus is described for accomplishing this in relatively simple but useful cases. * 
a. statistics and unique events 
   almost everyone will agree that when our background in statistical knowledge is extensive enough  and when the case with which we are concerned is a  repeatable  event  then objective probabilities are appropriate  and these are the probabilities that should enter into the computation of expectation and into our decision theory. a great many people will also agree that there is another whole class of cases  in which we are concerned with unique events  in which we lack statistical knowledge  and for which we must turn to subjective probability or one of its surrogates. i propose here to argue against this distinction. of course it is easy enough to argue this way in a purely philosophical vein: every event must be unique --it has its own spatiotemporal locus; and every event must belong to some class of events about which  in principle  we could have statistical knowledge. but this is not my point. my point is that from a down-to-earth practical point of view  from the point of view that seeks to compute probabilities and expectations for making decisions  the distinction between 'repeatable' and 'unique* events is not only untenable  but seriously misleading. 
b. kinds of cases 
   let us consider some examples of these alleged distinctions. consider the toss of a coin. there is a classical 'repeatable' event: not only can we toss a coin over and over again; coins have been tossed over and over again  and in the experience of each 
* this work has been supported in part by the signals warfare center. 
1 	reasoning 
of us there is a large data-base of results of coin tosses  or an impressionistic resume of such a data-base . and we have physical grounds  i.e.  grounds stemming from the laws of physics for thinking that coins land heads about half the time. and so we can regard that toss of that coin as a 
member of a class of tosses  of which we have reason to believe that half yield heads.  alternatively  we might regard that toss as a kind of trial that has a propensity of a half to yield heads. 
   now of course a particular toss  at a particular time and place  cannot be repeated. we all know that. but the event can be repeated 'in all relevant respects*. we don't have to make the toss at the same time or the same place; we don't have to use the same coin; we don't have to use the same kind of coin; we don't have to flip it in any particular way. 
   consider another kind of case. i want the probability that my friend sam will be at home tonight after supper. i know that on some week nights he goes to the movies. this is unlike the coin in that i can specify some of the factors that lead him to go out or to stay home. thus i might know that he likes westerns ~ so if there is a good western in town  he will be more likely to be at the movies. on the other hand  i might know that he is very conscientious about studying for his chemistry examinations - so if there were to be a chemistry examination tomorrow  sam would be most likely to be at home. it is hard to specify a  repeatable  event. in short this seems like a perfect case for subjective probability. but if i 
   know sam well  i will have some basis for knowing how often  in general  he goes out on week-nights. my knowledge is neither so precise nor secure as my knowledge of the coin  but surely it is not nonexistent. 
   but we must beware of allowing the variety of bur knowledge about sam to serve as an excuse for guessing wildly. analogously  if we were to have detailed and microscopic data concerning the coin toss  we could perhaps predict with a better than 1% success rate. this possibility should not be allowed to undermine our sensible tendency to assign a probability of a half to the occurrence of heads on the specified toss when we lack that microscopic data. 
   finally  there are some circumstances under which my probability concerning sam's being at home is just as exact as my probability concerning the flip of a coin. for example  i may know that he decided whether or not to go to the movies by flipping an ordinary coin. suppose in addition that i know that he went out if and only if the coin landed heads. then the probability that sam went to the movies is 1. this brings out an important point that i shall enshrine as an axiom: 
al if s and tare known to have the same truthvalue  then they have the same probability. 
this axiom does not require that s and t be equivalent in any strong sense; all that is required is that we know that they have the same truth value. 
this axiom already undermines the argument for subjectivity based on uniqueness. it is asked   how can you find an objective probability for the event of a new york nuclear power plant suffering a meltdown  when there is no class of instances to generalize from: there is only one new york nuclear power plant  its design is unique  etc.  the answer is that we need not be concerned about the frequency of failure in plants of such and such design  but rather can transform that sentence into one having the same truth value  to which our statistical knowledge is applicable.  the plant will fail if and only if gate valve #1 fails or gate valve #1 fails...  
   here is another example. i hold in my hand a 
   newly minted coin. i will toss it once  and then melt it down. what is the probability that this coin will yield heads when tossed  the relative frequency among tosses of this coin is 1 or 1 - we have no statistical knowledge of the behavior of this coin. but we know that the toss of this coin i am about to perform will yield heads iff the next toss of a coin yields heads -- and for tosses of coins in general we have lots of statistical evidence. 
c. a simple system 
   here is a very simple example of how objective probability can be applied to  unique  events. it is essentially due to reichenbach  1 . 
               be a finite set of potential reference classes; let   be a finite set of 
properties  including such properties as being a 
member of a particular class   and let be a 
set of distinct individuals. we can define a language on this basis in the usual way. 
add to this language enough mathematics to do statistics  and define an item of possible statistical knowledge to be a sentence of the syntactical form 
   which we read: the proportion of objects in the reference class r  that have the property ps is x. proportions satisfy the classical probability calculus. 
   let a bodyof knowledge k be a set of sentences. we impose few restrictions on k. we want it to be consistent in the sense that there should be no sentence s in k for which   s is also in k. 	we want some logical truths in k. we want the items of possible statistical knowledge to be consistent statements concerning the relations of the possible reference classes and properties. finally  we want the 
 finite number of  sentences of the form 
together with 	to generate a 
partition of all the sentences of the language under the relation of being known to have the same truth value. 
   these constraints are embodied in the following axioms: 
a1 r is closed under intersection 

thus rw is the smallest reference class about which we have statistical information to which iy is known to belong. this is essentially reichenbacns idea  except for the addition of axiom a l . 
 we can generate the probability more clearly by utting the fourth condition as a constraint on a table  et the first column of the table contain a list of all the 
reference classes rw to which iy is known to belong. let the second column contain the value of from the corresponding item of statistical knowledge: 
**a non-mathematical statement is one whose truth value depends only on empirical facts. 
	kyburg 	1 


d. limitations 
   this approach deals perfectly reasonably with tosses of coins and the like. it also does what we want for sam  in the case in which he decides whether or not to go to the movies by tossing a coin. but it has serious drawbacks. it fails to provide for the case in which we get the probability of sam going to the movies from a limited statistical basis. it gives us no probability at all when we know of iy that it belongs to two reference classes  and our knowledge about those reference classes doesn't agree  and we don't know that either reference class is included in the other. 
¡¡the remedy is simple and obvious  but it entails considerable complication. we allow items of possible statistical knowledge to embody approximate knowledge. let us write: 
to mean that the proportion of objects in the reference class rw having the property is in the closed interval 
   suddenly we have statistical knokwledge about every property and every reference class: at the very least we will know that the proportion lies in  o lj. and now what do we mean by      these changes work: say that two intervals  differ  if neither is included in the other  and rewrite  1  to say that if rw and rw' differ  then rw is known to be included in rw  

and. finally  we must include another clause to single out for us the most informative interval that is not ruled out by conflict with another interval: 
 1  ifrwf has not been eliminated as a possible reference class by the earlier conditions  then the interval corresponding to rw is a subinterval of the interval corresponding to 

this new definition of probability is still limited - it turns out that we would like two other relations  in addition to the subset relation  to excuse  difference .  one is a gubsample relation dual to the subreference class relation. the other is a cross-product relation that accounts for conditionalization in the presence of background knowledge.  and we would like to be able to consider equivalence to statements concerning several different individuals  kyburg  1 . but it is already quite powerful  and it has some rattier interesting properties: 
    1  all probabilities are objective  in the sense that each proeability is based on empirical knowledge about frequencies or chances in the world. 
    1  every statement in the language has a probability; there is no distinction detween statements 
1 	reasoning 
concerning  re pea table  events and statements concerning  unique  events. 
    1  no a priori probabilities are required; all probabilities can be based on experience.  but how they can be so based is another story.  
e. conclusion 
   probabilistic knowledge may be regarded as all of a piece. there is no need to distinguish between 
statistical  probabilities that have objective warrant 
in the world and  subjective  probabilities that merely reflect our subjective feelings. when we apply our knowledge of statistical facts to individual cases  it is the probability of a unique event that is at issue. when we offer a  subjective  probability for a unique event  it is  if it has any epistemological justification at all  based on some  possible approximate  statistical knowledge. the difference between the two cases lies in the fact that in the former case it is easy to specify the reference class -- it may even be built into tne problem through the use of the indefinite articles  a  and  an  -- and in the latter case  it may be quite difficult to put your finger on the reference class. but this is a difference of degree  and not of kind. the procedures suggested here  and in kyburg 1  can render both kinds computable within quite rich languages. 
