 
it is increasingly recognized in natural language processing that intonation makes a significant contribution to the communication of discourse structure. however  the correspondence between particular intonational features and specific aspects of discourse structure is only beginning to be understood. in this paper  we show how tune  phrasing  accent  and pitch range can combine to convey information about the nature of speaker intentions and about the relationship among those intentions. our findings reveal new sources of linguistic information for research in plan inference and discourse understanding  and allow us to make more sophisticated use of intonational variation in synthetic speech. 
1. introduction 
　　　it is increasingly recognized in natural language processing that intonation makes a significant contribution to the communication of discourse structure. however  the correspondence between particular intonational features and specific aspects of discourse structure is only beginning to be understood. in  we proposed a tentative mapping between what grosz and sidner  term the attentional and intentional structures of discourse  and intonational features such as pitch range  accent  phrasing  and tune. in this paper  we extend this work  focussing on the role of intonation in communicating intentional structure. we show how intonational features can combine to convey information about the nature of speaker intentions and about the relationship among those intentions. in particular  we describe how pitch range is used to communicate discourse structure; how phrasing and accent indicate cue phrase interpretation for words like now  moreover  and finally  which can convey relationships between intentions; and how tune conveys information about speaker intentions and the relationship between those intentions. our findings reveal new sources of linguistic information for research in plan inference and discourse understanding  and allow us to make more sophisticated use of intonational variation in synthetic speech. as a working framework  we adopt grosz and sidner's  model of discourse structure and pierrehumbert's system of intonational description . 
1 intentional structure 
　　　orosz and sidner  propose a tripartite view of discourse structure: a linguistic structure  which is the text/speech itself; an attentional structure  which includes information about the relative salience of objects  properties  relations  and intentions at any point in the discourse; and an intentional structure  which relates discourse segment purposes 
1 	natural language 
 dsps  - whose recognition is essential to a segment achieving its intended effect - to one another. each dsp contributes to the overall discourse purpose  dp  of the discourse. dps and dsps are intentions whose satisfaction represents the main purpose of a discourse or segment  e.g.  intend that an agent believe some fact  or  intend that an agent believe that one fact supports another.  while all dsps by definition must contribute to the dp  dsps may also be related to one another in one of two ways: first  dsp1 is said to contribute to dsp1 when dsp1 provides part of the satisfaction of dsp1; in this case dsp1 is said to dominate dsp1. second  dsp1 is said to satisfaction-precede dsp1 whenever dsp1 must be satisfied temporally before dsp1. these relations thus impose two partial orderings on dsps in a discourse: a dominance hierarchy and a satisfaction-precedence ordering. 
1 dimensions of intonational variation 
　　　in pierrehumbert's  system of intonational description  intonational contours are described as sequences of low  l  and high  h  tones in the f1  fundamental frequency  contour. a well-formed intermediate phrase consists of one or more pitch accents  which are aligned with stressed syllables  syllable alignment is indicated by *  on the basis of the metrical pattern of the text  plus a simple h or l which characterizes the phrase accent. the phrase accent spreads over the material between the last pitch accent of the current intermediate phrase and the beginning of the next - or the end of the utterance. intonational phrases are composed of one of more such intermediate phrases plus a boundary tone  which may also be h or l and is indicated by '%'. it falls exactly at the phrase boundary. 
　　　a phrase's tune  or melody  is defined by its particular sequence of pitch accent s   phrase accent s   and boundary tone. for example  an ordinary declarative pattern with a final fall is represented as h* l l% - that is  a tunc with h* pitch accent s   a l phrase accent  and a l% boundary tone. an interrogative contour is represented as l* h h% - l* pitch accent s   h phrase accent and h% boundary tone. the contrast between these two melodies is illustrated in figures 1  declarative  and 1  interrogative   for the sentence bill doesn't drink because he's unhappy.* 
　　　intermediate and intonational phrases can be identified by pausing and phrase-final syllable lengthening as well as the extra melodic elements of phrase accent and boundary tone present at the end. variation in phrasing is illustrated by comparing figure 1  a single phrase  with figure 1  two phrases . 
* these and subsequent examples were synthesized using the bell labs text to speech system . 

figure 1. two phrases 
　　　pitch accents  which fall on the stressed syllable of lexical items  mark those items as intonationally prominent. there are six types of pitch accent in english   two simple tones ~ high and low - and four complex ones. the high tone  the most frequently used accent  comes out as a peak on the accented syllable  as  on bill in figure 1  and is represented as h*. the 'h' indicates a high tone  and the '*' that the tone is aligned with a stressed syllable. l* accents occur much lower in the pitch range than h* and are phonetically realized as local fo minima. the other english accents are composed of two tones. for example  figure 1 shows a version of the sentence in figure 1 with a l*+h accent substituted for the h* accent on bill. 

figure 1. a l*+h accent 
note that the peak now occurs just after the stressed syllable. 
when a speaker's voice is raised  the overall pitch range 
- the distance between the highest point in the fo contour and the speaker's baseline  defined by the lowest point a speaker realizes over all utterances  -- is expanded. thus  the highest points in the contour become higher and other aspects are affected proportionally. in both cases  the shape of the actual contour is the same  but its scaling is different. 
　　　in addition to variations in overall pitch range  the intonation system exploits a local time-dependent type of pitch range variation  called final lowering. pitch range in declaratives is lowered and compressed in anticipation of the end of the utterance. final lowering begins about half a second before the end and gradually increases  reaching its greatest strength right at the end of the utterance. this phenomenon appears to reflect the degree of 'finality' of an utterance; the more final lowering  the more the sense that an utterance 'completes' a topic. 
1. pitch range and topic structure 
　　　the topic structure of a discourse includes the initial segmentation prerequisite to the identification of dsps as well as the relationships that hold among dsps. in   we proposed that speakers can signal this structure by manipulating pitch range and final lowering ratios. when speakers increase their pitch range from one utterance to the next  they can signal varying degrees of topic change. degree of final lowering in an utterance can be used to signal the 'level' of topic which that utterance concludes; maximum final lowering signals the conclusion of major topics  for example. in both cases  of course  it is the relationship of pitch ranges and final lowering ratios employed  rather than any absolute values  that is at issue. 
　　　while we developed these hypotheses in the course of synthesizing prepared text * similar hypotheses were developed independently by silverman   who verified them empirically. silverman tested subjects on potentially ambiguous texts such as the following  synthesizing them to reflect alternate paragraph structures by pitch range and final lowering manipulation: 
hirschberg  lit man  plerrehumbert  and ward 1 

this building company offers several different schemes for double- glazing. the cheapest is acrylic sheeting. you pay by the square metre  plus the mounting clips. installation is extra. the most expensive systems are the  slimline  and  royal  schemes. prices include sealed glass units  and draught-proof frames. all materials are delivered free within cambridge. 
depending upon the structuring of the paragraph  all materials... may apply only to  the most expensive systems  - or it may begin a new paragraph  and so apply to both cheap and expensive systems. for this and five other texts and for 1 listeners  silverman found that subjects' judgments about paragraph structure  elicited by questions such as  for which schemes are all materials delivered free within cambridge    followed the prosodic structuring 1% of the time.*' 
       we plan to record subjects reading similar texts to test whether they manipulate international features to disambiguate potentially ambiguous anaphors. from pitch tracks of these recordings  we hope to determine whether speakers communicate different anaphora resolutions for a given text by manipulating pitch ranges over the text or other intonational features such as accenting  speech rate  and pausal duration. 
1. phrasing  accent  and cue phrases 
       cue phrases  are linguistic expressions - such as and  first  first of all  for example  therefore ~ that may be used to explicitly convey information about the attentional or intentional structure of a discourse. for example  therefore can indicate that a new dsp is dominated by a previous dsp  while first can indicate relationships of dominance as well as of satisfaction-precedence. in general  cue phrases also have 'non-cue' interpretations. the problem of how to distinguish between the two has been little addressed in the literature. consider the cue phrase first. in example 1  first is used to convey information about the intentional structure:*** 
1. 
	tony: 	i have a couple of questions uh first i 
harry: fire away 
in particular  first indicates the start of a sequence of dsp's dominated by the dsp representing discussion of tony's questions. 
in contrast  consider the use of first in example 1: 
1. 
harry: well as far as the 1 in the savings account goes  take 1 out of there and put it in a money market fund. as far as the cds are concerned  the first one comes due when-give me a date. 
here  first is used as a modifier and does not provide explicit information about the intentional structure of the discourse. in 
* the text of tnt  a talking tutor for the unix screen-oriented text editor vi 
. 
*  these results were statistically significant. subjects* failure to follow prosodic cues in other cases might be due to semantic  mas of particular paragraphs or to variable subject sensitivity to such cues. 
*examples 1 are taken from a radio call-in program   speaking of your money   taped the week of 1 february 1 . 
1 	natural language 
other words  while cue phrases may be used to communicate discourse structure  they may also be used to different effect. 
       while the examples above might be syntactically distinguishable  other cases are not  as in 1. 
1. 
ron: right well 1 read various books on taxes myself and i was under the impression that uh when you get investigated that they have to tell you first uh i don't know if ... 
here  first might begin a new dsp  first uh  i don't know... . 
yet  from the recorded speech it seems clear that  instead  first ends the previous clause ...have to tell you first.* 
       our findings from a pilot study of the cue phrase now in recorded natural speech   show that cue and non-cue usages of linguistic expressions can be distinguished internationally. in the one hundred instances of now we examined  cue and noncue uses patterned distinctly in terms of accent and composition of intonational phrase. non-cue uses were always part of larger intermediate or intonational phrases  and were usually accented - always with a h* or complex accent. in contrast  cue uses were either 1  part of larger intonational phrases and deaccented or accented with l*; or 1  separate intermediate or intonational phrases accented with l* or h*. also  all cue uses either appeared in the initial position of intonational or intermediate phrases  or in positions preceded only by other cues. the few non-cue nows appearing in this position were always distinguished from cue nows by their h* accent. 
       thus  in our study  non-cue now was always distinguishable from cue now by a combination of accent type  position in intonational/intermediate phrase  and overall composition of phrase. we are currently examining other cue phrases in this regard  as well as extending the set of intonational features we are analyzing to include relative pitch range of target and surrounding intonational phrases  duration of cue phrase  and type of contour of the target phrase. we will also examine how cue and non-cue use in written text can be related to usage in speech. 
1. tune and speaker intention 
       tune provides information about two aspects of intentional structure. in  we proposed that tunes can convey the relationships among dsps. here  we describe work on how tune can help in the identification of dsps. 
       a given sentence may be uttered with different tunes to convey different meanings  and a given tune may induce different interpretations in different contexts. in the case of indirect speech acts  for example  a yes-no question contour on  can you pass the salt   will be more likely to elicit a direct yes-no response  while a declarative pattern will be more likely to be interpreted as a request to pass the salt . however  a yes-no question contour over  my name is mark liberman   did not convey a request for a yes-no response - but  rather  
note that example 1 is presented without the transcriber's punctuation. 
while orthography may help to disambiguate cue from non-cue usage in written text - if only by marking sentence boundaries - in cases such as 1  the sentence boundary itself can only be distinguished intonation ally. hence it is intonation  rather than syntax or surface position  that provides the necessary disambiguation in speech - and which is reflected orthographically in text. 
whether that name was known to the hearer . clearly  a more sophisticated notion of what tunes convey and how they interact with other aspects of the linguistic context is required. 
　　　one tune that we have been investigating is the l*+h l h% contour . this contour can be used to convey both uncertainty  i.e. it's not the case that the speaker believes a scale or scalar* is appropriate'  and incredulity  i.e. it is the case that the speaker believes a scale or scalar is inappropriate'. the former is illustrated by a's response in 1  and the latter by b's subsequent exclamation: 
1. 
b: did you do well on the midterm  
a: i got a b. 
b: you got a b! 
here  a conveys uncertainty about whether getting a b constitutes 'doing well' and b responds with incredulity about that uncertainty. 
　　　both incredulity and uncertainty can be subsumed by the abstraction lack of speaker commitment to the appropriateness of an evoked scale or scalar value. for any speaker s and any scale or scalar x  we can say that s is uncommitted to the appropriateness of x whenever  a  s believes x is inappropriate  or   b  s does not believe x is either appropriate or inappropriate  i.e.  s doesn't know whether x is appropriate or not  . now  we can say that s is incredulous about the appropriateness of x just in case  a  is true. and  we can say that s is uncertain about the appropriateness of x whenever is true. so  lack of speaker commitment --  a  or  b  -- subsumes both incredulity  a  and uncertainty  b . the incredulity and uncertainty interpretations appear distinguishable in terms of other intonational features -- rate and pitch range in particular; we plan to test the contribution of these factors empirically. 
　　　if  then  tune can convey such propositional attitudes  it can thereby convey information about a discourse's intentional structure. specifically  tune can provide information from which dsps can be inferred. for l*+h l h%  the knowledge that s believes x inappropriate plus the assumption that  by speaking  s intends to convey this  permits the hearer to infer that s intends to convey that x is inappropriate. so  in 1  a intends b to believe a uncertain about the appropriateness of the value she has supplied on the grading scale given the question 'did you do well '; b  in turn  intends a to believe that b believes that the grade does not constitute doing well on that scale. what remains is to discover how other tunes determine and reveal the intentional structure of discourse. 
1. discussion and future research 
　　　in this paper we have shown some of the ways intonation contributes to the intentional structuring of discourse. we have described research on the relationship between pitch range and discourse structure  the way phrasing and accent indicate cue phrase usage  and the information tune conveys about speaker intentions. we are continuing this investigation in the following ways: 1  extending our analysis of the intonational features of cue phrases; 1  investigating the interaction of pitch range manipulation and the use of cue phrases to signal topic 
* scales are defined as partially ordered sets and scalars as elements of those sets. 
structure; 1  conducting empirical investigations of the intonational disambiguation of indirect speech acts 1  conducting perceptual studies of l* + h l h% to determine whether differences in pitch range and rate favor one interpretation over another; 1  developing a compositional theory of tune meaning. 
