 
　　in this paper  we investigate the problem of interpretation uncertainty caused by the conventional deterministic approaches to drawing image understanding from the three view points of homograph  heuristic knowledge and data ambiguity. to reduce these three factors of uncertainties  we propose new paradigm with context-sensitive and hierarchical interpretation for homograph  multiple-interpretation for heuristic knowledge  and finally a certainty factor for data ambiguity. the validity of this paradigm is investigated by establishing a structure analysis system for drawing images with five hierarchical levels the interpretation proceeds from the lower level to the higher level in bottom-up manner using heuristic knowledge described as rules in a production system the heuristic knowledge is effectively used to compute or modify the certainty factor of multipleinterpretation in context-sensitive manner. 
	i. 	introduction 
　　the understanding of typewritten or handwritten schematic line-drawings increases the importance of automatic input to cad databases in the industry  groen and munster 1 . conventional understanding approaches start from the segmentation of the line-drawing image into image constituents such as black connected-regions. then  by splitting and merging the image constituents in a deterministic way  they are interpreted as drawing constituents such as symbols  interconnections and characters which compose line-drawings  jarvis 1 . 
　　the problem of these approaches is the misunderstanding caused by the deterministic interpretation ignoring its uncertainty. the uncertainty of interpretation arises mainly from the three factors: homograph  heuristic knowledge and data ambiguity  roth and reddy 1 . 
homograph: 
　　physical image constituents are generally smaller than conceptual drawing constituents in their size. image constituents  therefore  have no direct correspondence to drawing constituents one to one. to make the direct correspondence  drawing constituents must be hierarchically broken into lower or smaller ones and finally into constituents with same size as the image constituents. along with this hierarchy  image constituents are inversely integrated according to their interpretation. homograph is caused by the local interpretation of image constituents based on the restricted knowledge at low levels. this kind of nomographic uncertainty may be reduced by a global interpretation which refers to its surroundings {context-sensitive  and by hierarchical interpretation. hierarchical interpretation can increase the certainty factor by integrating image constituents and enlarging the range of reference for higher hierarchical levels 
heuristic knowledge: 
　　heuristic knowledge is not permanently valid but becomes valid or invalid according to the world state. due to the uncertainty of this heuristic knowledge  interpretation becomes ambiguous and sometimes contradictory. to reduce this conflict and to use heuristic knowledge effectively  multiple-interpretation with a certainty factor representing the validity of each interpretation is required better than a procedural approach  the knowledge representational approach supports multipleinterpretation 
data ambiguity 
　　the image constituents are extracted by signal processing from a line-drawing image. data ambiguity results from the uniform application of the signal processing irrespective of image quality. as the image quality decreases  the data ambiguity relatively increases  due to the fade-out and the false-appearance of image constituents. it can not be completely avoided even by data adaptation techniques. to represent this data ambiguity  the certainty factor is effective for image constituents extracted by the corresponding signal processing  ohta  kanade and sakai 1 . 
　　a new paradigm to reduce uncertainty caused by the abovementioned factors in schematic line-drawing interpretation can be established by incorporating 1  context-sensitive interpretation and hierarchical interpretation for homograph  1  multipleinterpretation and representational approach for heuristic knowledge  1  certainty factor for data ambiguity. 
i i . heuristic knowledge on line-drawings 
a. knowledge type 
　　two different types of knowledge may be ubed in the interpretation of line-drawings. one is task independent and common-sense knowledge for solid line  broken line and character. it is generally used to integrate lower-level image constituents into higher-level constituents in bottom-up manner  irrespective of the kind of line-drawings. the other is task dependent knowledge  e.g. symbols . it is used particularly for certain line-drawings to reduce the uncertainty of interpretation in top-down manner. 
task independent and common-sense knowledge an example for a broken line is as follows: 
 k-l  	the element of a broken line is slender. 
 k-1  	the interval between elements is not so long. 
 k-1  	the elements are placed repeatedly along its direction.  k-1  	a group of such elements composes a broken line. 
task dependent knowledge 
	ariki  morimoto  and sakai 	1 
　　examples are the knowledge about logical circuit symbols  and or nod  flow chart symbols or chemical plant symbols. 
　　this paper  at present  concentrates its topics on the effective application of task independent and common-sense knowledge in bottom-up manner to reduce ambiguity under the strategy of context-sensitive  hierarchical interpretation with multipleinterpretation. 
b. knowledge representation 
　　common-sense knowledge is represented as heuristic description of the shape and the relation of constituents in linedrawings.  k-l  and  k-1  are the description of the shape.  k-1  and  k-1  are the relational description. in the interpretation process  the knowledge is converted into rules such as  
 r-l  if the image constituent is slender  it may be the element of a broken line with some certainty factor. 
 r-1  if there are the other slender constituents around it at not so long distance  its certainty factor as an element is increased. 
 r-1  if there are the other elements of the broken line around it  its certainty factor is more increased. 
　　in the conversion of common-sense knowledge into rules  uncertainty occurs because the reverse expression is not always true. the example is that a hyphen  -  in a character string has the same local attribute as an element of a broken line. this kind of uncertainty is expressed effectively by multiple-interpretation with the certainty factors of the hyphen or the element of a broken line. context-sensitive and hierarchical interpretation will increase one of their certainty factors. 
c. knowledge utilisation 
common-sense knowledge about the shape of image 
constituents like rule  r-l  is utilised to compute their certainty factor. on the other hand  relational knowledge like rules  r-1    r-1  modifies the already computed certainty factor. the modification proceeds in two ways. one increases the certainty factor according to the positive evidence around the constituent. the other decreases it according to the negative evidence. for example  if there are slender elements around the constituent  the certainty factor as element of a broken line is increased by the application of rule  r-1 . inversely  if there are non-slender elements  the certainty factor as element of a broken line is decresed. in this way  context-sensitive interpretation increases or decreases the certainty factor according to its context 
　　in rule  r-1   a slender element at a low level of interpretation is searched for. on the other hand  an element of a broken line is searched at a high level of interpretation in rule  r-1 . hierarchical interpretation enables the modification of the certainty factor by the evidence at multi-level environment. 
iilstrategy of structure analysis 
using knowledge 
a. hierarchy of constituents and knowledge 
　　figure 1 shows the hierarchical structure of the constituents with five levels. 
1. image constituent level 
　　the drawing image is segmented into image constituents on the basis of the segmentation algorithm  kaneko and wakana 1 . the algorithm scans the image both in 
1 	perception 
horizontal and vertical direction and gives each black pixel the number of succeedingly connected black pixels in respective direction as the value up. according to the value ip  the drawing image is segmented into three types. 

1. geometrical element level 
　　segmented image constituents type 1  1 are interpreted as linear element and type 1 as massive element. certainty factor is computed for linear element using the common-sense knowledge such that  the line width is uniformly thin  and for massive element  the site is small or it does not contact to a linear element.   representation of the knowledge is shown in appendix a. and b.  if the certainty factor is not high  the constituent is re-interpreted as both linear and massive element. 
1. drawing-primitive level 
　　the linear and the massive elements are respectively classified and interpreted as drawing primitives by the heuristic knowledge about their shape and relation. 
interpretation of massive elements 
　　a massive element is interpreted as solid-line element  broken-line element  arrow  character and noise on the basis of the common-sense knowledge shown in appendix c. the certainty factor of four drawing primitives without noise is computed as an example in appendix d. 
interpretation of linear elements 
　　a linear element is interpreted as solid-line element  short line  line in characters and noise. the certainty factor is computed for solid line and line in characters. the short line is merged and noise is removed at the next structural element level. 
modification of the certainty factor 
　　the certainty factor is modified using knowledge about the relationship between drawing-primitives as shown in appendix e. 
1. structural element level 
　　drawing-primitives are gathered and integrated into structural elements like line  connecting point and character string. 


1. symbol level  drawing constituent  
　　lines which compose symbols are interpreted as symbol lines  and the remaining lines are interpreted as connecting lines as task dependent knowledge for symbol is not available at present  symbol recognition is not carried out. at this level  symbol extraction is only done using the following semi-task dependent knowledge.  1  a symbol is almost closed by lines.  1  lines with arrow do not compose symbols.  1  a symbol includes characters in itself. 
b 	interpretation process 
　　the hierarchical interpretation proceeds from the image constituent level to the symbol level in bottom-up manner  using heuristic knowledge about shape of and relation between the constituents. 
multiple-interpretation is done at three places in figure 1. 1  
the image constituents are interpreted both as linear elements and massive elements. 1  the massive elements are interpreted as solid-line elements  broken-line elements  arrows and characters. 1  the linear elements are interpreted as solid-line elements and characters. 
　　the multiple-interpretation is converged by the hierarchical and context-sensitive interpretation as shown in figure 1. in this figure  the hyphen in  is interpreted as solid-line element  broken-line element and character character however  has a high certainty factor as character so that the certainty factor of  -  is increased as character this hierarchical and context-sensitive interpretation has two effects; 
1 the certainty factor of constituents with distinct features is increased rapidly. this means that the interpretation of distinct constituent converges faster at a low level. 
1. inversely  the interpretation of ambiguous constituent is postponed until the processing proceeds to a higher level. it is  however  accelerated by the already converged interpretation 
of distinct constituents 
	iv 	experiments 
a. application of structure analysis 
   an application system has been developed to investigate the validity of structure analysis described in section iii. the system can transform the input drawing image into an output drawing image with beautiful sense according to the user specification such as language translation from japanese to english  or a figure size change leaving the character size unchanged  ariki and sakai 1 . 
　　transformation results are shown in figure 1 and figure 1 figure 1 a  is an input image with low quality due to gaps in solid lines  contact of a character with a line  false appearance of lines and white noise. the structure analysis described in section iii succeeded and the transformed image of figure 1 b  was generated. symbol lines and connecting lines are shown by solid lines and broken lines respectively in figure 1  handwritten drawings with a broken line are digitized at low resolution. structure analysis separated the characters touching lines and recognized the broken line. in figure 1 and figure 1  automatic character recognition and language translation are not implemented at present. they are left to user specification. 
b. evaluation of knowledge quality 
　　we briefly investigated the rate of correct interpretation at the drawing-primitive level for 1 line-drawing images with the quality of figure 1. they are summarized as follows. 
1. the rate of correct character interpretation is  this is because the common-sense knowledge such that  if characters exist around itself  it may be character.  has a high validity for interpretation. 
1 broken-line element is correctly interpreted at rate of 1% it is concluded that the common-sense knowledge such that  if broken-line element exists around itself  it may be broken-line element.  has a strong validity. 


 a  input image 	 b  transformed image 
figure 1 example of transformation 
 a  input image 	 b  transformed image 
	figure 1 	example of transformation 
	ariki  morimoto  and sakai 	1 

1. arrow is interpreted correctly at rate of 1%. the knowledge about the shape of an arrow does not seem to have strong validity. 
1. solid-line element is interpreted correctly in most cases  but sometimes it is confused with an arrow. 
v. conclusion 
　　in this paper  we proposed an uncertainty reduction paradigm based on context-sensitive and hierarchical interpretation for homograph  multiple-interpretation for heuristic knowledge  and 
finally certainty factor for data ambiguity. 
　　in the paradigm  the interpretation proceeds from the image constituent level to the symbol level in bottom-up manner using common-sense knowledge given as the heuristic description. the common-sense knowledge is used to compute or modify the certainty factor of multiple-interpretation in context-sensitive manner. the hierarchy of constituents and also the hierarchy of knowledge effectively serve to reduce the uncertainty of interpretation at lower level. remaining problems are summarised as follows: 
1. integration of top-down approach to this paradigm by using task dependent knowledge at the symbol level. 
1. detail evaluation of knowledge quality and automatic increase of knowledge quality by inductive reasoning. 
