 
     we develop a discrete representation for smooth objects embedded in 1-space  which describes the nesting of bumps  depressions  saddles  and related features within each other. the representation is intrinsic and stable under perturbation of the surface shape and embedding. the final structure is a graph of level set graphs. each level set graph represents a constant topology of level sets for a region of the gaussian projective plane  obtained from the gaussian sphere by identifying antipodal points  bounded by the images of parabolic curves  corresponding to a range of choices of height orientation. the graph of these graphs has the topology of the adjacency graph of the above tegions on the gaussian projective plane. we show what the topology of the graphs is  and specify what their bifurcations are. subparts correspond to subgraphs or collapsed graphs in a simple way. scale space transformations and smoothing correspond to simple bifurcations of the graph structure. 
i. introduction 
     shape representation is crucial in image understanding  both for object recognition as well as signal representation. generalized cylinders  e.g.  bin ford 1  agin and binford 1  nevatia and binford 1  brooks 1  are one well-known representation with a notable history. more recently  there has been interest in using differential geometry in shape description  e.g.  haralick  watson  laffey 1  horn 1  nackman 1  brady et al. 1  besl and jain 1   as well as fractals  pentland 1 . 
     our present subject is a representation for shape based on tome ideas from differential topology  which turns out to be related to all 1 of the approaches mentioned above. the shapes we are interested in are smooth 1-dimensional surfaces embedded in 1-space  a common class for vision. 
     my starting point for this is that i want to represent an object as a bunch of bumps. the representation should have invariance properties: it should be independent of position or orientation of the object  i.e. it should be intrinsic. it should also have stability properties  i.e. it should be constant under small perturbations of most anything involved in generating or matching to the representation  like noise  viewpoint  and  less obviously  perturbations of the shape itself. and it should degrade well under partial information; in particular it should commute with occlusion: the representation of a subpart should be a subpart of the representation. 
     anyway  the goals of invariance and stability  like spring  make a young man's thoughts turn to topology and geometry  so that is where we look for the tools of our representation. 
     since space is limited here  many details  technical and otherwise  including how to make all this rigorous  are omitted. for a more complete description  consult  blicher 1 . 
i i . canonical graph structures 
a. the level set graph for a height function 
     for a surface defined as a real function on the plane  the natural seroth order structure that is invariant under coordinate changes of the plane is the topology of level sets  i.e. the topology of contour lines. this generically leads to a binary tree structure where the leaves are extrema  and the branch nodes are saddles  koenderink and van doom 1; blicher 1  1 . the effects of a scale spectrum can be expressed in the bifurcations of this tree's topology as the function changes. the effect of a generic smoothing  e.g. convolving with a gaussian  is to cause a sequence of such bifurcations in the tree structure. we will extend this structure to an arbitrary surface. 
     first  take some surface embedded in 1-spare  and choose a 1-direction  figure 1 . let's look at the level sets  i.e. the intersections with horisontal planes. we can think of the surface embedding as a function which assigns to each point of the surface its z value. then the level set structure will be very much like that of the function on the plane. the critical points  where the horisontal planes are tangent to the surface  are either extrema or saddles  and the component containing a regular point is a circle  that of an extremum is a point  and that of a saddle is a figure-1. so if we shrink each connected component of a level set to a single point  we can see that as the horisontal plane moves vertically  these points trace out a graph with the branch nodes at saddles  and the number of cycles of the graph is the number of holes in the surface. the gfaph can be thought of as the spine of a generalised cylinder representation of the surface. it has all the nice properties of the tree structure for functions on the plane  as well it should since the latter comes from specialising morse theory for arbitrary functions to ones on the plane. 

figure 1: the canonical graph for a given z-direction. 
	blicher 	1 

b. w h a t happens as the x-direction changes 
     we were able to describe our shape in terms of level sets by choosing a particular direction for the x coordinate as special alas  if we were to choose some random other x-direction  we probably would get a different batch of critical points and a different graph structure. 
     the  obvious  mathematical solution to the choice of indirection is to consider all x-directions  and all possible graph structures-then things won't depend on choice of coordinates  since we use them all! the space of all x-directions is ... the gaussian sphere. so now  every choice of x-direction  hence every point on the gaussian sphere  has a graph associated with it that tells us the level set structure of the surface for that particular x-axis. 
     let's consider stability. look at what happens at an atomic bump  figure 1 . looked at with a slightly different vertical  it*s still a bump. in particular  we can't get rid of the critical point  the tangency with the plane . it may move  and will   but it still exists somewhere  if the change in orientation is small enough  and if we started at a typical orientation. this tells us that things are not all that bad: for typical  all but measure sero  points on the gaussian sphere  the graph structure is constant in some neighborhood of the point. 

figure 1: stability of bumps. 
     when does it change  consider what happens as we keep rotating the x-direction  figure 1 . as the extremum from our bump moves to the left  a saddle point moves toward it to the right  inexorably. once they meet  poof! no more critical point  and our graph has changed. this is a saddle-node bifurcation  since a saddle and an extremum have annihilated each other. running our rotation backwards would result in the birth of a saddle-node pair. where do they meet  at an inflection  i.e. at a point where the curvature is sero. for a surface  this is where the gaussian curvature is sero. such points are called parabolic points  and they generically group to form parabolic curvet  which 

are not parabolas! . that means that if we rotate the x-direction somewhat differently  we can't get rid of the parabolic p o i n t well just hit the parabolic curve in a slightly different place. 
     the other type of bifurcation  a saddle connection  can also occur. this will happen when changing the x-direction results in a saddle that was higher than another becoming lower with respect to the changing equal-height planes. from now on  we will only describe the part of the structure that comes from the saddle-node bifurcations. 
c. parabolic curves and the gaussian curvature graph 
     for a compact surface  the parabolic curves-the points of tangency where the saddle-node bifurcations happen-generically are closed curves that don't intersect  koenderink and van doom i1 . now both the surface and the gaussian sphere are divided into regions by the parabolic curves. on the gaussian sphere  the parabolic curves  or really their images under the gauss map  are the x-directions where the level set graph bifurcates  changes its 

figure 1: parabolic lines on a surface and their gaussian images. in general  the gaussian image curves may have cusps. 
topology  in a saddle-node. on the surface  they are the inflections. also  they are level sets of the gaussian curvature function  for the level value of sero. like other level sets  they exhibit a nesting structure  so that they  too have a graph structure associated with them. the gaussian curvature is a smooth function defined on the surface  so we can play the same level set graph game with it. this yields the gaussian curvature graph of the surface  which has the same topological features as the other level set graphs. this graph is intrinsic  though  since there is only one 

figure s: x-directions where the canonical graph changes. 
1 	perception 

gaussian curvature function for  a given embedding of  the surface. as we smoothly change the surface  say by deforming it   both the graph structure of the gaussian curvature map  hence the parabolic lines  and of the surface level sets in each domain of the gaussian sphere will remain constant  while the shape and locations of the domains will change. this will continue until we reach a bifurcation of the  parabolic  graph  at which time a domain may be created or annihilated  signifying a qualitative change in appearance for some view aspect. 
     there is a notion of scale for each of the graph structures  analogous to that for the level set tree of a function on the plane  defined by the nesting of the respective level sets.  smoothing  

can be effected by lopping off leaf nodes  or whole terminal subgraphs. 
d. the topological iodise 
     we've seen so far that the  images of the  parabolic curves on the gaussian sphere mark the normal directions where the level set graph undergoes a saddle-node bifurcation. equivalently  they divide the gaussian sphere into regions where the topology of the level set graph is constant  modulo saddle connections . we've also seen that distortions of the surface move these parabolic curves around on the gaussian sphere. to capture the topology of these regions  we can use the adjacency graph of the regions. 
   actually  we were not completely candid about the construction of the regions on the gaussian sphere. you may have noticed that it's not entirely clear which of the 1 possible normals to a level plane is the right one for mapping to the gaussian sphere at any given time. the answer is that really they both are  and the only solution is not to use the gaussian sphere at all  but to use the gaussian projective plane obtained by identifying antipodal  diametrically opposite  points of the gaussian sphere to single points. to make our pictures completely precise  we have to map the parabolic curves to this gaussian projective plane by the antipodal identification  and consider when the normal line to a level plane crosses one of these curves  i.e. when either normal of the level plane crosses the parabolic curve on the gaussian sphere. figure 1a shows the result of applying the above mapping. we are representing the projective plane by a hemisphere  with features from the rear hemisphere of the gaussian sphere mapped to the front hemisphere  which we show  by the antipodal map. in such a picture  the points on the circle at the boundary of the hemisphere are understood to be identified with their antipodal points  on the same circle . the dashed lines represent the parabolic curves that were on the rear of the sphere in figure 1  and which now have been mapped to the front of the sphere by the antipodal map  so that all the features are now on the front of the sphere  and we therefore only depict a hemisphere. this projective plane represents all the lines through the center of the sphere-the normal vectors with their sense of direction stripped away. note that rotating a line through only 1 degrees results in the same line again; that's why we have to identify antipodal points on the sphere. 
     it's the regions in the gaussian projective plane that really are the regions of constant level set graph. in figure 1 we show some of the level set structures for our example surface. we've depicted the surface rotating relative to fixed level planes for clarity. the relative direction of the normal line for each set of level planes lies on the associated region of the gaussian projective plane. the adjacency graph associated with these regions is shown in figure 1b. keep in mind that antipodal nodes on the outside circle are identified  even though each one has been shown twice to allow a comprehensible graph. 

figure 1: level set structures for regions on the gaussian projective plane.  not all the possibilities are illustrated.  
	blicher 	1 

     then each node in the adjacency graph has associated with it the level set graph that describes the bump structure for z-axes within its region  figure 1 . we call this the topological zodiac since it is reminiscent of some astrological charts. this graph of graphs completely specifies all the level set structures possible for the surface  and all the possible transitions between them. of course further information could be appended to the structure  
e.g.  metric information about the sise of regions  their actual orientation  etc. 
the topological sodiac is related to the visual potential of 
 koenderink and van doom 1  in that both representations are graphs of topological types  based on analysis of singularities. the former  however  represents solid shape; the latter  shape of outlines. the full details of the relationship remain to be worked out. 
i i i . summary and concluslons 
     we sought to represent protrusions with seroth order structure  and found that this is organised by 1st order singularities: critical points. the changes in this structure  in turn  are governed by 1nd order singularities: parabolic curves. the parabolic curves embed in the graph structure of the level sets of gaussian curvature. the resulting representation provides a stable discrete structure which captures some  but by no means all  of the intuitive notion of shape. it allows restriction to a range of scale  a characterisation of substructure  and thus permits a coarse-toftne matching strategy. 
     since all the information we have used is really contained in the gaussian curvature graph and the gaussian projective plane adjacency graph  it should be possible to dispense with the topological sodiac  the graph of level set graphs . it seems that the latter should be deducible by very simple operations directly from the above graphs. we haven't figured out how to do that yet  though. 
acknowledgments 
     i would like to thank ted selker for some very helpful discussions  danny sabbah for suggesting applying these ideas to shape representation  sanjay addanki for his critical appraisal  gabi kuper for bringing tex to yorktown  scott penberthy for mating machines in captivity  and sesh murthy for countless favors. 
