 	i introduction 
   
   this paper presents results of the application to epistemic logic structures of the method proposed by carnap for the development of logical foundations of probability theory. these results  which provide firm conceptual bases for the dempster-shafer calculus of evidence  are derived by exclusively using basic concepts from probability and modal logic theories  without resorting to any other theoretical notions or structures. 
   a form of epistemic logic  equivalent in power to the modal system s1   is used to define a space of possible worlds or states of affairs. this space  called the epistemic universe  consists of all possible combined descriptions of the state of the real world and of the state of knowledge that certain rational agents have about it. these representations generalize those derived by carnap  which were confined exclusively to descriptions of possible states of the real world. 
   probabilities defined on certain classes of sets of this universe  representing different states of knowledge about the world  have the properties of the major functions of the dempster-shafer calculus of evidence: belief functions and mass assignments. the importance of these epistemic probabilities lies in their ability to represent the ef-
fect of uncertain evidence in the states of knowledge of rational agents. furthermore  if an epistemic probability is extended to a probability function defined over subsets of the epistemic universe that represent true states of the real world  then any such extension must satisfy the wellknown interval bounds derived from the dempster-shafer theory. 
   application of this logic-based approach to problems of knowledge integration results in a general expression  called the additive combination formula  which can be applied to a wide variety of problems of integration of dependent and independent knowledge. under assumptions of probabilistic independence this formula is equivalent to dempster's rule of combination. 
the research work described in this paper was sponsored by the 
u.s. army signal warfare center  under contract daal1-c-
1  and by the national science foundation  under grant dcr1. 
1 	reasoning 
   the research work presented here was motivated by the need to improve the understanding of issues in the analysis and interpretation of evidence. in the context of this paper  the term evidence is used to describe the information  usually imprecise and uncertain  that is conveyed by observations and measurements of real-world systems. we have sought to gain such an understanding by examining the basic concepts  structures  and ideas relevant to the characterization of imprecise and uncertain knowledge. 
   our approach is strongly based on carnap's methodology  carnap 1  1  for the development of logical foundations of probability theory. in his formulation  carnap developed an universe of possible worlds that encompasses all possible valid states of a real-world system. information about that system  if precise and certain  identifies its actual state  e.g.  a detailed diagnosis of a disease . if imprecise but certain  this information identifies a subset 
of possible system states  e.g.  a number of possible diagnoses . if uncertain  then the information induces a probability distribution over system states  e.g.  probability values for specific diagnoses . 
   it is important to note  however  that in carnap's characterization no distinction is drawn between degrees of precision or detail when the information is uncertain. this representational shortcoming renders impossible the modeling of information that only assigns degrees of likelihood values to some subsets of possible states  i.e.  instead of prescribing those values over all such subsets that are of relevance to the modeler . this type of information  providing some knowledge about the underlying probability distributions but not all the distribution values  is quite common in practical applications  e.g.  in a medical diagnosis problem  tests and existing medical knowledge indicate that there is a 1% chance of liver disease but fail to provide any information about the likelihood of individual instances thereof . 
   seeking to generalize carnap's approach to allow for the treatment of this type of uncertain information we directed our attention to epistemic logics - a form of modal logics developed to deal with problems of representation and manipulation of the states of knowledge of rational agents. originally studied by hintikka  hintikka 1   their use in artificial intelligence problems was proposed by moore  moore 1 . recently epistemic logics have also been applied to the design of intelligent robots  rosenschein and kaelbling 1 . 
   in our extension of the carnapian ideas the starting point is a generalization of carnap's space of possible worlds  or universe. this generalization  obtained by considering representations of both the state of the world and the knowledge of rational agents  is called the epistemic universe. described in the next section  the epistemic universe contains several interesting and important subset families. two of these collections have as members truth sets and support sets  which are related  respectively  to different ontological and epistemological properties of possible worlds. furthermore  these families have the properties of sigma algebras  i.e. the basic domain of definition of probability functions. 
   again following carnap's lead we define probabilities on these sigma algebras and consider their relationships. we differ from carnap  however  in that we view evidence as generally providing information about the truth of some propositions while failing to give any indication about the truth of others. evidence is further regarded as a potential modifier of our state of knowledge; accordingly  uncertain evidence is represented as a conventional1 probability function defined on the algebra of epistemic sets. this probability is then shown to have the structure of the basic functions of the dempster-shafer calculus of evidence  dempster 1  shafer 1 . furthermore  if such an epistemic probability is extended to the sigma algebra of the truth sets  representing probabilities of the truth of propositions that describe the world   then the extension must satisfy the bounds of the dempster-shafer theory. these bounds correspond to the well-known concepts of lower and upper probability functions and  in this particular regard  our results are in agreement with the characterization made by suppes  suppes 1  of the role of uncertain information in determining the probability distribution values that underlie rational choices in decision problems. 
   our approach is also related in several ways to the probabilistic logic approach of nilsson  nilsson 1  - the major differences being in the use of epistemic concepts and the derivation of global conditions for probability extension  in contrast to formulas derived from interval probability theory or from approximate-estimation techniques. 
   in addition  this work has similarities with that of halpern and mcallester  halpern and mcallester 1  - the dissimilarities in this case being in the methods used to model uncertainty. it is important to note  however  that halpern and mcallester represent likelihood formally as the probability of knowledge  in the epistemic-logic sense  of prepositional truth  using an interpretation that is similar to ours in several significant respects. 
   section 1 deals with the problems associated with the combination of the knowledge of several mutually trusting agents. under assumptions that guarantee that the integrated knowledge is solely the logical consequence of the states of knowledge of the agents  several results are presented  including a general formula for knowledge combination. this additive combination formula may be applied to several knowledge integration problems involving either dependent or independent evidential bodies. for the latter case  the corresponding result generalizes the dempster's rule of combination. 
   it is important to emphasize that the results of sections 1 and 1  identifying the dempster-shafer calculus of evidence with the probability calculus in the epistemic universe  were derived by the direct application of conventional probability theory concepts without having to introduce other multivalued logic notions. the insight gained by using an epistemic model as the basic foundation of the dempster-shafer calculus of evidence has made possible the extension of this evidential formalism by the incorporation of new formulas for combining dependent evidence and for utilizing conditional knowledge. 
   in the exposition that follows  we have not included the proofs of any of the theoretical results obtained in the research being discussed  as such extensive discussion is well outside the scope of this paper. the reader interested in the actual details will find them discussed in a related work  ruspini 1a . 
ii the epistemic universe 
a. the carnapian universe 
   carnap's logical approach to probability starts with the construction of a space of possible worlds that encompasses all valid states of a system of interest. first  all propositions  actually instantiated first-order-logic predicates in carnap's formulation  of relevance to the system 

are considered. all possible conjunctions of the type 

where every proposition appears only once either as itself or as its negation  are then considered. after discarding logical impossibilities  the resulting set of logical expressions includes all possible system states that may be represented using the propositions p  q .... 
   each such state corresponds to the truth of an atomic proposition about the system in question. these atomic propositions are equivalent to the elementary events introduced in most treatments of basic probability theory. 
	ruspini 	1 
obviously  by construction  only one such proposition can truly describe the state of the world. the space of atomic propositions  or universe  is therefore a collection of all possible alternative states of the system. 
   possible worlds can also be regarded as functions that map each relevant proposition into its truth-value  i.e. true or false  or  alternatively  as subsets of true propositions  i.e.  those mapped into the true truth-value . if a possible world is viewed through a  conceptual microscope  as illustrated in figure 1  it can be seen to contain all true propositions in that world  including the negations of those that are false. two possible worlds will always be different since at least one proposition which is true in one of them will be false in the other. 

figure 1: the carnapian universe under the microscope. 
   the space of possible worlds  considered as a probabilistic space  is the basic structure used by carnap to relate the values of probability functions of subsets associated with relevant propositions on the basis of the logical relationships between those propositions. 
b. epistemic considerations 
   carnap's logical approach  while enabling a clearer understanding of the relations between logical and probabilistic concepts  suffers from a major handicap: it assumes that observations of the real world always determine unambiguously probability values for every subset in the universe. this assumption leads inevitably to problems associated with the need to define probability values when the underlying information is not rich enough to furnish them. 
if  for example  we have certain  i.e.  sure  information 
1 	reasoning 
that a guest to a party we are hosting is fond of french wine  we would ordinarily consider  in a nonprobabilistic setting  that this information constrains our spectrum of beverage choices  assuming  of course  that we aim to please our guest and are able to do so  without identifying what particular label or vintage he is likely to prefer. if  instead of being sure  our informant is uncertain and believes there is an chance that our caller will like french wine and a chance that he will opt for beer  it is unreasonable  simply because uncertainty has now entered the picture  to assume that this information can be used to assign probabilities for particular choices of wine or beer when before  in a world of certainty  we regarded similar information as being only capable of identifying a subset of possibilities. 
   these considerations have led to the development of schemes to represent uncertain information as constraints on the values of valid probability distributions. interval probability theories  williams 1   of which the dempstershafer calculus is a particular case  are important examples of this technique. 
   the approach we have followed here  however  proceds from a different logical foundation. starting from the notion that certain information improves our knowledge by reducing the scope of possible valid states  it considers that uncertain information is associated with a probability function defined on some subsets  actually a sigma algebra  of the universe  rather than on tvtry subset of the universe. while in the case of certain information we say that we know that the system state is in a subset of possible states  in the case of uncertain information we similarly affirm  with some degree of likelihood  that that state is in in a 
certain region of the universe. the corresponding probability values constrain the values of other probability functions defined over richer subset collections  i.e.  probability extensions . 
   to identify a model that constitutes the basis for defining probabilities that take values over epistemic structures  we must look at abstract formalisms that allow proper differentiation between states of the world and states of knowledge. this framework is provided by epistemic logics. 
c. epistemic logics and epistemic universes 
   the starting point for our generalization of the carnapian universe is again a collection of propositions about the real world  denoted by p  q  r  s .... we consider  in addition  more complex propositions obtained therefrom by negation  conjunction  and disjunction.1 the resulting set of propositions is called a frame of discernment. each of its members  describing a state of the world  is called an objective proposition or objective sentence. 
in addition to objective sentences  we shall also deal 
　　　1 we also consider the material implication -  defined  as usual  in terms of the negation and disjunction operations. 
this system is equivalent to the modal logic system s1  hughes and creswell 1 . 
   the space of possible worlds generated on the basis of the above schemata is called the epistemic universe and is denoted by  when seen through our imaginary conceptual microscope  as shown in figure 1  each possible world includes  as before  all objective propositions that are true in that world. each possible world  however  includes also all true epistemic propositions representing knowledge of the truth  or falsehood  of 
propositions and  in addition  propositions describing ignorance regarding the truth or falsehood of certain propositions 
   it is important to note that  in the epistemic universe  possible worlds may share the same set of true objective propositions  even though the states of knowledge  i.e.  true epistemic propositions  will be different in each case. 
   in the remainder of this work we will require to employ two important relations. 
   the first  called logical implication and denoted by =   holds between propositions in sentence space. this relation  well known in modal logic  is used to indicate the fact that in any possible world the truth of some proposition implies that of another. in other words  if  then it is logically impossible for q to be false if p is true. 
d. special sets in the epistemic universe 
   several subsets of the epistemic universe are of importance in the definition of probability functions that adequately represent the effects of uncertain evidence in knowledge states. 
   the subset of all possible worlds where an objective proposition p is known to be true  i.e. in which the epistemic sentence kp is true  is called the support set of p and is denoted by k p . 
   the epistemic set for an objective proposition p is the set of all possible worlds in which p is the most specific proposition that is known to be true  i.e.  p is the conjunction of all objective propositions q such that kg is true . the epistemic set e p  consists of possible worlds where 
kq is true if and only if q is logically implied by p  i.e.  
 pairb of possible worlds in the same epistemic set are always related by the accessibility relation ~. 
epistemic sets and support sets are related by the set 

     1 as characterised here  this relation is identical to the accessibility relation of modal logic only in the case of systems such as s1  where the accessibility relation is assumed to have the properties of a classical equivalence relation. 
	rusplni 	1 
   
equation 

which is of essential importance to establish the relationship between epistemic constructs and the dempster-shafer calculus. epistemic sets corresponding to different propositions  i.e.  those that are not logically equivalent - denoted simply by   in this work  are disjoint - the above expression  therefore  represents the disjoint partition of support sets in terms of epistemic sets. furthermore it can be proved that 

   finally  truth sets are important subsets of the epistemic universe that are directly related to the truth of ob-
jective  rather than epistemic  propositions. the truth set t p  for an objective proposition p is the collection of all possible worlds where the prposition p is true. 
   since p is true in a possible world ml whenever kp is true in w  then it follows that the support set k p  is a subset of the truth set t p . it is also true that k p  is the largest support set contained in t p .1 
   the inclusion relations between truth  support and epistemic sets are graphically illustrated in figure 1. this figure shows the truth set t p  for a proposition p; its corresponding support set k p ; and the epistemic sets for several propositions which imply p  including the epistemic set for p itself . as noted before  epistemic sets e q  for propositions q that do not imply p are disjoint from the support set k p  and intersect the complement t p  of the truth-set t p . 
i l l epistemic probabilities 
a. sigma algebras 
   the collections of subsets defined in the previous section are of particular importance in a number of respects. 
   first  epistemic and support sets have a clear epistemological interpretation as representations of similar states of certain  i.e.  sure  knowledge. furthermore  the effect of uncertain information on states of knowledge can be represented by probability values assigned to these sets. 
   truth sets  on the other hand  represent states of the world that share some ontological property. probability values assigned to these sets represent the likelihood of certain events in the real world - namely  the truth of the proposition associated with the truth set. because of the relations between knowledge and truth embodied in the axiom schema  e   these probability values can be expected 
     1furthermore  use of the negative introspective axiom  e1  showe that that k p  is the largest union of epistemic sets that is contained in t p . this axiom  however  is not required to prove any of the other results discussed in this work. 
1 	reasoning 
to bear some relation  however  to probability values over support and epistemic sets. this relationship is discussed below. 
   truth sets  on one hand  and epistemic and support sets  on the other  generate  by union  intersection  and complementation  sigma algebras of the epistemic universe  called the truth algebra and the epistemic algebra  respectively. sigma algebras1 are the proper domain of definition for probability functions. this fact has often been ignored in the past when  usually for the sake of simplicity  probabilities have been assumed to be defined on every subset of some space. consideration of the proper domain of definition for probabilities is  however  a most important issue in probability theory  e.g.  when relating joint and marginal distributions . 
b. probabilities  supports and masses 
   a probability function defined over the sigma algebra of support and epistemic sets is called an epistemic probability. epistemic probabilities represent the effect of un-
certain evidence on a rationl agent's state of knowledge. this effect can always be represented without ambiguity as the result of either previous experience or rational considerations. under conditions of perfect probabilistic information  in conventional approaches this is assumed to be always available  the corresponding probability is defined for each atomic proposition. at the opposite end  the vacuous epistemic probability function assigns a probability of 1 to the epistemic set e u  and a probability of 1 to every other subset  i.e.  the evidence does not convey any information . 
   two functions  both defined in the frame of discernment  can be associated in a natural manner with an epistemic probability. 
   the first of these  called a mass function and denoted by m  is defined by the expression 

i.e.  as the probability of the epistemic set associated with the objective proposition p. 
   the second function is called the support function and is denoted by 1. it is defined by the expression 

   support functions and mass functions are related by the equation 

which is valid for every objective proposition p in the frame of discernment. from this basic equation  by using results from combinatorial theory  hall 1   it is possible 
     1sigma algebras are families of subsets that are closed under the settheoretic operations of complementation  countable union  and countable intersection. 
   

figure 1: relations between epistemic  support  and truth sets. 
   
to show that s and m are belief and mass functions  respectively  in the sense of shafer  shafer 1 . 
   in particular  it may be seen that m is expressed in terms of values of the support function s by the equation 

where  p -＊ q  is the number of different  i.e.  not logically equivalent  propositions r such that  and where the sum is over all propositions q that imply p. 
   furthermore  the following inequality  utilized by shafer as an axiom for belief functions  can be derived as a necessary and sufficient condition characterizing support functions: 

where |/| is the cardinality of the index subset j. 
   it is important to emphasize that the epistemic probability p associated with mass and support functions is a conventional probability defined on the epistemic algebra of the epistemic universe. 
c. lower and upper probabilities 
   since both truth sets and epistemic sets are subsets of the epistemic universe  it is reasonable to ask what kind of relations exists between the probability values of members of either class. answers to this question are obtained by considering the problems associated with the extension of an epistemic probability to a probability function defined over the truth algebra. 
   the problem of probability extension has received a 
   great deal of attention in probability theory  see  for example  neveu  1 . the standard procedure for its solution is to define lower and upper probabilities for sets not included in the domain of definition  i.e.  sigma algebra  of the probability function being extended. 
   the lower probability of a set x is the probability of the largest subset1 of the sigma algebra  i.e.  where the probability is actually defined  contained in x. similarly  the upper probability of x is the probability of the smallest measurable subset that contains x. 
   if p. and p* denote the lower and upper probability functions  respectively  then well-known results of probability theory state that probability extensions p always exist and that the value p x  satisfies the inequality constraints 

in addition  the bounds provided by p. and p. may always be attained by some extension and are therefore the best possible. 
   if these basic theoretical results are applied to the epistemic universe  it can be seen that the value  of any epistemic probability extension p on the truth set t p  must satisfy the inequality 

where pi is the plausibility function of shafer  defined by 

   these basic results confirms the validity of the wellknown interval bounds of the dempster-shafer calculus. 
   
furthermore  lower and upper probabilities provide a general methodology to assess the impact of evidence upon understanding of the real-world state. the basic approach  according to these results  consists of representing knowledge as probabilities in an appropriate epistemic algebra  followed by estimation of the values of the lower and upper probabilities of truth sets. 
iv combination of knowledge 
   this section briefly describes the results of investigations concerning the combination of the uncertain knowledge of several rational agents. for the sake of simplicity the results presented here are confined to problems involving the combination of the knowledge of two agents  extensions to an arbitrary number of agents being straightforward . 
   each of these two agents is assumed to have obtained information about the state of the world through observation devices that may possibly be dependent or correlated to some degree. 
   construction of the epistemic universe that includes both the possible states of knowledge of the two agents  as well as the results of their integration requires the introduction of three unary operators: and '.   representing the knowledge of each agent  and the unsubscripted operator k  describing results of knowledge combination. it is assumed that neither agent has information about the extent or nature of the information available to the other  i.e.  propositions such as k 1 k 1 p are always false   and that each agent's domain of knowledge  i.e.  the sentence spaces and and their related frames of discernment  may be different. 
   since the operator k describes the results of integrating the knowledge of two agents  it is necessary to introduce an axiom that assures that the combined knowledge is solely a function of the states of knowledge being fused: 
 ck1  the proposition kp is true if and only if there exist such that    are 
   the epistemic universe constructed with this augmented framework is called a logical product universe. in this universe it is possible  as before  to define epistemic  support  and truth sets. however  since three epistemic operators are involved  these sets must be distinguished by subscripts that identify the respective knowledge sources. 
 denote the epistemic sets for the 
proposition p that are associated with the epistemic operators k k 1   and k1  respectively  then the basic set equation that relates these sets is 

where the union is over propositions p1 and p1  in the respective domains of knowledge of   such that the conjunction  is logically equivalent to p. 
   if p is an epistemic probability in the logical universe 1 the above set equation may be combined with basic probability results relating marginal and joint probability distributions to derive the following general expression for knowledge combination  called the additive combination formula: 
where k is a constant that makes 
   under assumptions of independence of the  marginal  epistemic algebras for k1 and k1  the above formula becomes a generalization of the dempster's rule of combination 

   simple cases of combination of dependent evidence  such as those governed by compatibility relations  may also be derived directly from the additive combination formula  as we have discussed elsewhere  ruspini 1a . 
   in more general cases  the corresponding expressions must combine the knowledge of the two agents  expressed by the additive combination formula  with knowledge about the dependence relations between the two evidential bodies. the latter information is typically modeled as probabilities defined on a subalgebra of the epistemic algebra. 
v conclusion 
   this paper has presented results that closely relate probability functions in epistemic universes to the concepts and constructs of the dempster-shafer calculus of evidence. the epistemic structures presented above also furnish important insight that is very useful to enhance the calculus of evidence by the development of expressions that allow for different types of dependent evidence to be combined. these expressions are the current object of our investigations  which focus particularly on the problems of combining multiple evidential bodies that share common information. 
   in addition  we are also concerned with problems related to the use of conditional evidence  i.e.  evidence that is valid only when some proposition is true . this research expands upon and enhances our previous results in this area  ruspini 1b . 
   our long term objectives include the treatment of problems involving combination of the knowledge of multiple agents that are aware  to different extents  of the informa-
   
1 reasoning 
   
tion available to one another. the corresponding issues are 
　　1  more precisely  this if the case if p if defined in the richer product epistemic algebra generated by the intersection! 
   
of central importance in the design of distributed artificial intelligence systems with planning and counterplanning capabilities. 
acknowledgments 
   the author benefitted from advice and suggestions received from colleagues in the artificial intelligence center. bob moore  stan rosenschein  and david israel suggested investigation of the carnapian viewpoint as a prospective avenue to gain a better understanding of the relationships among approaches to approximate reasoning. 
   john lowrance  tom garvey  tom strat  len wesley  and stephen leah comprised an abundant source of insight and encouragement. 
   i have also profited from conversations with andy hanson  haim gaifman  pascal fua  leslie kaelbling  martin fischler  ray perrault  kurt konolige  piero bonissone  
lotfi zadeh  terry cronin  ken laws  lorna shinkle  mike georgeff  martha pollack  ivan leclerc  todd davies  and oscar firschein. to all of them  many thanks. 
