 	1 	blackboard model for dependency parsing 
   
   this paper presents   blackboard-based computational modal for parting an inflectional free word order language  like finnish. the structure of sentences is described as partial dependency trees of depth one. parsing becomes a nondetermlnistic search problem in the forest of partial parse trees. the search process is able to solve ambiguities and long-distance dependencies as well. parsing is controlled by a blackboard system. a working parser for finnish has been 
implemented based on the model. 
1 introduction 
   in our f i r s t approach  the parsing process is described as a sequence of local decisions  neiimarkka et a l . 1 . a pair of adjacent structures of an input sentence is connected if a valid binary dependency relation exists between them. in that f i r s t version of the parser dependency structures were modelled procedurally with f i n i t e two-way automata  lehtola et a l . 1 . recently  we have developed a constraint-system formalism for dependency parsing  jappinen et a l . 1 . we also have augmented the model to cover long-distance dependencies. according to the augmented model a 
   blackboard-based dependency parser aop  augmented dependency parser  has been implemented  valkonen et a l . 1 . in this paper we focus on the blackboard-based computational method. 
   in our model binary dependency relations specify constraints on argument structures. in functional schemata the structure of sentences is described as local dependent environments of regents. the goal is to find a matching local environment description for each word of an input sentence. as a side effect of the recognition corresponding partial dependency trees are b u i l t . the partial dependency trees are linked into a parse tree covering the whole sentence  figure 1 . 
	problem space 	pertle 	dependency trees 	goal 	a complete 
	 f depth one 	peree tree 

figure 1. parsing as a search process in a forest of partial dependency trees. 
1 	natural language 

	figure 1. 	a blackboard model for dependency parsing. 
   there are three main components: a blackboard  a scheduler and knowledge sources. the blackboard contains the active environment description for regents. according to the structural knowledge in that environment description corresponding partial parse trees are b u i l t in the blackboard. also other changes in the state of computation are marked in the blackboard. 
   functional schemata and binary dependency relations are independent and separate knowledge sources; no communication happens between them. all data flow takes place through the blackboard. the module of knowledge to be applied is determined dynamically  one step at a time  resulting in the incremental generation of partial aolutions. 
   binary relations are boolean expressions of the morphological and syntactic restrictions defining a l l the permitted dependency relations between two words in a sentence. in functional schemata a grammar writer has described local environments for regents using dependency relations. only one of the schemata at a time is chosen as an active environment description for the current regent. the activated schema is matched with the environment of the regent by binary relation testa. simultaneously a partial dependency tree is b u i l t by corresponding dependency function applications. when a schema has been f u l l y matched and the active regent bound to i t s dependents through function links  thee local partial dependency parse tree is complete. 
   

   

