 
recent research in language analysis and language generation has highlighted the role of knowledge representation in both processes. certain knowledge representation foundations  such as structured inheritance networks and feature-based linguistic representations  have proved useful in a variety of language processing tasks. augmentations to this common framework  however  are required to handle particular issues  such as the role relationship problem: the task of determining how roles  or slots  of a given frame  are filled based on knowledge about other roles. three knowledge structures are discussed that address this problem. the semantic interpreter of an analyzer called trump  transportable understanding mechanism package  uses these structures to determine the fillers of roles effectively without requiring excessive specialized information about each frame. 
	i. 	introduction 
a variety of work in language analysis  bobrow and webber  1  sondheimer et a/.  1  lytinen  1  hirst  1  and language generation  jacobs  1  sondbeimer and nebel  1  exploits some structured knowledge representation. a structured representation is one in which entities  or frames  and their slots  or roles  may be related to more abstract objects and roles  as in kl-one  brachman and schmolze  1   frail  charniak et a/.  1   or kodiak  wilensky  1 . the main advantage of structured representations for natural language is that knowledge about how a given frame or role is expressed linguistically may be taken as default knowledge about the expression of more specific frames and roles. 
     semantic interpretation is the part of the language analysis process that consists of constructing a correct  complete representation of the content of a natural language input. the task is difficult because there are no hard and fast rules about the relationship between linguistic structure and underlying meaning. for example  consider the following inputs: 
   la  fvank was sent the message by jones. 
   lb  the message was sent fvank by jones. 
   lc  the job was sent to the line printer by jones. 
   1a  how many arguments does the command take  
   'rm' gives you the names of your files. 
   sentences  illustrate distinct senses of the verb  send   even in the computer domain  as well as the problem of determining the role of frank in the british english of  structurally identical to and 
demonstrate metaphorical senses of  take  and  give   metaphorical because a command operating upon arguments is not actively taking them  and printing a list of files is not really giving because you don't receive anything. practically  we want to avoid representing the senses as giving or taking because the other concepts involved violate constraints or selectional restrictions on the roles they would play: commands are not suited to being givers or takers as they are not animate. a variety of work in linguistics and ai  chafe  1  becker  1  wilks  1  has argued that metaphors such as these may be the rule as much as the exception. 
     a major problem in interpreting sentences such as the above is the following: 
  the role relationship problem: the problem of determining  for a given candidate frame  what the conceptual fillers are of the roles of that frame  given a combination of abstract and specialized linguistic knowledge. in  candidate frames are sending-electronic-mail and transmission-to-printingdevice; in candidates include command-execution 
and command-producing-output. the semantic interpreter must determine  for example  that frank fills the source role and jones the addressee of the sendingelectronic-mail event in or that the arguments mentioned in fill the input role of the command. this problem is important because it should not be necessary to specify  for each potential frame  the extensive knowledge required to fill the roles of that frame appropriately. 
     this paper describes how the features of a representation called ace apply to the problem described above. the representation is used both by the king generator  jacobs  1  and a language analyzer  trump  transportable understanding mechanism package   jacobs  1   in a variety of applications. 
	jacobs 	1 

	i i . 	the ace framework 
ace is a set of tools originally designed to promote extensibility by encoding knowledge about language in a uniform manner  jacobs and rau  1 . as with some of the work with k l - o n e  bobrow and webber  1  sondheimer et al  1   the idea of ace is to use the same structured 
representation  k o d i a k  wilensky  1   for both linguistic and conceptual structures  but the representation is augmented by having explicit structures that tie together linguistic and conceptual roles. 
     the discussion that follows considers the ace knowledge structures used in representing these role relationships and how these structures can be used to determine appropriate role fillers in linguistic processing. 
a. 	linguistic relations 
linguistic relations in ace represent the linguistic structures to which conceptual roles are associated. these relations are organized hierarchically  so that often the syntactic realization of a linguistic relation derives from a more abstract category  while its meaning is represented at a more specific level. 

figure 1: linguistic relations and syntactic structures 
     figure 1 shows the ace representation of two linguistic relations applicable to the examples discussed here. the 
  d   link in these figures stands for dominate  the kod i a k term for subsumption  or  a-k-o . common relations such as verb-indir-relation and verb-object-relahon are associated with syntactic structures; since these relations might appear in a range of surface forms  the association of linguistic and conceptual information to the relations adds flexibility to the system. 
b. 	the ref association 
linguistic relations provide a hierarchy of linguistic roles that are associated with conceptual interpretations. the explicit link between linguistic and conceptual structures is accomplished using ref. having explicit knowledge about linguistic expression makes it easier to use the same knowledge for both analysis and generation and promotes the 
1 	natural language 
interaction between abstract and more specialized linguistic knowledge. for example  the relationship between the indirect object and the conceptual recipient is a high-level r e f association that may combine with particular knowledge about verbs of a more concrete nature. 

figure 1: ref links linguistic and conceptual structures 
     two important ref relationships in ace are illustrated in figure 1. the association of the to-pmodrelation at the level of g-trans-event for  generalized transfer events   a higher level than the verb-indir-relatwn  represents the knowledge that the object of the preposition  to  describes a more general role  destination  than the recipient described by the indirect object of a verb. generalized transfer events include physical transfers as well  while in transfer events the recipient must abstractly receive the transferred object. 
     ref addresses the role relationship problem by providing a general means of associating linguistic and conceptual roles. unlike systems such as hirst's  hirst  1   such relationships are often derivable from the knowledge structures in the network rather than being required explicitly for each word/sense template. for example  the relationship between the indirect object of the verb  sell  and the customer role is derived from the role-play between indirect-object and recipient and the fact that the customer plays a recipient role in the transfer of merchandise  cf.  jacobs  1  . w i t h the preposition u to   as in  sold the book to fred   the role of customer is filled by virtue of its role-play relationship with the destination role. 
c. 	the v i e w association 
the v i e w association is similar to ref  except that it represents metaphorical relationships rather than associations between linguistic and conceptual roles. for exampie  there is a broad class of english  transfer  expressions such as  give a kiss    take a punch   and  get a back rub . the generalization here may be captured as a conceptual relationship  namely being acted upon is often viewed as a transfer  in which the patient of the activity is viewed as the recipient. 
     the example of  taking arguments  is similar  in that commands do not really  give  or  take  or  get  anything  but the language is extremely consistent in describ-

figure 1 shows a view re-
this representation has been slightly abbreviated due to 
its complexity; in reality the common manner of describ- 	figure 1: operation of trump 
ing the complex command-execution event belongs to a 
broader class of metaphors along with  the frosting takes 
two cups of sugar . the view as illustrated  however  
encompasses quite a range of expressions. the power of 
this view comes from the role-plays that capture the 	system  showing the results of the syntactic  mapping  and 
consistency of the metaphorical expressions  such as that 	concretion processes. the application of role relationships 
relating command to cooperator and thereby to the source 	is a major part of the work done by the semantic inter-
role of an initial transfer in an exchange  causal1.trans . 	preter  or phases  1  and  1  above. when a linguistic 
view thus provides a tool for handling numerous role re- 	structure is mapped  the interpreter must find the role 
lationships that otherwise would be enumerated as special 	in the resulting concept that appropriately corresponds to 
cases in the system. 	the linguistic role. often this involves following a chain 
of role-play associations  and occasionally it does not 
	jjj. 	the t r u m p analyzer 	completely specify the resulting role. for example  in 
 john gave mary a kiss   versus  john gave mary's cheek 
trump 	 transportable 	understanding 	mecha- 	a kiss   the semantic interpreter correctly determines that 
nism package   jacobs  1  is a natural language system 	the linguistic indirect object may express either the surface 
designed for use in a variety of domains. the theoretical 	being kissed or the person being kissed. the semantic con-
basis of the system is that the ace knowledge base design 	straints on these roles favor the more likely interpretation  
makes it possible for a core of linguistic knowledge to be 
exploited across domains. 	trump currently consists of about 1 lines of 
	the algorithm that trump uses to perform linguistic 	common lisp code  including the parser  semantic inter-
analysis consists of the following mechanisms:  1  a syn- 	preter  knowledge base manipulation  and lexical acquisi-
tactic parser  which identifies linguistic constituents and 	tion mechanisms. the  core  ace knowledge base consists 
instantiates linguistic relations that are tied to matched 	of several hundred linguistic entries with about a thou-
structures   1  a mapping mechanism  which produces 	sand 	concepts  but this is not large enough to select a new 
conceptual structures by following view and ref links 	domain without coding a fair amount of new knowledge  
from these instantiated linguistic structures  and  1  a 	the 	system is currently being used  experimentally  in four 
phase called concretion  which finds the most specific frame 	drastically different natural language projects. while we 
suggested by other information and fills out the roles of 	are far from having a program that can easily function 
that frame. for more details of this process  the reader is 	within a new application area  the exercise is proving useful 
referred to  jacobs  1 . 	in identifying natural language tools that do apply across 
	figure 1 is a sketch of the operation of the trump 	domains. 
	jacobs 	1 

iv. 	relation to other systems 	references 

three knowledge-based systems are especially similar in design to t r u m p . these are the k l - o n e based work described by sondheimer  weischedel and bobrow  sondheimer et al  1   the absity program of hirst  hirst  1   and lytinen's m o p t r a n s  lytinen  1 . 
     the k l - o n e based work is closest in knowledge base design to t r u m p   as the systems use similar  uniform representational frameworks for both the linguistic  syntaxonomy  and the conceptual knowledge base. the translation rules of this system  corresponding closely to the r e f associations of ace  can also be applied through inheritance  thus facilitating the use of generalized role relationships. these rules  however  are not expressed in a declarative form; thus it is not as clear how they would apply to language generation  and it proves difficult to handle metaphorical expressions. 
     hirst's system also applies a similar knowledge organization  but for theoretical reasons hirst does not allow role relationships to be inherited in his system  requiring case-role specifications for each word sense. the  polaroid words  in hirst's system correspond closely to the concretion mechanism of t r u m p   in that roles are filled and more specific frames activated as more information propagates from the linguistic mechanism of the system. 
     lytinen's m o p t r a n s system is similar to t r u m p not only in the organization of knowledge structures  mops  but also in the choice of some of the higher level frames that are used to derive specialized interpretations via frame selection. mops  however  do not really support structured inheritance: although constraints and prototypes may be assigned at the concept/role level  a role or slot of a particular frame cannot derive from multiple roles. thus  as in absity  much of the knowledge used to handle role relationships must be handled at a very specific level. also  this knowledge is attached to the individual mops  rather than being declaratively represented. 
	v. 	summary and conclusion 
the role relationship problem in semantic interpretation is the task of appropriately filling out the roles or slots of a candidate frame. three knowledge structures of ace-linguistic relations  r e f associations  and v i e w associations-help to alleviate this problem by providing a hierarchy of linguistic structures and explicit role relationships that include metaphorical expressions. these structures are particularly useful in choosing among candidate concepts and in appropriately filling the roles of selected concepts. they combine with a representation such as k o d i a k or k l - o n e to form an enriched framework for language processing. the t r u m p language analysis system supports the application of this core knowledge about language across domains. 
1 	natural language 
 becker  1  j. becker. the phrasal lexicon. in theoretical issues in natural language processing  cambridge  massachusetts  1. 
 bobrow and webber  1  r. bobrow and b. webber. knowledge representation for syntactic/semantic processing. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  palo alto  california  1. 
 brachman and schmolze  1  r. brachman and j. schmolze. an overview of the k l - o n e knowledge representation system. cognitive science  1   1. 
 chafe  1  w. l. chafe. idiomaticity as an anomaly in the chomskyan paradigm  foundations of language  1   1. 
 charniak et al  1  e. charniak  m. gavin  and j. hendler. the frail/nasl reference manual technical report cs-1  brown university department of computer science  1. 
 hirst  1  g. hirst. semantic interpretation and the resolution of ambiguity. cambridge university press  cambridge  england  1. 
 jacobs  1  p. jacobs. a knowledge-based approach to language production. phd thesis  university of california  berkeley  1. 
 jacobs  1  p. jacobs. language analysis in not-solimited domains. in proceedings of the fall joint computer conference  dallas  texas  1. 
 jacobs and rau  1  p. jacobs and l. rau. ace: associating language with meaning. in t. o'shea  editor  advances m artificial intelligence  north holland  amsterdam  1. 
 lytinen  1  s. lytinen. the organization of knowledge in a multi-lingual  integrated parser. phd the-
sis  yale university  1. 
 sondheimer and nebel  1  n. sondheimer and b. nebel. a logical form and knowledge-base design for natural language generation. in proceedings of the fifth national conference on artificial intelligence  philadelphia  1. 
 sondheimer et al  1  n. sondheimer  r. weischedel  and r. bobrow. semantic interpretation using k l one. in proceedings of the tenth international 
conference 	on 	computational 	linguistics  	palo 	alto  1. 
 wilensky  1  r. wilensky. knowledge representation a critique and a proposal. in j. kolodner and c. riesbeck  editors  experience  memory  and reasoning  lawrence erlbaum associates  hillsdale  new jersey  1. 
 wilks  1  y. wilks. 	making p