 
　　we apply circumscription to formalizing reasoning about the effects of actions in the framework of the situation calculus. the axiomatic description of causal connections between actions and changes allows us to solve the qualification problem and the frame problem using only simple forms of circumscription. the method is applied to the hanks-mcdermott shooting problem and to a blocks world in which blocks can be moved and painted. 
1. introduction 
　　we consider the problem of formalizing reasoning about action in the framework of the situation calculus of mccarthy and hayes  1 . a situation is the complete state of the universe at an instant of time. a fluent is a function denned on situations. for instance  in the blocks world  the location of a given block x is a fluent whose values are the possible locations of blocks. in the language of the situation calculus  the value of this fluent at s for a block x is denoted by location x s . if s is a situation and a an action then result a s  stands for the situation that results when the action a is carried out starting in the situation s. 
　　we are primarily interested in the form of reasoning which hanks and mcdermott  1  call  temporal projection : given some description of the current situation  some description of the effects of possible actions  and a sequence of actions to be performed  predict the properties of the world in the resulting situation. 
　　a number of difficulties arise in attempts to describe the effects of actions in the situation calculus and in similar formalisms. one of them  known as the qualification problem  is related to the fact that the successful performance of an action may depend on a large number of qualifications. as a consequence  the axiom describing the effect of such an action has to include a long list of assumptions. it is desirable to treat each qualification as a separate fact and describe it by a separate axiom. 
　　this research was partially supported by darpa under contract n1-c-1. 
1 	reasoning 
　　another difficulty is that  in addition to the axioms describing how the properties of the current situation change when an action is performed  we need a large number of axioms listing the properties which are not affected by a given action. this is called the frame problem. for instance  when a robot is moving a block  appropriate  frame axioms  must guarantee that all the properties of the situation which are not related to the positions of the robot and the block  for instance  the positions of all other objects  remain the same. 
　　john mccarthy proposed approaching the qualification problem and the frame problem using circumscription  mccarthy 1  1 . we assume that the reader 
has some familiarity with this concept; for the definition  see  mccarthy 1 . with regard to the qualification problem  the idea is  instead of listing all the qualifications in the antecedent of one axiom  to condition the axiom on the fact that  a certain aspect of  the action is not  abnormal  in the situation in which the action is performed. for each qualifying condition  a separate axiom postulates that the condition implies the abnormality of this aspect of the action. circumscribing abnormality should ensure that the action has its expected effect whenever we are not in any of those exceptional situations which  according to the axioms  make the action abnormal. 
　　for the frame problem  similarly  mccarthy proposes an axiom which guarantees that the location of x in the situation result a s  is the same as its location in the situation s unless a certain aspect of a is abnormal. then circumscribing abnormality should allow us to prove that x does not change its position if the action consists of moving a block other than x  or in painting a block  etc.  so that all  frame axioms  should become provable. 
　　further analysis has shown  however  that the result of minimizing abnormality relative to mccarthy's axiom set is not quite as strong as necessary for the successful formalization of the blocks world. the difficulty can be illustrated by the following example  mccarthy 1 . 
consider the situations 
1 = result move a top b  sq  
and 
1 = result move b top a   1   
where 1 is a situation with exactly blocks a and b on the table. we expect circumscription to guarantee that the first action  move a top b   is  normal   so that a is on top of b in situation 1. in view of that  the second action is  abnormal   so that the positions of the blocks in situation 1 will be impossible to predict on the basis of mccarthy's axioms . however  if the first move is  abnormal   for some unspecified reason   the positions of the blocks after the first action may remain unchanged  so that the second move may succeed after all. this observation shows that the intended model of mccarthy's axioms is not the only one in which the set of abnormal objects is minimal. in the intended model  the first action is normal  and the second is not; in the other model  it is the other way around. using circumscription  we can only prove the common properties of all minimal models; minimizing abnormality will only give a disjunction. 
　　another example of such an  overweak disjunction   for an even simpler system of actions  is discussed in  hanks and mcdermott 1 . there are three possible actions: load  a gun   wait  and shoot  an individual  whose name  according to some accounts  is fred . normally  waiting does not cause any changes in the world  but shooting leads to fred's death  provided  of course  that the gun is loaded. assume that all three actions are performed  in the given order. an axiom set similar to mccarthy's axioms for the blocks world is shown to have an unintended minimal model  in which the gun mysteriously gets unloaded on the waiting stage  so that the shooting does not kill fred. in the intended model  wait does not change the world  but shoot does; in the unintended model  it is the other way around. in either case  abnormality is minimal. here again  the result of circumscription is too weak. 
　　it is easy to notice that  in both examples  there is a conflict between minimizing abnormality at two instants of time. in the intended model  minimization at the earlier instant is preferred. but circumscription knows nothing about time; it interprets minimality of a predicate as the minimality of its extension relative to set inclusion. this  according to hanks and mcdermott  is the reason why circumscription does not live up to our expectations in application to temporal reasoning:  ... the class of models we want our logic to select is not the  minimal models  in the set-inclusion sense of circumscription  but the  chronologically minimal   a term due to yoav shoham : those in which normality assumptions are made in chronological order  from earliest to latest  or  equivalently  those in which abnormality occurs as late as possible   hanks and mcdermott 1 . 
　　the paper by hanks and mcdermott was presented at the aaai conference in 1  and three more talks given at the same conference   kautz 1    lifschitz 1  and  shoham 1   met their challenge by formalizing  in somewhat different contexts  the idea of chronological minimization. as could be expected  all of them had to use forms of logical minimization more general than circumscription in the sense of  mccarthy 1 . 
　　in this paper we argue that formalizing chronological minimization is not the easiest way to solve the temporal projection problem. we start with another view on the difference between the intended and the unintended models of the axioms for actions: in the intended model  all changes in the values of fluents are caused by actions  whereas in other models this is not the case. to express this distinction formally  we add new primitive predicates to the language.* with this different choice of primitive concepts  the effects of actions can be characterized by simple axioms in the language of the situation calculus plus traditional circumscription. the axiomatic treatment of causality is the main distinctive feature of our approach.** 
　　the method is illustrated by formalizing two examples: the shooting problem and the blocks world. the formalizations are reasonably complete  in the sense that they allow us to predict the effect of the execution of any sequence of actions. they are also computationally tractable  in the sense that  in both cases  the result of circumscription can be determined by simple syntactic methods  such as predicate completion . proofs of these facts will be given in the full version of the paper  lifschitz 1 . 
1. the yale shooting problem 
　　to formalize the shooting story from the hanks- mcdermott paper  we use object variables of four sorts: for truth values  v   for actions  a   for situations  s   and for truth-valued fluents  / . the object constants are: truth values false and true  actions load  wait and shoot  situation 1 and fluents loaded and alive. the binary situation-valued function result must have an action term and a situation term as arguments. finally  there are three predicate constants: holds f s  expresses that / is true in the situation s; causes a f v  expresses that 
　* an early attempt to describe causation by axioms was made by patrick hayes  1 ; see also  mcdermott 1 . 
 ** a similar solution was independently found by brian haugh  1 . 
	lifachltz 	1 
　　
a causes the fluent / to take on the value v precond f  a  expresses that / is a precondition for the successful execution of a.* 
     our axioms for the shooting problem can be classified into three groups. the first group describes the initial situation: 
	holds alive so   	 yl.l  
	-holds loaded  so . 	 1  
the second group tells us how the fluents are affected by actions: 
causes load loaded true    1  causes shoot  loaded  false    1  causes shoot  alive  false .  1  these axioms describe the effects of successfully performed actions; they do not say when an action can be successful. this information is supplied separately: 
	precond loaded  shoot . 	 1  
the last group consists of two axioms of a more general nature. we use the abbreviations: 
 . 
one axiom describes how the value of a fluent changes after an action affecting this fluent is carried out: 
		 y1  
 recall that v can take on two values here  true and false; the equivalence in the consequent of y1 reduces to holds f result a s   in the first case and to the negation of this formula in the second.  if the fluent is not affected then its value remains the same: 
		 1  
   * notice that  syntactically  the variables for actions are object variables  not function variables  even though each action a has a function associated with it: the situational fluent s result a s . similarly  the variables for truth-valued fluents are object variables  not predicate variables. the value of / at s is represented by holds f s . 
1 1 	reasoning 
     this axiom set obviously does not include a number of assumptions that may be essential. the axioms do not tell us  for instance  whether false and true are different from each other and whether there are any truth values other than these two; we do not know whether load  shoot and wait are three different actions  etc. in this preliminary discussion  instead of making all these assumptions explicit  we limit our attention to the term models of the axioms  in which every element of the universe is represented by a ground term of the language  and different terms represent different objects.  such models are also called herbrand models in case of universal theories . we will identify the universe of a term model with the set of ground terms. 
     it remains to specify how circumscription is used. we circumscribe causes and precond  with the remaining predicate holds allowed to vary  relative to the conjunction 1 of the axioms 1-1. this will lead us to the conclusion that causes and precond are true only when this is required by the axioms of the second group  1. the minimization of causes will imply  in view of axiom 
1  that the only changes taking place in the world are those corresponding to axioms 1 -1. this solves the frame problem. the minimization of precond  in view of the definition of success will imply that the only unsuccessful actions are those in which precondition 1 is violated. this solves the qualification problem. 
     the main technical difference between this formulation and other attempts to apply circumscription to the situation calculus is that the predicates which we circumscribe  causes and precond  are not fluents  they do not 
. have situation arguments. the predicate success  which does have a situation argument  is defined in terms of the minimized primitive precond. since the minimized predicates have no situation arguments  the conflict between minimizing in earlier and later instants of time simply cannot arise. 
     it is not difficult to prove that this circumscription 1 has a unique term model mo- in this sense  it completely determines whether any given sentence is true or false. 
in particular  the formula 
holds{alive  result shoot result wait result load so     
is false in mo. the predicates causes and precond can be described in mo by explicit definitions: 

　　
　　the definitions can be obtained by applying the predicate completion procedure to axioms y1. they can be also characterized as the result of circumscribing the predicates causes and prccond relative to y'1. these predicates occur both in y1 and in y1  but we see that axioms y1 can be ignored when the result of circumscription is determined. 
　　the interpretation of holds in mo can be viewed as the description of the work of a deterministic finite automaton a with 1 internal states  corresponding to all possible combinations of values of the fluents loaded and alive. the initial state of a is  false true . its input symbols are load  wait  shoot. strings of input symbols are  plans   and the goal condition of a planning problem would define a set of final states. for example  the goal -alive corresponds to selecting  false false  and  true  false  as the final states  and the plan load  wait  shoot is accepted by a with this set of final states. each state of a corresponds to a set of situations which are indistinguishable in terms of the fluents loaded and alive. 1. an alternative formulation 
　　the formalization of the yale shooting problem proposed above has two defects. first  we were only able to show that actions lead to the expected results in term models of the circumscription  not in arbitrary models. second  we exploited some special features of the problem that are not present in more complex problems of this kind. now we will consider an improved  though somewhat less economical  formalization of the shooting story. here are the main differences between the two versions. 
　　1. since it is essential in the first solution that  in a term model  different ground terms have different values  we will need some uniqueness of names axioms  expressing this property. the following notation will be useful: if o   . . .   c  are constants of the same sort then u c.  ...  c   stands for the set of axioms c  c  
 1   i   j   n . for instance  u load  wait  shoot  is 
load # watt  load # shoot  wait # shoot. 
　　1. it is also essential in the first solution that every situation in the term model is the result of executing a sequence of actions in 1.* we see several ways to deal with this problem  all of them  admittedly  somewhat unintuitive. in the new solution we choose to restrict axioms 
y1 to a subclass of relevant situations; we will postulate 
　* this fact allows us to define the interpretation of holds in mo by recursion on the second argument. 
that 1 is relevant and that the result of executing an action in a relevant situation is relevant also. 
　　1. the only precondition in the yale shooting problem  given by axiom y1a  is extremely simple: loaded is one of the  coordinate fluents1 defining the state of the corresponding automaton  see the end of section 1 . even in the blocks world  we need preconditions of a more complex nature  such as clear i and clear top b for the action movc b l   where clear is explicitly defined in terms of primitive fluents. accordingly  in the second solution we explicitly distinguish between fluents in the general sense and primitive fluents. only a primitive fluent can occur as the second argument of causes  but preconditions do not have to be primitive. 
　　1. the value which a causes / to take on may depend on the situation in which a is executed. for instance  toggling a switch may cause its status to change in two different ways  depending on its current status.* accordingly  we will allow a truth-valued fluent  not necessarily primitive   rather than a truth value  to be the last argument of causes  the value of that fluent in the situation  s is the value that f will take on in the situation result a s   provided a is successful. the effect of toggling a switch can be described then by an axiom such as causes toggle  on  not on  
 not is the function which transforms a fluent into its negation . 
　　in the new formalization of the yale shooting we have an additional sort of variables  primitive fluents. on the other hand  we do not need variables for truth values any more. thus the language has variables for actions  a   for situations  s   for truth-valued fluents  /   and for primitive truth-valued fluents  p . this last sort is considered a subtype of fluents  so that a term representing a primitive fluent can be used wherever the syntax requires a fluent.  accordingly  in a structure for the language the domain of primitive fluents must be a subset of the domain of fluents . 
　　the object constants are the same as in the language of section 1. as before  load  wa.it and shoot are action constants and 1 a situation constant; loaded and alive are primitive fluents and false and true are fluents  intuitively  the identically false fluent and the identically true fluent . the only function constant  result  and the predicate constants holds and precond are used as in the first formulation. the arguments of causes must be an action  a primitive fluent and a fluent. in addition  we * this problem was pointed out by michael georgeff. 
	lifschltz 	1 
　　
need the unary predicate relevant  whose argument must be a situation term. 
     the axioms of the first two groups  y  and y1  section 1  are included in the new formulation without change.  it is easy to see that all of them are wellformed formulas of the new language . the definitions of success and affects remain the same  except that variables of different sorts are required now in the definition 
of 	affects: 

the counterpart of y1 is the following law of change: 
		 lc  
	 li  
　　in addition  we need a few axioms which have no counterparts in the first version. let act be the list of actions load  wait  shoot  and let fl be the list of fluents loaded  alive  false  true. 
we need the following uniqueness of names axioms: 
 vi  
 u1  
 u1  
     axiom u1 represents the assumption that a situation includes a complete description of its history  i.e.  uniquely defines what action has led to it and in what situation the action was performed. 
　　we also need to assume that the non-primitive fluent constants 
false true 
denote objects which do not belong to the subdomain of primitive fluents. if this list is denoted by npf then this assumption can be expressed by 
		 u1  
　　the next group of axioms consists of the fluent definitions for the non-primitive fluents: 
		 fd.true  
1 	reasoning 
		{fd.false  
finally  there are 1 axioms for the new predicate relevant: 
	relevant 1  	 rl  
 r1  
 r1  
axioms rl  r1 imply 
relevant s 
for any situation term s without variables. axiom r1 guarantees  in the presence of rl and r1  that a sequence of actions cannot possibly lead from 1 back to 1  i.e.  1 is not  in the future  of 1 . 
by y' we denote the conjunction of the axioms y   
y1  lc  li  u  fd  r. the predicates causes and precond are circumscribed now relative to y' with the remaining predicates holds and relevant allowed to vary. this circumscription has many non-isomorphic models. 
but in all of them the predicates causes and precond satisfy the following conditions  essentially identical to their definitions in the model mo of y : 

moreover  every ground atom is either true in all models of this circumscription  or false in all of them. thus our  circumscriptive theory  is sufficiently strong to decide any sentence without variables. 
1. the blocks world 
　　now we are ready to consider a slightly larger example: a blocks world in which blocks can be moved and painted  as in  mccarthy 1 . even though the object domain is now entirely different  the primitive concepts result  holds  causes and precond will be used again  and some axioms  notably  the law of change and the law of inertia  will be included in the axiom set for the blocks world in exactly the same form. these axioms represent the general properties of actions which are likely to be useful for constructing axiomatic descriptions of many different object domains. 
　　as before  we have variables for actions  a   for situations  s   for truth-valued fluents  /   and for primitive truth-valued fluents  p   the last sort being again a subtype of fluents. in addition  there are 1  domainspecific  sorts: blocks  1   locations  /  and colors  c . 
object constants: so  true  false  blocks block1  ...  
blockn  where n is a fixed positive integer   location 
table  and  finally  colors red  white and blue. here is the list of function constants  along with the sorts of their arguments and values: 

the predicate constants are the same as in section 1: holds  causes  precond and relevant. 
　　the first group of axioms contains some general facts about blocks  their locations and colors: 

　　the laws of change and inertia lc and li are formulated as in y' above. to state the counterparts of the uniqueness of names axioms from y  we define act and fl for the blocks world language as follows: 

now the list act consists of the symbols for functions returning actions  not of object constants  as in y'. fl contains both object constants and function constants. we will extend the definition of u ...  to the case when some or all of its arguments are functions. we can treat constants as 1-ary functions and thus define the meaning of are functions returning values of the same sort. by definition  this stands for the following set of axioms: for all 
of appropriate sorts. these axioms express that /n are injections with disjoint ranges. if each /  is an object constant then we get the special case defined in section 1 above. example: axiom vz can be written in this notation as u result . 
npf is defined as the list of terms false  true  clear i. 
now axioms u1-u1 are expressed exactly as in section 1. in addition  we have 1 domain-specific uniqueness axioms: 

the fluent definitions include  in addition to fd.true and fd.false  the definition of clear: 
		 fd.clear  
finally  the axioms r are formulated as in y'. 
　　by b we denote the conjunction of all these axioms. as before  we circumscribe causes and precond  with holds and relevant allowed to vary. it turns out that in each model of this circumscription the minimized 
	llfschltz 	1 

every ground atom is either true in all models of this circumscription  or false in all of them  so that this  circumscriptive theory   like the theory from section 1  is complete on the level of atomic formulas. 
acknowledgements 
     this paper is an outgrowth of ideas developed by john mccarthy in his research on commonsense and nonmonotonic reasoning  and i am grateful for the opportunity to discuss my work with him. i have also benefitted from discussions with david etherington  michael gelfond  michael georgeff  matthew ginsberg  robert 
givan  brian haugh  patrick hayes  robert kowalski  
drew mcdermott  nils nilsson  donald perlis  raymond reiter and yoav shoham. 
