 
this paper shows how multiple low level sources of information can be integrated in a iconic data-base  and how this data-base can be suitably organized for symbolic manipulation. the heuristics used to segment images of a simplified real world are described. experimental results are presented. 
	i 	introduction 
     a main task in artificial vision is the ability to analyze images obtained from real scenes to understand their content. this may be done by assigning appropriate interpretations to objects within the scene. accordingly  an image must firstly be segmented into regions that roughly correspond to objects  surfaces  or parts of objects in the scene represented by that image. two factors combine to make the task of segmentation difficult: i  noisy data  ii  object occlusions. to solve the problem  at least three requirements are necessary  according to the computational model proposed by marr :  a  full exploitation of physical and geometrical constraints of the environment   b  integration of multiple low level sources of information   c  use of global knowledge  i.e. knowledge about basic physical properties of the objects . 
     some of these concepts have been implemented in several systems  see  for example  1 1 1 1 1  . in particular  nazif and levine  propose an architecture for the integration  in a rule-based environment  of evidences derived from several low level processes  edge detection  region analysis ... ; the aggregation of elements - edges into lines  lines into regions - is performed on the basis of gestalt principles . a similar approach is followed also by flinchbaugh and chandrasekaran . 
     this paper  stemming from some of the ideas and intuitions of the mentioned systems  deals mainly with iconic segmentation of images  with the purpose of providing a description of images entities  like  for example  closed contours; some principles derived from the psychology of perception are used  many of which have been developed on an experimental ground. in particular it is shown how data derived from early processing stages can be integrated in a iconic data-base  and how this database can be suitably organized for symbolic manipulation. the heuristics used to segment images of a simplified real world  a low scale model of an office-like environment with planar surfaces  are described  together with their actions on a symbolic data-base. experimental results are presented. 
	ii 	building a iconic data-base 
     the edge detection procedure is based on the socalled marr-hildreth approach  i.e. on the detection of the zero crossings of the second derivative of a gaussian filtered image . the filtering operator is a rotationally symmetric laplacian of gaussian producing contours that are closed or closed at the image boundary. during the extraction of the zero crossings  local orientation and slope are also computed to provide additional information about the local discontinuity. unfortunately these measures are not sufficient to evaluate the perceptual relevance of a given edge because edge detection is a local operation while the perceptual evaluation of a scene is driven also by global features and by some kind of knowledge about the scene. for this reason  removing the irrelevant edges at this early stage of the visual process may be a hopeless procedure unless suitable hypotheses are made about the global properties of the scene. for the class of scenes used in our experiments  a low scale model of an office-like environment with planar surfaces  see figure 1  the information about local orientation is used to extract linear segments as primitive elements to code boundary information  see below . 
     along with the information about contours  also regional segmentation is performed. in spite of the fact that boundary and regional representations are two different descriptions of the same entities  designing a unique framework to include both boundary and regional information is no simple matter. the problem has been faced stemming from the observation that the image convolved with the laplacian of gaussian operator is naturally segmented into regions of either positive or negative sign  and that the borders of these regions are the zero-crossings contours. this regional segmentation has the advantage of being exactly dual to the boundary representation  making easy the process of switching from one description to the other. moreover  due to the fact that all the contours are closed  each contour is the boundary between only two regions  one of negative sign  the other of positive sign . 
     at the present stage of implementation for each image a stereo pair is acquired in order to extract rough depth information  and  from a single view three images are acquired using red  green and blue filters. 
	adorni  massone  sandini  and immovilli 	1 


figure i - original image acquired by a tv camera  zero crossings extraction  and segments reconstruction. 
the rgb color coding is then transformed into a hsv  hue  intensity  saturation  color base. the zero crossings are extracted from the  intensity  image only but the information about local slope is computed also for hue and saturation. each contour is described as a chain of segments  see figure 1   which seems to be a reasonable hypothesis for the class of objects under consideration; each segment codes  besides its position in the image domain  the local properties measured from the edge detection algorithm  averaged along the segment  and a pointer to the two regional descriptors. the inclusion of exploration strategies to provide 1d information by means of active movements of the observer within the environment is under consideration; occluding contours  1  and motion  1  are used as volumetric sources of information. 
lll building a symbolic data-base 
     this section shows how numeric data derived from early processing can be organized in a data-base suitable for symbolic manipulation  symbolic data-base  sdb . 
     sdb has been hierachically organized into three linked levels: 
- segment level  segm  
- region level  region  
- simple object level  obj  
     it is worth pointing out that sdb is not just an interface to allow symbolic manipulation but it is a data structure shared by different processes which interact through it; these processes are  see figure 1 :  1  image reasoner  described in the next section; 
 1  perceptual processes  devoted to scene segmentation;  1  conceptual processes  devoted to scene interpretation. 
1 	perception 

	iv 	reasoning about symbolic data 
     to locate significant entities in images it is necessary to organize segments already coded in sdb into closed contours which do not  by the way  necessarily correspond to contours in the scene domain. this task is performed by the image reasoner  ir . 
     at this purpose  information about segments is considered selectively on the basis of their length  that is  longer segments are analyzed first . all the information is hierarchically explored; information at a higher detail is used to confirm or reject the inferred structures. 
     ir is organized as a production system; general heuristic knowledge about image properties is embodied into rules of the type precondition -   action. actions can modify segments and regions as follows: 
- create a new segment on the basis of features of 

figure 1 
existing neighbour segments; 
- delete segments which are discovered to be generated by noise or unsignificant details; 
- merge more segments into one segment; 
- create new regions and compute their features; 
- delete existing regions; 
- modify features of existing regions; 
- merge two regions into one region; - subdivide one existing region into subregions. 
     the output of ir is a line-drawing representation of the original image on which perceptual processes  pp  can perform occlusion analysis. 
     it is worth noting that ir and pp are interacting processes in the sense that  in case pp find some inconsistencies  ir is recalled on a better knowledge basis. at the actual stage of the implementation of the system ir is composed of about 1 rules logically divided into segment rules  which operate on segments and hypothesize new segments and segment clustering  and region rules  which hypothesize directly the presence of a region. 
     let's consider the situation shown in figure 1. by applying the rule: 
r replace segm 1. 

the two segments can be merged into a new one. predicates in the rule preconditions return a degree of evidence to take into account errors which may occur at the early processing level; the evidence associated to the rule action is the wheighted average. a threshold criterion is used to decide when backtracking is needed. this rule can be regarded as an application of the gestalt principle of  good continuation  it can handle those situations where region contours present partially occluded lines which are perceived by a human observer as converging into a common vertex. the term occlusion refers in this context  not only to lines hidden by physical objects  but also to lack of information due to early processing errors. 
     as an example of region rules let's consider the concept of subjective contours  1   i.e. those illusory contours which are perceived in spite of the absence  in the visual field  of discontinuities in brightness  or surface orientation  or color and so on. in  a computational model for treating subjective contours has been presented  based on the concept of induced in homogeaeity  1 . some rules implementing that model have been introduced in this system to handle situations like the one shown in figure 1a. an example of such rules is the following: 
r subj cont 1: 
	it 	 there is a subjective contour  and 
 induced inhomogenity is high  
then  there is an evidence!value  that 
 compute the type of the subjective contour  and 
 create region according to the type    
contour of figure 1a. 
     by using the information about the x y z coordinates of each segment vertex  see appendix 1   ir is also able to infer qualitative spatial orientation of regions and spatial relationships among them. these qualitative attributes are coded as follows: 
on reqion i region d. 
horizontal reoion i.reaion j ... . 
vertical reoion h.rboion k.... . 
such attributes are used by perceptual and cognitive processes. 
     as far as the control strategy is concerned  it has been already pointed out that the analysis starts from longer segments. actually  four length thresholds are considered  which have been experimentally fixed. processing an image with a lower threshold means adding new segments; their consistency with manipulations operated at a higher threshold is checked and the additional constraints introduced by the presence of new segments are  possibly  used for backtracking. 
	v 	conclusions 
     in this paper a iconic data-base and a symbolic data-base have been described as shared dynamic structures for low level image segmentation and high level perceptual reasoning. the main characteristics of the approach are: i  the use of multiple sources of information  including edges  color  stereo and multiple views   ii  the combined extraction of regional and boundary information  iii  the use of symbolic reasoning to extract perceptually important entities  iv  the possibility of reasoning over segments or groups of segments and not over single edges  which constrains the combinatorial explosion of rules applicability  v  the use of perceptual models with a strong psychological experimental background; 
low level processing is implemented in c on a 
microvax ii connected to a vds 1-eidobrain image processing system. symbolic data-dase and image reasoner are implemented in franz lisp and ops1 on a vax-station. data transfer is performed through ethernet network. 
future developments of this work are concerned with 


figure 1b shows possible reconstructions of the subjective 

figure 1.  a  example of subjective contour;  b  possible reconstructions using the concept of induced in homogeneity. 
	adornl  massone  sandlni  and immovllll 	1 

the introduction of volumetric information derived from occluding contours and motion; an interface with a geometric modeling environment based on octrees is also envisaged. 
appendix 1 
　　figure 1 shows the general structure of segment  region and object descriptor in sdb. 

　　the meaning of the various subfield is explained as follows. every seom structure contains a symbolic label  lab seom  and an order numbering  log pos  along a possible segment chain  ncont . every extremal point of a segment  extri  can be a fork point  in this case is mult=true  or not. the numerical information  info  is related to hsv color base  delta h. delta s. delta v . rfioions information is related to pointers to the two regional descriptors. the evidence field contains information about the degree of evidence of the presence of the hypothesized segment. the initial hypothesis is that data derived from l - l stages arc true; in this way the evidence field of a seom derived from iconic data is intially set to 1. every region structure contains a symbolic label  lab reg   pointers to the segments composing the hypothesized region  ptr segm   a regional descriptor  rdfiscr  which is actually only the average light intensity  computed from contours segments. a region is found by applying some rules which are stored in the rules field and a value is assigned measuring the evidence of the hypotheses which have triggered the clustering operations. 
　　every obj structure contains a symbolic label  lab obj   pointers to segments composing the hypothesized regions  ptr reg   the rules used to assume the presence of a simple object and a i ure of the evidence of the simple object. 
acknowledgements 
the authors wish to thank manuel leeuwenberg  walter gerbino  marco sambin and peter van der helm  for their helpful comments and suggestions. the present work was partially supported by an esprit grant  p1  and from the italian ministry of education under a special grant on vision. 
