 of robinson's paper and are listed in the appendix. the time required to obtain all the parse trees are listed in table 1. this experiment does not involve the morphological analysis  and inflections are treated by grammar rules. comma is also defined as a lexical entry. the morphological analysis part of the system is 
	matsumoto and sugimura 	1 

now under development. it will be implemented as a preprocess of the parser. it also employs a similar model to the parsing algorithm  which will be reported elsewhere. for the expreriment  we used quintus prolog on vax 1 and esp on psi machine  the 
prolog machine developed at icot. the speed of psi is about 1 kilolips  logical inferences per second . the system is currently used as the syntactic analysis part of our japanese discourse understanding system duals. 
iv conclusions 
   this paper briefly introduced our parsing system based on logic programming. let us summarize the main charasteristies of the system. the system employs a bottom-up parsing strategy so that left-recursive rules do not cause problems. the group of efficient parsing algorithms called tableau methods  such as earley's algorithm  earley 1  or chart parsing  kay 1  use side-effects to keep intermediate parse trees. our system creates processes  predicate calls  when intermediate parse trees are constructed. it gives the same effect to the parser without using any side-effects. the translated prolog program is deterministic and it never backtracks. in particular  the definition of typetwo clauses is a tail recursive program. these are the reasons of the efficiency of our system when it is compiled. 
the translator from a grammar of the restricted 
dcg introduced in the preceeding section to a prolog program has been developed. the parser automatically produces parse trees consisting of non-dynamic extraconditions. if there is more than one parse tree  they are evaluated after renaming the variables since some parse trees may share logical variables. 
   several projects are underway at icot concerning the system. a large japanese grammar is under development  which will eventually run on the system. a morphological analysis part  together with automatic segmentation part for japanese language are also under development. efforts to extend the range of grammar formalism are also being made. as for syntactic description  we have already proved that even gapping grammars  dahl 1a   dahl 1b  can be implemented in our framework  matsumoto 1 . some of our members are comparing our system with other general parsing systems. 
appendix: sample sentences 
1. he explain s the example with rule s.  1 words  
1. it is not tie ed to a particular domain of application 1.  1 words  
1. diagram analyze s all of the basic kind s of phrase s and sentence s and many quite complex one s.  1 words  
1. the annotation s provide important information for other part s of the system that interpret the expression in the context of a dialogue.  1 words  
1. procedure s can also assign score s to an analysis  rate ing some application s of a rule as probable or as unlikely.  1 words  
1 	natural lanouaqe 
1. this paper present 1 an explanatory overview of a large and complex grammar  diagram  that is use ed in a computer for interpret ing english dialogue.  1 words  
1. its procedure s allow phrase s to inherit attribute s from their constituent s and to acquire attribute s from the large er phrase s in which they themselves are constituents.  1 words  
1. consequently  when these attribute s are use ed to set context sensitive constraint s on the acceptance of an analysis  the contextual constraint s can be impose ed by condition s on constituency.  1 words  
table 1 : parse time for sample sentences 

