 
     we formalize a mathematical approach to probabilistic logic for zero-order logic and derive new inequalities that are necessary and sufficient for consistent probability assignments to propositions. we prove that a complete theory of probabilistic logic requires the a priori assignment of probabilities for a system with k basic propositions. we also show that a proposal due to cheeseman  namely  to regard measures of confidence in knowledge systems as expectations that are conditioned on unknown distributions  does not work in general. we demonstrate this by showing that several certainty measures proposed for expert systems are not consistent with the derived inequalities for probabilistic logics. 
i introduction; probabilistic logic 
     a common practice in machine reasoning systems is the assignment of a measure of plausibility to any statement. several such assignments exist and have been the subject of experiments  freedman and shooman 1; and tong et al 
1 . some authors  cheeseman 1; nilsson 1; and pearl 1  have proposed probability theory  based on a classical bayesian approach  for the basis of a formal theory of plausibility assignment for knowledge systems.  for surveys of other systems of assignment  see  freedman 1; prade 1; and reseller 1 . part of the problem of deriving consistent and complete probability assignments to statements concerns the formalization of the statistical dependencies between statements. another problem concerns the definition of the correct sample space for statements. 
     recently   nilsson 1  has defined a sample space for propositions that results in a fundamental method of assignment  called probabilistic logic. probabilistic logic is based on classical probability theory  with the standard operators for negation  conjunction  disjunction  and implication. notation for these operators are given in prolog notation as: 

     let l be a set of propositions at. a probability function on l  a probabilistic logic function  is a map 

that is subject to two rules: 
rl. if a is a tautology  then | 
r1. if not a b  is a tautology  then 
¡¡¡¡a classical probability theory is a triple . . . .  of a sample space s  a boolean algebra of borel sets and a measure . defined for  since we are concerned here with a discrete sample space  the probability theory is given by a 
      probability  p that is defined on all subsets of s that satisfies 

     in order to justify the use of a probability theory in logic  one must show that conditions  1  and  1  imply that p has an interpretation as a classical probability on a relevant sample space. the correct sample space recently defined by  nilsson 1  is given by the following: 
definition: the nilsson space n l  of a set l of propositions is the set of all consistent assignments of truth values to the elements of l. 

truth value assignment is given by the truth function t  defined by: 

     we note that in this example  the truth value of b:-a is uniquely determined by the truth values of a and b. consequently  n l  is in one-to-one correspondance with the 
nilsson space for l*=  a  b . here  l* is an example of a basic space associated with l. 
definition: a basic space associated with a set l of propositions is a maximal subset l* of l  such that the elements of l* can be assigned arbitrary truth values and then uniquely determine the truth values of all the other elements of l. 

consequently  all basic spaces derived from a given l have the same cardinality. 
     we note that in the above example  neither  a  b:-a  or  b  b:-a  are basic sets  since in both cases  not all truth assignments for  a  b  b:-a  are possible:  f f  is excluded in the first case  and  t f  is excluded in the second case. moreover  the value of the third proposition cannot be determined:  f t  does not determine t b  in the first case  and  t t  does not determine t a  in the second case. this implies that not every set of propositions admits a basic space. this leads to the following: 
definition: a set of propositions l is well-formed if has a basic space. 

guggenheimer and freedman 1 


1 	reasoning 


guggenhelmer and freedman 1 
