r e a s o n i n g w i t h c o n s i s t e n t p r o b a b i l i t i e s 
dimiter driankov 
department of information and computer science 
university of linkoping 
1 1 link1ping  sweden 

a b s t r a c t 
the objective of the present paper is twofold: first  to establish explicit conditions for the elicitation of consistent a priori and conditional probabilities for a set of events representing pieces of evidence and hypotheses. furthermore  an algorithm is proposed which uses these consistent input probabilities to compute lower and upper bounds for higher order joint probabilities. secondly  problems concerning the aggregation and propagation of probabilistic estimates are considered. it is shown how these could be solved by using the higher order joint probabilities obtained for the elements of the so-called complete set of mutually exclusive atomic events. 
representing a rule as  how to determine a consistent higher order joint probability such as  etc. these are usually answered under the very much restrictive assumption that all e. 's represent independent evidence. also it is often forgotten that although the input probabilities might have been elicited in a consistent way  the resulting higher order joint probabilities might not be consistent at all. 
	driankov 	1 


1 	reasoning 


　　it is to be stressed here that the bounds on the higher order joint probabilities might be consistent for some of them and inconsistent for others. to resolve this problem will require to determine explicit conditions for the input probabilities so  that the bounds on all higher order joint probabilities be consistent. this in turn will produce consistent higher order conditional probabilities. the consistency condition for each particular higher order joint probability is that   i.e. an inequality which two parts are linear functions of certain particular a priori probabilities and certain e n t r i e s   o f c. furthermore  each an be represented as a linear function of particular input a priori and conditional probabilities. thus  if we want all higher order joint probabilities to have consistent bounds  we have to find such values for certain of the input probabilities  which are solutions to a system of simultaneous inequalities - each inequality representing the consistency condition for the bounds of each particular higher order joint probability. 
iv 	reasoning w i t h consistent probabilities 
　　the possibility to obtain consistent bounds for an arbitrary set of higher order joint probabilities helps in determining the probability of conjunctions of any number of e. 's; the probability of disjunctions of any number of e. 's  and also higher order conditional probabilities for if - then rules which premises and/or conclusions are conjunctions of an arbitrary number of 
　　however  when determining the probability of an arbitrary compound logical proposition or a conditional probability consisting of such propositions  an arbitrary set of higher order joint probabilities is simply not enough. in this special case one needs higher order 
joint probabilities for the following set of mutually exclusive events: 


　　here  1 expresses that an event occurs and 1 that it does not occur. the rows represent a complete set of mutually exclusive atomic events where p. is the 
probability of the i-th of those events and 
1. now applying the technique proposed in the previous section we can obtain consistent bounds for each atomic event p. that confine its actual value. 
obtaining consistent probabilities for 1 complete and mutually exclusive events  guarantees that we can always find a concrete single value for each of the p. 's  so that they sum up to 1 though  one can as well use the intervals confining it. then  having assigned such a single value  or an interval  to each atomic event we can  as shown in  konolige 1   express any logical formula as a disjunction of some subset of  1 . furthermore  the probability of the proposition of interest can be determined by simply summing the probabilities of the corresponding mutually exclusive atomic events  members of the disjunction. one advantage that comes from this representation in terms of higher order joint probabilities is that loops in the inference net does not matter - the algorithm through which these joint probabilities are obtained does not make any use of the concept of directionality. 
v 	conclusion 
　　the paper presents a new method for computing consistent probabilities for arbitrary logical propositions the main advantages being that:  i  it allows the expert to assess in a consistent way a minimal amount of input-data in terms of a priori and conditional probabilities;  ii  the amount of computational effort for determining higher order joint probabilities is much less when compared to methods based on the minimum-information assumption  konolige 1  and  cheeseman 1   since in our case only systems of linear inequalities are considered  and  iii  inconsistencies in the intermediate and/or final results  are traced back to the input data and  thus can be resolved by introducing direct changes in some of the input probabilities. 
