 
　　　we propose the use of a many-sorted logic based on a boolean lattice of sorts  with polymorphic functions and predicates  for natural language understanding. this type of logic provides a unified framework for various problems such as discourse consistency verification  polysemy and  abuses  of terms  syntactic ambiguity solving and anaphora resolution. in addition  this logic enables intelligent diagnosis of categorial constraint violations between predicates and arguments. 
i. introduction 
　　　in most fields for which natural language interfacing is relevant  expert systems  data bases  etc.   the universe is divided into categories  and inter-object relations are defined only between given categories. thus  speaking about the hypotenuse of a circle or about the radius of a triangle does not make any sense*. natural language interfaces must by all means prevent such inconsistencies. 
　　　herein  we propose the use of a many-sorted logic for inconsistency checking. in this approach  ill-sorted formulae do not belong to the logic language  and the problem of their truth value does not even arise  no more so than if they were syntactically ill-formed. the many-sorted logic used is based on a boolean lattice of sorts which reflects the categorial organisation of the universe. it includes polymorphic functions and predicates which enable us to handle polysemy problems  metonymy   abuses  of terms  etc. . the sort computation mechanisms of this logic allow for consistency checking even if the sort of an objet is not expressed  thus allowing a rather elliptic style in the dialog  and enable us to provide intelligent diagnosis of the various possible situations of inconsistency. in addition  this logic automatically solves many cases of syntactic ambiguity and makes anaphora resolution easier. these various features provide for greater flexibility in natural language man-machine dialogue. 
　　　while it is obvious that the above-mentioned natural language understanding  n.l.u.  problems can be solved by other means  we show here that many-sorted logics provide a unified framework and efficient algorithms. 
　　　we use a particular many-sorted logic which has some similarities to that proposed by cohn  1   but also some differences  particularly in the way we define quantifiers and sorting functions  unfortunately  we have no room here to go into technical matters : see veronis  1 . in this logic  the set of sorts constitutes a boolean lattice for the partial order relation     a-sort-of   between sorts. this hypothesis is not at all a restrictive one  since the set of subsets 1u of the universe u of interpretation is really a boolean lattice for set inclusion  and since there exists a rather natural boolean morphism  p which maps the sort lattice into 1u  figure 1 . given a sort s  
 p s  is the subset of individuals  which are  of sort s. therefore  the relation x  is-an  s can be translated by x e  p s . hence  the boolean sort lattice is a perfect mirror of the organization of the universe. 

figure 1 : boolean lattice of sorts 

ii. sort system 
　　　the interest of many-sorted logics in computer science in general has been stressed time and again  since they often make theorem proving easier by cutting down the search space  walther  1  cohn  1 . in addition  they also constitute an efficient knowledge representation tool  hayes  1   hence our choice to use this feature in n.l.u. 
 examples throughout tnis paper are taken from a natural language interface for a c.a.i  system for plane geometry under development at g.r.t.c. 
　　　there is no need  of course  to describe in extenso the sort lattice  by giving a name to each sort. we will have eponymous and anonymous sorts  as in cohn  1 . eponymous sorts are those which are actually named  and correspond to sort predicates  e.g. triangle  iso-tri  right-tri  equi-trf . they are related to a family of subsets of the universe which constitute pertinent categories from a cognitive point of view. anonymous sorts correspond to all the other subsets obtained by boolean closure from this family. they are useful in computation  but do not correspond to cognitively pertinent categories. they can be automatically expressed  only when the inference engine uses them  in 
	veronis 	1 
terms of the eponymous sorts by means of the lattice operators r li and    e.g. iso-tri n righmri will be associated with triangles which are both isosceles and right-angled  isotri  equi-tri with those which are isosceles but not equilateral  
etc. . 
　　　most many-sorted logics do not impose a boolean lattice structure on the sort system  and the relation   is seen simply as a common partial order. this can be debated on resolution efficiency and completeness grounds  schmidtschauss  1 . nevertheless  as we previously said  in 
n.l.u. we are concerned mainly with knowledge representation  and it is easy to see that if the sort system is not a boolean lattice  some sorts will be  lacking . for example  we need complements since if a triangle is known as not being right-angled  we have no right to speak about its hypotenuse. similar arguments can be advanced concerning meets and joins. moreover  given the mechanism of eponymous/anonymous sorts described above  it is just as easy for a user to give a boolean system as to give a common partial order. one has simply to describe overlapping or disjointness of sorts  for example in terms of atomic sorts. 
iii. polymorphism 
　　　polymorphism  stratchey  1  is a very interesting feature as regards n.l.u.  since it provides a good framework for polysemy. we will first distinguish between two types of polymorphism : true  or universal  and apparent  or ad hoc  polymorphism  cardelli and wegner  1 . 
　　　in universal polymorphism  the same function or predicate works uniformly on a range of sorts. it can be subdivided into inclusion polymorphism  which is due to the inclusion of categories  for example  isoceles triangles inherit all functions and predicates that are allowed for triangles   and parametric polymorphism  in which an explicit or implicit parameter determines the coherence of functions or predicates relative to their arguments. in our system  set membership can be seen as a case of parametric polymorphism : points belong to segments  lines and circles; lines belong to line directions  but segments do not belong to lines  etc. 
　　　in ad hoc polymorphism  while the same function or predicate  and the same word in natural language  assuming that we try to maintain  inasmuch as possible  a one-to-one correspondance between words and functions or predicates  works on different sorts  it corresponds in the interpretation to different  and even unrelated  functions or relations. it also subdivides into two major types  corresponding to different forms of polysemy in natural language. 
we have first a certain number of  abuses  of terms. 
thus  sides and heights of a triangle are seen sometimes as lines  sometimes as segments; one can speak of perpendicular lines as well as perpendicular segments  and even about lines perpendicular to segments. this phenomenon can be seen as a form of metonymy: when we say that two segments are perpendicular  we want to say that the lines which contain them are perpendicular. purist may consider that one should use distincts words  and distinct predicates  since one actually has different mathematical relations. nevertheless  this is an unnecessary imposition on the user and generally leads to larger axiomatisations due to the duplication of information  e.g. in many cases  the same theorem can apply to the  perpendicularity  of both lines and segments . through the use of polymorphic predicates and functions one can considerably simplify the system  and maintain one-to-one correspondences between words and predicates. appropriate treatment precludes contradictions  and hence provides for a better modelling both from cognitive 
1 	natural language 
and linguistic view points. this first type of polysemy can be related to coercion polymorphism : the relations  e.g. perpendicularity  are actually defined for a given category  lines  in the universe  and their application to other categories  segments  through  abuse  of term can be understood only through a coercion schema  the lines containing those segments are perpendicular . 
the second type of polysemy is quite different. 
although we can speak of the base of an isosceles triangle  as well as the bases of a trapezoid  the sub-jacent mathematical phenomena are completely unrelated. the base of an isosceles triangle is defined as a side adjacent to two equal sides  whereas the bases of a trapezoid are two parallel opposite sides. this is no longer an  abuse  of a term based on a metonymic relationship  and  in fact  experts do not speak of  abuse  of term in such a case . instead  the same word is accidentally  overloaded  by two unrelated meanings. here again  there is no need to impose a rigid terminology  and this kind of polysemy can be handled in the logic system as overloading polymorphism. 
iv. consistency verification 
　　　the natural language interface must verify the consistency of the dialog. this task is somewhat complicated by the fact that sorts may be expressed or left implicit. phrases such as  circle c  or  a is a point   explicitly assign sorts to objects  since the words  circle  or  point  correspond to sort predicates. in this case  the rest of the statement must be checked in order to verify consistency with these sorts. quite often however  the sort of objects is not expressed. for example :  a and a' belong to d and d' respectively  and are distinct from o.  . entire statements can be given in this fashion. in this case  the analysis system  and the human reader  must be able to reconstruct the sort of each object. 
　　　due to polymorphism  this sort computation is not purely trivial. from a sentence such as  s is the base of t   we cannot directly infer unique sorts for objects s and 1 . following the analysis of each sentence  or phrase  corresponding to an atomic formula  we create a sort array in which we keep track of the well-sorted domain of this formula  that is to say the greatest sorts which can be given to each variable while maintaining coherence. roughly speaking  sentence or phrase combination corresponds to logical operations on formulae : conjunction  disjunction  negation  implication. we assume that a compound formula makes sense only if each of its constituents does  and this leads us to define a meet operation between sort arrays. basically  well-sorted domains corresponding to constituent formulae are intersected to give the well-sorted domain of the compound formula  as shown in figure 1. 


     various cases of inconsistency can be distinguished  hence intelligent diagnoses can be provided instead of some standard laconic message such as  sentence rejected   which hardly helps the user to repair the mistake. figure 1 shows various occurring situations. 
     the sort computation also enables us to remove most syntactic ambiguities. let us take for example the ambiguous sentence :  ab  is a chord of circle c of which d is the perpendicular bisector  . two syntactic parsings can be performed depending on whether the relative clause is attached to chord or to circle. the sort computation automatically gives the second analysis as inconsistent. finally  this technique can also facilitate the resolution of anaphora  by cutting down the space of candidate objects. 
v. conclusion 
　　　a many-sorted logic based on a boolean lattice of sorts  with polymorphic functions and predicates seems wellsuited to natural language understanding  it provides a unified framework for various problems such as discourse consistency verification  polysemy and  abuses  of terms  and facilitates syntactic ambiguity solving and anaphora resolution. in addition  this logic enables intelligent diagnosis of categorial constraint violations. we believe that our approach is not specific to the particular domain of geometry  from which we drew our examples  but  to the contrary  can be extended to many fields in which the universe of interpretation is divided into various categories of objects. 
