  
gerald gazdar 
school of cognitive sciences  university of sussex  brighton bn1on  united kingdom 

take two or three upper case letters and glan them together with a  g  on the end  and  prest o   you have the name for a new grammar formalism. or  at least  so it must seem in a decade that has seen the arrival of cog  cug  dog  cog  fug  gpsg  hpsg  jpsg  lfg  mog  mls  rgpsg  uog  and xg. but the plethora of acronyms  and nonacronyms - patr h     disguises much commonali t y   shared properties which set them apart from the mainstream linguistic and computational linguistic a c t i v i t y of the 1s. the key characteristics of the new grammar formalisms  characteristics exhibited by most of them  are  i  the availability  at least in principle and sometimes in practice  of a declarative semant i c s for the notation used    i i   the use of a basically type 1 rule format  single mother  unordered  no e x p l i c i t context sensitivity  under   i i i   a node admissibility rather than a string rewriting interpretation  with  iv  a recursively defined tree or directed acyclic graph based category set  and  v  unification as the primary operation for combining syntactic information. it is primarily the shared properties  rather than the myriad differences of notation  that this survey focusses on  although some of the more interesting differences between them emerge from the historical account of cxnceptual links and antecedents. 
declarative grammar formalisms were not in vogue in the 1s. in linguistics  the dominant transformational tradition had essentially ceased to use any rule formalism at a l l in research work  though the textbooks of the period s t i l l provided expositions of the rule formalisms used in 1s research . a l l that you w i l l see in papers of the time is a widely used informal notation for structural descriptions and a taxonomy of syntactic constructions whose taxa have the names of the grammatical rules proposed by linguists in the 1s - raising  gapping  egui  passive  and so on. in natural language processing  nip   grammars and grammatical rules were equally hard to find. the augmented transition network  aim  apparatus provided a paradigm for designing programs in which grammar  parser and  often  semantics were inextricably intertwined. even pidgin is far closer to a procedural language for programming marcus-parsers than it is to a declarative grammar formalism. 
the inspirations for the grammar formalisms of the 1s are manifold. within linguistics  
1 panels and invited talks 
many of those who had been profoundly impressed by the technical rigour and formal elegance of montague's work on semantics began to react against the informal but s t i l l baroque character of mainstream 1s work on syntax. in search of simplicity and precision  they looked again at pretransfonnational grammar formalisms such as dependency grammar  phrase structure grammar  and categorial grammar  the latter having been used by montague in his fragments of english syntax . as a result we see the appearance of dependency unification grammar  dug   generalized phrase structure grammar  gpsg   combinatory categorial grammar  oog  and their various descendants and hybrids such as hpsg  headdriven fhrase structure grammar   jpsg  used by the nip group at ioot   r-gpsg  from mtt   cug  categorial unification grammar   mog  metacategorial grammar  and uog  unification categorial grammar . 
within the nip community  two developments  	one 
european  the other north american  began to converge. the f i r s t of these was prolog. computational linguistic considerations provided the primary motivation for colmerauer's design of the language and his metamorphosis grammars are thus much more intimately related to prolog than ains are to lisp  say. metamorphosis grammar was to be the f i r s t of a whole series of logic grammar formalisms  a series that has i n cluded extraposition grammar  xg   gapping grammar  slot grammar  and modular logic grammar  mug . undoubtedly the most influential member of t h i s group  however  is the definite clause grammar  dog  notation. the convergent north 
american development was the appearance of kay's functional grammar  subsequently renamed functional unification grammar  fug  and the the appearance of the closely related lexical functional grammar  lfg . fug was directly influent i a l   especially in i t s advocacy of unification  in many of the grammar types listed in the 
preceding paragraph. lfg  l i k e gpsg  was i n tended to embody empirical claims about the nature of a l l natural languages in the details of i t s formal design. by contrast  grammar formalisms l i k e dog  fug and pair ii   i t s e l f the pro-
geny of dog  fug and gpsg  are not intended to make linguistic claims  but merely to provide linguistically natural and computationally tractable languages for writing grammars i n . a recent trend has seen compilation from formalisms of the former type into formalisms of the l a t t e r type. 
