 
   in this paper  an algorithm for identifying an object from a set of known objects is presented and justified. the novelty of this algorithm  called mask  for object identification is in its use of three-dimensional data which has been obtained from projection of parallel laser light planes. the knowledge that laser light planes are parallel to each other allows automatic discovery of two constraints from the three-dimensional data. the first constraint is based on colinearity between various points and the second constraint on coplanarity between various segments of the three-dimensional data. these automatically derived constraints  then  are used by mask in a tree search algorithm for object identification. mask has been implemented in prolog and sample applications to various objects are presented. 
introduction 
   suppose a specimen object is selected from a set of known objects. it is assumed that all objects are polyhedral  possibly nonconvex . the specimen object may have up to six degrees of freedom relative to the sensors. how can a robot recognize the specimen object  recognition in this context means  1  identifying the object as one  or none  in the set of known objects and  1  finding the exact location and orientation of the specimen object. the robot knows about an object if it has access to a polyhedral model of the object. a polyhedral model of an object consists of  1  a name for the object   1  a list of edges  each described by starting and ending points  and  1  a list of faces  each described by the forming edges. this paper is a contribution  not to threedimensional sensing  but to the process of using such data in object recognition. it differs from other approaches in that it discovers constraints from the three-dimensional data which are then applied in the tree searching process. 
   in order to recognize the specimen object  the robot will first generate a series of parallel laser light planes. one method to accomplished this is by using optical devices  mersch and stubbs 1 . the distance between parallel planes can be specified as well. once the parallel light planes are generated  the space curves which are formed as a result of the intersection of each light plane with the object can be extracted  see  echigo and masahiko 1   and  tsai 1 . since we are working with polyhedral objects  each space curve is actually composed of a series of line segments. thus  each space curve is reduced to a list of pairs of 1-d points which describe the starting and ending point of each line segment. hereafter  this reduced list is referred to as the list-of-line-segments. 

for example  in figure 1 points pi to p1 describe the first list-of-line-segments and all lie in one plane; similarly ql to ql. after all  they were obtained from intersecting a light plane with the object. the line segments in a listof-line-segments are not always connected. discontinuities are due to occlusions. thus  not every point in the list-of-line-segments corresponds to an edge of the object. mask  however  requires that every point correspond to an object edge. to solve this problem which is caused by occlusions  the list-of-line-segments is further reduced to only those points that lie on an edge of the object. hereafter  this reduced list is referred to as a light probe. note that a light probe refers to a connected set of edgepoints; not just projection of a light plane on an object. this reduction is possible and applied on the grounds that a data point in the list-of-line-segments lies on an edge of the object if and only if it is connected on both sides to other points. for example  in figure 1 point p1 is an edge-point  however  points p1 and p1 might not correspond to edges of the object. 
   mask takes as input  a collection of light probes and an enhanced polyhedral model of some object. the output consists of a set of object edge to edge-point assignments if the collection of light probes match the object model  otherwise  a failure is reported. this output can then be used to determine the object's exact location and orientation  see  silverman  tsai and lavin 1 . the set of object edge to edge-point assignment is also referred to as an interpretation  grimson and lozano-perez 1 . 
   the polyhedral model of an object is enhanced by precomputing  1  a table containing min-max distances between every pair of edges of the object and  1  a possible-next-edge-list for each edge of the object. the min-max distance table is an idea taken from  grimson 
	arbab 	1 
   
and lozano-perez 1 . a possible-next-edge-list for an edge ei is simply a list of all the edges on the adjacent faces. note that consecutive edge points of a light probe would have to lie on edges of adjacent faces due to planar intersection of light with the object. these tables are precomputed and stored with the polyhedral model of every object. 
   mask is composed of three phases which are described in the following three sections. in phase i  light probes are collected in various groups and certain conditions that hold between groups are discovered. phase ii assigns to each group of light probes a list of valid interpretations. these assignments are based on the min-max distance table and the possible-next-edge-list. phase iii propagates the conditions that were discovered by phase 1 among the valid interpretations of each group as computed by phase ii. as a result  a set of consistent interpretations is assigned to each group. application of the algorithm to sample problems is then discussed. 
phase i 
   the collection of light probes is first partitioned into various groups. light probes correspond to the same group if and only if they come from adjacent parallel light planes that have intersected all the same edges of the specimen object. thus  light probes are placed in the same group if and only if they satisfy two conditions. first  all the light probes in the same group must be of the same length. light probes have the same length if they contain the same number of edge-points. second  the corresponding points of all the light probes  in the same group  must be on the same edge of the object. this can be determined via a colinearity test. 
   the grouping of light probes  then  is done by selecting the first and second consecutive light probes of the same length and simply assuming that they correspond to the same edges of the object. the rest of the light probes  of the same length  which immediately follow the first two light probes can then be tested for colinearity on all the corresponding points. this technique for grouping light probes is correct on the grounds that the distance between parallel light planes is controllable and can be decreased  thus increasing the number of light planes  such that the smallest discontinuity in any of the known objects would not be skipped over. for an example of light probe grouping  see figure 1 where light probes have been collected together in six groups labeled gl to g1. 
   the presence of errors  introduced by various sensing devices  in the light probe data can cause the test for colinearity between three points to fail  when in fact the three points are colinear. thus  the light probe grouping is not always unique. for example  in figure 1 it is possible  due to errors  to collect light probes in group g1 into two or more smaller groups. mask  however  is insensitive to the various groupings of the light probe. it suffices to find any one of the possible light probe groupings. 
   after the initial light probe grouping  two conditions that may hold between members of any two groups are discovered. these conditions will be used in the third 
1 	robotics 
phase of mask as constraints in a tree search algorithm  as in  waltz 1  and  huffman 1 . the first condition holds between two groups gi and gj if for some n and m the nth edge points of all light probes in gi are colinear with the mth edge points of all light probes in gj. for example  in figure 1 the second point of any light probe in group g1 is colinear with the second point of any light probe in group gl. in fact  they all lie on edge e1. the third point of any light probe in group g1 is colinear with the fourth point of any light probe in group g1. in fact  they all lie on edge elo. note that here  colinearity between points of light probes in various groups does not always imply that the points must correspond to the same edge of the object. it could be that they correspond to two different object edges that happen to be colinear. 
   the second condition holds between two groups gi and gj if for some n and m the nth line segment of all the light probes in gi is coplanar with the mth line segment of all the light probes in gj. for example  in figure 1 the first line segment of any light probe in group gl is coplanar with the first line segment of any light probe in groups g1  g1 and g1. in fact  they all lie on the face which is composed of edges el  e1  e1  e1 and e1. the second line segment of any light probe in group g1 is coplanar with the third line segment of any light probe in group g1 and g1  also with the second line segment of any group in g1 and gl. they all lie on the face which is composed of edges e1  el1  elo and el 1. 
   the presence of errors in the light probe data can cause the tests for colinearity and coplanarity that are employed to detect the above two conditions to fail. this failure implies that not all of the conditions between points and probe segments are detected in this phase. a complete list of the two conditions. however  is not a requirement. a partial list of the conditions will suffice. errors in the light probe data do not play an important role in the next two phases  as the computations involved are symbolic. 
phase ii 
   the second phase of the algorithm starts out by picking from each group only two light probes  the first and last one. these are selected on heuristic grounds only. this heuristic is based on the grounds that min-max distances between edges of the object are more likely to occur around starting and ending points of edges. for each light probe a collection of valid interpretations is formed. the exact definition of a valid interpretation is given below. the set of valid interpretations for each group  then  is formed by simply taking the intersection of all valid interpretations for the first light probe with all valid interpretations for the last light probe. this is on the grounds that both light probes correspond to the same group and thus must correspond to the same object edges. 
   an interpretation for a light probe is a list of objectedge to data-point assignment. for example  
 el  e1  el1  is one possible interpretation for the light probe composed of the three points:  pi  p1  p1  and it assigns edge el to point p1  e1 to p1 and el1 to p1. an interpretation for a light probe is valid if and only if it satisfies two constraints. it is possible to state other constraints but only two will be discussed  others are de-
   
scribed in  arbab 1 . the first constraint simply states that the actual distance between points pj and pk which has been obtained from the specimen object must be within the min-max distance that actually holds between edges ej and ek of the object. the second constraint applies on the ground that  a  the light probe data does not contain any discontinuities and  b  it is impossible  in such a case  for a laser light plane to strike any face of the specimen object more than once. thus  edges el to ei can be assigned to points pi to pi of a light probe if and only if  1  the distance between pj and pk for  i is bounded by the min-max dis-
tance between ej and ek and  1  an edge en can not be 
assigned to a point pn if it belongs to a face that has already been assigned to a point pm for 

   with these two constraints in hand a tree search algorithm for a light probe is constructed. every node in the tree corresponds to a point in the light probe. there is an arc emanating from each node for every object edge that can possibly be assigned to the node. the depth of this tree is equal to the length of the light probe. in figure 1  a sample search tree for the first light probe of group g1 of model house object is shown. for example  the assignment of edge el to point p1 is not consistent with the assignment of edge el1 to point p1 on grounds of the first constraint  i.e.  the distance between points p1 and p1 is not within the min and max distances between edges el and el1. the assignment of edge el1 to point pi is not consistent with the assignment of edge el1 to point p1 on the grounds of the second constraint. a standard depth-first left-to-right backtrack tree search algorithm is then employed to propagate the constraints among the nodes of the tree. only those interpretations that completely satisfy both constraints remain. these are the set of valid interpretations for a light probe. 

phase iii 
   a collection of valid interpretations for each group of light probes was constructed in the second phase. the size of this collection typically ranges from tens to hundreds for the objects experimented with so far. recall that  in the first phase of the algorithm two conditions that could hold between various groups were extracted. they were:  1  colinearity between various light probe data points in different groups and  1  coplanarity between various light probe segments in different groups. 
in this phase  those conditions are employed as constraints and together with the min-max distance constraint  they form the backbone of another round of tree searches. 
   this time  a node of the tree corresponds to a group of light probes. there is an arc emanating from a node for every possible valid interpretation that can be assigned to the node. the depth of the tree is equal to the number of groups. in figure 1  a sample search tree for the model house object is shown. for example  interpretation  e1  e1  el1  for group g1 is not consistent with interpretation  el  e1  el1  for group gl on the grounds of the first condition  i.e.  edge e1 and e1 are not colinear. interpretation  e1  e1  el1  for group g1 is not consistent with interpretation  ell  e1  e1  for group gl on the grounds of the second condition  i.e.  no line segment connecting ell to e1 can be coplanar with a line segment connecting e1 to e1. 

   the min-max distance constraint is applicable to interpretations li and ij for groups gi and gj. this is on the ground that  for every light probe pri in gi and prj in gj the distance between every point of pri and prj must be within min-max distances of the corresponding edges in li and ij. a standard depth-first left-to-right backtrack tree search algorithm is then employed to propagate the three constraints  the first and second condition plus the min-max distance constraint  among the nodes of the tree. only those interpretations for each group that completely satisfy the three constraints are left behind. these are the set of consistent interpretations for each group. a group can have an empty set of consistent interpretations if light probe data from the specimen object does not correspond to the given object model. 
application 
   application of mask to a simple model house  shown in figure 1  is described below. for more complicated examples  including non-convex and occluded objects  see  arbab 1 . the edges of the object are labeled as el to el1. intersection of some parallel light probes with the model house are shown. it is important to note that figure 1 is showing the light probes and not the actual light planes that intersected the object. the distinction being that a light probe is obtained from the resulting intersection of the light planes according to the procedure specified in the introduction. 
	arbab 	1 
   

   the data was obtained through simulation and some errors were artificially injected in the data. each light probe has been classified by phase i of mask as a member of some group. there are a total of six groups  labeled gl to g1. there are 1 colinearity and 1 coplanarity relations that hold between light probe points and segments of various groups. phase ii of mask finds 1  1  1  1  1 and go valid interpretations for groups gl to g1. however  there are only 1 consistent interpretations that can be assigned to groups gl through g1 and are discovered by phase hi of mask in approximately eight seconds on an ibm 1. 
   assignment of an interpretation to a group means that points of a light probe within that group can be assigned to edges in the interpretation list. for example   gl --   cl e1 el1   means that first point of any light probe within group gl can be assigned to edge el  second point to e1 and the last point to el1. 
   mask has found the solution  up to symmetry  of every problem to which it has been applied. it also reports a failure when light probe data from the specimen object does not match the model object. 
acknowledgement 
the author is grateful to bernie dimsdale  hal 
hichborn  mark lavin  jim moore  eugene paik and 
gary silverman for their discussions and comments on this work. the author is also grateful to the anonymous referee whose comments resulted in a number of important clarifications. 
1 	robotics 

