grasp planning for human prehension 
thea iberall 
laboratory for perceptual robotics 
department of computer and information science 
university of massachusetts 
amherst  mass 1 

　adstra ct. the study of the human hand in prehensile movements can offer insights into the design of robot grasp planners. a design for a two-level llierarchical grasp planner is presented. the first phase maps an object and task representation into a grasporiented description of the task the second phase maps this description into an opposition space  which captures the available foices and degrees of freedom of the hand as these mappings are not unique  constraints acting on the hand/object /task interaction are discussed. 
i. introduction 
　current research into the nature of robot task specifications has demonstrated the need for hierarchical systems jlozano-perez and brooks 1  vijaykumar and arbib 1 . in vijaykumar and arbib   four different types of planners were identified. a strategic planner deals with high-level  more global  decisions  breaking down high-level task specifications into more primitive commands. a tactical planner then deals with lower-level  more local  decisions  performing a subset of primitive commands. other primitive commands go to the path planner  necessary for moving the manipulator through a cluttered space. finally  a grasp planner determines a proper grasp  based on the primitive 'grasp' command coming from the strategic planner. a task plan is produced by first searching for relationships that constrain the solution. in a similar planning system  lozano-perez and brooks  produce a skeletal plan  and then look towards refining it through application of constraint knowledge. 
　by studying the interaction between the central nervous system  cns  and the human hand within the context of prehension  i.e.  grasping   we hope to isolate issues for grasp planners for dextrous robot hands. the shape that the hand takes on during prehension depends on a variety of complex issues  involving object and task properties  hand and arm capabilities  and even cns features. when observing human reaching and grasping behaviors  one notices both variability and invariances. examples of invariances include the typical s-shaped trajectory of the arm  e.g.  jeannerod 1   the two-phase velocity profiles noted by  jeannerod 1  and modelled by  arbib et al 1   and the opening of the hand larger than the objject to be grasped  jeannerod 1 . however  human arm and hand movements also contain a great deal of variability  e.g.  mackenzie and marteniuk 1 . variability is also observed at a higher level  in the multiple strategies people use to grasp objects. yet  even at this high level  stereotypical hand postures have been noted in the literature  schlesinger 1  napier 1 . 
　our approach  therefore  to designing a grasp planner for human prehension is to account for invariances and variaibiity  identifying and resolving the constraints acting on these behaviors. both the path planner and the grasp planner are limited both by internal constraints as well as constraints that arise from their interaction. the arm  while following some internal kinematic and dynamic constraints  hollerbach and flash 1  mackenzie and marteniuk 1  marteniuk et al 1   cannot be directed anywhere; instead  it must be directed towards a location that makes sense for the prehensile posture. such hand constraints  as finger pad locations  lengths of fingers  flexibility of ligamentous and tendonous structures  etc.  all contribute to determine what that planned location should be. 
　in the next section  a human hand-oriented grasp planner is discussed  in isolation for now from path planning issues involving arm and body effects. in the third section  some of the constraints acting at the hand vs object level are analyzed. 
i i . grasp planner 
　in order to develop a grasp planner  both an object representation and a task representation are needed. furthermore  hand variables that will be modified during a particular motion must be described. between the input and the output  the mapping from the object/task representation to the hand also must be described. in figure 1  a block diagram of a grasp planner is shown. 
grasp object task context  

opposition space parameters 
figure 1: a two-level grasp planner 
　the grasp command is sent from the strategic planner  along with a pointer to the object to be grasped and the context within which it will be grasped. information about the object is available in an object database. for example  if the object to be grasped is a hammer  then the command grasp hammer  swing.upjdown  would tell the grasp planner that the object is the one in the database identified as hammer. the task for which it will be used involves the swing up down degree of freedom.  see 
	iberall 	1 
lyons  and vijaykumar and arbib  for other context information . for the object representation  systems that select the correct object features that can then be mapped into a robot hand posture have previously been discussed lozano-perez and winston 1  lyons 1 . while lozano-perez and winston  define objects in terms of solid geometries  e.g.  cylinders  holes  etc   vi-
jaykumar and arbib  define objject features in terms of surfaces  e.g.  cylindrical surfaces  rectangular faces  etc . we find this latter approach to be more useful for a grasp planner  because the hand must grasp surfaces. an obj-
ject representation for a large steel hammer  based on the 
specifications of vijaykumar and arbib   would be: 
 hammer-1 

　once a command is sent  the grasp planner maps the grasp command into hand variables. a two-step process is visualized to accomplish this task  see figure 1   in the first phase  the grasp command parameters are mapped into a more useful  grasp-oriented  set of task requirements. task requirements consist of both functional constraints and physical constraints  iberall et al 1  iberall 1 . functional constraints are less a property of the object to be grasped  and more a property of the manner in which the 
1 	robotics 
object will be used within the task. a fundamental functional constraint on most prehensile tasks is that the object not be dropped. the posture used by the hand during the task must be able to overcome the anticipated forces acting on the object. initially  during the lifting phase of a task  the initial force is likely to be just the weight of the object. later  during the actual task  other forces such as additional inertial forces come into play. underlying these functional constraints are physical constraints  that are based both on properties of the object as well as on properties of the hand. in iberall   we showed how task requirements could be described in terms of one or more opposition vectors. opposition vectors exist between opposable surfaces  and task-related dofs  forces  and torques all are described relative to an opposition vector. for example  the center of mass of a hammer is somewhere in or very near the head of the hammer. when one picks up a hammer by its handle  a torque therefore arises and it can be measured relative to the opposition vector. the opposition vector extends through the handle between hand surfaces. the swinging of the hammer through the air will cause the opposition vector to both rotate and translate. this swinging will also  of course  generate other torques acting upon the opposition vector. the internal task requirements for lifting the hammer  lying on a support that allows access to the handle  would be as follows: 

　in the second phase of the grasp planner  figure 1   these internal task requirements are mapped into specific hand variables. in iberall  1a  1b   it was shown that hand postures could be described as combinations of three basic oppositions  pad  palm  and side   with an opposition being defined by the axis along which the force was being applied relative to the palm. the opposition occurs between the surfaces of virtual fingers  arbib et al 1   which are groups of real fingers acting together in applying a force against other fingers or against task torques. the particular shape chosen by the hand is called an opposition space  iberall et al 1   which defines the functional capabilitites of that hand posture for executing a stable grasp and manipulating the object. 
　as seen in figure 1  a hand is shown grasping two different size hammers  with a simple vector notation showing the virtual fingers being used in the oppositions. in figure 1a  two opposition vectors are shown for a medium-sized hammer. the vectors go through the same opposable surfaces but are positioned differently along the handle. as 


figure 1: preshaping and grasping two different sized hammers. 
the hand preshapes  seen in the left side of figure 1a   the opposition space thus formed is the one where side opposition  between the thumb as vfl and index finger as vf1  occurs with palm opposition  between the palm as 
vfl and all four fingers as vf1 . in figure 1b  we see the mapping for a larger and heavier hammer. one opposition vector is used  with palm opposition occurring between the palm  vfl  and the four fingers  vf1 . in this latter case  the thumb is pressing against vfl  helping vf1 to create more force to counteract the anticipated large task-related torques. 
　objects of course have an infinite number of opposition vectors. however  only some of these locations are useful for the task for which the object will be used. the point of the internal task requirements is to discover those useful locations in a way that will capture the person's intent for the object as it relates to the object's task-significant properties. however  neither the object-to-task-requirement mapping nor the task-requirement-to-opposition-space mapping  which is basically an inverse kinematic mapping  are oneto-one mappings. in order to approach a functional specification of these mappings  we look towards capturing the constraints acting on both phases. in the next section  the sources for some of these constraints are analyzed. 
i i i . constraints on grasping 
　constraints on prehensile behaviors arise from a variety of sources. the hand and wrist bones have been shaped through millions of years of evolution  leaving modern man with a skeletal support and articulation system useful for enhanced object manipulation. extrinsic muscles in the forearm send tendons into the hand  thus allowing the hand to be relatively small  tubiana 1 . many of these extrinsic muscles have common origins in the forearm  thus causing constraints on fractionated finger movements. ligaments as well cause constraints on finger movements. for example  abduction of the fingers at the metacarpophalangeal joint is only possible when those ligaments are relaxed. 
　thus  anatomical constraints arise from the size and shape  length  width  etc  of the bones  the shape of the articular surfaces between bones  the location of tendon insertions and origins  the location of passive ligaments  the location and nature of skin specialized for prehension  with glands and epidermal ridges   and the size of the hand's surface areas  of the palm  of the finger pads  etc . biomechanical constraints arise from the stresses placed on these 
same bones  tendons  muscles  and ligaments. these include relative mechanical advantages of the various tendons  directions of movement of the fingers  the amount of force that can be applied by different hand configurations  and the way that these forces can be brought to bear. 
　other constraints arise from the object  object property constraints   and its anticipated interaction with the hand  interaction constraints . object property constraints arise because objects have dimensions  such as length  width  and height. the size along these dimensions produces constraints on the location where an object can be grasped. if an object is larger than the hand along one of these dimensions  then any opposition vector along that dimension is not useful. if the object is very much smaller than the hand surfaces  as is a thread  for example   then the hand is limited by perceptual constraints that require additional information for discriminating the tactile sensations. objects also have shape. a complex object can be divided into object features  each of which then have dimensions  as was done in  vijaykumar and arbib 1  . small features on large objects do not generally make useful locations for grasping  popielarczyk 1 . if an opposition vector is chosen through a small feature on a heavy object  for example  through the knob on a radio   the arising torque produced by lifting will most likely exceed the available force at the fingers. of course  with large objects that specifically have small features carefully placed for grasping  e.g.  handles placed above the center of mass on heavy boxes   this is not the case. in addition to the weight consideration  the size and placement of features puts limits on the type of opposition possible  e.g.  palm opposition could not be used in grasping the knob . 
　during the task  object lifting and manipulation   forces and torques act on the object. the weight and distribution of mass create constraints on the prehensile activity. a torque will arise if the opposition vector chosen fails to pass through a vertical line through or above the center of mass of the object. moments that tend to twist the opposition vector can be cancelled by increasing the friction between the fingers and object  either by applying more active force or else increasing the amount of skin surface against the object. if the weight of the object is not offset by  at least  an equal and opposite force  the object will not be lifted. this force can be supplied in a direction normal to the weight vector  with its magnitude affected partially by the coefficient of static friction. this latter value depends on the material and texture of the object surfaces  as well as on the hand surface's frictional responses  johanssen and westling 1 . frictional characteristics can enhance interactions  thus reducing the amount of active force necessary in the prehensile configuration  e.g.  fewer real fingers in a virtual finger . if the surface texture is smooth  then any opposition vector between the surfaces will have a reduced frictional component. if the pads  with their epidermal ridges and greasy lubricant  are not used  with an appropriately larger applied force   the object will likely slip out of the grasp. a surface also has a measure of compliance  affecting the amount of force that can be applied against the surface. another surface feature is the temperature of the object  which provides constraints in terms of the acceptable range for contact with human skin. objects and their features have accessibility constraints. 
	iberall 	1 

some object features are unavailable for grasping because of other objects. an example is the bottom of an object not being accessible because of the table or the surface supporting it. 
　in this short analysis  major constraints arising from the hand  anatomical  biomechanical  and perceptual   the obect  dimensions  shape  feature accessibility   and their in-
teraction in the task  forces and torques  skin and object surface characteristics  object and hand size relationships  have been delineated. further analysis is needed  and empirical results for quantifing these variables. some of the more general issues have been ignored  such as constraints related to the arm and body  constraints imposed by the laws of physics  and constraints related to the cns in general. 
i v . conclusion 
　the study of the human hand in prehensile movements can offer insights into the design of robot grasp planners. a design for a hierarchical grasp planner is presented. the first phase takes an object and task description and breaks them down into internal task requirements. these task requirements include functional and physical constraints  and are designed to capture the intended use of the object in prehensile-specific terms. the task requirements are then mapped into an opposition space  which captures the available forces and dofs of the hand  using vectors to represent virtual finger configurations. as the mappings in these phases are not unique  knowledge about constraints acting on the hand/object/task interaction first must be identified and then applied. empirical verification and quantification of the effects of these constraints and other constraints remain as future tasks. 
acknowledgements 
　i would like to thank my students at the hartford graduate center  including ted popielarczyk  ralph zampano  and daniel eldridge. 1 would also like to thank r. vijaykumar  m. arbib  and c. mackenzie; also e. i. robbins for editing an earlier draft of this paper. 
