 
this paper presents a method for applying standard inferencing mechanisms to a broader class of sentences than that which was possible before. the logic of proposition surrogates allows representation of and reasoning with a class of sentences  the so called opaque sentences  that pose special difficulties for standard logics. w i t h i n this class are sentences with one or more occurrences of such words as know  believe  aware  search  hunt  etc. 
it is shown that standard formal  programming  languages  e.g. first order logic  can be extended with proposition surrogates to deal with facts that have traditionally been expressed in modal or various other proposed logics. it has been argued that such facts can not adequately be expressed in standard logics; the findings and results recorded here  however  are to the contrary. proposition surrogates can be added  in a conservative manner  to standard automatic reasoning systems. 
proposition surrogates and their historical development are presented. an inference engine based on the logic of proposition surrogates is then outlined and applied to some problems in this area. 
1 	introduction 
in be griff sschrift  a formula language for pure thought modeled upon that of arithmetic  gottlob frege  1  takes identity to be a relation between names or signs of objects: 

mean that the sign a and the sign b have the same conceptual content  so that we can everywhere put b for a and conversely. 
1 	automated deduction this is the basic idea behind the axioms of equality which are assumed by various systems of logic. following is an explicit list of the axioms of equality: reflexivity x = x  symmetry x = y -  y - x  transitivity x = y y = z-  x = z  substitution in predicates 

substitution in functions 

   a number of theorem provers1 that are based on such logics implement the axioms of equality either directly or by various methods and rules of inference. it is because of the axioms of equality that certain conclusions can follow from premises. for example if it is true that eight is greater than five 
		 1  
and that the atomic number of oxygen is eight 
		 1  
it can then be concluded  on the bases of 1  1 and the axioms of equality  that: 
		 1  
which truthfully expresses the proposition that the atomic number of oxygen is greater than five. in the paper titled on sense and denotation  frege  1  expresses dissatisfaction with his earlier choice of the identity relation. he explaines in detail why a name cannot always be replaced by another of the same truth-value or content  in the view of the invariance of the truth of the whole sentence. it is of course assumed that declarative sentences denote a truth value  either true or false  and express a proposition  the objective content which is capable of being the common property of many   just as names have a denotation  the particular object named  and a sense  the manner and context of presentation . ajdukiewicz  1  illustrates the same point with the following example: 
   if it is true that newton knew that eight is greater than five 
		 1  
then it can be concluded  on the basis of 1  1 and the axioms of equality that: 
		 1  
which is certainly not true since it expresses the proposition that newton knew that the atomic number of oxygen is greater than five  a fact which was beyond his ken . 
1
﹛﹛for example  see the work of wos and robinson  1  and more recently digricoli and harrison  1 . 

how is it  then  that a sound system of logic admits false conclusions based on true premises and standard rules of inference  
﹛according to the terminology of church  1   this problem is called the parados  of the name relation. a number of radically different solutions have been proposed to solve the paradox of the name relation. following are various contrasting views whence the source of the problem lies and how it should be solved. 
1 	philosophical views 
1 	sense and denotation 
frege's  1  solution to this paradox revolves around the idea that names  sentences  or signs have associated with them a sense  the proposition expressed  which is no less relevant than the denotation. he also identifies three different contexts  ordinary  direct  and indirect  in which names can be used. in an ordinary context  names have their customary denotation and sense. the direct context is what is now known as the use-mention distinction: words name  denote  other words1. in an indirect context  names denote their customary sense  not their customary denotation  and have an indirect sense which is different than their customary sense. 
﹛the paradox is resolved since formula 1 is about the customary sense of the number eight  not its customary denotation  and formula 1 is about the customary denotation of the number eight  not its customary sense. therefore  formula 1 does not warrant the substitution of f{o  for 1 in formula 1. frege did not present a formulation  similar to that provided in begriffsschrift  for the logic of sense and denotation. 
   church presents three different alternatives under which a formulation of the logic of sense and denotation can be carried out. the three alternatives-alt  1   alt 1   alt 1}~ correspond to different sets of assumptions under which two sentences can be considered to have the same sense or express the same proposition. that two sentences s and 1 have the same sense if and only if s ~ s1 is logically valid is called alt s . a stronger criterion of identity between senses  alt l   is that s is convertible to 1 according to the rules of lambda calculus. the strongest criterion of identity between senses  alt o   is that 1 and 1 differ at most by one or more alphabetic changes of bound variable  or one or more interchanges of synonymous notations. two names are synonymous if they have the same denotation as well as the same sense. 
﹛a sound system of axioms characterizing two of these alternatives  alt 1  and alt l   has been specified by church  1  1 . mccarthy  1  also presented a first order theory of individual concepts and propositions based on frege's solution1. formulation of the logic 
1
﹛﹛carnap  1  used the word antinomy  but the word paradox is preferable since no apparent contradiction occurs in the absence of any further assumptions. 
     1 in writing  quotation marks or italics are used for direct contexts. 1  it differs  however  from frege's solution in that the latter calls for an infinite hiearchy of senses where as the former of sense and denotation remains open under alt o   the strongest alternative under which two sentences can be considered to express the same proposition. the solution presented in this paper is under alt o   however  it differs from the logic of sense and denotation. 
1 	contextual descriptions 
russell's  1 solution to the paradox eliminates names altogether from the language  and introduces contextual descriptions. the relevant distinction is that contextual descriptions have no meaning of their own; however  every sentence in which they occur has a meaning. it was commonly believed that the theory of contextual description can be used to resolve the paradox of the name relation as well as other paradoxes. by providing counter examples church  1  demonstrates that  if intensionality is to be avoided  then the theory of contextual descriptions cannot be adopted as a solution to the paradox of the name relation. contextual descriptions  however  remain useful for solving a variety of other problems. 
1.s 	nonclassical logics 
the notion of possible worlds has recently received a lot of attention from philosophers because it can be used to provide an analysis of necessity and possibility. more recently it has also been applied to propositional attitudes such as believing and knowing. a number of different modal logics based on the possible world models have been proposed. 
   there are disagreements  however  among philosophers regarding the nature of these possible worlds. some say that possible worlds combine the actual world with other worlds that contain only things similar to those in the actual world. others say that a possible world is described by a set of propositions  such that each proposition or its negation is a member of the set. some of the modal logics based on possible world semantics unnecessarily commit the agents to be what hintikka  1  called logically omniscient1. the strongest objection to nonclassical logics is the lack of efficient inferencing mechanisms. construction of efficient inference engines for modal logics must also address the computational complexities of logics that are based on the possible world models. 
1 	proposition surrogates 
this paper presents a modification  arbab  1   of the solution first proposed by ajdukiewicz  1  and later formalized by church  1 . the solution follows the 
allows only a single level. an infinite array of senses is called for since various levels of indirection  pat knows that newton knew that ...  can easily be formed. 
﹛﹛1  in 1  russell had outlined a different solution to the paradox of the name relation. russell  1   however  flatly states that the russell  1  solution is very similar to frege  1   and both are shown to be unsatisfactory. the particular line of reasoning presented by russell  1  remains unclear to this author! 
1
﹛﹛an exception to this is church's  1  formulation of the logic of and sense and denotation under alt 1  which is also based on the possible world models. 
	arbab 	1 

philosophy that there is nothing inherently wrong w i t h the underlying logic  either the rules of inference or the axioms of equality ; therefore  it is unnecessary to construct new logics  e.g.  modal logics  or to abandon  or weaken  the axioms of equality. the source of the problem lies in how natural language sentences are to be formulated in the formal language. in short  if well-formed formulas corresponding to english sentences are written correctly  then paradoxical conclusions will not arise. for example  1 is not the correct representation of the fact that newton knew that eight is greater than five  since it leads to paradoxical conclusions. w h a t are  then  the well-formed formulas corresponding to natural language sentences  
   the answer is based on the idea that sentences denote truth-values and express propositions. the proposition expressed by a sentence is  of course  independent of the particular natural language in which it happens to be written and can be expressed by sentences in different languages. for example  the two sentences eight is greater than five  in english  and acht ist grober als funf  in german  both express the proposition that eight is greater than five. one method of encoding propositions within a formal language is presented in this paper. the encodings are called proposition surrogates  since in the formal language they play the role of the proposition expressed by a sentence. the algorithm for constructing proposition surrogates can then be added to any formal language. in this paper an inference engine based on the proposition surrogate solution is presented and applied to some examples. 
1 	solution 
ajdukiewicz  1  1  argues that if sentences are in an indirect context  then they are ambiguous. it is primarily this ambiguity that leads to paradoxical conclusions. there are at least two different meanings that can be attributed to such sentences. let us call these   and 次. the paradox arises because we understand the sentence on the basis of  but formulate it on the basis of 次. the solution  then  is to formulate the sentence according to the understood meaning. for example  the first meaning    of the sentence 
	newton 	knew 	that 
	the atomic number of oxygen is greater than 	five 	 1  
can informally be stated as follows: 
newton knew about the atomic number of elements  about oxygen  about the relation greater than  about the number five  that the atomic number of oxygen is greater than five. 
sentence 1 can be formulated on the basis of $ as follows: 
		 1  
﹛﹛the existence of propositions are not effected by the fact that they can or can not be expressed in a particular natural or formal language. 
1 	automated deduction 
where /  o  gt  and 1 correspond  respectively  to the atomic number of elements  the constant oxygen  the relation greater than  and the constant five. the ordered ntuple occurring in the second position of the knew predicate is a proposition surrogate. its first member corresponds to the form of the formula  and the rest contain the primitive constants  function  and predicate symbols that occur in the formula. for every about clause in   there is an appropriate constant  function  or predicate name in the proposition surrogate. 
   the formula which corresponds to a proposition surrogate can be obtained by applying the first member of the proposition surrogate which is always a lambda expression containing the particular form of the formula to the rest of the members which are always the particular constants occurring in the formula. the formula which corresponds to the above proposition surrogate is gt f o   1   which expresses the proposition that the atomic number of oxygen is greater than five. 
   the second meaning  次  of 1 can informally be stated as follows: 
newton knew about the atomic number of oxygen  about the relation greater than  about the number five  that the atomic number of oxygen is greater than five. 
sentence 1 can be formulated on the basis of 次 as follows: 
		 1  
   the distinction between the two meanings can now be made clear by examining the different number of about clauses. according to   newton knew about the atomic number of elements  /   oxygen  o   and that the value of the atomic number of oxygen  / o   is greater than five. if sentence 1 is understood according to   then its truth value is falsehood  since knowledge of the atomic number of elements  /  can not be attributed to newton. sentence 1 understood according to 次  however  is true. the second meaning  次  of 1 does not attribute explicit knowledge of the atomic number of elements  /  or oxygen  o  to newton: they do not individually appear among the primitive constants of the proposition surrogate. 
   the difficulty with this solution to the paradox of the name relation lies in the way primitive constants of the formalized language are handled: an equality relation between primitive constants of the formalized language can be used to reintroduce the paradox. consider  for example  the two sentences: 
	john believed that dr jekyll was a gentleman 	 1  
	dr jekyll is mr hyde 	 1  
sentence 1 is formalized under alt o  as: 
		 1  
where john  gent  and dj are primitive constants of the language corresponding to john  gentleman  and the dr jckyll respectively. sentence 1  is formalized in the usual way as: 
		 1  
in formula 1  it is possible to substitute rah for dj on the basis of the axiom of equality and formula 1  thus arriving at the conclusion: 
		 1  
which corresponds to the paradoxical conclusion: 
	john believed that mr hyde was a gentleman 	 1  
   an extensional solution to the problem of primitive constants is outlined below. the idea of pointers to constants  address of a particular cell within the memory of a computer  and the associated operators  obtaining the address and de-referencing  is well-known in the field of computer science. the analogy1 between pointers and what frege  1  called the sense of a name can be used to construct a solution to the problem of primitive constants of proposition surrogates. 
   church's 1 algorithm for obtaining the proposition surrogate under alt 1  is modified so that every occurrence of a primitive constant  say c  in the proposition surrogate is replaced by  c  the particular pointer to c ; and every occurrence of a bound variable in the body of the lambda term corresponding to the primitive constant c  is replaced by application of the +  de-referencing  operator to that variable. for example  1 will now be formalized under alt 1  as: 

 1  
- 
1 	example 
let us assume  then  the availability of a two place predicate ps syp  such that p is the proposition surrogate corresponding to s under alt 1   for the exact details and the prolog code see arbab  1 . this example is called the the wise man puzzle and has been used to test the representational ability of formalisms for knowledge representation. 
a certain king wishes to determine which of his three wise men is the wisest. he arranges them in a circle so that they can see and hear each other and tells them that he will put a white or black spot on each of their foreheads  hut that at least one spot will be white. in fact  all three spots are white. he then offers his favor to the one who will first tell him the color of his spot. 
after a while  the wisest announces that his spot is white. how does he know 1 
the solution to this puzzle requires a wise man to reason about what other wise men know and do not know  from observations and the king's announcements. the puzzle solved here is actually a simplified version of the original puzzle. the simplifying assumptions arc that there are only two wise men  and that after some time the first wise man announces that he cannot tell the color of his spot  whereupon the second wise man says his own spot is white. the following is a partial list of a formulation of the puzzle in first-order logic  and prolog modified with proposition surrogates  the complete list can be found in arbab  1  . 
  that each wise man knows that there is at least one white spot is expressed by 

note that | p j is short hand for the proposition surrogate of p under alt 1  obtained according to the algorithm presented in the last section. the corresponding prolog clause is: 

note that ps s  p  is true iff p is the proposition surrogate of s. also  if p is unbound then the prolog interpreter will compute the proposition surrogate of s and bind it to p. 
that each wise man knows that the other wise man knows that there is at least one white spot  is expressed by 

the corresponding prolog clause is: 

notice the doubly-indirect context- thus the two calls to the ps predicate. 
  that a does not know that he has a white spot  since he made an announcement to this effect  is expressed by 
		 1  
the corresponding prolog clause is: non know a  w   a       . 
  that d knows that a does not know that he has a white spot  since b heard a's announcement  is expressed by 


1
﹛﹛this is not to suggest that frege's  1  sense of a name is simply a pointer to that name  only that pointers can play the logical role of the sense of a name. 
the corresponding prolog clause is: 
1
﹛﹛this puzzle has been attributed  by konolige  1   to an unpublished note by mccarthy. 
	arbab 	1 


1 	conclusion 
it was shown that the common interpretation of the identity relation  i.e.  a relation involving only denotation of names  leads to the paradox of the name relation. this is the source of inconsistencies when a classical set of axioms and rules of inference are assumed by the formal language. the philosophical point of view defended here is that the elimination of the paradox of the name relation requires neither a modification of the classical set of axioms  nor of the rules of inference. 
   an inference engine based on the logic of proposition surrogates can play an important role in the field of machine intelligence  for if a machine is ever to interact intelligently with other agents  machines or humans  then it must be able to represent and reason with facts about the agents' state of mind. an agent's state of mind  of course  includes  but is not limited to  facts about its knowledge  beliefs  awareness  and expectations. 
   the logic of proposition surrogates can be used to represent and reason with such facts. an inference engine based on the logic of proposition surrogates enables a machine not only to represent  but also to discover  logical consequences of such facts. 
1 	automated deduction 
1 	acknowledgement 
this work was carried out at u c l a under the supervision of professor stott parker of the computer science department  and professor alonzo church of the philosophy and mathematics departments. the author is grateful for their contributions of ideas and corrections made over the years. needless to say  all remaining errors are attributable solely to the author. 
