 
in 1 wu wen-tsiin discovered an efficient method for mechanical theorem proving. this method has been applied to prove and discover theorems in various kinds of geometries. based on an extension of one of wu's algorithmic procedures  the author implemented a prover cps for proving so-called constructive geometric theorems  as well as a general theorem prover ps. using this prover we proved more than one hundred non-trivial theorems and discovered also a number of interesting ones. this paper is a summarization of our early work  as a abbreviation of the chapter 1 from my chinese doctoral dissertation. 
1 	introduction 
the idea of proving mathematical theorems mechanically can be traced back to leibniz early in the seventeenth century. the first one who pointed out precisely the mechanical methods  in particular  for geometry  is llilbert. his classic work grundlagen der geometric  hilbert  1  is not only a model of axiomatization system but also a tremendous contribution to the mechanization of geometry. a complete decision method for elementary geometry and algebra was then given by tarski  1 . unfortunately  his method  even with the great simplifications due to seidenberg   is too complicated to be feasible. in fact  no theorems of any geometric interest have been proved in this way. a early geometry machine written up by gelernter  might prove only some trivial theorems. in 1 wu wen-
t.siin discovered an algorithmic method which has been successfully applied to theorem proving in many kinds of elementary geometries involving ordinary euclidean geometry  non-euclidean geometry and circle geometry. using wu's method  a number of non-trivial geometric theorems have been proved and discovered by several research groups  chou  1  kutzler and stifter  1  wang and gao  1 . the application of the grobner basis method to geometry theorem proving has been in-
vestigated in the past few years  kapur  1  kutzler and stifter  1 . 
　wu has extended his method to elementary differential geometry and established a general theory of mechanical theorem proving since 1. this theory solves the mechanization decision problem of various kinds of geometries and provides the feasible methods for theorem proving and theorem discovering. the first step ofwu's approach  in starting from the defining axiomatic system of geometry as shown in the grundlagen of llilbert  is to introduce some number systems and coordinate systems so that the geometric entities and relations will be turned into algebraic ones  the coordinatization and algebraization of geometric problems. then the algebraic relations corresponding to geometric ones occuring in the theorems under the consideration will be  differential  polynomial equations   differential  polynomial inequations and  differential  polynomial inequalities. the next step of wu's approach  restricted on the classes of theorems  particularly  in which no order relations are involved  i.e.  there will appear only  differential  polynomial equations and inequations but not any  differential  polynomial inequalities in the algebraic relations   is to decide in an algorithmic manner whether the algebraic relations corresponding to the conclusion of a geometric theorem are formal consequences of the relations corresponding to the hypothesis of the theorem under some non-degenerate conditions. note that these non-degenerate conditions play a very important  rule in wu's theory. if we leave them aside  then this decision problem may be reduced  by hilbert's nullstellensatz  to determine the membership of a radical ideal. however  only a few geometric theorems may be proved in that way because most of the theorems are actually only generically true. the degenerate cases in geometry cannot be indicated explicitly by the algebraic relations. hence for geometry  before solving the algebraic problem  we have first to determine the non-degenerate conditions. 
　among those involving no order relations  there are a type of theorems for which the hypotheses may be stated successively according to certain constructive types by introducing new geometric entities  and in the state ments of each step the algebraic relations corresponding to the geometric ones are linear equations in the new introduced geometric dependents as variables. this type of theorems  as an extension of hilbert pure intersection theorems  will be called constructive geometric theorems. the main part of this paper aims to discuss the mechanical proving of constructive geometric theorems. 
	wang 	1 
1 an extension of hilbert mechanization theorem 
as theorem 1 in a later edition of the grundlagen  hibert pointed out that if a pure intersection theroem holds in pascal geometry  then this theorem may be proved successively by adjoining some suitable constructions of points and lines  as a combination of finite number of pascal configurations. this theorem so-called hilbert mechanization theorem by wu indicates that the pure intersection theorems may be proved mechanically. as one of his methods  wu gave a constructive proof of the hilbert mechanization theorem by presenting an algorithmic procedure  wu  1  1b . in view of the hilbert explanation of pure intersection theorems  wu discovered that the constructions of points  replacing a line by two points  occurring in the theorems are of not more than 1 types. in each of these 1 types  the corresponding algebraic relations are linear equations in the newly introduced geometric dependents. thus they may be found successively from the linear equations as a rational function which has the parameters only as variables. 
　it is easy to see that there are actually only two geometric objects collinear and parallel occurring in wu's 1 constructive types. the author  wang  1  noticed that there are other important geometric objects such as perpendicular in ordinary geometry for which the corresponding algebraic relations are linear equations too. hence the theorems involving the constructive manner related to perpendicular may also be proved in the same algorithmic procedure as pure intersection theorems. this means that hilbert mechanization theorem may be extended to suit more geometric theorems. we shall not distinguish the kinds of geometries. the involved notions are directed against certain geometry for which they have definite meaning. thus we may add five new ones following wu's 1 constructive types. 


　since the distance and cosine themselves cannot be expressed as algebraic equations  we thus need to consider the squares as their alternative algebraic expressions. in fact  this change does not influence the characters of geometric entities  wu  1b . 
1 	method for proving constructive 
geometric theorems and prover cps 
　
1 	automated deduction 
　
if the hypothesis of a geometric theorem may be stated step by step according to a certain constructive manner such that in the statement of each step the corresponding algebraic relations are linear equations in the new introduced geometric dependents as variables and the conclusion of the theorem may be expressed as a sot of polynomial equations  this theorem is then called a constructive geometric theorem. certainly  the theorem  of which the hypothesis may be stated step by step according to the given 1 constructive types and the conclusion may be expressed as polynomial equations  is a constructive one. 
　evidently  the algorithmic procedure given by wu for proving hilbert pure intersection theorems works also for constructive geometric theorems. by experiments on computers  the author found that it is not very efficient to prove theorems in accordance with wifs original procedure. a suitable adjustment of wu's algorithmic steps is thus required1. to do this  we will not attempt to find 
1
　　in fact  this adjustment was pointed out by professor wu himself when the author discussed his algorithm with him in spring 1. 
　

	wang 	1 
　

1 	automated deduction 
　
fortran 1 for proving theorems of equation type. however  the prover is not complete. some facilities such as characteristic set computation  irreducible decomposition and command input of geometric statements need to be further improved. 
1 	proving and discovering geometric theorems 
using the implemented prover cps  as well as ps  we have experimented on several computers for proving and discovering geometric theorems since 1. more than one hundred non-trivial theorems have been proved. part of these theorems was collected as appendix a in my doctoral dissertation  wang  1  and written up in english in  wang and gao  1   among them  there are several interesting ones discovered independently by the author. most of the discovered theorems were already found later from certain books and papers. so far  a seemingly new one  wang  1  concerning pappus lines and leisenring lines has not been found in any literatures. 
　cps is a complete and very efficient prover. it may be applied to prove many more geometric theorems over the applicability domain of hilbert mechanization theorem. in fact  some theorems in solid geometry have also been proved by this prover. as noticed in  chou  1   most theorems in elementary geometries may be expressed as linear constructive geometric theorems discussed. in fact  by choosing appropriate coordinate systems or changing the manner of geometric statements  many seemingly inconstructive geometric theorems  especially those involving quadratic relations or reducibility problems  may also be restated as constructive geometric theorems. consider the following example. 
ex  secant theorem  from a point s two secants are drawn to cut a circle at points a  c and b  d respectively. then sa1 ＊ sc1 = sb1   sd1. 
　this theorem is related to a quadratic relation and reducibility problem about distinguishing two intersection points of a line and a circle from each other  wu  1 . to deal with this problem  we do the following: first fix one of the two points of intersection  drawing the perpendicular from the center of the circle to the line  and then determine the point symmetric to the first intersection point with respect to the perpendicular. in this way  the secant theorem may be stated as a constructive theorem and proved easily by our prover. in fact  the prover cps may treat various metric relations involving angle  area and so on as given in the constructive types. as we know  the different description of the geometric theorem and different choice of coordinate system affect directly the efficiency of the proof. whether the algebraic relations corresponding to the hypothesis of a geometric theorem have lower degrees or a better triangular form depends closely on the description of the theorem and the introduction of geometric entities  which are thus very important  not in principle but in practice. 
　by the general prover ps  the author has proved a number of non-trivial geometric theorems as illustrative examples  such as the apollonian circle theorem which is one of the most difficult theorems proved by chou  using wu's method. our proof of this theorem was carried out on a small computer iip1. the maximal number of terms of polynomials appearing in the reductions is 1. some non-trivial theorems have also been proved by ps on an ibm-pc. however  using the prover  theorem proving becomes a relatively simple work besides certain techniques such as the suitable choice of coordinates  in fact  which may be done mechanically too . 
　for discovering geometric theorems  there are several different ways  for example  numerical searching  guessing and then proving as discussed in  chou  1 . the cps involves also a sub-program for the first goal. a systematic way for theorem discovering is by means of creating first a geometric proposition and finding then the triangular form and the remainder using wirs method. if the obtained remainder itself is identically equal to 1  then this proposition forms  of course  a true geometric theorem. otherwise  if any factor of the remainder to be 1 has some geometric meaning  we may regard the geometric statement correspoinding to that algebraic relation as a new additional hypothesis of the created proposition and discover thus a new geometric theorem. 
　the author was trying to discover new theorems by different ways for a period of time after the implementation in 1 and discovered independently several interesting theorems. as examples  we may list four of them as follows. 
　1. if four lines in a plane form four triangles  then the orthocenters of these four triangles are collinear; 
　1. the five gauss lines determined by five given lines in a plane  taken four at a time  are concurrent; 
　1. in the pappus point theorem  two intersection points of every three pappus lines are harmonically separated by the two basic lines  as are two intersection points of every three leisenring lines; 
　1- the angle formed by the sims on lines of two points for a same triangle does not depend on the choice of the triangle and is measured by half the are between the two points. 
　among the above theorems  the second one has been called wang's theorem by several authors  chou  1  kapur  1  kutzler and stifter  1 . however  this theorem  even a more general theorem based on this one discovered by chou   is not a new one and thus not due to me at all. in fact  the above four theorems are all known. 
　about pappus lines and leisenring lines  rigby published a paper in journal of geometry in 1. in his paper  there are some interesting geometric theorems involving the pappus point theorem discovered by wu  1b  independently in 1 and the above third theorem discovered by myself. the author  wang  1  reproved a set of theorems appeared in rigby's paper using prover cps and in the meantime  conjectured and proved the following 
	wang 	1 
　
theorem the stx intersection points of every pappus line and its corresponding leisenring line are collinear. 
　this theorem is probably a new one. the proofs of other theorems concerning the pappus lines and leisenring lines are quite simple by our prover. however  the proof of this theorem is not so simple as expected. it took about 1 hours cpu time on an ibm1 computer. the hypothesis of this theorem involves 1 polynomials in 1 variables. the maximal number of terms of polynomials appearing in the reductions is 1. 
acknowledgement 
the author is deeply grateful to professor wu wen-tsun for his guidance  encourgement and valuable help on this work. this paper is written in part during author's visit at computing laboratory  oxford university. the thanks are to professor c. a. r. hoare for the invitation and to dr. s. a. cameron for the arrangements. 
