 
analogies are often used to help provide explanations of unfamiliar phenomena by comparing them to familiar phenomena. analogical explanations are of two kinds: ones that provide systematic clarification  and ones that give a causal account of why something happened. we describe a theory and implementation of analogical mapping that applies to both kinds of explanation. the theory says that the elements of one analog are mapped onto the elements of another on the basis of structural  semantic  and pragmatic constraints. our program acme  analogical constraint mapping engine  uses localist networks of units representing mapping hypotheses to determine the correspondences between analogs. this paper describes acme's application to eight analogies that have been used by chemistry teachers. 
1 analogy and explanation 
     analogies have numerous functions. in problem solving and decision making  analogies to past cases can be used to suggest solutions to new problems  holyoak & thagard 1  hammond 1  kolodner and simpson 1  carbonell 1  1. analogical arguments are sometimes used to reach conclusions  as in the philosophical argument for other minds: since i have a mind  and you are similar to me in numerous respects  i infer that you have a mind also  thagard 1 . analogies have various literary uses  serving to evoke emotions   love is a rose  . finally  analogies can be very valuable in teaching  when an unfamiliar phenomenon is explained in terms of something familiar. for example  we can explain heat flow in terms of water flow  the structure of the atom in terms of the structure of the solar system  gcntner 1   or variables in a programming language in terms of boxes that contain objects  burstein 1 . 
the research reported in this paper was supported by 
thagard  cohen and holyoak 	1 contract 	mda1-k-1 	from 	the 	basic 
research office of the u.s. army research institute for behavioral and social sciences. 
     analogical explanations are of two different kinds  corresponding to two senses of  explain  distinguished by dictionaries: 
1. to make plain or clear. 
1. to give the reason for or cause of. 
we shall call the first kind of explanation clarifying  and the second kind why-answering. consider how one might explain the british parliamentary system to an american ignorant of it. the best strategy  at least initially  would be to point out correspondences between the american system and the british: 
president - prime minister 
congress - parliament 
house of representatives - house of commons senate - house of lords 
there are problems with this analogy  for example that the prime minister is a member of parliament while the 
president is not a member of congress  but the analogy would give the american a start at understanding the british system. in this case  the analogy serves to make plain the nature of parliament by displaying its systematic correspondences with something that is  for the american  more familiar. a different kind of explanation would be prompted by questions such as  why was margaret thatcher elected prime minister in the last british election   such whyquestions are a request for causal explanations: the questioner wants to know what events or situation produced her victory. sometimes explanations that answer such questions are analogical: thatcher's victory was like bush's victory in the 1 u.s. election  in that the economy was strong and the opposition was not very formidable. the point of this analogy is to suggest how similar phenomena have similar causes. 
     both clarifying and why-answering analogical explanations can be found in an interesting section of the journal of chemical education called  applications and analogies'. this feature consists of letters from chemistry teachers at both high school and college levels who describe analogies that they have found useful in teaching chemistry to their students. for example  one analogy compared flow of energy through molecular motion in a gas to flow of wealth in a population. to learn using the analogies that 

their teachers give to them  students have to be able to bring the familiar everyday events offered as source analogs into correspondence with the target chemical phenomena. of thirty-five chemical analogies we have examined  1 arc clarifying analogies and 1 are why-answering. 
　　　a crucial stage in learning by analogy is mapping one analog onto another. in order to use a source analog to learn about a target analog  people and machines need to be able to determine what elements in the target correspond to what elements in the source. holyoak and thagard tin press  proposed a constraint satisfaction theory of analogical mapping that was applied to numerous examples and used to model the results of several psychological experiments. acme has now been applied successfully to eight additional analogies selected  as being particularly interesting  from the journal of chemical education. several of these analogies are primarily intended to provide the clarifying kind of explanation  while others have as their primary function explaining why something occurs. 
1 a constraint satisfaction theory 
　　　holyoak and thagard fin press  identified three major kinds of constraints that govern how parts of two analogs can be placed in correspondence with each other: semantic similarity  structural consistency  and pragmatic centrality. these constraints are not absolute requirements on successful mappings  but rather arc pressures that operate to some degree  hofstadter 1 . 
1 structural consistency 
　　　if we represent analogues as sets of interrelated propositions  gentner 1   then structural consistency requires that if a proposition p in the target is in correspondence with a proposition p* in the source  then the predicate and argument s  of p must each correspond to the respective predicate and argument s  of p*. if two propositions are mapped  then their constituent predicates and arguments should also map. two analogues constitute an isomorphism if the mapping between them is structurally consistent and one-to-one. sensitivity to structural consistency has been a crucial component in virtually all ai models of analogical mapping  e.g.  carbonell 1; falkenhainer  forbus  & gentner 1  in press; kolodner & simpson 1; thagard & holyoak 1; winston 1 . gentner's   systematicity principle  can be interpreted as a special case of structural consistency  in which correspondences between higher-order predicates  those such as  cause   which take propositions as arguments  enforce correspondences involving lower-order relations and their arguments. 
1 semantic similarity 
　　　more controversially  holyoak and thagard  in press  claimed that mappings should also favor correspondences between elements that are semantically similar. for example  dog should tend to map to cat more than it does to house  since cat and dog are both a kind of animal and a kind of pet. sophisticated judgments of the semantic similarity of two analogs cannot rely merely on finding identical 
1 	machine learning 
matches of predicates  but rather require a richer semantics to identify similar concepts. the semantic similarity of concepts in two analogs appears to depend on numerous semantic relations  including: 
 1  being represented by the same predicate; and 
 1  being connected by semantic relations such as synonymy or kind and part-whole relations. 
1 pragmatic centrality 
　　　the constraint of pragmatic centrality favors mappings that help to accomplish the purposes of the analogy. in why-answering explanations  for example  the purpose is generally to give a causal explanation that answers a question or set of questions  so the elements of the propositions to be explained will be particularly important. hence a mapping should tend to produce correspondences involving the important elements. numerous ai theorists have argued that causal relevance to goal accomplishment should influence retrieval  winston 1  1; schank 1; carbonell 1  1; hammond 1; kolodner & simpson 1 . we maintain that causal relevance should be considered in mapping between analogs as well as in the process of retrieval. mapping thus involves the simultaneous satisfaction of structural  semantic  and pragmatic constraints. 1 acme 
1 creating a network of mapping hypotheses 
the input to acme  analogical constraint mapping 
engine  consists of predicate-calculus representations of the source and target analogs  plus optional information about semantic similarity and pragmatic importance. we assume that a mapping may be computed either from a target analog to a source or vice versa. when given two structures as input  acme automatically generates a network in accord with the constraints postulated by the theory. the first step in building a mapping network is to construct mapping units corresponding to each possible hypothesis about pairings between elements. to limit the number of units formed  correspondences are only allowed between elements of the same basic type: propositions to propositions  n-place predicates to n-place predicates  and objects to objects. acme constructs units to represent all possible pairings of elements of the same type. 
　　　as the units are established  links are formed between them to implement the constraint of structural consistency. all links are symmetrical  with the same weight regardless of direction. all excitatory links have a default excitation weight given by parameter e. for predicates that lake more than one argument  the argument mappings support each other. links are also created between predicate-mapping units and their corresponding argument-mapping units. each potential correspondence between propositions thus generates an interconnected subnetwork of mutually consistent correspondences between elements of the propositions. after all the units have been formed  inhibitory links with weights equal to a parameter i are formed to connect all units that represent alternative mappings for the same element. 
　　　in addition to the units representing mapping hypotheses  the network includes two special units. the semantic unit is used to convey information about the system's prior assessment of the degree of semantic similarity between each pair of meaningful concepts in the target and source  and the pragmatic unit similarly is used to convey information about the pragmatic importance of possible correspondences. the semantic-similarity constraint is enforced by placing excitatory links from the semantic unit to all units representing mappings between predicates. the weights on these links are made proportional to the degree of semantic similarity between the mapped concepts. similarly  the pragmatic-centrality constraint is represented by weights on links connecting the pragmatic unit to relevant mapping units. section 1 and figure 1 below provide an example  and a full statement of the algorithms used can be found in holyoak and thagard fin press . 
1 running the network 
　　　the manner in which the network is run to arrive at a solution is a straightforward application of constraintsatisfaction methods that have been investigated extensively in other applications  see rumclhart and mcclelland 1 . to initialize the network  the activation levels of the semantic and pragmatic units are fixed at 1 and the activations of all other units are set to 1. on each cycle of activity  all units  except the semantic and pragmatic units  have their activation levels updated on the basis of the activation levels and weights associated with neighboring units and links. the updating procedure is based on that suggested by 
grossberg . the activation level of unit  on cycle t+1 is given by: 

　　　as we noted earlier  many previous simulation models of analogical mapping have been proposed  see hall  in press; thagard  1 . other models have included structural  semantic  and pragmatic constraints on mapping  but no single model has integrated these constraints as acme does. the most closely related previous simulation is the sme program  which was developed as an implementation of gentner's structure-mapping theory  falkenhainer et al.  1; gentner  1  1 .* acme and sme have several important similarities. both models derive a global  best  mapping from a set of constituent hypotheses about element correspondences  the mapping units of acme and the  match hypotheses  of sme . both programs operate on predicate-calculus representations of analogs  and both emphasize the role of proposition mappings in enforcing mappings between corresponding elements of the propositions. 
　　　acme follows sme in using constraints of structural consistency and one-to-one mapping  but there are notable differences. whereas sme insists on mappings that are one-to-one  acme operates with pressures that prefer but need not necessarily produce such mappings. acme treats isomorphism as a separate constraint from semantic similarity: whereas sme requires multi-place relations to be identical in order to be mapped  acme allows mappings between relations with no similarity beyond having the same number of arguments. more generally  acme includes semantic and pragmatic constraints on the mapping component  as well as purely structural constraints. acme prefers mappings between elements that are semantically similar  whereas sme excludes such information as relevant only to stages of analogy outside mapping. to implement the constraint of pragmatic centrality  acme allows preferences for  presumed  mappings and for mappings involving  important  elements. 
　　　mapping is at least implicitly part of every analogy program  but space restrictions prevent us from comparing acme with models that have been proposed by  for example  winston  1  1   hofstadter   anderson and thompson   kolodner and simpson   hammond   carbonell  1  1   and burstein . for analogies restricted to a single domain in which the same predicates and arguments turn up in both structures to be mapped  mapping becomes a simple special case of the more complex processes used by acme and sme for cross-domain analogies. 
1 application of acme to chemical analogies 
1 eight analogies 
　　　acme hits been successfully applied to a total of eight analogies from the journal of chemical education. a 
1
    sme runs in several different modes. our comparison here is with sme running in the mode that implements gentner's structure-mapping theory. 
	thagard  cohen and holyoak 	1 

few of these were quite simple  whereas others involved numerous propositions and complicated mappings. here is a list of the analogies with a brief description of each. the first 1 are why-answering analogies  whereas the last 1 are clarifying. 
　　　 1  leveling effect of solvents and opening jars  macomber 1 . students have difficulty understanding how the basicity of a solvent can affect the apparent acidity of a compound. this analogy compares strongly and weakly basic solvents to a father and son who differ in their abilities to open stuck jars: the father can open some jars that are too tightly stuck for the son to open  just as a strongly basic solvent can dissociate weaker acids  that have protons bound tightly  than can a weakly basic solvent. 
　　　 1  chemical bonds and tug of war  tsaperlis 1 . this is intended to help students understand how atoms are held together. atoms with bonds between them are compared to two people playing tug of war with a rope. the atoms are bonded together because they compete for electrons  just as the people are held together because they compete for the rope. 
　　　 1  gas chromatography and store escalators  starkey 1 . students have the misconception that the separation of a mixture of compounds in a gas chromatography column involves different lengths of time that each compound spends in the mobile  gas  phase  whereas the difference really comes in the stationary  liquid  phase. the gas column is compared to a store with escalators  where shoppers enter at the first floor and make their way up eight floors to the top. the different length of time it takes them to get to the top does not depend on the amount of time they spend in transit on the escalators  but only on how much time they spend shopping on the floors. 
　　　 1  distribution of molecular velocities and distribution of wealth  white 1a . this analogy compares the distribution of molecular velocities to the distribution of money. just as a series of financial gains can lead a millionaire to have an action-filled life  so a series of collisions can cause a molecule to gain enough energy to react. 
　　　 1  soluble vs. insoluble mixtures and marble/magnet mixtures  kjonaas 1 . mixing polar molecules such as water and non-polar molecules such as oil produces an insoluble mixture  just as putting marbles and magnets together fails to produce a homogeneous mixture because the magnets stick together. 
　　　 1  chiral molecules and people's hands  richardson 1 . how chiral molecules react to one another is compared to how people are more easily able to shake the right hands of other people with their right hands than with their left hands. there is no attempt here to explain why molecules have these relationships  only to point out systematic correspondences with human hands. 
　　　 1  entropy as degree of disorder and classroom attire  white 1b . in order to convey an understanding of entropy  this analogy considers a classroom in which every member owns a pair of blue jeans and a white shirt or blouse  as well as other clothes. it is highly improbable that the class will end up in a uniform state with all of them wearing the same color jeans and shirt on a given day. no explanation is given of why order and disorder arise in chemical phenomena. 
　　　 1  reactions yields and voter turnout  rocha-filho 1 . just as in an election only some of the members of the electorate actually vote  so in a chemical reaction the actual yield is often less than the theoretical yield. no explanation is given of why the theoretical yield is less; the point of the analogy is merely to clarify the discrepancy in reactions by relating it to the more familiar discrepancy in elections. 
　　　in order to apply acme to them  each of these analogies was formalized in predicate calculus. the resulting representations were then used by acme to generate constraint networks. table 1 gives information about the results of running each analogy. it displays for each analogy the total number of propositions used to represent each pair of analogs  the number of units created by the network  the number of links set up  the number of cycles of updating it took before acme came up with the correct mapping 


1 	machine learning 

 when the unit representing the correct mapping for each predicate had higher activation than competing units   the number of cycles it took the network to settle  when every unit had reached asymptote   and two sensitivity measures explained in section 1. 
1 a sample network 
     most of the networks produced in these examples are too complex to show in a one-page figure  but figure 1 shows the network produced for analogy  1  which was by far the simplest  requiring only 1 units and 1 links. the input for this analogy consisted of only 1 propositions per structure: 
election 
 electorate  number-possible-voters  s1  
 turnout  number-actual-voters  s1  
 greater  number-possible-voters number-actual-voters  s1  
reaction 
 theoretical-yield  number-rcactant-molecules  tl  
 actual-yield  number-product-molecules  t1  
 greater  number-reactant-molecules number-productmolecules  t1  
in this case  but not in all the others  the structures are isomorphic. the last element in the list is the name of the proposition. for conciseness  figure 1 uses the abbreviations el  tu  g  ty  and ay for the predicates above  and pv  av  rm  and pm for the objects. for example  el=ty is the unit that represents the hypothesis that electorate corresponds to theoretical-yield. excitatory links are shown by solid lines  while inhibitory links are shown by dotted lines. 

figure 1. 
network constructed for the reaction/election analogy 
1 sensitivity analyses 
     all of the simulations reported here have used the same parameter values: .1 for excitation. -.1 for inhibition  and .1 for decay. in general  lowering excitation and making inhibition closer to 1 tends to prolong settling time. increasing decay tends to flatten the activation curves  both positive and negative  keeping them closer to 1. varying excitation and inhibition systematically reveals that there is a critical value for each. table 1 lists excitation ceilings and inhibition floors for the four major examples. the excitation ceilings are the maximum values that excitation can have without the networks requiring more than 1 cycles to settle; inhibition here is constant at the default value of -.1. the inhibition floors are the minimum values that inhibition must have to de-activate units representing inferior hypotheses; excitation here is constant at the default value of .1. the excitation ceiling and the inhibition floor indicate the most important respects in which quantitative parameter changes in acme have qualitative effects. 
     analogical mapping is highly sensitive to representational matters  but acme's success on the chemical analogies does not depend on our particular encodings. to test the representational sensitivity of our inputs  we amalgamated the solvents/jars analogy with the bondsaug of war analogy and mapped a combined solvents + bonds structure with a combined jars + tug of war structure. the resulting network had 1 units and 1 links  but settled in 1 cycles  only slighdy more slowly than the networks used in the original analogies. acme found the same mappings for the solvents and bonds predicates that it did in the original runs  showing that the additional representations did not impede its ability to find correct mappings.1 
1 conclusion 
     in sum  the 1 chemical analogies have provided interesting additional applications of the constraint satisfaction theory of analogical mapping. there are more than twenty analogies in the journal of chemical education that we have not yet attempted to model. it will be interesting to see if they highlight additional extensions needed to our theory and program. the most important future work planned for acme is to integrate it with arcs  a program for modeling the retrieval of analogs  thagard  holyoak  nelson  & gochfeld  1 . retrieval of a source analog from a target has also proven understandable in terms of satisfaction of a variety of constraints. the psychological evidence suggests  however  that retrieval depends more on semantic similarity and less on structural consistency than 
1
    holyoak and thagard tin press  show that the space complexity of acme is 1 n1   considering number of links created as a function of number of propositions in the input representations. experiments have shown that cycles to settle does not tend to increase with size of network. 
	thagard  cohen and holyoak 	1 

does mapping  so arcs differs from acme in giving a much bigger role to semantics. 
