 
the knowledge to be acquired for the development of knowledge based systems is often distributed across a group of experts rather than available for elicitation from a single expert. group elicitation presents major problems because experts can disagree on the use of concepts and vocabulary  and this disagreement may be tacit causing confusion. this paper describes a computer-supported methodology for knowledge acquisition from groups in which the conceptual frameworks of different experts are compared in a way that makes such disagreements overt and readily identifiable. 
1 sources of dissent in conceptual systems 
computer elicitation of entity-attribute  or repertory  grids has proved to be a powerful technique for acquiring the declarative knowledge structures of an expert in a domain 
 shaw and gaines  1  1  boose 1  boose and bradshaw  1  diederich et al  1  gaines  1a . 
entity-attribute grids are used to elicit from the expert two types of information about a particular sub-domain: the distinctions made between relevant entities in that subdomain; and the terms used for these distinctions. 
in a well-established scientific domain it is reasonable to suppose that there will be consensus among experts as to relevant distinctions and terms-that is  objective knowledge independent of individuals  popper  1 . however  the  expert systems  approach to system development has been developed for domains where such objective knowledge is not yet available  and the primary sources of knowledge are the conceptual structures of individual experts  gaines  1b . when multiple experts are available for a domain where a consensus has not yet been reached  it is important to be able to compare their conceptual structures  both among themselves and with those of potential clients for the resultant knowledge-based system. 
gaines and shaw 	1 studies have been made of extending performance systems based on entity-attribute grids to allow multiple knowledge structures from different experts to be combined without distortion  enabling  dissenting opinions  to be requested  boose  1 . in some cases  however  apparent dissent between experts is due to conflict in using the same terminology for different concepts. in addition apparent difference in viewpoints can result from the use of different terminology for the same concept. figures 1 through 1 illustrate some of the phenomena that can arise by considering the mappings from the concepts of experts or clients to the relevant distinction in the domain and the term used for that distinction. 
in figure 1: consensus arises if the conceptual systems assign the same term to the same distinction. 

fig.l consensus between conceptual systems 
in figure 1: conflict arises if the conceptual systems assign the same term to different distinctions. 

fig.1 conflict between conceptual systems 

in figure 1: correspondence arises if the conceptual systems assign different terms to the same distinction. 

fig.1 correspondence between conceptual systems 
in figure 1: contrast arises if the conceptual systems assign different terms to different distinctions. 

fig.1 contrast between conceptual systems 
consensus shows a shared conceptual sub-system. conflict shows possible dissent over the application of a concept in a domain since the same term is being used in different ways. correspondence shows possible dissent over the appropriate term to be used for a concept contrast shows conceptual sub-systems that are not shared  and cannot lead to direct dissent. it may indicate different areas of expertise. 
the following section describes a methodology for eliciting and processing entity-attribute grids that derives this classification for groups of experts and clients. 
1 comparing conceptual systems 
any comparison of conceptual systems necessarily involves approximation since a complete conceptual system may involve indefinitely complex relations and different concepts will never be identical in all respects. however  in the initial phases of knowledge acquisition  highlighting gross similarities and differences is itself valuable in promoting directed discussion among experts and clients that can lead to the exposure of more subtle relationships. as a start one wishes to elicit the major distinctions that an individual uses in a domain  the terminology used for them  and the relation of such distinctions and terminology to those of others. 
entity-attribute grid elicitation is an effective method for eliciting major distinctions and terminology in a domain  shaw  1 . it is an extensional approach in which individuals are asked to specify a set of entities in a domain  then make distinctions among them  naming the distinctions and classifying all the specified entities in terms of them. the extension of a distinction determined in this way is only an approximation to the underlying concept since critical entities may be missing in the classification. however  both manual and computer-based elicitation techniques attempt to prompt the individual for additional entities to discriminate between extensionally related distinctions  that is making the same  or similar  classifications . 
group comparisons  as discussed in this paper  have similar dynamics-an extensionally apparent consensus or correspondence may be accepted or rejected  and the rejection may be based on the specification of additional entities as counter-examples. knowledge acquisition is essentially a negotiation process leading to approximations to conceptual structures that are adequate for some practical purpose such as system development. 
measures for comparing extensionally defined distinctions may be formulated in terms of a fuzzy sets model of grid data  gaines and shaw  1  1 . the bipolar attributes in a grid are treated as a pair of predicates defining fuzzy sets and the rating of an entity on an attribute is regarded as defining a degree of membership to each of these sets. following the conventions of gaines  we shall use ordinary characters for fuzzy sets  boldface characters for fuzzy variables  and denote the degree of membership of a variable to a set by concatenating it to the right of the set. thus  x is the fuzzy set defined by predicate x  a lhp or 
rhp of the grid  and the degree of membership of entity e to fuzzy set x is xe. a measure of equivalence between two attributes can then be defined as: 
		 1  
where the and and equivalence operators on the right hand side can be any of the many proposed for fuzzy logic-in the examples in this paper we use lukasiewicz's operator for equivalence and zadeh's sigma count for conjunction  smets et a/  1 . other distance measures that are zero when attributes are applied identically to entities and increase continuously with increasing differences in application could also be used. 
to apply  1  as a measure of similarity between distinctions it is necessary that they have the same extension-that is  that the group agrees on a common set of entities among which they will each make distinctions. phase 1 of the methodology consists of establishing this common set of entities and ensuring  as far as possible  that each individual 

in the group is defining the entities in the same way. this appears straightforward if the entities are well-defined  named concrete objects in the world. however  the concept of an entity turns out to have its own difficulties in practice-if the entities are people  is it important in what mood and what role they are -if the entities are tools  is it important who is using them and to what purpose  again  entity definitions are part of the ongoing negotiation process of knowledge acquisition  and tacit disagreement over them can be a source of dissent. the methodology described compares entities also using a similar measure to  1  over the attributes being used. 
for the sake of simplicity  we will phrase the following in terms of comparisons between pairs of individuals. the methodology extends simply to a group as discussed later. the measurement of consensus and conflict requires a common terminology for the distinctions and is based on the exchange of grids. one individual is given the grid elicited from the other with attributes and entities specified  but not the values  and asked to rate the entities on the attributes. the measure defined in  1  can then be used to determine how well the distinctions made by the second individual match with those made by the first. distinctions which match above an upper threshold are in consensus and those that match below a lower threshold are in conflict-those matching between the thresholds are ambiguously related. correspondence and contrast between two conceptual systems may be measured by eliciting independent grids from the two individuals and using the measure defined in 
 1  to determine for each distinction in one grid the best matching distinction in the other. distinctions which match above an upper threshold are in correspondence and those that match below a lower threshold are in contrast-those matching between the thresholds are ambiguously related. as important as the mathematics and methodology is the presentation of the results to the individuals in such a way that they readily visualize the areas of potential dissent and their sources. figure 1 is a graphic presentation of a consensus and conflict analysis from a grid exchanged between two experts in geographic mapping techniques  shaw and woodward  1 . the differences are shown in the grid on the left in numeric form and as shading with darker gray indicating greater difference. the sets of attributes and entities have both been sorted so that those with highest matches indicating greatest consensus are at the top of their respective lists. the graphs on the right show the declining match values and may be used to decide where to place thresholds distinguishing consensus and conflict the presentation of figure 1 contains sufficient raw and processed data that it may be used for a range of discussions  from identification of apparent disagreements  such as that on the use of the term  linear interpolation  and the entity  probability matching   to a detailed analysis of how these disagreements have arisen. measures of correspondence and contrast are presented in a similar graphical form with attributes paired from the two grids. 
	gaines and shaw 	1 


figure 1 shows the basis for the calculation of the results levels are chosen because they symmetrically separate the no given in figure 1. the ratings given to the entities on the match level of 1 from the total match level of 1-a attribute  discontinuous-continuous  by each expert are match level of 1 corresponds to a perfect inverse match . 
shown on the top two lines  1 indicates  discontinuous  and the consensual items in figure 1 are simple to deal with- 1 indicates  continuous  . the differences are shown on the an obvious question is  to what extent can a knowledgethird line and correspond to those for this attribute in figure based system be built based only on these well-agreed 1  noting that the entities are re-ordered in figure 1 and that distinctions   the conflicting items can be looked at with 
zeroes are not shown . 	the reverse implication   to what extent can a knowledge-
to provide a synopsis for discussion by the experts  the based system be built not using these ill-defined results of the comparisons are summarized and presented in distinctions   
the four quadrant diagram exemplified in figure 1  the 1 
if some of the distinctions are agreed to be necessary for system development then the basis of the conflict can be examined in greater detail starting with the presentation of figure 1. many resolutions of the conflict are possible  but the computer-based methodology can go no further than making the basis of conflict and the possible need for resolution apparent. 
the corresponding items may again be looked at in terms of their relevance to the problem. in addition their further interpretation often leads to significant insights into the 
knowledge structures involved. for example  the terms low-level-data- high-level data and nominal data- interval or ratio data corresponding may be interpreted as arising from different levels of abstraction. 
questions then arise about whether the levels should be represented in the knowledge structures   which will be best understood by a client    and  should one term be used as an explanation of the other in response 
to a help request   

interpretation of the correspondences in figure 1 is an important knowledge acquisition methodology in its own right. the simple example shown brings to light abstraction hierarchies  physical and social causal links  and other relations between attributes. the methodology has the advantages of group brainstorming in stimulating knowledge elicitation  and captures the results in a highly structured and usable form. 
note that the derivation of consensual  corresponding  conflicting and contrasting attributes is completely algorithmic  based solely on the data in the grids. this derivation is done by a computer program  not a knowledge engineer  and its basis can be demonstrated clearly to the experts and clients through computer output such as figure 1. thus  there are no opinions being expressed about the correctness of the use of the attributes and terminology  that the differences highlighted are 'right' or 'wrong.' it is open to the experts and clients to consider  discuss and explain these differences  changing or retaining them as they wish. conflicts can be retained in the final system if desired by tagging classes  objects and rules with the sources from which they derive. 
the methodology has been described in relation to comparisons between two people. however  it scales up linearly with the size of the group  so that n people will be involved in n elicitations  one base elicitation and n-1 exchanges. the following section reiterates the methodology in detail as a practical technique for knowledge acquisition with groups of experts and clients. 
1 a methodology for comparing conceptual structures 
figures 1 through 1 show the phases of a methodology for comparing conceptual systems. 

  in phase 1  the problem is discussed with the group of experts and representative clients  and a domain is identified. 
  the use of computer-based knowledge acquisition is introduced  a specific task is agreed upon  and a purpose for the elicitation developed. 
  the first step in acquisition consists of the elicitation of a grid from each individual. this gives each person experience in using the computer-based system and provides an initial set of entities and attributes particular to the individual. 
  these grids are processed using graphical clustering methods  and the results shown and explained to the individual from whom the data was elicited. as a result an individual may extend or elaborate their conceptual system expressed in the grid. 
  the group meets together to discuss each set of entities  review and revise the purpose or context of the elicitations  and agree on a common purpose and set of entities which all understand to be used in the next two phases. 

this common entity set provides the basis for the second phase of knowledge acquisition which consists of the elicitation of a grid from each individual using the set of common entities. 
these grids are again graphically clustered  and the results reported and explained to each expert respectively. again this may lead to extension and elaboration. 
this data is then processed to identify corresponding and contrasting attributes. 

	gaines and shaw 	1 

  the third phase of knowledge acquisition consists of the individuals exchanging their grids elicited in phase 1 with each other individual in the group to produce grids in which one person classifies the common set of entities using another person's attributes. 
  this data is then processed to identify consensual and conflicting attributes. 
  their conceptual systems and the relations between them are then discussed by the group. consensus is identified. conflict is resolved  qualified or noted as irresolvable. correspondence is interpreted as due to differences in terminology or correlations through some identified phenomenon. contrasts are analyzed as irrelevant or a relevant part of some specialist viewpoint. 
  this analysis is propagated through all further phases of knowledge acquisition such as class  property and object definitions  and rule specification. for example  possible conflicts are avoided if possible  and identified and explained otherwise-correspondences are used to generate alternative forms of questions and explanations. 
1 conclusions 
the knowledge to be acquired for the development of knowledge based systems is often distributed across a group of experts rather than available for elicitation from a single expert. group elicitation presents major problems because experts can disagree on the use of concepts and vocabulary  and this disagreement may be tacit causing confusion. this paper describes a computer-supported methodology for knowledge acquisition from groups in which the conceptual frameworks of different experts are compared in a way that makes such disagreements overt and readily identifiable. 
the methodology provides facilities for revealing the similarities and differences in the conceptual systems of groups of experts and clients. it can be used to focus discussion between experts  and between them and representative clients  on those differences between them which require resolution  enabling them to classify them in terms of differing terminologies  levels of abstraction  disagreements  and so on. 
the methodology promotes the full exploration of the conceptual framework of a domain of expertise by encouraging experts and clients to operate in a brainstorming mode as a group  using differing viewpoints to develop a rich framework. it avoids social pressures forcing an invalid consensus by providing objective analysis of separately elicited conceptual systems. 
acknowledgements 
financial assistance for this work has been made available by the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada. we are grateful to many colleagues at the knowledge acquisition workshops for discussions which have highlighted many of the issues raised in this paper. we are particularly grateful to brian woodward  john boose and jeff bradshaw for many fruitful discussions of knowledge acquisition systems  and to the anonymous referees for helpful comments. 
