 
many researchers believe that certain aspects of natural language processing  such as word sense disambiguation and plan recognition in stories  constitute abductive inferences. we have been working with a specific model of abduction  called parsimonious covering  applied in diagnostic problem solving  word sense disambiguation and logical form generation in some restricted settings. diagnostic parsimonious covering has been extended into a dualroute model to account for syntactic and semantic aspects of natural language. 
the two routes of covering are integrated by defining  open class  linguistic concepts  aiding each other. the diagnostic model has dealt with sets  while the extended version  where syntactic considerations dictate word order  deals with sequences of linguistic concepts. here we briefly describe the original model and the extended version  and briefly characterize the notions of covering and different criteria of parsimony. finally we examine the question of whether parsimonious covering can serve as a general framework for parsing. 
1 	introduction 
natural languages are rife with ambiguity. there are lexical ambiguities; words in isolation may be seen to have multiple syntactic and semantic senses. there are syntactic ambiguities; the same sequence of words may be viewed as constituting different structures. and finally  there are semantic and pragmatic ambiguities  all of which may be resolved in context. ambiguity and its context-sensitive disambiguation  it turns out  are two important characteristics of abductive inferences. 
　there have been various attempts at characterizing abductive inference and its explanatory nature  appelt  1; charniak and mcdermott  1; hobbs  et al.  1; josephson  1; konolige  1; pople  1; reggia  1  etc. . 
while they differ somewhat in details  they all boil down 
   *this research was supported in part by the state of ohio research challenge grant to the author. 
to accounting for some observed features using potential explanations consistently in a  parsimonious   often  minimal   way. over the past decade  a formal model for abduction based on these ideas was developed at maryland; this theory is called parsimonious covering. the theory originated in the context of simple diagnostic problems  but extended later for complex knowledge structures involving chaining of causal associations. 
　a diagnostic problem specified in terms of a set of observed manifestations is solved in parsimonious covering by satisfying the coverage goal and the goal of parsimony. satisfying the coverage goal requires accounting for each of the observed manifestations through the known causal associations. ambiguity arises here  because the same manifestation may be caused by any one of several candidate disorders. ensuring that a cover contains a  parsimonious  set of disorders satisfies the goal of parsimony. there could potentially be a large number of covers for the observed manifestations  but the  parsimonious  ones from among them are expected to lead to more plausible diagnoses. the plausible account for a manifestation may be one disorder in one context and another disorder in a different context. such contextual effects are to be handled automatically by the specific criterion of parsimony that is chosen. 
　for medical diagnosis  reasonable criteria of parsimony are minimal cardinality  irredundancy and relevancy  peng  1 . minimal cardinality says that the diagnosis should contain the smallest possible number of disorders that can cover the observed symptoms. a cover is considered irredundant  not redundant  if none of its proper subsets is also a cover  i.e.  if the cover contains no disorder by removing which it can still cover the observed symptoms. relevancy simply says that each disorder in the cover should be capable of causing at least one of the observed manifestations. 
　consider an abstract example where disorder d1 can cause any of the manifestations m1 and m1; d1 can cause any of m1  m1 and m1; d1 can cause m1; d1 can cause m1 and m1; and finally  d1 can cause m 1 . if the manifestations {m 1   m 1   m1} were observed  the disorder set {d1} constitutes a minimal cardinality cover; the irredundant covers that are not minimal cardinality covers are {d   d1} and {d1  d 1 }; and an example of a redundant  but relevant cover would be {d 1   d1  d1}. while {d 1   d1} is a cover that has an irrelevant disorder  d1  in it  {d 1   
dasigi 

parsimonious covering natural language theory  diagnosis  processing similarities: symptoms words disorders internal assertions intermediate syndromes word senses and 
structures symptoms with ambiguous words 　multiple causes pathognomonic unambiguous words 　manifestations observed manifestations a sequence of words  to be explained  in input text 
 to be interpreted  causal relation  between lexical and semantic symptoms and associations  between disorders  words and senses  diagnostic explanation semantic interpretation  i.e.  a set of disorders   i.e.  a set of related assertions  differences: 
order of entities ignored word order important sets of entities sequences of concepts 	i single type of knowledge two types of knowledge  causal   syntactic/semantic  	| table 1: similarities and differences between diagnostic problem solving and natural language processing 
d1} is a non-cover  since together the disorders in this set cannot account for all observed manifestations. 
   several natural language researchers have been actively involved in modeling abductive inferences that occur at higher levels in natural language  e.g.  at the pragmatics level. abductive unifications that are required in performing motivation analysis  for instance  might call for making the least number of assumptions that might potentially prove false  charniak  1 . litman uses a similar notion of unification  called consistency unification  litman  1 . hobbs and his associates propose a method that involves minimizing the cost of abductive inference where the cost might involve several different components  hobbs  et ai  1 . although  charniak and mcdermott  1  indicate that word sense disambiguation might be viewed to be abductive  nobody has pursued this line of research. it is very clear that there exists a strong analogy between diagnostic parsimonious covering and concepts in natural language processing. there are  however  important differences as well. these similarities and differences are summarized in table 1. we have tried to extend parsimonious covering to address some of the idiosyncrasies of language  contrasted to diagnosis  and apply it to low level natural language processing. 
1 	natural language 
1 	c o v e r i n g a n d p a r s i m o n y i n l a n g u a g e 
linguistic concepts are viewed in parsimonious covering to be much like disorders and manifestations in diagnostic problems. however  in order to account for word order and structural constraints in language on the one hand and to account for the lexical and semantic content on the other  two aspects are attributed to each linguistic concept. these two aspects are loosely referred to as syntactic and semantic aspects  respectively. concepts are covered parsimoniously in these two aspects  and the processes of covering are called syntactic and semantic covering. 
　the notions of coverage and parsimony are briefly sketched here for syntactic covering through an abstract example here. unlike in the case of diagnostic covering  the covers in syntactic covering are sequences rather than sets. consider the following descriptions of categories c1 through c1 in terms of simpler categories  or words  w1 through w1 below  sequences are indicated by being enclosed between  
　the categories shown in bold face are mandatory categories  i.e.  categories that must be present for the description to viably apply to a context. semantic considerations govern whether a category is mandatory in a description. depending on the domain   the patient blind  might still make sense  indicating that the omitted copula is not mandatory   but  the patient  alone does not make complete sense  indicating that for this type of sentences  an adjectival complement is mandatory . see  dasigi  1  for discussion. 
	suppose the input sequence is 	. some 
valid covers  covering sequences  are  
some non-covers 
are 	either because they cannot account for all the categories in the input sequence or because they cannot account for the correct order. note that although  is a cover   is not a cover. for instance  it makes sense to 
cover  paint the wall  with the sequence  verb nounphrase   but not by  noun-phrase verb . irredundant covers include . of these two irredun-
dant covers  the former is also minimal  i.e.  of minimal cardinality  and the latter is not. insertion of c1 into any valid cover causes it to be a non-viable cover since the category mandatory to c1  namely  w1 is not present in the input sequence to be covered. thus   is a non-viable cover. 
　consider the cover  superficially  it appears to be a redundant cover since c1 by itself is a cover. when the second rather than the first description of c1 is taken into account  however  there is no redundancy in the cover  in a certain sense. for more concreteness  consider the following two classic sentences that differ in a single word: 

 john painted the wall w i t h a crack.  
 john painted the wall w i t h a brush.  
　now  suppose there exist the usual descriptions for noun phrases  noun-phrase  and prepositional phrases  prep-phrase . although in both sentences  the highlighted words can be syntactically covered by the irredundant cover  noun-phrase   the sequence  nounphrase prep-phrase  is a more appropriate cover in the second sentence  and we would like to consider that cover as irredundant  too. this characterization of irredundancy is obviously important  and is somewhat similar to the notion of  relevant diagnostic covers  defined in the previous section. 
　for the sake of completeness  we briefly describe the salient features of semantic covering. a detailed account and algorithms may be found in  dasigi  1 . the conceptual objects manipulated by semantic covering are domain-specific semantic senses. for semantic covering  the order of the concepts being covered is no longer important. semantic covering involves discovering the relationships underlying the domain-specific entities evoked by input words  so that a parsimonious semantic cover can be synthesized for them; this cover corresponds to the logical form of the original sequence of words. there are two types of semantic covering. the first type of covering involves covering individual content words by domain-specific senses corresponding to objects  attributes  etc. this type of covering involves only lexical associations. here  a domain-specific entity semantically covers a content word if any of the content words in the name or synonyms of the entity is morphologically re lated to the word itself or a domain-specific or domainindependent synonym of the word. 
　the other type of semantic covering is based on the relationships in a domain-specific semantic network. a 
simple domain-specific entity may be represented by a single node in the semantic network  e.g.  an attribute. also  a non-atomic subgraph of the semantic network can represent a more complex domain-specific entity  e.g.  an assertion that relates an attribute and a possible value for it. either kind of domain-specific entity - whether represented by a single node or by a subgraph in the domain-specific semantic network - is said to be covered by any of its supergraphs. since any super-graph of a domain-specific concept can cover it  for any domainspecific concept there are potentially a huge number of covers  some of which are very redundant. there should be some means of controlling the number and sizes of potential covers. criteria of parsimony and other constraints are used to achieve this control. 
　a criterion of parsimony called cohesiveness is chosen  inspired by the fact that in order to be understandable  text must be cohesively connected. a set of semantic categories are designated as assertionals  loosely corresponding to the notion of a sentence or an independent clause in english . a semantic cover corresponding to a non-assertional category is considered to be cohesive if it is the smallest  in terms of nodes  connected graph covering the concepts in question. a semantic cover corresponding to an assertional category is considered to be cohesive if either it is the smallest connected graph covering the concepts being covered or it is a not necessarily connected graph of several such domain-specific entities belonging to assertional categories. if there is more than one unconnected cover for the same concepts  the smallest connected cover of such unconnected components is the cohesive cover. it can be seen that cohesiveness refers to the  size  of the covers  and it is similar to  minimal cardinality   used in early versions of parsimonious covering theory for diagnostic problems. indeed  if minimality were to be extended to structured entities  it would be similar to cohesiveness above. cohesiveness refers to how well a cover fits into its surrounding context  a generalization of the notion of minimal cardinality  applied to structured entities. 
　consider two consecutive concepts that have the same domain-specific entity  say an object  as one of the many candidate covers. since both concepts can be covered by the same entity  the entity is a minimal cover for both of them together. this example of parsimonious covering is essentially the same as minimal covering in the unextended parsimonious covering theory for diagnostic problem solving. however  suppose the two concepts involved cannot be covered by the same domain-specific entity. a 
minimal cover in the unextended parsimonious covering theory would consist of any pair of entities  pair - because there are two words to be covered  such that each entity in the pair covers one concept. but when structured entities with semantic associations among them arc considered  the entities in the pair must also unify  taking domain-specific associations into account.1 unification of such structures corresponds to a search in the domain-specific semantic network  say  by marker passing  charniak  1 . 
　one important remark about semantic covering is in order. cohesiveness  as a notion of parsimony for semantic covering  is intended to capture how plausible a semantic cover is. but it is possible that a cohesive cover might turn out to be implausible when checked for well-formedness. because of this possibility  there should be means to recompute the next most plausible  cohesive  cover. thus  whenever a cohesive cover is found  all the irredundant covers must be saved so that the space of possibilities they constitute can be explored for cohesiveness if the cohesive cover that was found were to be rejected later. consider the following abstract example. let x1  x1  x1  x1 and x1 be the senses of one ambiguous linguistic concept and y1  y1   y1 and y1 be the senses of another concept. if these two concepts were syntactically covered together by an open class semantic category  then semantic covering will be initiated. now  what needs to be semantically covered is the conjunction of the following two disjunctions  representing 1 - 1 
1
　　this can be understood as follows: an assertion may be viewed as a predicate assert  v  a  o   where  v   a and  o are variables such that  v is a possible value of attribute  a  which in turn is an attribute of object  o. if one of the constituents is covered by a specific value vl and the other is covered by a specific attribute a1  the covers effectively specify the assertions assert  vl  aa  oo  and assert  vv a1  ooo   respectively. now unification may be performed in the usual sense. 
dasigi 
combinations : 

suppose a cohesive cover is found between x1 and t/1. then the irredundant cover will be constituted by the following three conjunctions of disjunctions  which represent the remaining 1 combinations : 

if the cohesive cover that was discovered gets rejected  the next most cohesive cover might be computed from these irredundant covers. 
　semantic covering interacts closely with syntactic covering. irredundant syntactic covering has a very nice property  namely  when complete sets of irredundant syntactic covers are considered  they are transitive across any number of layers when more than two layers of covering  e.g.  as in typical parse trees  are involved  peng and reggia  1; dasigi  1 . however  for a sequence of items  the number of irredundant covers at the next layer grows exponentially  dasigi  1 . heuristics are needed for focusing search in such an ocean of covers  and semantic considerations serve this role. in the space of irredundant syntactic covers  search would be focused on  plausible  semantic covers. thus  the two routes of covering aid each other by syntactic covering providing a search space for semantic covering  and the latter focusing further syntactic covering at the next layer. integration of the two routes of covering is facilitated by attributing both syntactic and semantic categories to distinguished linguistic concepts  called open class concepts.1 in general  if the category that has just been postulated as a cover happens to be an open class category  it initiates semantic covering  thus integrating both the routes of covering. 
1 	s o m e e x a m p l e s 
a significant prototype was implemented to apply this algorithm in the context of an interface to an expert system. instead of syntactic categories such as nouns  verbs  noun-phrases  etc.  semantic categories were used in the syntactic covering process. semantic covering was performed using domain-specific concepts defined in a knowledge base used by the expert system. in an ops1style expert system language  domain-specific concepts such as  patient  vision  blind  etc. were classified into semantic categories such as objects  obj   attributes  attr   values  val   etc. two application domains were considered; the first domain is characterized by a sizable  prototype neurological knowledge base and the other deals with a toy chemical spills knowledge base. some examples that were successfully handled by the prototype interfaces are: 
 visual acuity is blind.  
 visual acuity is blind on the left.  
1
　　this notion is very similar to that of open class words in languages. non-open class concepts only have syntactic aspect  and correspond to  syntactic sugar  in language. see  dasigi  1  for more discussion. 
1 	natural language 
 babinski on the left. right unremarkable.   the water is brown  radioactive and oily. its ph is basic ...  
　these examples demonstrate the use of lexical information  limited ability to handle ungrammatical sentences  interpretation of sentences in a discourse context rather than in isolation  etc. note that the first few words of the first two inputs are the same. their interpretations are  however  significantly distinct in the context of the knowledge base that was used  illustrating a form of non-monotonic inference in text interpretation. all but the last input is from the neurology domain and the last one is from the other. 
　a very simple example of parsimonious covering is given below to convey the flavor of the approach; more detailed examples of dual-route parsimonious covering may be found elsewhere  dasigi  1; dasigi  1 . details are omitted due to space considerations  and we appeal to the reader's intuition in making sense out of this brief example. suffice it to say that the category assert  and its variations  corresponds to sentences or clauses; obj and attr  and their variations  correspond to noun phrases; and val  and its variations  correspond to noun phrases or adjective complements. the category asgverb stands for  assignment verb   e.g.   is  . there are different ways an assert may be described in terms of the other categories mentioned so far. often  val is a mandatory category in describing an assert  that is  it is unlikely that an assert makes semantic sense if a val is not present . now  suppose a sentence begins with 
      vision is and is to be covered syntactically. one sequence of terminal categories that cover the first two words in this sentence is  attr  asg-verb  among others  since vision is an attribute and the word  is  is an instance of asg-verb. since  this is an embedded sequence of what is expected of the above description of assert  the category assert is postulated to be a non-viable syntactic cover for the first two words. it is a cover because the 
two semantic categories occur in the description of assert  in the correct order. but the cover is non-viable nevertheless  because  not all mandatory categories in this particular description  namely  val  have occurred yet. when all expected mandatory categories occur  the cover will be considered viable. further  viable or not  the cover is tentative because other possible covers exist and one of the other covers might prove to be globally more plausible. now  suppose the sentence ends as follows: 
	 ... 	impaired  
then  since impaired is a domain-specific value  the mandatory category is also encountered; so assert is confirmed as one of several viable syntactic covers for the given words. to keep things simple for the present purposes  it is assumed that assert turns out to be the most plausible syntactic cover. 
　the covering category in this example  namely assert  was designated as an open class category. in general  if the category that has just been postulated as a cover 

figure 1: interleaving of syntactic and semantic covering. the dashed arrows indicate other concepts that are evoked  e.g.  other attributes named by  vision   other types of verbs that  is  evokes and many other concepts named by  impaired.  
happens to be an open class category  it initiates semantic covering  with the standard notion of compositionality   thus integrating the use of both  that is  syntactic and semantic  aspects of knowledge. now  we continue the example from the viewpoint of semantic covering. recall  however  that this process is interleaved with syntactic covering  and does not necessarily follow it. see figure 1. 
　the word  vision  is covered  among other things indicated above  by a concept that has the semantic category attr. category attr is of open class and so not surprisingly the concept that covers  vision  also has a domainspecific entity  say a l 1   that uniquely characterizes it. in effect  this one linguistic concept covering  vision   has two facets: the semantic category attr and the domainspecific entity al1. similarly  the word  impaired  is covered by  among others  a concept of the semantic category val that has the unique domain-specific entity  say v1  associated with itself. the verb  is   however  is covered by a concept of the category asg-verb and since asg-verb is a not an open class category  it does not have a corresponding domain-specific entity. 
　as already explained in the course of syntactic covering  assert is computed to be a syntactic cover; it also turns out to be a parsimonious syntactic cover. for semantic covering  what needs to be covered is the set of entities grouped under this category  i.e.  a l 1 and v1  by identifying domain-specific associations that relate them. definitions of parsimony and covering in the semantic route attempt to capture these intuitions  and the concept characterized by the assertional  semantic category assert and the domain-specific entity constituted by 

becomes the integrated parsimonious cover for the given sequence of words. 
1 	d i s c u s s i o n 
the ability of parsimonious covering to handle ungrammatical sentences  as exemplified earlier  does not call for any special  or ad hoc  handling. it is a natural consequence of the very definition of covering itself. one could argue that a conventional production rule approach may easily be augmented to achieve the same effect. for instance  it might be possible that a description such as: assert: attr asg-verb val  
where val is mandatory  can be encoded into the following production rules: 

the number of such rules can grow exponentially in the number of non-mandatory categories. 
　the previous paragraph should not be misconstrued as downplaying the significance of syntax in language. indeed  the verb is plays a crucial role in disambiguating sentences such as  
 flying planes is/are dangerous.  
our point is that omission of the copula in such sentences still does not make them incomprehensible. it does leave the sentence ambiguous  to be sure. at present  the se mantic covering process does not worry about number agreement between the verb and subject  unless ambiguity arises. the underlying assumption here is that people try to make sense  and are not always grammatical.1 
　in summary  parsimonious covering provides a framework to view parsing natural language as an abductive process. a proof of concept is provided by implementing the basic ideas in an application independent interface shell. admittedly  the semantic knowledge used is very restricted in nature  at the moment appropriate only to an object-oriented class of applications. while the presumed logical form is also  correspondingly  of a limited generality  in this work  it has allowed for the construction of an interface shell. further  it has been noted that an abductive approach to word sense disambiguation may make it possible to define word senses naturally in context using descriptions of scenarios  as opposed to rules  charniak and mcdermott  1; dasigi  1; dasigi  1 . 
　many significant linguistic issues remain to be answered in this framework  however. two features of this preliminary work  namely  use of a semantic grammarlike descriptions that are closely related to the class of expert systems for which interfaces could be generated  and reliance on the assumption that ambiguity resulting from ungrammatically is resolvable in context  make it hard to predict the generality of the technique for unrestricted natural language. our ongoing work further extends the model in the directions of using regular syntactic categories  and incorporation of further structure 
1
　　the majority of test inputs used by the prototype came from physicians' anonymous case descriptions  where insuring the grammaticality of sentences was  apparently  not the first priority. 
dasigi 

into verb definitions  consequently making the logical form much more general  as follows. 
　the logical form employing triples  as in the work described here  specifies a value for an attribute of an ob-
ject. natural language sentences that can be represented by such logical form generally involve stative verbs. such sentences describe a state rather than an action or an event. while such sentences capture most of the input text to diagnostic expert systems  which was the context in which the prototype was developed   they fall significantly short of characterizing open-ended english text  where actions and events are of a great significance. a more general logical form  such as the following as described in  allen  1   is more appropriate for sentences involving actions and events: 
 specifier name type modifiers  
here  the specifier specifies some detail of the concept  e.g.  the tense for actions or events  the quantifier for nominal concepts  etc.   while the name serves to identify the concept. the concept itself is  to a large extent  characterized by its type  e.g.  break-action  state  person  dwelling  fruit  etc.   while the modifiers  if any  allow for specifying attributes that modify the concept being represented. 
　the modifiers may involve recursive substructures representing other concepts. such recursive substructures represent the partial semantic interpretations associated with grammatical subconstituents  while the entire logical form represents the semantic interpretation corresponding to the grammatical structure of the entire sentence. the overall logical form covers  i.e.  is constructed from  the individual partial interpretations  and it does so  parsimoniously.  an appropriate notion of parsimony here seems to be essentially the same notion of  structural minimality  or  cohesiveness  of the semantic structures built  much the same way the notions are used in this paper. it is hoped that this ongoing work will help answer the important questions raised above. 
acknowledgements 
past support from jim reggia of the university of maryland and his comments on earlier versions of this paper are gratefully acknowledged. 
