 
conventional envisioners proposed in qualitative physics have two difficulties in common: ambiguities in prediction and inability of reasoning about global behaviors. we take a geometric approach to overcome these difficulties and have implemented a program psx1nl which can reason about global behaviors by analyzing geometry and topology of solution curves of ordinary differential equations in the phase space. 
in this paper  we highlight a flow grammar which specifies possible patterns of solution curves one may see in the phase space. the role of a flow grammar in psx1nl is twofold: firstly  it allows psx1nl to reason about complex patterns in a uniform manner; secondly  it allows psx1nl to switch to an approximate  top-down algorithm when complete geometric clues are not available due to the difficulty of mathematical problems encountered. 
1 	introduction 
one of the core issues in qualitative physics is to develop an envisioner for deriving the behavior from the structure of given dynamical systems. the intended advantage of total envisioners  hereafter  simply  envisioners    over numerical simulators is an ability of automatically deriving an abstract  qualitative description of behaviors of a given dynamical system under various initial conditions. constraint propagation and satisfaction on symbolically represented quantity space have been a common technique of implementing envisioners  weld and de kleer  1 . 
　however  as is often pointed out  envisioners based on constraint propagation and satisfaction have two problems: ambiguity in prediction and inadequate global analysis. both of these problems are attributed to the local nature of constraint propagation and satisfaction. 
　a promising direction would be to take a geometric approach. in fact  mathematicians have long been using geometric methods to study complex behaviors of nonlinear differential equations. why not build an envisioner on a firm ground  
1 	qualitative reasoning 
　in this paper and related work  nishida and doshita  1; nishida d ai. 1   we propose a geometric method of reasoning about phase portraits  collections of all solution curves of ordinary differential equations in the phase space. the outline of the method is this: 
  collect geometric features of solution curves using varieties of quantitative techniques  
  infer topology of the phase portrait from geometric cues  and 
  reason about the global behavior by analyzing topology of the phase portrait. 
this method solves the problems raised above in the following way: firstly  the problem of ambiguity is much reduced because the geometry and topology of phase portraits are determined based on quantitative information; and secondly  global analysis based on geometric and topological analysis of phase portraits is theoretically supported by dynamical systems theories  hirsch and smale  1; cuckenheimer and holmes  1   yet  the method satisfies a general requirement to envisioners  for it produces symbolic description of total behavior. the method is incorporated in a program psx1nl which works on ordinary differential equations defined on a two-dimensional phase space. 
   in developing psx1nl  we have argued the importance of representation and accordingly we have introduced flow patterns to represent the geometric and topological features of phase portraits. notion of flow patterns  algorithm for deriving flow patterns  and algorithm for reasoning about global behavior are presented elsewhere  nishida and doshita  1; nishida et ai  1l . 
   in this paper  we highlight a flow grammar  which specifies all possible flow patterns one may see in the phase space. the role of a flow grammar in psx1nl is twofold: firstly  it allows psx1nl to reason about complex patterns in a uniform and systematic manner; secondly  it allows psx1nl to switch to an approximate  top-down algorithm when complete geometric clues are not available dne to the difficulty of mathematical problems encountered. 
　we begin with the background of this work  introducing mathematical notions and flow patterns. next  we describe a flow grammar and related issues in some detail. finally  we compare our work with related work and show the future direction. 
figure 1: the vector field  arrows  and phase* portraits 
 curves  of  1   partly drawn  
1 	qualitative theory of differential equations 
in this paper  we consider planar ordinary differential equations  planar odes for short  
		 1  
on stale variables x t  and y +  that vary with time the right-hand side of  1  specifies the velocity of state change at each point in the phase space. in other words  formula  1  introduces a rt ctor field in the planar phast space spanned by x and y. in normal situations  a vector field implicitly specifies a phase port mils  a collection of non-intersecting directed curves such that each directed curve is tangent to the vector field. each directed curveis called an orbit or a solution caret or a trajeitory. and corresponds to a solution under a certain initial condi tion. 
　for example  figure 1 shows  a  the vector field and  b  the p 1 a se portrait of an ode: 
		 1  
　state change of a dynamical system occurs along with orbits. to put it another way  each orbit can be identified with a function from the phase space to the phase space. in this sense  the phase portrait is said to define a flow in the phase space. dynamical systems theories suggest that understanding the behavior begins with qualitative analysis by identifying regions in the phase space which orbits approach as   and classifying orbits by the regions they tend towards  or by asymptotic behavior . as for two-dimensional planar odes  it 
is proved that orbits may either diverge to place at infinity  or tend towards a fixed point  an orbit consisting of a point which makes the right-hand side of  1  zero  or a limit cycle  a cyclic orbit which attracts or repells nearby orbits .1 methods of dynamical systems theories are powerful enough to provide useful information 

figure 1: key orbits characterizing the behavior of  1  
in  
about the behavior even when nonlinear odes cannot be solved analytically and it is not possible to represent 
orbits as an explicit analytical function of f. 
1 	flow patterns and global analysis 
in order to derive global behavior  we partition the phase space into regions  and characterize the local flow in each region  and put together the results of local analysis to reason about global behavior.1 
   we use flow mappings to represent local flow. for example  the local flow of  1  in region abc d - { x  y     can be characterized by fixed 
points and several other key orbits as shown in figure 1. flow mappings corresponding to this characterization is 

the first term of the above says that orbits transverse to boundary edge a a continuously maps points there onto boundary edge a' a. either side of the arrow may as well be a fixed point as in the fifth term above  or a limit cycle. 
　flow mappings can be obtained by searching for points of contact  such as a'. b'. c   1  c. d  where the orienta-
tion of flow flips from inward to outward or vice versa. we further classify points of contact into concave nodes. such as a'  b'  c where the orbits passing on these points lie inside the region immediately before and after the contact  and convex nodes  such as a  c. d  where the orbits lies outside the region before and after the contact. 
　global analysis requires only topological aspects of flow. we use flotv patterns to represent the topology of flow. figure 1 a  shows a symbolic representation of the flow in region abcd in figure 1 and  b  gives a schematic representation. 

   *it follows from poincare-bendixson theorem. see p. 1 of  hirsch and smale  1  for more details. 

 b  schematic representation of  a  	
figure 1: basic flow patterns 

figure 1: a flow pattern representing the local flow in region abcd in figure 1 
   the computability and complexity of generating flow patterns depend on the class of odes. for twodimensional piece wise linear differential equations  which result from approximating each occurrence of nonlinear terms in a nonlinear differential equation by a set of connected pieces of linear functions  the almost all process is computable  nishida and doshita  1 . for more complex classes of odes  difficulties arise mainly because complete information may not be available due to the complexity of mathematical problems encountered  nishida et a/.  1 . this implies that the procedure may fail when it tries to divide the phase space into uniform regions or to annotate flow at the boundary of regions. moreover  handcrafting procedures which can deal with these situations would be quite painstaking because of unmanageably many combination of possibilities. to overcome these difficulties  we take a grammatical approach  which will be presented in the next section. 
   the main stream of global analysis is to merge flow patterns in turn and examine topological properties of resulting flow patterns for larger regions. limit cycles  if any  can be detected in finite steps as far as it is not totally contained in a single region as a result of phase space partition and the local flows in related regions are properly analyzed  nishida et a/.  1 . we use several heuristics to back up the incompleteness. since attracting and repelling sets of planar odes are either fixed points or limit cycles  and since fixed points are determined in analysis of local flow  the above gives a complete process for global analysis in theory. of course  there is a chance that the above method may fail or 
1 	qualitative reasoning 
produce an incorrect result  due to the failure in characterizing the local flow or numerical error. this is a common difficulty we encounter in addressing nonlinear problems. 
1 	flow grammar 
a flow grammar specifies all possible flow patterns in closed regions.1 generally  a flow grammar is a system where b is a set of basic flow patterns  c a set of composition rules  and d a set of distortion rules. 
　in the rest of this paper  we will describe one particular flow grammar  though other formulation might be possible as well. particularly  we assume that closed regions do not have fixed points on the boundary and that the given flow is structurally stable.1 moreover  the flow grammar presented below does not generate limit cycles for efficiency. limit cycles are handled in the algorithm which calls for the flow grammar  nishida et a/.  1l . 
　basic flow patterns specify flow patterns which contain at most one fixed point. we have four basic flow patterns as illustrated in figure 1. basic flow patterns have at most one type of points of contact on the boundary. 
　composition rules specify the way the flow patterns with more than one fixed point are computed. suppose we are to  fuse  a couple of together at boundary segments a1 b1 of p1 and 1 of p1 in order for flow patterns p1 and p1 to be properly 
1
　　 the notion of flow grammar was inspired by process grammar  leyton  1 . 
　　1  structurally stable flows are those which persist under an infinitesimal perturbation to their parameters. if the purpose is to analyze odes for physical systems  only structurally stable systems may be observed. peixoto's theorem suggests that fixed points which may appear in structurally stable flows are either sinks  sources  or saddle points  see p. 1 of  guckenheimer and holmes  1  for more detail . 


 1  merge into a convex node: vv - v 

	  : convex node  	o : concave node 
figure 1: four patterns governing fusion of flow at end points 
fused  the flow at the open intervals  ai  b1  and  a1  b1  should be complementary: outgoing  incoming  flow of pi should correspond to incoming  outgoing  flow of p1  and each convex  concave  node of p1 should correspond to a convex  concave  node of p1. at the end points a  and 1   flow should be either one of four patterns shown in figure 1. 
　distortion rules specify flow patterns arising when the relative geometric relation between the flow and the boundary segment becomes complex. we have two distortion rules as shown in figure 1. one introduces a sequence of a concave node and a convex node into a 
　boundary segment and the other introduces them in the reverse order. 
　figure 1 illustrates how the flow pattern shown in figure 1 can be obtained by applying a sequence of distortion rules to the basic flow pattern b+. figure 1 illustrates flow patterns formed by applying a composition rule to basic flow patterns b＼ and b . 
　we classify flow patterns by the number of fixed points and points of contact involved: we use a tuple  as an index to the finite set of flow patterns which have nsa saddle points  sinks or sources  nc concave nodes  and nv convex nodes. although 
 1  cv-distortion 
		=* 	
 1  vc-distortion 
figure 1: distortion rules 

figure 1: derivation of flow patterns shown in figure 1  drawn schematically  

	; 	 1 flow patterns in total  
figure 1: flow patterns formed from basic flow patterns b＼ and b  
	nishida and doshita 	1 

the index appears four-dimensional  it is actually threedimensional  as shown in the following theorem: theorem 1 for any c1 structurally stable flow and a closed region r  let the number of saddle points and sinks or sources in r be nsa and nss  respectively. lit the number of convex nodes and concave nodes at the boundary dr of r be nv and nc. respectively. then wt havt the following relation: 
		 1  
outline of proof the theorem can be proved by the following facts:  a  the flow grammar g can produce all possible flow patterns which do not contain limit cycles   b  introduction of limit cycles does not affect the index   c   1  holds for basic flow patterns   d  application of distortion rules trivially retains  1 . and  e  application of composition rules also retains  1   for the number of concave nodes and convex nodes should be equal at the boundary segments to be fused except the two end points  and nv - nc decreases by one at the two end points of fusion in each of four patterns governing fusion  see figure 1 .  
　since nsa  nss  nc  and nv  are computed independently  the above theorem can be used as a constraint for detecting numerical errors or missing information. it can also be used to enumerate flow pattern efficiently. for example  if both nv and nc are 1  it follows from  1  that nsa - nss  - 1. thus  we can start enumerating flow patterns from those with index  1 1 . 
1 	enumerating flow patterns 
the flow grammar presented in the previous section is ambiguous in the sense that there usually exists more than one derivation which produces the same flow pattern. in order to cope with this unfortunate property  we have to rely on a generate-and-test method. in order to decrease the cost of enumeration  we use two techniques. 
　the first technique is to pose a constraint on the sequence of derivations so as to suppress a sequence of derivations which eventually produces a flow pattern to be generated otherwise. flow pattern p is minimal if there is no other flow pattern q such that p results from applying a distortion rule to q. if is easy to determine whether a given flow pattern is minimal or not. we have found the following property: 
theorem 1 for any derivation sequence s which involves more than one application of distortion rules  there exists a derivation sequence s' such that s' produces the same flow pattern as s and application of distortion rules comes later than application of other rules in s'. 
thus  it suffices to first generate minimal flow patterns and then apply distortion rules. 
　the second technique is to use a short-hand representation of flow patterns to reduce the cost of comparing flow patterns. an f~rep is a cyclic list1 of form 


figure 1: observation  drawn schematically  
 each element of an f-rep 
corresponds to a boundary segment delimited by a couple of points of contact and qualitatively denotes in the counterclockwise order how points on the boundary segment are mapped by orbit intervals involved in the flow pattern. if the interval corresponding to x i j is mapped from/to another boundary segment b  we use a positive integer indicating the relative position of b counted in the counterclockwise order from the current boundary segment. if it is either a fixed point or a limit cycle  we use a negative integer. si denotes the orientation of the flow there; it is + if the flow comes from the outside  and - if it leaves for the outside. 
　for example  an f-rep for the flow pattern in figure 1 is: 
		 1  
where  the first element is for boundary segment and the second is for and so on. note that f-rep for a set of flow mappings is uniquely defined except the existence of variants which only differ from each other in the way fixed points are numbered. and importantly it seems that different flow mappings give different f-reps. more study is left for future. 
1 	utility of flow grammar 
the utility of a flow grammar is twofold: firstly  it enables to reason about complex patterns in a uniform manner  and secondly  it provides constraints. both of these features are implemented in psx1nl. 
when no information is available about fixed points  
psx1nl switches to an approximate algorithm based on a generate-and-test method. the input is a set of observations consisting of partially traced orbits and estimated location of convex and concave nodes. a flow pattern p is an interpretation of an observation o if there exists  possibly empty  a set of assumptions a such that 
 an interpretation is minimal when there is no other interpretation which explains the observation with smaller set of assumptions. psx1nl uses the enumerator described in the previous section to generate flow patterns in turn and seeks for a minimal interpretation. for example  given the observation shown in figure 1  

1 	qualitative reasoning 

psx1iml produces twelve minimal interpretations  two of which are shown in figure 1. currently  psx1nl will simply increase the number of observations when 

	 !  	 1  

figure 1: minimal interpretations of the observation in figure 1 
more than one minimal interpretation is found whenever psx1nl detects a symptom suggesting that a limit cycle is contained in the given region  it will divide the region into two by a line across the limit-cycle-like orbit focusing observation for resolving ambiguity would be an interesting problem left for future. 
1 	related work 
attempts to incorporate global information have been made by several authors  lee and kuipers  1; struss  1 . unfortunately  mast computational methods developed so far only make of the non-intersection constraint of orbits and some other partial constraints  and hence the ability of reasoning about global behaviors is still quite limited. their weakness mostly comes from the lack of adequate representation. in contrast  flow patterns and a flow grammar provide a means for reasoning about various aspects of geometric constraints  allowing an envisioner to symbolically reason about the structure of global and asymptotic behaviors. 
   intelligent analysis of nonlinear odes is quite a new field. poincare  sacks  1  would be the first program addressing intelligent analysis of nonlinear odes. poincare integrates qualitative and quantitative methods  as psx1nl does. both poincare and psx1nl work on planar odes including nonlinear odes  though poincare supports bifurcation analysis which is not yet implemented in psx1nl. the difference in phase portrait analysis is that psx1nl makes use of more representation than poincare and other programs based on the conventional simulation technology. this leads to three consequences. first  psx1nl saves computational resources  for it keeps geometric and topological information in an more abstract form. for example  psx1nl keeps information about only a few essential points on orbits  while poincare has to keep the location of all points on orbits. second  psx1nl can derive richer conclusion from the same observation obtained by quantitative analysis  as demonstrated in the previous section. third  psx1nl is more robust from incompleteness of information and numerical errors. for example  poincare rely on an external package in locating fixed points. if the package fails poincare fails  too. in contrast  psx1nl can switch to a robust  approximate method based on a flow grammar. 
a stochastic approach  doyle and sacks  1  is another candidate of uniform treatment of global behavior supported by mathematical theories. since the stochas tic approach possesses a complementary nature to ours  it would be interesting to seek a way for combining the two. 
1 	further work 
an important work left for the future research is extension into higher dimensional flow. the research in that direction is quite challenging both theoretically and practically. unfortunately  the extension of this work into higher dimensional flows is not trivial  for firstly flow patterns become far more complicated  secondly  representing higher dimensional geometric objects is hard  and thirdly it becomes subtle to characterize the topological structure of flow. however  we believe that the concepts exploited in this paper would be of much help in such extension. 
