* 
this paper describes an approach to student modeling for intelligent tutoring systems based on an explicit representation of the tutor's beliefs about the student and the arguments for and against those beliefs  called endorsements . a lexicographic comparison of arguments  sorted according to evidence reliability  provides a principled means of determining those beliefs that are considered true  false  or uncertain. each of these beliefs is ultimately justified by underlying assessment data. 
　the endorsement-based approach to student modeling is particularly appropriate for tutors controlled by instructional planners. these tutors place greater demands on a student model than opportunistic tutors. numeric calculi approaches are less well-suited because it is difficult to correctly assign numbers for evidence reliability and rule plausibility. it may also be difficult to interpret final results and provide suitable combining functions. when numeric measures of uncertainty are used  arbitrary numeric thresholds are often required for planning decisions. such an approach is inappropriate when robust context-sensitive planning decisions must be made. instead  the ability to examine beliefs and justifications is required. this paper presents a tms-based implementation of the endorsement-based approach to student modeling  discusses the advantages of this approach for plannercontrolled tutors  and compares this approach to alternatives. 
1. introduction - limitations of numeric student models 
this paper proposes a symbolic  i.e.  non-numeric  means of coping with uncertainty in student modeling. rather than represent the uncertainty of the tutor's beliefs with numeric degrees of confidence the student model explicitly records arguments  called endorsements in  cohen  1   for and against each belief. no interpretation of numbers or use 
this research was sponsored by the armstrong laboratory  
human resource directorate  formerly afhrl/idi   in cooperation with nasa under subcontract #1  ricis research activity #et.1  nasa cooperative agreement ncc1 . 
principles of a! applications of numeric combining functions is required. instead  the different kinds of arguments are compared based on the reliability of their evidence to decide if belief or disbelief in a proposition is justified. 
previous research on the blackboard instructional planner 
 murray  1   a planner-controlled tutor for leaching troubleshooting for a complex hydraulic-electronicmechanical device  illustrated some of the shortcomings of numeric student models. that research motivates the research presented here. before reviewing the earlier research  we briefly consider the role and demands placed on the student model in both planning and non-planning  i.e.  opportunistic  tutors. 
　in opportunistic tutors the student model may be used to decide what skills to address  e.g.  west  burton and brown  1   or what topics to explore  e.g.  menotutor  woolf  1  . other uses are problem selection 
 e.g.  bip  barr  1   or hint generation  e.g.  wusor-i1  carr  1  . frequently  diagnostic student modeling is used to provide a detailed model of a student's problem solving and to evaluate its correctness  e.g.  proust  johnson  
1  . 
　the student model for a planner-controlled tutor must not only address these issues but others. a sophisticated student model is needed to allow customized plan generation based on an initial assessment of the student. later it is needed to track and help revise the plan as instruction is delivered. it must interpret different kinds of assessments  student data  such as the student's background  any student selfassessment  test questions  any instructor assessment  student-initiated questions  and student problem-solving actions. typically  the student model for opportunistic intelligent tutoring systems will handle a much more limited range of assessment data and have fewer responsibilities. for example  those tutors that act as problem-solving monitors  the most common paradigm  predominantly focus on assessing problem-solving actions for hint generation and future problem selection  e.g.  imts  towne et a/.  1  . 
　the student model of the blackboard instructional planner illustrates some of the shortcomings of numeric student models and how they can limit tutor capabilities. that student model is an overlay  carr and goldstein  1  of a semantic net representation of domain concepts. associated with each concept is a number representing the tutor's confidence that the student has acquired the concept. the numbers are initialized from a pre-instruction questionnaire according to inferred cognitive stereotypes  rich  1  and later are adjusted according to the student's test and problemsolving performance. 
　with this numeric approach the tutor tended to either replan at the wrong times or not replan when it should. the problem was that planning decisions could only rely on these numbers  which were compared to threshold values. replanning can easily go awry because of the difficulty of determining precisely how to adjust the numeric weights to integrate the different kinds of assessment data  and because of the arbitrary nature of the three planning thresholds that were used. one threshold measured when a concept was learned  another when it was forgotten  and a third when an instructional activity was making insufficient progress. when the thresholds and updates were adjusted conservatively the planner tended not to replan when it should. when they were adjusted less conservatively the planner tended to replan when it should not. 
　these problems led to the development of an endorsement-based student model  esm . the remainder of this paper describes the endorsement-based approach  compares it to alternatives  and argues that it is particularly appropriate for planner-controlled tutors. 
1. the endorsement-based approach to student modeling 
the key aspects of the esm arc as follows: 
/. explicit representation of tutor beliefs and their endorsements-propositions represent the tutor's beliefs about the student's skills along with arguments for and against those beliefs. 
1. inheritance of endorsements-an isa hierarchy represents the subject matter. the esm uses the hierarchy to represent the degree to which a student has generalized a skill. endorsements for a generic skill  a skill that can be applied to all members of a class  are inherited down the hierarchy towards subclasses  or instances  representing more specific skills. endorsements against a generic skill are propagated up towards superclasses representing more general skills. 
1. wide variety of assessments-several different kinds of information  varying both in specificity  source  and reliability are incorporated. 
1. lexicographic comparison of arguments- endorsements are sorted into equivalence classes according to reliability. this ordering allows lexicographic comparison of pro and con arguments. the result of the comparison is a label for each belief 
- believed-true  believed-false  unknown  no data   or uncertain - and an indication of the decisive argument  if any  that indicates how well justified a belief is. 
1. consistency between endorsements and labels-the student model explicitly represents the justification for each endorsement and tutor belief. all justifications are ultimately grounded in assessments  student data . if endorsements become invalid or labels change then consistency is maintained between derived endorsements and any labels that depend on them. 
these features are best illustrated by examples. 
1 	examples 	of 	endorsement-based 	student modeling 
this section presents a scenario demonstrating the endorsement-based approach. assume the student is learning to troubleshoot a device and must first learn how the device and its individual parts operate. figure 1 shows a class hierarchy of parts of the device. classes of parts are connected to subclasses by solid arrows. these in turn are connected to part instances by dashed arrows. the tutor's goal is to ensure that the student understands the operation of all of the device's hydraulic valves. this goal  a generic skill  is represented by the proposition sk op  hydraulic valves . 

sk stands for  studeni knows   a notation adopted from ipeachcy and mccalla  1  . the general form is sk skill  node  where node is either a class or instance. sk  op  ljvk1  is believed true when the tutor believes the student understands the operation of the uvk1 valve. sk op  latchable valves  is believed true when the tutor believes the student understands the operation of all the latchable valves: 
uvk1  uvk1  and uvk1. so  if sk op  uvk1  was believed false then sk op  latchable valves  would also have to be believed false. 
　the scenario below illustrates how an endorsement-based student modeling system can cope with several different kinds of assessments  can infer new beliefs based on inheritance using the links in figure 1  and can retract beliefs that are no longer justified. it also shows how pro and con arguments are compared. 
	murray 	1 


table 1. a summary of pro and con arguments for the scenario 

　table 1 summarizes the scenario. the top row lists the labels of the five left-most nodes in figure 1. these nodes are the only ones whose labels change in this scenario. in the top row  latch  and  hydra  stand for  latchable valves  and  hydraulic valves  respectively. below each node are two columns marked + and -. for each node x all pro arguments for sk op x  appear in the + column and all con arguments appear in the - column. the letters are abbreviations for different kinds of arguments. for example  d stands for a default belief. the other kinds of arguments and their abbreviations are shown in table 1; they will be explained as the scenario unfolds. boldface arguments are the deciding arguments in determining the label of propositions  i.e.  they cast the deciding vote for or against a proposition. if an argument is in boldface underneath a - column with label node then sk op  node  is believed-false. similarly  a boldface argument in the + column indicates a label of believed-true. 
　initially the tutor assumes that the student does not know how the valves operate. these default assumptions are indicated by the three ds in line 1. since there are no arguments to oppose these  each node1 is labeled believedfalse. the remaining two nodes receive the labels unknown as no arguments are recorded for them yet 
　line 1 shows the student's self-assessment  st  of his knowledge of the operation of latchable valves. this is recorded as a pro argument under latch as the student claims 
1
  actually for each node the predicate sk op node  is assigned the label. for succinctness  nodes are referred to instead of their corresponding sk predicates. 
principles of al applications 
to understand how this kind of valve operates. the node latch now receives the label believed-true. 
　line 1 represents three new endorsements inferred by inheritance. as shown in figure 1  if the student understands how latchable valves operate then he should understand how uvk1  uvk1  and uvk1 operate. each new inherited belief  ib  overrides the previous default  d  beliefs  changing the labels from believed-false to believed-true. 
　as shown in table 1  each endorsement is classified into an endorsement reliability class according to the kind of endorsement and whether it is positive or negative. table 1 lists the different kinds of endorsements used in the scenario  in order from most credible to least credible. consistent data trends  tr  are considered the most reliable  followed by student claims of ignorance  st-   and then specific counterexamples to generic skills  pr- . tutor presentations are considered the next most reliable evidence  tu+   followed by arguments to label parent nodes the same as the majority of their children  lt . a student's claim to know some skill  st+  is considered less reliable  but answers to individual questions are even more suspect. however  a given short answer question  s/a  is considered more reliable than a multiple choice question  m-c   which in turn is considered more reliable than a true false question  t/f . the weakest beliefs are those based on inheritance  ib+  or defaults  d . 
　continuing the scenario  the tutor asks one question on each latchable valve in lines 1  1  and 1. only the second question is answered correctly. as arguments based on test 

data are more strongly believed than inherited beliefs or default beliefs the labels for uvk1 and uvk1 are now believed-false once more. 
　a new kind of argument  called a data trend  is inferred by the student model from these three questions. a data trend is only inferred based on test questions or other kinds of student performance  and only when a clear majority of the data is pro or con. a data trend is considered the most reliable kind of endorsment since it is based on multiple snapshots of student performance. individual questions  t/f  m-c  or s/a  are more liable to noise-lucky guesses  confusion  typos  etc. 
　a negative data trend is added as a con argument to the node latch in line 1 as two out of three questions on latchable valves were missed. it overrides the student's selfassessment causing the label of latch to become believedfalse. the previous inherited beliefs  which depended on latch being labeled believed-true  are now retracted as shown in line 1 by a strike through each retracted belief 
 ib . 
　if the student does not understand how latchable valves operate then he cannot understand how hydraulic valves operate. that is why a pr  for propagated disbelief  argument is added to the minus  con  column under hydra in line 1. that causes hydra to become labeled believedfalse. 
now the tutor reviews the operation of the valves. lines 
1  1  and 1 indicate these tutor presentations. after a tutor presentation prior test results or default beliefs indicating lack of the knowledge covered are no longer necessarily valid and are retracted. such retractions occur in lines 1  1  and 1. in line 1 the t/f argument against uvk1 is retracted. the data trend argument  tr  against 
latch depends on that t/f argument  so it too is retracted and the label for latch is recomputed. it becomes believed-true again  which in turn causes the inherited endorsements  ib  for uvk1  uvk1  and uvk1 to be reintroduced in line 1. 
　after the final presentation a different kind of trend is inferred called a label trend. the earlier data trend depended on test data. this second kind of trend reflects a trend among the labels  not data  of the children of a node. the labels must be justified by arguments that are at least as strong as tutor presentations  which is why no label trend was inferred from the defaults in line 1. lines 1 and 1 show label trends added to latch and hydra  assuming that directional valves  see figure 1  was already labeled believed-true because of a sufficiently strong argument. 
　the label trend endorsement  lt  for hydra causes sk op  hydraulic valves  to become labeled believedtrue. this completes the scenario as the tutor's goal is now achieved. 
　note that the strength of a belief can be measured by the reliability of its deciding argument. for example  belief that the student knows how uvk1 operates increases from line 1  ib  to line 1  m-c  to line 1  tij  as shown in tables 1 and 1. if the planner had wanted stronger justification before believing its goal was achieved  it could have required a stronger deciding argument for sk op  hydraulic valves   such as an argument of the data trend class. in that case further questioning of the student after the tutor presentation would be required to gather such data. 
　the key points illustrated in this scenario are listed below: 
/. many different kinds of assessments are handled in the esm-three different kinds of test questions are used along with default beliefs  inherited beliefs  student self-assessment  and changes inferred from tutor presentations. 
1. no numeric degrees of belief are required for evidence--the ordering of endorsements according to their reliability is sufficient. 
1. no numeric combining functions are required-all arguments are retained unless later retracted. unlike numeric approaches  each argument's contribution to a label can always be determined. 
1. inferred beliefs reflect the inheritance hierarchy of the subject matter-the inheritance in figure 1 is enforced by the esm. the esm uses the class hierarchy to represent the extent to which the student has generalized a skill. 


table 1. endorsement reliability classes  in order of believed reliability 
	murray 	1 

　the lexicographic comparison routine was demonstrated in the scenario only with simple cases. in general  an arbitrary number of arguments can be compared. they are first sorted into equivalence classes of reliability  such as those shown in table 1 then  starting with the most reliable class  the pro and con arguments in that class are paired. if one or more pro arguments are left over then the label for an sk proposition in question will be believedtrue. if one or more con arguments are left over it will be believed-false. if all arguments can be paired then the next most reliable class is considered to break the tie. if a tie is never broken then the label is uncertain. if there are no arguments at all it is unknown. 
1 	implementation 
the esm is implemented in a layered fashion over a simple forward-chaining rule-based inference engine  assertional database  and justification-based truth maintentancc system  jtms . these were obtained from the documentation and code of de kleer  forbus  and mcallester  de kleer et al.  1 . 
　the role of the jtms is to ensure consistency between inherited and propagated beliefs and those they depend on  and to notify the lexicographic comparison routines that esm labels need to be recomputed when such beliefs are retracted or previous endorsements are un-outed  i.e.  reintroduced . the assertional database stores propositions representing sk predicates  their esm labels  and the pro and con arguments that justify the labels. forward-chaining rules carry out the propagation and inheritance of endorsements and invoke the lexicographic comparison routines when new arguments should be considered. 
1. related work in student modeling and uncertain reasoning 
now we consider related work in student modeling and uncertain reasoning. numeric and symbolic approaches to uncertainty are discussed for both its and non-its applications. 
1 numeric approaches 
possible numeric approaches to representing uncertainty include certainty factors  shortliffe and buchanan  1   dempster-shafer theory  shafer  1   fuzzy logic  zadeh  
1   or use of bayes' rule. these approaches are discussed in  bonissone  1   along with the following problems: 
1. inability to distinguish uncertainty from lack of evidence-if a single number is used to represent degrees of belief  then typically 1 will represent both a complete lack of data and uncertainty due to a balance of conflicting data. 
1. normalizing pro and con evidence-if on the other hand two numbers are used so the distinction above can be made  then the amount of evidence for and against a belief may be normalized. this results in disproportionate weighting of a single piece of evidence that contradicts several other pieces of evidence. 
1. difficulty of assigning numbers-all of these approaches require numbers to be assigned to indicate the reliability of each piece of evidence. 
1. difficulty of interpreting numbers-with the exception of approaches based on bayes' rule  it can be hard to provide consistent and meaningful semantics to the numbers assigned to derived beliefs. 
1. obscuring the source of derived beliefs-no records are maintained showing how numeric degrees of belief have been accumulated from different sources of evidence. 
1. arbitrary combining functions-there may be several consistent ways of combining conflicting data reflecting conservative  optimistic  or moderate viewpoints. 
1. stringent assumptions-bayes' rule can be simplified given strong requirements regarding the mutual independence of each piece of evidence and the exhaustivity and disjointness of the hypotheses. unfortunately  these requirements  or the need for a large number of conditional probabilities  if the simplifying requirements are lifted   often render the approach impractical. 
　formal approaches to handling uncertainty are infrequently used in intelligent tutoring systems  with some exceptions. certainty factors have been used in guidon  clancey  1  but the initial assignment and subsequent updating within tutorial rules is somewhat arbitrary. a different approach  based on fuzzy logic  is being applied to the taps intelligent tutoring system  derry et al.t 1  to handle imprecision in measuring the correctness of student inputs.1 
　frequency of use measures or parameter adjustment approaches  neither based on probability theory  are the most commonly used numeric approaches to uncertainty in its. west  burton and brown  1  and wumpus 
 stansfield  1  rely on the frequency of use approach. they measure how often a skill was used compared to the numbers of times it could have been used. examples of the parameter-adjustment approach include the blackboard instructional planner  discussed earlier   kimball's integration tutor  kimball  1   meno-tutor  woolf  1   and the user modeling system grundy  rich  1 . 
1
  in contrast  there is no uncertainty in the assessments the esm receives. instead  there is uncertainty in deciding which tutor beliefs are justified when conflicting assessments are present. 

1 non-numeric approaches 
typical non-numeric symbolic student models used to represent student problem-solving strategies or knowledge include the following: 
j. procedural networks - such as buggy's  burton  1  procedural network to represent subtraction skills. 
1. rules and mal-rules - such as the rules of lms  sleeman  1  representing correct and incorrect linear algebra simplifications. 
1. plan and bug libraries - such as the loop plans and bug recognizers of proust  johnson  1  used to understand pascal programs. 
1. rule application heuristics - such as acm's rlanglcy et al.  1  use of production rules to model subtraction skills. rule application heuristics induced from student solutions allow acm's rules to model student problem solving. 
　these student models go beyond overlays by representing incorrect beliefs a student may have. however  except for acm's  they typically do not address issues of uncertainty other than by applying averaging or other statistical techniques to reduce the effects of noise in data  wenger  1 . the kind of knowledge they focus on is primarily the representation of subskills required to perform an algorithmic  procedural  or problem-solving task. 
　as mentioned earlier  the esm is built over a truth maintenance system  tms  to maintain consistency between endorsements and labels. in general  tmss and nonmonotonic logics can be used to represent tutor assumptions about the student and detect contradictions that arise when tutor expectations do not match student performance  as in  fum et al.  1  . the faulty assumptions can then be retracted and the consistency of the student model restored.  huang  1  adopts this kind of approach to enforce default cognitive stereotypes and switch stereotypes when expectations are contradicted. 
　the difficulty with tmss  without extensions  are the restricted labels of tms nodes. due to frequently conflicting justifications for and against any particular belief about the student  the tms will have to resolve or tolerate many contradictions. resolving the contradictions may require too much student interrogation at an inappropriate time. alternatively  the beliefs can just be considered unknown  but that is not much use to the planner. 
　cohen first presented endorsement theory in a portfolio recommendation program called folio  cohen  1 . that program weighed pro and con arguments for various investments and intermediate conclusions  such as whether a client would accept high risk investments  in making its recommendations. 
　cyc  guha and lenat  1  uses a similar approach called argumentation. in this approach alternative defaults are compared and specific preference relationships between defaults  e.g.  assumption a is preferred to assumption b  are used to decide which is the most compelling. the endorsement-based approach is similar except it uses a less flexible means of weighing arguments. 
1. conclusion 
this paper has described problems with numeric approaches to representing uncertainty in student models. these problems have motivated the development of an endorsement-based approach. an endorsement-based student model  esm  is particularly suitable for planner-controlled tutors due to the greater demands they place on the student model. these tutors rely on the student model to generate  track  and revise instructional plans. they must query the student model and interpret the results to decide if a current activity has achieved its objective  if a previous objective needs to be reachieved  or if a pending objective has already been achieved. the endorsement-based approach supports these kind of queries by allowing context-sensitive planning decisions to be made that rely on an examination of tutor beliefs and the evidence that justifies them. 
　the key research contribution of this work is the symbolic approach to uncertainty of the esm. in this approach the tutor's beliefs about the student's knowledge are represented explicitly. arguments for and against these beliefs are justified in terms of underlying assessments. the justifications are used to maintain consistency between assessments  inferred arguments  and the tutor's beliefs. arguments may be inferred from trends in data  or may be propagated or inherited according to the knowledge representation of subject matter skills. the esm weighs all arguments for and against a belief by sorting the arguments according to evidence reliability and then performing a lexicographic comparison. 
acknowledgements 
i would like to thank dr. kurt steuck of the armstrong 
laboratory  human resource directorate  formerly afhrl/idi   for technical guidance during this effort 
