ion of logical-linguistic phenomena  scha  1; stallard  1 . a level bound to lexical semantics can be individuated  usually denoted as efl  english-oriented formal language  and a level of meaning representation 
 usually denoted as wml  world model language; see figure 1 . meaning representation is therefore as much as possible independent from the application domain. in alfresco the interpretation modules' task is to present a meaning representation of the sentence that can be used by the various modules of the system. 
　the interpretative phase has several functions: in the first place it computes quantifiers' scopings. the algorithm is based on the concept of cooper storage as in  hobbs and shieber  1  and on a  lexical classification of quantifiers; b  syntactic and surface order characteristics; c  presence of disambiguating expressions. it solves definite expressions such as determinative np's  demonstratives  for example deriving from pointing actions   pronouns  by interacting with the topic module. it interprets the sentence dynamically  exploiting the semantics of operators  quantifiers  verbal modifiers  various levels of coordination and so on. the resulting representation is intensional  i.e. it is possible to abstract it m relation to time and context. the integration with temporal and contextual interpretation modules is currently under investigation. 
 indef x  indef y 
 and  monument y  
 has-place n i l y  definite  town z         
 and  fresco x  
 has-place n i l x y  
	 made-by n i l x  definite 	 painter w      
 want n i l speaker  see n i l n i l x    
figure 1: a w m l form for  i would like to see a fresco of the master in a monument of the town.  
in our case  without passing to a dhl form  data 
base language in  scha  1   wml expressions are selectively and dynamically mapped into yak's assertional language. in the process the topic module  see below  is called in. 
1 	the topic module and pointing 
in a multimedia! dialog system  the topic module must integrate global focus strategies  local focus approaches and deictic reference techniques. the main points of alfresco's topic module  see  samek-lodovici and strapparava  1  are the following. 
alfresco basically structures discourse in turns  with confirmations of referents from previous turns into the current one. the user normally refers to entities bound to particular frescoes. so the basic idea is to combine a  grosz's idea of factoring the search for referents into topic-spaces  grosz  1 : our topic-spaces are typically built around frescoes; and b  hajicova's approach consisting in letting the entities that have been mentioned slowly fade away unless they are mentioned again with a certain functional role  hajicova  1 . 
　the system relies on two stacks: 1  a stack of turns  where each turn contains the referents inserted or confirmed by the user or by alfresco   and 1 a stack of topic units  in which each topic unit contains all the referents inserted by the user or by the system while discussing a particular fresco. 
　as far as the deictic context is concerned  in our case it changes whenever a new fresco is displayed on the screen. similarly to xtra  wahlster  1    kobsa ct al.  1  we associate the accessible entities with the 
regions they occupy on the screen. regions overlap significantly  e.g. the region of the ''annunciation  and the region of the angel gabriel in giotto's annunciation . as in cubricon  neal and shapiro  1   the alfresco topic module permits both the use of linguistic input 

to solve ambiguous touches and the use of touches to solve ambiguous linguistic input. more generally  both a touch and a linguistic expression may be ambiguous and yet yield a unique referent through mutual constraint. 
1 	the user's interest model 
the user's interest model consists of an activation network  the nodes of which are associated with ordered sets of individual concepts. the grouping of the individuals is performed according to a measure of domain-dependent pragmatic closeness; whenever a set is activated  all the entities composing it are considered somehow relevant. each set represents an interest area and is identified by particular concepts or individuals represented in yak. the individuals that belong to an area and their relative relevance  represented by the ordering  are computed on the basis of their proximity to the identifier of the area  if it is an individual  or to its instances  if it is a terminological concept . the process that builds the interest areas interprets the a- box as a graph in which the nodes are the individual concepts and the edges connect an individual to those individuals filling one of its roles or having a role filled by it. 

figure 1: some interest areas 
　the dynamic information represented by the model consists in the activation level associated with the interest areas. a node receives a certain amount of activation whenever one of the individuals it contains is referred to by the user or the system. the intensity of these activation impulses depends on how explicitly the individual is mentioned. after each user query  activation impulses are propagated through the network. 
   figure 1 shows a simplified activation network relative to the domain of alfresco. the areas are grouped in structures that represent interest dimensions  i.e. classes of entities that are likely to be at the centre of the user's interest. the dimensions currently used in the user model correspond to the t-box concepts defining art schools  towns and time periods. the weighted links connecting different areas can represent different kinds of pragmatic closeness: for instance  a link between two areas of the towns dimension represents geographic closeness.  geographic closeness  is intended as a pragmatic relation  with consequences relative for instance to the possibility that the user considers a trip from one town to another. 
the generator makes use of the user's interest model. 
for instance  it asks the latter which is the most relevant area of a certain dimension of interest  and the model returns the main element associated with the most active area of that dimension. 
1 	actions performed by the system 
the actions performed by alfresco are realized exploiting the media the system is based upon: a  the system can show one or more images or pieces of film  b  give some punctual answer to a question by replying with instances such as the title and location of a painting  or dates etc.  or  finally  c  give a more complex description of a fresco or some other entities  through natural language. all three different media allow the user to interact with them by direct manipulation. a higher level  ad hoc  pragmatic component decides how to read in the given dialogic situation  considering the type of request  the context  the model of the interest of the user  the things already shown or said to the user and so on we shall focus our attention on the language generator. 
there are three main aspects: 
1  the semantic/pragmatic component and its interactions with the other modules of the dialog system  user model in particular ; 1  the syntactic realization component; 1  the integration of nlg and hypertext tech niques. 
　the communicative goal of the generation component  providing information about instances of the domain  i.e. frescoes   is achieved by execution of rhetorical schemata  mckcown  1 . 
　the schemata's task is to select and order appropriate attributes  generic-classes  values  instances  figure 1  from a. set of possible alternatives; the process of selection is driven by both an a prion  strongly domaindependent ordering between the kb items and a sequence of queries to the kb. for instance  the selection of the comparative-attribute for a fresco starts by ask ing the kb for other instances with a similar value for the content attribute  the first in an a prion ordering  and values for the other attributes subsumed by con cepts stemming from the user modeling module; if the kb returns one instance  this is used as a comparative instance and the selection process ends  if it returns more than one instance another a priori ordering  this time between the instances  is exploited; in both cases the content would be the comparative-attribute. when no in-
stance is returned  the selection process iterates on other attributes. 
　the user modeling component provides a relevance criterion for operating selections between the individual concepts described in the assertional box of the knowledge representation system. after this phase of determination of the rethorical schemata and of the particular contents  the syntactic realization component is called in.the algorithm works on a unification based formalism in a bottom-up  head driven fashion  pianesi  1  and yields complex natural language sentences. 
1 integrating nl generation and hypertextual techniques 
the system's answer is a hypermedia node containing a 
 possibly generated  text with links to both the hyper-

media network and images from the videodisc. in particular  the output of the nl generation component is passed to the hypermedia module which transforms the plain text into a hypertextual entry point to the underlying hypermedia network. buttons pointing to hypermedial information are associated to individual contents selected by rethorical schemata. 
　the hypermedia module is based on the notecards system  a general hypermedia environment developed at xerox farc. we chose notecards for its powerful programmer's interface to a lisp environment and general tailorability. the system provides an extremely flexible environment in which it is possible to integrate many of the different kinds of interaction that can take place in the exploration of a complex set of knowledge.the primitive constructs of the system are cards and links: 
  cards are usually displayed on the screen as stan-dard xerox lisp windows containing a piece of text. notecards allows for the creation of new card types. 
  links are used to interconnect individual cards into networks; they are displayed as icons inside the substance of a card. clicking the mouse in such an icon retrieves the destination card and executes the associated actions  usually the card is displayed on the screen . 
the tailorability of notecards has been exploited in alfresco in the implementation of virtual  dynamically constructed  links that connect text cards to images and fragments of films stored in the videodisc. 
　alfresco's generated text appears as a card providing the user with a dynamic entry-point both to images from the videodisc and to a static base of hypertextual information. figure 1 shows the card produced in relation to the last point in the dialog of section 1. the canned texts accessible through buttons deal with particularly complex topics  such as comparisons between styles as they are elaborated by art critics  definitely outside the expressive scope of current kr systems. 

figure 1: 	 the effects of good government ts a fresco by 
a.l. in the public palace. the effects of good government was painted m 1. a fresco from the same period is s. silvestro and the holy kings by maso di banco  painted in 
1. another work by a.l. in a monument of siena is the annunciation  of 1 in the ptnacoteca . 
presenting the user with a mix of generated and canned text in general can be misleading; in fact the unaware user might: a  make references to canned text  the system is unable to understand  and b  overestimate the system's capabilities. the use of graphic containers overcomes this problem making clear the difference between the two kinds of text: canned text has to be presented in an evocative graphical format  such as a simulated open book. 
another important aspect is the browser construct. 
browsers are constructs containing a structural diagram of a network of cards with different types of links visualized in different dashing styles. browser cards can be automatically computed by the system and  when generated  have an active behaviour: i.e. it is possible to click on a node of the displayed network in order to access the corresponding card. the user can refer to this overall structure in her exploration. 
　two general problems  connected with the rationale of section 1 are worth discussing: 
1. user modeling connected to linguistic communication may suggest the possibility of applying the same model to the control of hypertextual communication. anyway  it is not clear whether a simple user model  such as that of alfresco  could really improve the efficiency of hypertextual interaction: it might be the case that only very sophisticated  and yet not understood  modeling techniques can help hypertext exploration when another powerful means for focusing a request  i.e. natural language  is available in the same environment. 
1. would it be advantageous that the model of interest  to be used in the language-centered modality  is changed as the user browses through the network1 we feel that given a  the limited accuracy of current user models and b  the fact that hypertext modal ity on its own would only be used in a very limited way to explore the surroundings or have a general bird eye's view of the domain  it may be wrong to constrain the behaviour of the whole system in that way. it seems to us better not to modify the user model through the hypertext modality thereby minimizing any consequences for the natural languagecentered interaction. 
1 conclusions 
we have discussed the combination of natural language dialog and hypermediality within an artificial intelligence view of information exploration. the habitability of a system that provides an active integration of the two paradigms is greatly enhanced and a number of interesting issues that amplify more traditional possibilities arise. the exploratory dialog system alfresco has been presented: an nl and hypermedial system connected to a videodisc that gives information about italian frescoes of the fourteenth century. the system as described here is implemented in xerox common lisp and runs on a sun 1 connected to a videodisc unit. 
　many points are to be explored: among the extensions we intend to pursue the idea that the system can in the 
end provide through further negotiation a suggestion for a personal cultural-touristic itinerary. we believe that this area is of great potential because cultural tourism is increasing material relevance  especially in italy  but also 

because it is an area that requires a shift from a massoriented  impersonal perspective toward an individualoriented  creative opportunity for all. in general  we think that the integration of hypermediality with ai and nlp technology opens a wide range of new perspectives for the development of intelligent interfaces and that it will ultimately lead to an innovative paradigm for manmachine interaction. 
a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
we would like to thank jon slack for many helpful discussions and luigi stringa for encouraging an integrated view of ai at irst. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 arens et al  1  y. a rens  l. miller  s.c. shapiro  and n.k. sondheimer. automatic construction of user interface displays. in proc. aaa 1 conference  st. paul  minnesota  1. 
 arens et al.  1  y. arens  s. feiner  j. hollan  and r. neches. proc. of the 1jcai workshop on a new generation of intelligent interfaces. detroit  1. 
 cohen et al  1  p.r. cohen  m. dalrymple  d.b moran  f.c.n. pereira    j.w. sullivan  r.a. gargan 
jr  j.l. schlossberg  and s.w. tyler. synergetic use of direct manipulation and natural language. in proc. of chi1 conference  austin  texas  1. 
 conklin  1  j. conklin. hypertext: an introduction and survey. ieee computer  1   1. 
 feiner and mckeown  1  s. feiner and k. mckeown. coordinating text and graphics in explanation generation. in proc. aaai-1 conference  boston  mass.  1. 
 franconi  1  e. franconi. the yak manual: yet another krapfen. technical report 1  
irst  trento  italy  1. 
 grosz  1  b. grosz. the representation and use of focus in dialogue understanding. technical report 1  sri project 1  sri  menlo park  ca  1. 
 llajicova  1  e. hajicova. focusing: a meeting point of linguistics and artificial intelligence. in p. jorrand and v. sgurev  editors  artificial intelligence ii: methodology  systems  applications. elsevier science publishers  1. 
 halasz  1  f.g. ilaiasz. reflections on notecards  seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems. communications of the acm  1   1. 
 hobbsand shieber  1  j.r. 	hobbs 	and 
s.m. shieber. an algorithm for generating quantifier scopings. computational linguistics  1-1   1. 
 hollan et al.  1  j. hollan  e. rich  w. hill  d. wroblenski  w. wilker  k. wittenburg  and j. grudin. an introduction to hits: human interface 
tool suite. technical report aca-hi-1  mcc  austin  texas  1. 
 hovy  1  e. hovy. generating natural language under pragmatic constraints. erlbaum lawrence associates  1. 
 kass and finin  1  r. kass and t. finin. modeling the user in natural language systems. computational linguistics  1   1. 
 kobsa et al.  1  a. kobsa  j. allagyer  c. reddig  n. reithinger  d. schmauks  k. harbusch  and w. wahlster. combining deictic gestures and natural language for referent identification. in proc. coling 1  bonn  germany  1. 
 lavelli and stock  1  a. lavelli and o. stock. when something is missing: ellipsis  coordination and the chart. in proc. coling 1  helsinki  finland  1. 
 macgregor and bates  1  r.m. 	mac-
gregor and l. bates. the loom knowledge representation language. technical report isi/rs-1  usc/information sciences institute  marina del rey  ca  1. 
 maclaughlin and shaked  1  d m . maclaughlin and v. shaked. natural language text generation in semi-automated forces. technical report 1  bbn  cambridge  mass.  1. 
 mckeown  1  k.r. mckeown  text generation. cambridge university press  1. 
 neal and shapiro  1  j.g. neal and s.c. shapiro. intelligent multimedia interface technology. in proc. of the workshop on architectures for intelligent interface technology  monterey  ca  1. 
 paris  1  c.l. paris. combining discourse strategies to generate descriptions to users along a naive/expert  spectrum. in proc. of jjca1  milano  italy  1. 
 pianesi  1l  f. pianesi. x-bar theory and deep structure: a tabular bottom-up generator. technical report 1  irst  trento  italy  1. 
 samek-lodovici and strapparava  1  v. sameklodovici and c. strapparava. identifying noun phrase 