 
this paper considers the interpretation  as a three-dimensional velocity field  of the changing intensity pattern induced by a smoothly deforming lambertian surface of uniform albedo illuminated by a distant point light source. the requisite  intensity rate constraint  which is derived contains no terms relating to the tangential components of surface velocity  so the determination of the velocity field is ill-posed  exhibiting a form of  aperture problem . a stretch-based regulariser is applied to enable estimation of the velocity field and tests with synthetic data show a requirement for high accuracy. 
1 introduction 
this paper considers a problem in the field of non-rigid motion interpretation. whereas motion has often been presumed to be merely a cue as to surface structure  as perhaps implied by the phrase  structure from motion''  this work takes the stance that in a dynamic world where objects may be in relative  even non-rigid motion  the motion of a world point is itself of interest. the problem addressed here is that of the interpretation  as a three-dimensional velocity field  of the changing intensity pattern induced by a smoothly deforming lambertian surface of uniform albedo illuminated by a distant point light source. thus  the surface viewed deforming is presumed to accord with the most common assumptions in the field of shape from shading  see e.g.  horn  1    - the image intensity of a surface point is presumed to vary in a known manner with the angle between the surface normal and the light source direction. hence  if the surface deforms such that this angle changes  the intensity of the  changing  corresponding image point will also change  and the assumption used to derive the  motion constraint equation   first proposed in  horn and schunck  1   and since used to underpin most work in visual motion interpretation  will be broken. 
   *the author wishes to acknowledge the financial support of the serc during the early part of this work  the department for continued use of its resources  the supervision of drs. r.b.fisher and j.c.t.hallam  the comments of l.d.cai and h.w.hughes  and the photography of d.howie. 
　however  here it is presumed that the instantaneous shape of the deforming surface region may be determined by the application of shape from shading within a bound-
ing contour  as analysed in  blake et a/.  1 . similarly the full three-dimensional velocity is presumed known at identifiable feature points on the bounding contour from combined stereo and motion. this will enable the estimation of the three-dimensional velocity along the entire bounding contour using a method such as that proposed 
in  cameron-jones  1   thus  the problem remaining is that of estimating the three-dimensional velocity field over the surface region from the intensity rate  given the velocity on the bounding contour and the static information. 
　the derived  intensity rate constraint   which relates the change in intensity at an image point to the motion of the surface  contains terms relating to the normal velocity component at the point  but not the tangential components of the velocity. hence the determination of the three-dimensional velocity field is an ill-posed problem  and the application of a regularisation approach using a stretch-based criterion is proposed. the choice of regulariser was motivated by a psychological study of human observation of objects in motion  jansson and johansson  1  which suggested that a distinction should be made between bending and stretching modes of nonrigidity  corresponding to deformations in which internal lengths  e.g. those along a surface  are preserved or altered respectively. 
　previous work on continuous non-rigid motion includes the extension in  subbarao  1   of the classical rigid motion continuous time optic flow interpretation work of e.g.  longuet-lliggins and prazdny  1   and  koenderink and van doom  1  in which bending motion of a surface approximated  with a difference geometry approach  by hinged planar facets was considered. however  the work most related to that of this paper is  shulman and aloimonos  1   which proposed a general regularisation framework for the determination of  non- rigid motion from a changing intensity pattern. the technique proposed here and most previous work may be regarded as special cases of this framework but the approach of this work  which was developed independently  is quite distinct in its use of a coordinate system set in the surface. this enables the form of the constraint relating the image intensity change to the world 
	cameron-jones 	1 
figure 1: diagram of viewing and illumination configuration 
velocity to be clarified in a manner which is not possible in the conventional cartesian coordinate system. 
　the subsequent sections of this paper will show the derivation of the  intensity rate constraint  and the estimation of the velocity field from synthetic data using the method proposed. 
1 the intensity rate constraint 
this section shows that for a deforming lambertian surface of constant uniform albedo  viewed orthographically and illuminated by an infinitely distant point source   the local image intensity rate is independent of the tangential components of surface velocity  depending only on the normal component of surface velocity  the instantaneous shape and the illumination. the derivation of this intuitively obvious  but  as far as the author is aware  hitherto unproved fact is simplified by the use of a coordinate system set in the surface  rather than the cartesian system customarily employed in the visual analysis of motion. this coordinate system is retained in subsequent sections to emphasise the form of the constraint underlying the interpretation of the intensity rate  although a transformation into a cartesian system could be preferable in a practical application. 
1 	problem definition 
it is desired to derive an expression for the temporal intensity derivative at a point in a changing intensity image  which is the orthographic projection along the zaxis of an arbitrarily smoothly deforming smooth surface of constant uniform albedo lambertian reflectance  illuminated by a point light source at infinity.  see figure 1 . 
1 	static image intensity 
for a lambertian surface  at any instant  the image intensity corresponding to a point on the surface  will be: 

where 
  i is the image intensity  assuming appropriate sensor calibration  
1 	vision 
figure 1: lines of curvature on toroidal surface patch 

figure 1: intensity displayed as a function of lines of curvature parameters 
   is the surface albedo  hereafter absorbed into 1 for convenience 
  1 is the light source vector 
  n is the unit normal vector on the surface 
1 	surface coordinate system 
the derivation will presume that the surface has been parameterised  in the form  by its lines of curvature and that all relevant quantities such as image intensity may be considered as functions of and the parameters of the visible point corresponding to the image point. an example of this is illustrated in figures 1 and 1  where part of a uniform albedo toroidal surface  illuminated by a point source behind the viewer  is parameterised by its lines of curvature  as added to the x - y plane image   and the intensity as a function of these parameters illustrated below  with the lines of curvature now forming a rectangular grid . 
the choice of parameterisation simplifies the first 
fundamental form  see e.g.  weatherburn  1  for more on differential geometry if required  to: 
		 i  
and the second fundamental form to: 
		 1  

it will also be useful to define the quantity 
		 1  
which represents the surface area per unit area of parameter space. 
1 	derivation 
given the previous expression for the image intensity at a point  knowing that the light source is fixed  and presuming the surface reflectivity to be unchanged in motion  the change in intensity at the changing image point corresponding to a given point on the surface is : 

　substituting for the change in the unit normal vector  from e.g.  weather burn  1   gives: 

where the vector fields v  translational velocity  and n are defined on the surface  and is defined as: 
 1  
　considering the full and partial first-order derivatives of image intensity: 

hence 

where 
  i is the intensity rate at a fixed image point 
   is the 1-d gradient of the intensity. 
　the latter concept may seem rather odd given that the intensity image is two-dimensional! it should be regarded as expressing the projection. in this case   orthographic projection in the z direction   movement in the z direction will leave the image unaffected as the intensity gradient is zero in this direction. in the case of perspective projection  contraction towards  or expansion from  the point of projection is special in that a surface element remains in correspondence with an image plane element. a cross-section of the conceptual threedimensional intensity resulting from the toroidal surface previously illustrated is shown in figure 1. the terms involving tangential components of velocity in 1 may be eliminated by considering the expansions of the terms  using the basis  
thus: 


figure 1: z-y plane section through  1-d  intensity function 

the intensity rate constraint : 
		 1  
　the intensity rate constraint and the motion constraint equation  horn and schunck  1   used in the calculation of image flow  are closely related and the former exhibits a scaled up form of the  aperture problem  associated with the latter  as there are two components of tangential velocity to be indeterminate. further discussion of the new constraint  analytical examples of surface deformations satisfying it  and a yet more general form may be found in  cameron-j ones  1 . 
	cameron-jones 	1 

1 interpretation of smooth surface deformation 
in this section the method of  cameron-jones  1  for interpreting the image intensity change of a cylindrical deformation is extended to the case of a  potentially  doubly-curved constant albedo lambertian surface undergoing a smooth deformation. a  square of  divergence term is used as a regulariser to infer the velocity field over the surface  assuming a knowledge of the initial surface structure and the velocity on the bounding contour  
1 	the divergence-based regulariser 
it was shown in the previous section that the intensity rate at a point in an image of a deforming constant albedo lambertian surface is related to the normal velocity and its derivatives by the intensity rate constraint 1. it has been proposed in  cameron-jones  1  that in a special reduced dimensional case of surface motion  equivalent to curve motion in the plane  the velocity field over the surface may be estimated by the application of a stretch-minimising regulariser  as used in  d'haeyer  1  for determining image curve motion. when considering the generalisation of this method to the unrestricted form of smooth surface deformation  the most straightforward approach is to choose a regularisation term which is again a measure of surface stretching  and apply it to the full form of the intensity rate constraint. 
　the form of this regulariser should be such that it is zero in the case of a pure bending motion and hence the regularisation will yield the correct solution given correct input data representing this significant case. in a pure bending motion the surface dilatation and shear are both zero  hence terms representing either or both seem plausible candidates. the dilatation  per unit area  is measured by the divergence  a differential invariant  which has the prerequisite property of depending upon both tangential and normal velocities and  as will be shown below  is mathematically convenient for considering the limiting case of ideal input data where  may be made very small. thus the  square of  divergence was used as the regulariser in this work; however  if a similarly appropriate shear-based term were found it might yield correct results in some other interesting cases. 
　thus  the velocity field is chosen by minimising  with respect to v  the following integral over the surface   sub-
ject to the known v on the bounding contour : 

   as commented above  this method should yield the correct velocity field in the case of a pure bending motion of a surface  which is completely visible and unshadowed   independent of the magnitude of  a further significant case is that in which the surface is undergoing a uniform expansion  with everywhere constant divergence   and  is sufficiently small that the regularisation results in minimising the  square of  divergence term over the surface  subject to the normal velocity found from the intensity rate constraint and the known 
1 	vision 
velocity on the bounding contour. in this case the  divergence theorem   page 1 of  weatherburn  1   may be applied to the known velocities to show that the minimisation is consistent with the correct motion being found. 
　the divergence theorem states that for a closed curve on a surface  arclength s   letting m be the unit vector tangential to the surface and normal to the curve in the direction out of the enclosed region  the surface integral of the divergence of a vector quantity  such as v is given thus: 

hence the integral of the divergence over the surface may be found from the normal velocity  which is found from the intensity rate constraint  and the known velocity on the bounding contour  which are constraints upon the minimisation of the integral of the squared divergence. consequently the minimisation of the integral of the square of the divergence is done subject to this  implicit  constraint and hence the result of that minimisation will be the correct uniform value of divergence and thus the correct motion field. 
　the formal minimisation of the regularised problem may be performed by applying the calculus of variations to the integral and the resulting three coupled second order partial differential equations may be solved numerically over a bounded surface region  given the velocity on the bounding contour. for further details and more extensive results than will be presented here see  cameron-jones  1 . 
1 	application results 
the method was tested on data representing two deforming surfaces:  1  a bending circular cylindrical region  as used in  cameron-jones  1  in which the deformation was restricted to being cylindrical  and hence one dimension of the problem ignored  and  1  an expanding  rotating and translating toroidal region. for simplicity  results are presented for only one deformation of each of these surfaces with only a a few variations of the input. 
　the first  that of the circular bending motion is illustrated in figure 1. the surface  as a function of the surface coordinates and time  is given by the expression: 

　in the example used  the surface region with r = 1  r = 1  and in the range  -1  1    both sampled every 1  was viewed from the z direction  at time t = 1.  all dimensions are in pixels. in the case of orthographic projection  this appears a natural unit . the albedo was 1  and the light source vector at  1 1 1 . 
　the second case  that of the toroidal region expansion  rotation  about the z axis  and translation   viewed from the y direction   is illustrated in figure 1. 

figure 1: cylindrical region bending - velocity field superposed on intensity image 


   the two types of motion were both chosen to be cases in which the intensity at the  changing  image point corresponding to a moving point of the viewed surface changes; thus the standard assumption that image flow is equivalent to optic flow does not hold. in the toroidal example  if the rotation is set to zero  the assumption does hold  and the method proposed in this section still works . 
   the results which will be given are in the form of root mean square  rms  velocity errors   calculated over the points at which the velocity is determined . the error at each individual point is the magnitude of the vector which is the difference between the  known  true and estimated three-dimensional velocity. in all cases where noise was added  the example was repeated 1 times and the resulting mean and standard deviation of the rms velocity errors will be given. 
   experiments were conducted for a range of grid sizes and regularisation parameters  using perfect differential data in which the intensity rate  and its spatial derivatives  and velocities are exactly known  using data in which these were found using temporal and spatial finite difference approximations  and experiments in which noise was added. for full details see  cameron-jones  1 . 
results will be given here for the cases of grids of 
1 x 1 increments  as depicted in the figures  using a regularisation parameter of 1 - 1   in the noisy finite time increment case. the velocity rms errors should be compared with: 
1. the rms true velocities over the cylindrical and toroidal surfaces: 1 and 1. 
1. the rms velocity errors in the case where the intensity rate  its spatial derivatives  and velocities are calculated as differentials: 1 and 1. 
1. the rms velocity errors in the case where the intensity rate and velocities are calculated as differentials  but the spatial derivative of the intensity rate is calculated by differencing: 1 and 
1. 
   the level of intensity rate noise added may be compared against the rms intensity rates over the two regions for the two time increments: 1 and 1 for the cylindrical bending case  and 1 and 1 for the toroidal stretching case  for time increments 1 and 
1 respectively. 
　the means and estimated standard deviations of the rms errors for the 1 and 1 time increment cases over 1 trials are given below  with the noise-free results reproduced for comparison. 
   there are two apparently paradoxical aspects of the results which should be explained. firstly  some cases in which small amounts of noise are added produce  statistically insignificant  better results than the corresponding noise-free cases. this is possible because the noise-
free cases are not error-free  as they contain the effects of discretisation  hence a small perturbation may make the results better or worse. the results are worse when the equivalent sequence of perturbations are subtracted rather than added. secondly  the noise-free result for the cylindrical bending case with a time increment of 1 is better than the result in the instantaneous differential case. this is possible because temporal discretisation is not the only effect - spatial differentials are better estimated. the results are worse when the negative of this velocity field is used . 
   when the results are considered in terms of the accuracy to which the input intensity must be determined to yield various accuracies of output  it appears that both 
	cameron-jones 	1 


table 1: cylindrical bending case - finite time increment : noise added to intensity rate 

table 1: toroidal stretching case - finite time increment : noise added to intensity rate 
the cases of the 1 time increment and the 1 error in intensity rate  corresponding to an error of order 1 in the intensity measurement  are points at which the output errors become worse by an order of magnitude when the intensity measurement does so. as these cases have errors of about 1%  and the underlying error due to the original discretisation is about 1 %   it seems plausible to suggest that for both the cases considered  the method requires the intensity to be measured to an accuracy of order 1 for the resulting intensity rate to constitute an acceptable input to the method. 
   as the m a x i m u m intensity in both cases is almost 1  it is clear that this level of accuracy is much greater than that which can be achieved with standard camera technology  hence the physical reproduction of these experiments would be rather fruitless. this is  of course  not to deny that a case could be contrived in which the method could be demonstrated on real data  merely to suggest that such a case would indeed appear contrived in the colloquial sense. 
   experiments regarding the addition of noise to the intensity rate in the differential case show that the instantaneous intensity rate would have to be measured to an accuracy better than 1%  of the rms intensity rate  to ensure that the errors induced by the noise were of a similar order of magnitude to those inherent in the solution. this demonstrates an important point regarding the design of  cameras  for computer vision - it would be desirable for many techniques to have temporal and / or spatial derivatives measured to similar levels of accuracy to that to which the intensity itself is measured. as might be expected  errors in the boundary velocity produce errors of a similar order of magnitude in the output. tests on the light source data suggest again that measurements of about 1% accuracy are required  and others on the shape data demonstrate some noise tolerance. 
1 	vision 
1 conclusions 
the  intensity rate constraint  relating the intensity rate in an image of a deforming lambertian surface  illuminated by a distant point light source  to the motion of that surface has been found. as the intensity rate is constrained only by the normal component of surface velocity  there is a form of  aperture problem . the estimation of the full three-dimensional velocity field over the surface using a stretch-based regulariser has been demonstrated for synthetic data. practical application of this technique may require an improvement in camera technology. 
