 
we describe a new approach for reasoning with belief functions in this paper. this approach is fundamentally unrelated to probabilities and is consistent with shafer and tversky's canonical examples. 
1 introduction 
belief functions  shafer  1; smets  1  serve as a way to quantify human beliefs. it is a non-additive formalism. 
that is  where a is a set formalizing some proposition and ac is a's complement with respect to some underlying universe of discourse. this is different from probability theory where is assumed. 
the reasoning mechanism of belief functions consists of two rules: dempster's rule of conditioning allows us to update a given belief function in light of new information about the actual situation  whereas dempster's rule of combination allows us to combine  distinct  or 
 independent  belief functions  shafer  1; smets  1 .1 
﹛researchers interested in belief functions often try to understand this formalism from the perspectives of probability theory  e.g.   halpern and fagin  1; kyburg 1; nguyen  1; pearl  1  chapter 1  . this is understandable  as the origin of belief functions lies in the seminal paper of dempster   where he set out to study a particular subclass of upper and lower probabilities. however  dempster's original view of belief functions is nowhere to be found in shafer's 1 monograph  where he offered a re-interpretation of dempster's work and coined this formalism the term  belief functions.  
﹛nevertheless  three questions about belief functions are of interests. one  why should human beliefs be quantified by belief functions  two  why should dempster's rule of conditioning be used for updating belief functions  three  when is dempster's rule of combination applicable in 
 * this work was supported in part by the drums project funded by the commission of the european communities under the esprit il-program  basic research project 1. 
formally  dempster's rule of conditioning is a special case of dempster's rule of combination. however  the underlying intuitions are completely different. one is concerned with belief updating  while the other is concerned with belief combination. 
1 	qualitative reasoning 
combining belief functions  representing  evidence  
﹛shafer and tversky  used canonical examples to answer the first and third questions  and their approach is not too far away from dempster's original ideas.1 in essence  shafer and tversky's approach is that we first compute the probability distribution on a space and then  by establishing a special relationship between and a second space we obtain our belief  a belief function  on  
as we see it  there may be two drawbacks with shafer and 
tversky's canonical examples. the first drawback is that one may be tempted to question the legitimacy of using dempster's rule of conditioning for updating the belief function on  because if we view the belief function on  as the lower bound of a family of probabilities on 
 which is something we are not obliged to do  and both shafer  1 and smets  have explicitly rejected this idea   then we will have to use a different conditioning rule  dempster  1; fagin and halpern  1; jaffray  1 . the second drawback is more pragmatic in nature: as shafer and tversky only offered a pragmatic recommendation for reasoning with belief functions  it does not make belief functions adequately  protected  against potential misuse of this theory. in other words  one might still use belief functions  dempster's rule of combination in particular  in a way that does not correspond to the canonical examples  see  for example  the analysis of  pearl  1  . 
﹛in an attempt to remedy these drawbacks of the current belief-function framework  in the sense of shafer and tversky   we propose a radical  restructuring  of this framework as follows. first  we take away dempster's rule of combination and make dempster's rule of conditioning the one and only way for making inferences. then  we suggest that we construct a belief function that is  minimum committed  in characterizing our intuitions.1 
﹛the benefits of our approach for reasoning with belief functions are four-fold. the first benefit is that we can now use belief functions directly. no references to probabilities are needed. the second benefit is that as belief functions arc no longer linked to probabilities  there is no more reason why we should reject the use of dempster's rule of 
1
 but see  halpern and fagin  1; ruspini  1; smets  1  for some alternative answers. 
1
 a belief function bel1 is not as committed as a belief function bel1 if and only if for every proposition  

conditioning for updating belief functions.1 the third benefit is that we can now use dempster's rule of conditioning to justify dempster's rule of combination  thereby investigating the issue of  when is dempster's rule of combination applicable  . the fourth and final benefit is that our restructured belief-function framework is more  robust  against potential misuse of belief functions. because now whenever one wants to use dempster's rule of combination to combine belief functions within our framework  he or she will have to explicitly justify the use of this rule. without such a justification  the use of dempster's rule of combination would only amount to what we call  inappropriate use of dempster's rule of combination.  
﹛the reader might rightfully ask at this point: is this proposed reasoning approach consistent with shafer and tversky's canonical examples  the answer is  yes   and we will give more detail about this answer later in the paper. 
﹛the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. sections two and three describe our restructured belieffunction framework. section four shows that our approach is consistent with shafer and tvcrsky's canonical examples. finally  section five concludes. 
1 basic concepts 
﹛the purpose of this section is to introduce the basic concepts of belief functions. we wish to emphasize the fact that only dempsters rule of conditioning is introduced here  as dempster's rule of combination is no longer considered an integrated part of our belief-function framework. 
﹛let x =  x1 x1  ...  xn  be a finite non-empty set of variables and let 成 1  成1 ...  成n be the respective frames of these variables  each 成i is a finite non-empty set of values xi can take; these values arc mutually exclusive and exhaustive . xi is boolean if 成 =  yes  no . let h be a non-empty subset of x.成h is the cartesian product of the frames of the elements of h. 成x  the set of all possible situations  is abbreviated as 1. by the  xi-value   1   i   n  of an element  a1  a 1  ...  an  of 成  we mean ai. 
﹛we will need to work with subsets of 成 in specifying a belief function. however  it is often desirable that we only work with some of the variables in specifying a particular fragment of our belief. therefore we allow the use of logical formulas in referring to subsets of 1  and we list in the appendix the formal correspondence between f  a formula  and  fj  f s corresponding subset of 1. this allows us to use a notation like   rain = yes   wet = yes   to refer to 成  minus  all those situations  elements of s  that have rain-value yes and wet-value no. it also allows us to use  -. temp = high   in referring to s  minus  all those situations  elements of 成  that have temp-value high. this 
1
 we acknowledge that this does not make dempster's rule of conditioning any more feasible than any other updating rule one might think of. however  the point here is that dempster's rule of conditioning now becomes as competitive as any other updating rule. what we need to do  then  is perhaps to find some axiomatic justification of this rule. 
is a rather effective way to refer to subsets of 1.  in addition  we will use  rain  as a shorthand for  rain = yes  in the case of boolean variables.  this way  we can unambiguously refer to subsets of 1 without committing ourselves to explicitly stating what variables are in x. 
﹛a belief function on 1 is a function bel: 1成 -   1  1  which is characterized by an m-value function m b e l  written as  m  whenever confusions can be avoided; m is also called  the m-values of bel    where m: 1成 -*  1  1  satisfies two conditions: 

and for every subset b of 1  bel b  is defined as m a .1 a subset a of 1 is called a focal element 
of bel if m a    1. when bel is such that m 1  = 1  we call bel the vacuous belief function. 
﹛intuitively  means that  i believe that the actual situation is one of the situations in a  and c corresponds to how confident i am in entertaining this belief'  bel a  = 1 means that  i do not entertain the belief that the actual situation is one of the situations in a  1 and m a  = d means that  in the course of establishing bel  a is found to be the most specific subset of 1 that deserves this particular amount  d  of intuitive support.  as such  bel serves to characterize  part of  some distinguished state of mind  with m being the  internal structure  of bel. 
﹛once we accept this intuitive view of bel and m  it is only natural that we extend this intuitive interpretation to bel . i b  and m . i b   where  for example  bel a i b  = c  1 means that  given that the actual situation is in b  i believe that the actual situation is in a  and c corresponds to how confident i am in entertaining this belief.  this gives rise to the following conditioning rule known as dempster's rule of conditioning  shafer  1 . let bel be a belief function on 1 and m be its associated m-values. let b be a non-empty subset of 1 such that bel bc  =/1. 

1
this definition is consistent with  shafer  1 . 	smets 
 has a slightly more general definition  called an  open world  definition  in which m 1  does not have to be 1 and bcl a  is defined as the sum of the m-values of those non-empty subsets of a. 
1
 consider the belief that the actual situation is in a. here  according to our interpretation  an agent either entertains this belief or does not entertain this belief. and when the agent does entertain this belief  he/she/it is entitled to a degree of confidence  c  in doing so. in other words  we do not think of bel a  as the extent to which an agent entertains this belief. 
	hsia 	1 

1a . 
1 	qualitative reasoning 
1 shafer  also requires that  
1
 that is  we assume that the system has some pre-processing ability and  as such  it can assist us in making fragmentary specifications 
	hsia 	1 
specification probabilities. 
1 	qualitative reasoning 


