 
with few exceptions the study of nonmonotonic reasoning has been confined to the single-agent case. however  it has been recognized that intelligent agents often need to reason about other agents and their ability to reason nonmonotonically. in this paper we present a formalization of multi-agent autoepistemic rea-
soning  which naturally extends earlier work by levesque. in particular  we propose an n-agent modal belief logic  which allows us to express that a formula  or finite set of them  is all an agent knows  which may include beliefs about what other agents believe. the paper presents a formal semantics of the logic in the possibleworld framework. we provide an axiomatization  which is complete for a large fragment of the logic and sufficient to characterize interesting forms of multi-agent autoepistemic reasoning. we also extend the stable set and stable expansion ideas of single-agent autoepistemic logic to the multi-agent case. 
1 	introduction 
while the study of nonmonotonic reasoning formalisms has been at the forefront of foundational research in knowledge representation for quite some time  work in this area has concentrated on the single-agent case with only few exceptions. 
   this focus on single agents is somewhat surprising  since there is little doubt that agents  who have been invested with nonmonotonic reasoning mechanisms  should be able to reason about other agents and their ability to reason nonmonotonically as well. for example  if we assume the common default that birds normally fly and if jill tells jack that she has just bought a bird  then jill should be able to infer that jack thinks that her bird flies. multi-agent nonmonotonic reasoning is also crucial when agents need to coordinate their activity. p'or example  assume i promised a friend  who is always on time  to meet him at a restaurant at 1pm. if i leave my house knowing that i will not make it there by 1pm  1 will probably not change my plans and still go to the restaurant. after all  i know that my friend has no reason to believe that i am not on my way to meet him and that he will therefore wait for me. note that i reason about my friends default assumption to wait in this case. other examples from areas like planning and temporal projection can be found in  mor1 . 
   one of the main formalisms of nonmonotonic reasoning is autoepistemic logic  e.g.  moo1  . the basic idea is that the beliefs of agents are closed under perfect introspection  that is  they know1 what they know and do not know. nonmonotonic reasoning comes about in this framework in that agents can draw inferences on the basis of their own ignorance. the following example by moore illustrates this feature: i can reasonably conclude that i have no older brother simply because i do not know of any older brother of mine. a particular formalization of autoepistemic reasoning is due to levesque  lev1   who proposes a logic of only-knowing 
{ol   which is a classical modal logic extended by a new modality to express that a formula is all an agent believes. an advantage of this approach is that  rather than having to appeal to non-standard inference rules as in moore's original formulation  ol captures autoepistemic reasoning using only the classical notions of logical consequence and theoremhood. 
   in this paper  we propose a propositional multi-agent extension of ol. we provide a formal semantics within the possible-world framework and a proof theory  which is complete for a large fragment of the logic. the new logic also leads us to natural extensions of notions like stable sets and stable expansions  which were originally developed for the single-agent case. 
   general multi-agent nonmonotonic reasoning formalisms have received very little attention until recently.1 a notable exception is work by morgenstern and guerreiro  mor1  mg1   who consider both multi-agent autoepistemic reasoning and multi-agent circumscription theories. on the autoepistemic side  they propose multi-agent versions of stable sets  which al-
1
　　 while we are concerned with belief and  in particular  allow agents to have false beliefs  we nevertheless use the terms knowledge and belief interchangeably. 
1
　　there has also been work applying nonmonotonic theories to special multi-agent settings such as speech acts  e.g.  per1  ak1  . unlike our work  these approaches are not concerned with general purpose multi-agent nonmonotonic reasoning. 





sentences. 
1 
reasoning 
are two examples: 
　a formal derivation of this theorem of 1l can be obtained as follows. let 
standard propositional logic or further analysis. 
1
   in contrast  1 note that if we replace agent autoepistemic reasoning. 


1 	conclusion 
we proposed a multi-agent logic of only-knowing that extends earlier work by levesque regarding the singleagent case. our logic gives a semantic and proof theoretic account of autoepistemic reasoning for many knowers. notions like stable set and stable expansion fall out as natural extensions of single-agent autoepistemic logic. 
   as for future work  it would be interesting to obtain a complete axiomatization for all of ol. also  as noted earlier  there are subtle differences between 1l n and halpern's logic. halpern showed that every valid sentence in his logic is also valid in 1l n and that the valid sentences of both logics coincide when restricted to 
 however  there are sentences such as that are valid in 1 l n but not in halpern's case. for a better comparison of the two approaches it would be interesting to see which modifications are necessary to obtain identical logics. finally  a more expressive firstorder language should be considered to make 1l n more applicable in real world domains. we conjecture that an approach as in  lev1  could be adapted for this purpose without great difficulty. 
acknowledgements 
   i would like to thank joe halpern and hector levesque for fruitful discussions on this subject. 
