 
the difference between bayesian conditioning and 
lewis' imaging is somewhat similar to the one between gardenfors' belief revision and katsuno and mendelzon' updating in the logical framework. counterparts in possibility theory of these two operations are presented  including the case of conditioning upon an uncertain observation. possibilistic conditioning satisfies all the postulates for belief revision  and possibilistic imaging all the updating postulates. lastly  a third operation called  focusing  is naturally introduced in the setting of belief and plausibility functions. 
1 	introduction 
numerical formalisms for the representation of uncertainty usually describe stales of knowledge in terms of possible states of the world these states w are supposed to be mutually exclusive and usually is assumed to gather all the possible states of the world. both in probability theory and in possibility theory  to each state w is attached a degree 
  which estimates the extent to which co may represent the real state of the world. these states can be put in correspondence with the models used in logical formalisms. by convention   means that we are completely certain that co cannot be the real slate of the world. but the meaning of  is completely different in probability theory where it means that co is the real state  complete knowledge   and in possibility theory where it only expresses that nothing prevents co from being the real state of the world. 
　in these two formalisms  the change of the current state of knowledge  called 'epistemic state' in the following   upon the arrival of a new information stating that the real world is in  corresponds to a modification of the assignment function d into a new assignment d  this change should obey general principles which guarantee that i  d' is of the same nature as d  preservation of the representation principles ; ii  which denotes 'not a'  is excluded by d'  i.e.   what is observed is held as certain after the revision or the updating ; iii  some informational distance between d' and d is minimized  principle of minimal change . counterparts to these principles are also at the basis of revision and updating in logical formalisms . 
　the probabilistic framework offers at least two ways of modifying a probability distribution upon the arrival of a new and certain information: the bayesian conditioning  but also d. lewis 's 'imaging' which consists in translating the weights originally on models outside a to models which 
1 	knowledge representation 
are their closest neighbours in a. this paper shows that the existence of these two modes  which can be also defined in the possibilistic framework  is analogous to the distinction between belief revision based on alchourr1n  gardenfors and makinson  agm  postulates  and updating based on katsuno and mendelzon ' postulates. 
　the paper is organized in three main parts. the next section surveys basic results on probabilistic conditioning and imaging. section 1 introduces these two operations in the possibilistic framework and provides new results and justifications for them. section 1 briefly considers belief and plausibility functions and then emphasizes the existence of a third operation  called 'focusing'  in this setting. 




1 	knowledge representation 




1 	knowledge representation 


1 	conclusion 
this paper has emphasized that belief revision in the sense of gardenfors  as well as updating in the sense of katsuno and mendelzon can be defined through conditioning and imaging respectively both in the probabilistic and in the possibilistic settings. the possibilistic framework leads to a more complete agreement with the two sets of postulates  first stated for propositional logic  than the probabilistic setting. the paper also has tried to relate the revision of a 
possibility distribution on a set of possible worlds to the revision of a knowledge base made of uncertain logical formulas. more work is needed to relate probabilistic rules to the axiomatic approaches to belief change in the logical framework  despite the existing bridges between probability and possibility theories. namely we might consider devising revision and updating rules in logics of uncertainty different from possibilistic logic  and especially probabilistic logic. indeed while the problem of change has been thoroughly studied for probabilistic representations of epistemic states on a set of possible worlds  nothing has been done at the syntactic level. besides the justification of the different rules in evidence theory is in its infancy. the idea of focusing  i.e. changing the reference class as opposed to revising a body of knowledge might be worth introducing in the logical setting also. 
　the coherence between numerical versus symbolic approaches to knowledge representation is still present in the revising and updating problems. pushing further the consequences of such a coherence looks like a challenging task. 
　the reader is referred to a more complete version of this paper for further discussions and proofs . 
acknowledgements: this work has been partially supported by the european esprit basic research action n＜ 1 entitled 
 defeasible reasoning and uncertainty management systems  drums-1  . 
