 
the aim of this work is to combine advantageously the two existing approaches for theorem proving in non classical logics: proving in the considered non classical logic  called here the direct approach  and proving in classical logic by way of translation -called here the translation approach. some results in propo-
sitional s1 show evidence of the relevance of this approach. we assume a translation from s1 into first-order logic and then we define a partial inverse formula translation from firstorder classical logic into s1. semantic relations are proved to hold between the backward translated formulas. we answer positively  for s1  to one conjecture stated in a previous work by the authors. an interpolation theorem stating a property stronger than refutational completeness is also proved. a plausible conjecture stronger than the interpolation theorem is proposed. these results are interpreted in the framework of a slight variant of an existing resolution calculus for s1. we illustrate our method on a simple example. future work includes applications of the approach to other modal logics. 
1 	introduction 
the interest in non classical logics is now unanimously accepted in artificial intelligence and in computer science. concerning the way to mechanize them  there are two approaches: 
  the direct approach: it consists of building  or using existing  specific proof systems for these logics  see for ex.  fitting  1; enjalbert and farinas del cerro  
1   
  the translation approach: a problem expressed in a non classical logic  from now on called source logic  is translated into classical logic  from now on called target logic . the problem is therefore solved in the target logic  see for ex.  ohlbach  1  . 
   each approach has good defenders -see for ex.  thislewaite et al.  1; ohlbach  1 . the direct approach naturally arose the first. relating logics is a technique that has been used in pure logical studies: in correspon-
1 	automated reasoning 
dence theory and in definability theory. it has been also used in automated deduction for non classical logics as an alternative to implement specific calculi for each non classical logic and it is the theoretical foundations of the second approach. historically the innovative work of e. orlowska introduced the notion of resolutioninterpret ability of a logic into another -see  orlowska  1j. more recently a. herzig and h-j. olhbach  see  heme  1; ohlbach  1  and a related work by m. chan  chan  1   emphasized the idea of logic morphism  which is implicitly used in the previous work of e. orlowska. their works in which unification plays a central role were applied to several classes of modal and temporal logics. 
   the two approaches have drawbacks -and obviously advantages. the direct approach needs the construction of new theorem provers whereas the translation approach generates proofs from which the relation with the initial problem is difficult to grasp. in this paper we contend that the two approaches are not mutually exclusive but can be profitably combined. we propose to build from the proofs obtained after translation  partial  possibly total  proofs in the specific systems for non classical logics  with the help of inverse translations. so  it becomes possible to add the advantage of the efficiency of theorem provers for classical logics with that of presenting results  in the present case partial proofs  in the source logic. a computer system implementing this hybrid approach would allow the user to formalize his problem in his favorite logic and to get a reasonable solution in the same logic. 
   we do not consider in this work neither the problems inherent to the translation approach such as the nature of the classical logic into which the translation is done  first-order logic  fragment of second-order logic ...   nor the theoretical limits of translation  definability  or the choice of proof systems for non classical logics -tableaux  resolution  matings and so on. 
   in order to show how cooperation between the translation approach and the direct one is possible we shall define a partial backward translation from classical firstorder logic  from now on abbreviated fol  into propositional logic s1. semantic relations hold between the backward formulas and we shall show that some s1clauses that logically entail some backward translated formulas  can be derived in a variant of the resolution 


	caferra and demri 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 

	caferra and demri 	1 

from the proof in figure 1  lemma 1 and theorem 1 

¡¡so  we cannot build an interpolant between any two formulas f and g by using the system rs1. the alternative syntactic interpolation lemma presented in  czermak  1  cannot be adapted to rs1 -see also the related semantic interpolation lemma given in  gabbay  1 . conject ure 1 can be seen as an intermediate plausible result between theorem 1 and the modal equivalent of the lee's theorem. furthermore we conjecture that proposition 1 can be extended to rs1. we believe that in spite of the relative lack of interest of consequence finding in research of automated theorem proving for classical logics  results about modal consequence finding could generate applications for artificial intelligence. that is why we propose the following result with the hope that a modal equivalent may exist for the system rs1 -or rs1'. 

1 	automated reasoning 
we get a p.o.s. of s1-clauses ; its construction is based on theorem 1. moreover in this case corollary 1 is applicable so we get the following sequence of semantic entailments. each formula of the sequence logically entails the next one. 

the properties of the previous sections allow us to built other p.o.s. of s1-formulas. furthermore we present a 
refutation in rs1 -figure 1. from conjecture 1  every backward translation of a clause in fol admits an interpolant in rs1. the proof in figure 1 contains all the required interpolants that are the backward translations themselves but it is not always the case. 
	1 	conclusion and future work 
with respect to the aims stated in section 1  it has been shown that from a standard translation of s1-formulas into first-order logic it is possible to define a partial inverse formula translation having interesting semantic properties -theorem 1  corollary 1. the properties of the inverse translation have been used to prove a theorem concerning consequence finding in s1 using a vari-


figure 1: refutation with the proof system rs1 
ant of the resolution system rs1 -corollary 1. corollary 1 can be used as a syntactic criterion to guide proofs in rs1'. we also answer positively to one conjecture and partially answer to a second one -see  caferra et a i   1 . 
   the inherent limitations of our work are threefold. the expressive power of propositional logic s1 is obviously limited. the extension of our results to first-order s1 is not straightforward because there is neither interpolation lemma for first-order s1  fine  1   nor reasonable normal form for all the quantificational s1formulas. we have shown that rs1 is incomplete for consequence-finding. finally it should be mentioned that the computation of s1 normal forms remains expensive. 
the main lines of future work are to prove conjecture 
1 of section 1  to extend the present results to other modal logics  k  s1 ...  with expectable increasing difficulties and to consider other proof systems -tableaux  matings. 
