 
in this paper we address the problem of scalability in temporal reasoning. in particular  new algorithms for efficiently managing large sets of relations in the point algebra are provided. our representation of time is based on timegraphs  graphs partitioned into a set of chains on which the search is supported by a rnetagraph data structure. the approach is an extension of the time representation proposed by schubert  taugher and miller in the context of story comprehension. the algorithms presented in this work concern the construction of a timegraph from a given set of relations and are implemented in a temporal reasoning system called tg-ii. experimental results show that our approach is very efficient  especially when the given relations admit representation as a collection of chains connected by relatively few cross-chain links. 
1 	introduction 
temporal reasoning is an important task in many areas of ai  including planning  natural language processing and expert systems. in several applications  temporal knowledge may be expressed in terms of collections of binary relations between intervals or points. temporal reasoning tasks include determining the consistency  satisfiability  of such collections  finding a consistent scenario  an interpretation for all the temporal variables involved  and deducing new relations from those that are known  or computing their closure . since allen's work on binary interval relations  allen  1   numerous researchers have addressed temporal reasoning in terms of constraint propagation techniques  ladkin and maddux  
1; vilain et al  1; van beek and cohen  1; dechter ei al  1 . the main problem with these techniques is their scalability. the problems of determining the satisfiability and of computing the closure of a set of assertions in allen's interval algebra  ia  are 
np-complete  vilain et al  1 . restricting ia to the 
   *the authors thank james allen for drawing their attention to the problem of scalability and for many fruitful discussions. the work of the first author was carried out in part in the context of the maia project at irst  with the support of oliviero stock  and of cnr pf sistemi informatici e calcolo parallelo. the second author was supported by rome lab contract f1-c-1. 
1 	knowledge representation 
lenhart schubert 
computer science department 
university of rochester 
rochester  ny 1  usa schubert cs.rochester.edu 
  pointizable  ia  p1a   i.e. to the set of relations in ia that can be translated into conjunctions of point relations between the endpoints of the intervals  makes these problems tractable. algorithms have been developed for pia running in 1 n1  space and 1 n1  time for determining consistency  van beek  1  and 1 n1  time for computing the closure  van beek and cohen  1   for n points . unfortunately these bounds are still unacceptable for domains in which a large data-base of relations needs to be managed  allen and schubert  1 . recently  other approaches based on graph algorithms have been proposed whose main characteristic is that of providing better performance in practice compared to the more traditional constraint-based approaches  miller and schubert  1; ghallab and mounir alaoui  1; dorn  1; golumbic and shamir  1 . 
　we are interested in the problem of efficiently managing large data sets of qualitative temporal relations in the point algebra  pa   vilain el al  1 . the 

 pia can be represented  ladkin and maddux  1 . our approach is based on ideas derived from a temporal reasoning system developed in the context of natural language comprehension  schubert et al  1; miller and schubert  1 . in this system temporal relations are represented through graphs  called timegraphs  whose vertices represent points and whose edges represent temporal relations. the main characteristics of timegraphs are their partitioning into a set of chains  which are sets of linearly ordered points  and their use of a rnetagraph structure to guide the search processes across the chains. one advantage of this approach is that the space complexity can be linear in the number of stipulated relations. the other advantage is the efficiency in terms of computation time in domains such as planning  allen et al  1  and story understanding in which the temporal data tend to fall naturally into chain-like aggregates  miller and schubert  1 . essentially this is because the  worlds  described in stories and plans con-
sist of individuals  or sets of related individuals  each moving through a course of actions and events  creating a trajectory in time. building timegraphs in practice takes much less time than computing closure  the minima/ network in constraint propagation terminology   and 
the amount of time spent in querying relations is nearly constant. 
in this paper we present new algorithms for building 
　r e m a r k . this theorem has two important consequences. one is that it enables us to write linear time procedures which obtain the strongest relation between two points entailed by an explicit graph  called the minimal labelby van beek and cohen  .secondly  it pro-
vides the basis for a new proof of their lemma 1 in  stating that any path-consistent nonmininmal network 
	gerevini and schubert 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


	gerevini and schubert 	1 

	1 	query algorithms 
given an explicit tl-graph  theorem 1 permits us to derive the strongest relation between two time points that is entailed by the graph  just by looking for all the paths connecting the two corresponding vertices. furthermore  in timegraphs there are four special cases in which those paths can be obtained in constant time. given two points p1 p1 the first case is the one where 
p1 and p1 are alternative names of the same point  see 
1 	knowledge representation 


	gerevini and schubert 	1 


1 	conclusions 
in this paper we addressed the problem of scalability in temporal reasoning  proposing a collection of new algorithms that are implemented in a temporal reasoning system called tg-ii. with respect to the constraint propagation approach  in our system both space and time complexity are reduced significantly for many practical applications. in fact  the space complexity depends on the size of the set of the stipulated relations and on a limited number of 』 relations  a subset of those forming 』diamonds   and not on the number of time points  as in the constraint propagation approach . instead of computing the closure of the set of relations  we build a time-
graph providing a collection of data structures that allow efficient deduction of relations at query time. experimental results show that building a timegraph is much faster than computing the minimal network and that  on average  querying relations is very efficient. the larger lesson here is that exploitation of the inherent temporal structure  in our case  the chain-like structure  of the information in certain important classes of domains can yield dramatic improvements in practical performance  vis a vts algorithms aimed at the worst case. 
   current and future work concerns the design of efficient algorithms for adding new relations to the timegraph dynamically and the integration of metric relations 1. we are also investigating an extension of the point algebra in order to include in a timegraph particular 1-point and 1-point relations which allow the representation of  disjoint  relations. unfortunately  it appears that to obtain any significant extensions  while retaining computational tractability  we need to sacrifice completeness  since we recently established that even consistency for graphs containing only relations of form  x   y  and  x strictly outside the interval formed by y  z   where y   z  is np-complete  gerevini and schubert  1 . thus we are exploring efficient  incomplete methods for such graphs. 
1
　　these were handled in the original implementation of timegraphs  schubert et al.  1; miller and schubert  1   but as noted 』 was not handled and also   and   relations 
entailed via metric relations were not extracted in a deductively complete way. 
1 	knowledge representation 
