 
we provide syntactic characterizations for a number of propositional model-based belief revision and update operators proposed in the literature  as well as algorithms based on these characterizations. 
1 	introduction 
in this paper  we provide syntactic characterizations and algorithms for a number of belief change operators proposed in the literature. we already characterized winslett's 'possible models approach'  pma  update operators in  del val  1b   where we explored in depth some of the operators in the pma family  provided algorithms to compute them and experimentally showed that they could be of practical value for  small  updates of quite large databases. in this paper  we show how other operators can be characterized in a very similar way  and show how to design algorithms for computing the result of applying these operators to disjunctive  negation and conjunctive normal form  dnf  nnf and cnf  respectively  databases  which return a database in the same format. 
   the interest of these syntactic characterizations goes beyond  we believe  the usefulness of the algorithms that can be immediately derived from them. all the operators we discuss are based on some notion of minimal change  and the similarities among the various characterizations we provide suggests that our techniques can be easily extended to other belief change operators based on this notion that might be proposed in the future. as well as to variants of the operators discussed here  e.g. prioritized versions  as discussed in  del val. 1b; del val  1  . because of their formal nature and relative simplicity  the characterizations could also prove useful for the design of improved algorithms  facilitate proofs of their correctness  help identify syntactic restrictions with a positive impact on complexity  and help define useful notions of  approximate belief change   see also  del val  1a  on this last point . 
   much ai work on belief change has taken as starting point the   a g m approach  to belief revision proposed by alchourron  gardenfors and makinson  alchourron et al.  1; gardenfors  1 . katsuno and mendelzon 
1 knowledge representation 
 1a  have recently suggested  however  that at least two different belief change operations should be distinguished  revision and update. loosely speaking  the former says that the beliefs may have been wrong and in need of revision  whereas the latter says that the beliefs were correct  but the world has in the meanwhile 
evolved and the beliefs must be updated. both types of belief change have been characterized by relation to some sets of properties or  postulates   the a g m and the km postulates  respectively . as shown by katsuno and mendelzon  1b; 1a   most agm-like revision operators are based on a  global  order of p