 
since konolige's translation of default logic into strongly grounded autoepistemic logic  several other variants of moore's original autoepistemic logic that embody default logic have been studied. all these logics differ significantly from moore's autoepistemic logic  stan dard ael  in that expansions are subject to additional groundedness-coriditioris. hence  the question naturally arises whether default logic can be translated into standard ael at all. we show  that a modular translation is not possible. however  we exhibit a a faithful polynomial-time translation from propositional default logic into standard ael which is nonmodular. it follows that the expressive power of standard ael is strictly greater than that of default logic. our translation uses as important intermediate step an embedding of marek's and truszczyriski's nonmonotonic logic n into standard ael. 
1 	introduction 
reiter's default  logic  and moore's autoepistemic logic  are among the most relevant formalizations of nonmonotonic logic. a first investigation into the relationship between default and autoepistemic logic was carried out by konohge . 
   konolige  encountered some groundedness-problems in moore's original version of autoepistemic logic  standard ael   which impeded a straightforward translation of default logic into standard ael. in particular  the autoepistemic theory a that would mast intuitively correspond to a given default theory t in many cases admits some additional stable expansions that do not correspond to any default extensions of t. these additional expansions are weakly grounded in the initial premises in the sense that they contain sentences p whose inclusion is merely based on the agent's belief in p. consequently  konolige has defined a more restrictive version of autoepistemic logic that we will here call strongly grounded autoepistemic logic  sgael . in sgiael  only spe 
   *this is a short version of the full paper  available from the author by email/ftp. 
1 	knowledge representation 
cific strongly grounded expansions are admissible. each strongly grounded expansion is a stable expansion in the sense of standard ael  but not vice-versa. konolige succeeds in showing that sgael exactly corresponds to default logic and exhibits bidirectional translations between these two formalisms  
   sgael differs significantly from standard ael. in particular  in sgael it may be the case that two logically equivalent but syntactically different sets of premises  have a different semantics  i.e.  different respective sets of sgael-expansions. further  all 
strongly grounded extensions of a theory  are stable-set minimal 	for  which is not the case in standard ael. 
　the second major approach of translating default logic into variants of ael has been taken by marek  schwarz  and truszczyriski  1; 1; 1  their approach is based 
on the concept of nonmonotonic modal logics as introduced by mcdermott . they show that default logic is faithfully embeddable in a wide range of different nonmonotonic modal logics. the simplest of these logics is the nonmonotonic counterpart of the pure logic of necessitation n the modal logic consisting of propositional cal-
culus augmented by the necessitation rule 	we will make intensive use of this logic in the present paper. note that 
just as sgael  nonmonotonic n is considered a stronger logic than standard ael  since each n-expansion of a set of premises  is also a standard ael-expansion of  but not vice-versa. 
   in  it is shown that standard ael corresponds to the nonmonotonic version of the modal logic k d 1 based on the modal axioms k  1  1  and d : unfortunately  the proposed translations schemes which allow the embedding of default logic into a large number of other nonmonotonic modal logics fail to apply to nonmonotonic k d 1   hence they are not applicable to standard ael. 
   other methods for translating default logic into formalisms close to ael have been developed by nierncla  1j  lin and shoham   siegel   and kaminski . each approach introduces a different version of ael which captures default logic. each of these logics is more restrictive than standard ael in the sense that  in general  a set  of given premises in these logics admits fewer expansions than in standard ael. 
　in summary  all previous methods translate default logic into formalisms that are different from standard 

a el- the reason seems to be that standard ael allows for expansions that are not sufficiently grounded in the premises. consequently  these approaches are based on more restrictive formalisms that admit less expansions 
　the question whether default logic can be translated into standard ael has remained open so far in the present paper  we solve this problem by giving both a negative and a positive1 answer. 
　first  in section 1   we show that there exists no modular translation between default logic and ael this 
means that after adding a new fact f to the formula set w of a default theory  d  w   a complete recomputation of the translation becomes necessary. an exception are prerequisite-free default theories  which are modularly translatable to standard ael. 
　in section 1  we show that it is possible to polynomially translate general default theories to standard ael if one gives up on modularity. section 1 concludes the paper with a philosophical interpretation of our translation. 
　in this paper we limit ourselves to consider propositional default logic and ael. note that the impossibi-
lity result for modular translations extends trivially from propositional default logic to the more general first order case. we assume that the reader is familiar with default logic and ael and do not redefine these concepts. 
1 	impossibility of modular translation 
let us first define the concept of faithful translation. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 	a 	faithful 	translation from 	default logic to ael is a mapping tr which transforms each de-
fault theory d into an autocpistcmic theory tr 'p  such that the objective parts of th  autocpistcmic expansions of tr v  arc identical with the default extensions of d 
   the concept of modular translation in the context of default logic was introduced by tomasz lmielinski in  tij. loosely speaking  a translation scheme is modular if ad ding new facts  not defaults  to a default theory is reflected by the translation through adding these new tacts to the result of the translation  lmielinski  considered translations between default logic and circumscription. we adapt his formal definition of modularity to the context where ael is the target system as follows 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 	a 	translation 	tr from 	default 	logic to 
ael 	is 	modular 	iff for each 	default set 	i  	and each 
   as lmielinski points out  modular translations are highly desirable both from the conceptual an d the com putational point of view. indeed  changes to a default theory  d  w   due to changes in the underlying  real world   will in most cases affect w but not d  as the de-
fault rules in d usually represent time-invariant  proper ties. with a modular translation  when w is changed  we do not have to recompute the result of the translation  but we may just add the new elements of w to the old result. 
   note that both konolige's translation from default  logic to sgael  and truszczyriskrs translation t from default logic to nonmonotonic n are modular. in the 
	gottlob 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


	gottlob 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 


