 
this paper is in two parts. in the first part  the outline of an emotion reasoning architecture  embodied in a simulation program called the affective reasoner  is presented  and a rudimentary personality representation for simulated agents is introduced. in the second part  an exercise is reviewed in which the affective reasoner is given the task of representing agents with different personality types in such a way as to allow the user to engage in a simulated interaction with them. representational issues pertaining to the unique appraisal and behavioral styles of the different personality types are addressed. conclusions are drawn about the usefulness of the affective reasoner in such a paradigm. 
1 introduction 
a central assumption of this paper is that simulations of social interactions between agents should incorporate models of individual affect and personality. most human interaction revolves around people's individual needs and goals. these lead to idiosyncratic  internally motivated behavior  and to emotional responses to situations that arise. if these aspects of mental life are not captured in simulations of interpersonal interactions  then simulated agents will be at best bland  lifeless  and unrealistic. this problem has been largely ignored in a i . 1 
   this paper describes a general emotion reasoning architecture  embodied in a program called the affective reasoner  which has been used as a basis for simulating such interpersonal interactions. also discussed are the results of using this architecture to solve the problem of 
   * preparation of this article was supported in part by andersen consulting through northwestern university's institute for the learning sciences. 
   *but see  bates et al.t 1  and  frijda and swagerman  1  for interesting approaches to related problems. 
cognitive modeling 
representing four distinct client types in an interactive simulation designed to teach selling. 
1 the affective reasoner 
the affective reasoner  hereafter ar  is a simulation platform that embraces a wide range of emotionreasoning issues. in the current research  various worlds are simulated  and populated with agents capable of participating in emotional episodes based on their concerns. agents are given unique dispositions modeled as a hierarchical set of appraisal frames. these frames represent their individual goals  principles  preferences  and moods. combinations of the appraisal frames are used to interpret situations that unfold in the simulation. the interpretations  in turn  are characterized in terms of the way they may or may not meet the eliciting conditions for emotions. in some cases emotions result  which then may be expressed  through a set of selectively activated behavioral channels  in ways that are observable by other agents  and as new simulation events which might perturb future situations. additionally  agents use a casebased heuristic classification system to reason about the emotions of other agents  and to build representations of those other agents' personalities that will help them to predict and explain future emotion episodes involving those observed agents. 
1 	t h e e m o t i o n eliciting c o n d i t i o n theory 
embodied in the ar is a set of rules for mapping from emotion eliciting conditions into emotion types  based on the work of ortony  clore  and collins  ortony et a/.  1 . their theory has been adapted for the simulation and extended from twenty-two to twenty-four categories of valenced reactions to situations  as outlined in figure 1. each of the twenty-four emotion types has a set of eliciting conditions. when the eliciting conditions are met  and various thresholds have been crossed  corresponding emotions result. a key element of the theory is that the way an emotion-eliciting situation maps into eliciting conditions depends on how an individual 
agent interprets that situation. for example  suppose that a captain heroically/foolishly goes down with his ship  while trying to salvage it. on the one hand  his fellow seamen might see this as praiseworthy  since he has upheld the principle of dedication to maritime service. on the other hand his wife might perceive it as blameworthy  since she sees him as having violated the principle of putting the needs of his family foremost. in both cases the act is the same; it is only the construal of the situation which is different. 
　emotion-eliciting conditions leading to emotions fall into four major categories: those rooted in the effect of events on the goals of an agent  those rooted in the standards and principles invoked by an act of some agent  those rooted in tastes and preferences with respect to objects  including other agents treated as objects   and lastly  selected combinations of these three categories. another way to view these categories is that they are rooted in an agent's assessment of the desirability of some event  the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of some act  the attractiveness of some object  or selected combinations of these assessments. 
　this theory was used as an organizing principle for the appraisal mechanisms of agents. added to the implementation of the theory are components for actually mapping from situations into the eliciting conditions  an expressive component for generating actions  and a component for reasoning about the emotions of other agents. in addition  extensions to permit the representation of mood and emotional intensity are under development  elliott and siegle  1 . in the sections that follow  overviews of the three main components of the ar are given. complexities such as those that arise in the implementation of expectations  multiple and conflicting emotions  relationships between agents  and so forth  are not discussed here  but are given a full treatment in  elliott  
1 .1 
1 	generating  emotions  
emotion-eliciting situations may arise in the course of the simulation. these situations may or may not be of concern to one or more agents. if they are  then varied interpretations of the situation may be made  depending upon the makeup of the relevant appraisal frames in each agent's interpretive personality component. these interpretations are reduced to emotion eliciting condition relations  eecrs   which in turn are used to generate instantiated emotion templates. figure 1 illustrates the different sources for these emotion templates. below are annotations for the steps illustrated in the figure: 
   1for example  mood representation alone affects both the appraisal mechanisms and the expressive components of simulated agents; it affects both the intensity and duration of subsequent affective states; and  it may require as many variables to adequately represent. elliott and siegle  1; frijda et al.} 1; gilboa et al.  ; clore  1 . 
group specification name and emotion type well-
being appraisal of a 
situation as 
an event joy: pleased about an event distress: displeased 
about an event fortunes 
of 
others presumed value of a a situation as an event affecting another happy-for: pleased about an event desirable for another 
gloating: pleased 
about an event undesirable for another resentment: displeased about an event desirable for another sorry-for: displeased about an event undesirable for another prospect based appraisal of a situation as a prospective 
event hope: pleased about a prospective desirable 
event 
fear: displeased about a 
prospective undesirable event confirmation appraisal of a 
situation as confirming or disconfirming an expectation satisfaction: pleased about 
a confirmed desirable event 
relief: pleased about a disconfirmed undesirable event 
fears-confirmed: displeased 
about a confirmed undesirable event 
disappointment: displeased 
about a disconfirmed desirable 
event attribution appraisal of a situation as 
an accountable act of some agent pride: approving of one's own act admiration: approving of 
another's act shame: disapproving of one's own act reproach: disapproving of another's act attraction appraisal of a 
situation as containing an attractive or unattractive 
object liking: finding an 
object appealing 
disliking: finding an 
object unappealing wellbeing / attribution compound emotions gratitude: admiration + joy anger: reproach + distress gratification: pride + joy remorse: shame + distress attraction / attribution compound emotion extensions love: admiration + 
liking 
hate: reproach + disliking figure 1: emotion types  table adapted from  o'rorke and ortony  1  and  elliott  1   
	elliott 	1 


cognitive modeling 

1. a situation is created when a simulation event is popped off the queue and the state of the simulated world is altered in a way that might be of concern to one or more agents. 
1  1  1  1. the construal frames representing the goals  principles  and preferences of some agent are matched against the eliciting situation frame. working memory is attached to slots in the construal frames and can alter the success of the match  as well as the resultant bindings that are generated. working memory is also used to implement that portion of mood which affects the appraisals of agents  elliott and siegle  1 . when a match succeeds for some construal frame  and its inherited properties  then the situation is considered to be relevant to the agent's concerns. since an agent may simultaneously have more than one different construal of the same situation  multiple interpretations of that situation may result. when all matches fail  the situation is not considered relevant to the agent's concerns and is ignored. 
1. if the situation is relevant to the concerns of the agent  bindings will have been created during the match process. in addition to those bindings created when slots in the situation frame are unified with patternmatching variables in slots of the construal frame  including inherited slots   additional bindings may come from attached procedures and from working memory. 
1. a basic emotion eliciting condition relation   e e c r   is created for each construal of the situation. 
1. 1. the status attribute of the e e c r may be changed to confirmed or disconfirmed if the situation is relevant to a stored expected outcome. 
1  1 . since there may be multiple construals there may be multiple eecrs. these are collected together before further processing. 
1  1. the event-based construals and attributionbased construals are split off into two  non-intersecting  sets. they are recombined  as applicable  to form the compound-emotions eecrs  subsuming the component eecrs. 1 when recombination is not applicable the original eecrs are passed along instead.  for example  there is no compound emotion that corresponds to the eliciting conditions arising when a blameworthy act helps the appraising agent to achieve a goal.  see figure 1. 
1. the domain-independent rules contain the backbone of the emotion eliciting condition theory. a l l emotions are generated using these rules. when a completed e e c r matches the left-hand side of one of these rules  an emotion instance is generated. 
1  1  1  1. those emotions not about the fortunes of others are the direct emotions. a subclass of these is the prospect-based emotions of hope and fear. these latter emotions stem from unconfirmed events and so generate expectation frames. these frames are stored  and may be used to interpret future situations. 
1  1  1 . for each other agent involved in the situation  the observing agent maintains representations of their concerns in concerns-of-others databases. these representations are used to interpret the situation in 
1
　　 allan collins points out that this subsumption is a matter of debate. collins  1  this implementation was arbitrarily chosen. 
ways presumed to be of concern to other agents  using steps similar to 1  1 and 1. in addition  satellite concerns-of-others databases  and presumed relationships of others  allow agents to interpret situations with respect to second and third party agents  elliott and ortony  1 . 
1   1  1. if the situation is determined  partly by assumption  to be of concern to the other agent  then the domain-dependent rules are used to determine the meaning for the target agent. is the agent pleased about the outcome for the other agent  relationships between the agents are stored in working memory and may be altered as the simulation progresses. 
1  1  1  1. each of the resulting fortunes-ofother eecrs results in an emotion using the domainindependent rules. 
1  1. the direct and fortunes-of-others emotions are all collected into a group and passed to the actiongeneration module. included in each emotion instance is a set of bindings from both the original match and the intermediate processing. 
1 	e x p r e s s i n g e m o t i o n s 
once emotional states have been generated for agents in response to eliciting situations  agents manifest these states according to their unique temperament traits. for example  when one agent is angry she might tend to shout  whereas another might smile and deny that anything is wrong. actions having nothing to do with emotional states are not covered by this mechanism. actions that do stem from emotional states  however  may be classified into one of the four high-level categories  expressive  information-processing  affect-oriented  emotion regulation and modulation   and plan-oriented.1 figure 1 gives a breakdown of the action response categories and their theoretical groupings for the emotion gloating. 
   the high-level categories are arranged  as far as possible  from the more spontaneous to the more planned  e.g  expressive actions tend to be less planned than those for emotion regulation and modulation . within these high-level 
categories the particular action response categories are similarly arranged  e.g.  somatic expressive responses tend to be more spontaneous than communicative-verbal expressive responses . lastly  within the action sets themselves the tokens  and mini-plans  are arranged from the least intense to the most intense  e.g.  smiling as a non goal-directed  expressive behavioral-toward-animate expression of gloating is less intense than is laughing . in all cases  these are at best partial orderings.1 
   once an action has been selected  it is instantiated using the set of variable bindings generated from the original match between the construal frame s  and the eliciting situation frame. for example  the variable  other-agent might be bound during the original match process  which could then 
1
　　 the high-level categories are not presently used for action generation. one possible use of the theory underlying these categories  however  might be as a basis for a functional representation of emotions as initiators of purposeful  motivated actions. in this regard  the information processing actions  for example  might be seen as representing aspects of an agent's attempts to  understand what is going on.  
1
　　 this is not an attempt to list action words that might be associated with a particular emotion. while this might be interesting with respect to understanding or generating text  it is not relevant to the goal of characterising psychological states. 
	elliott 	1 
be used to instantiate the action response template  laugh at  other-agent . 
   from figure 1 we can see that superior smile and throwing arms up in the air axe two ways of non-verbally communicat-
ing gloating  and that inducing embarrassment and inducing others to experience joy at the victim's expense are two ways 
of modulating the emotions of others. the expressive component is closely related to the domain in which the ar is being used  so only those expressive actions which do not further perturb the system  i.e.  are not expressed as relevant simulation events  are directly portable from one application to another. the largest implementation  taxi world  elliott  1   used about 1 different action paths. multiple actions may simultaneously express a single emotion instance.1 
1 	observing and modeling other agents 
the ar has mechanisms whereby simulated agents may reason about the emotions  and the personality makeup  of other agents. to do this  features derived from an observed eliciting situation  and the observed agent's response to the situation  are formatted as a for a slightly modified version of pro-
tos  bareiss  1   a heuristic classification system. once an observing agent has classified the case as belonging to an instance of one of the 1 emotion types  the agent stores this knowledge as part of its internal representation of the other agent. for example  one agent might observe another frown and speak rudely when kept waiting. from prior experience the observing agent knows that its counterpart often expresses anger by speaking rudely and frowning. using this knowledge to abduce anger it then looks for interpretations of the eliciting situation that would lead to anger. once a suitable explanation is found  such as the violation of a principle that one should not be kept waiting  and the thwarting of a time-dependent goal  it updates its internal representation of the other agent so that those concerns are included. 
   several levels of defaults are required to implement this mechanism. searches might have to be made through the representation of the current presumed concerns of the other agent  through defaults for the role of the agent  through defaults for agents that are  similar  in nature  and through the system catalog of  what might explain  the response. also necessary are satellite concerns-of-others knowledge bases used in conjunction with a representation of the presumed relationships-of-others since observed agents may have emotional responses based on the fortunes of third-party agents as well  elliott and ortony  1 . 
     other issues that have had to be addressed include determining the dimensions along which to tune a particular agent's temperament traits  e.g.  an agent who grows quiet when under the influence of negative emotions  or an agent who is task-oriented  and vocal  with respect to standardsbased emotions   the interplay and consistency of multiple manifestations of an emotion  e.g.  some agent might deny anger when she is angry  or might shout about it  but will not do both at the same time   dynamic changes in the agent's temperament  e.g.  tending toward low energy before meal times   and so forth. 
1
     it is worth mentioning that versions of the ar have been run which focus almost entirely on these aspects. in one  the system itself  as an automated agent  reasons about the emotions of the user within a constrained format. although this idea has not been developed  it suggests at least the possibility of a simple form of affective user modeling. 
cognitive modeling 
1 social simulation using the affective reasoner 
the ar has been used as a basis for constructing a social simulations. in this environment  users interact with one or more simulated agents via the computer keyboard and mouse. users get feedback through simulated facial expressions for the agents  and through formalized text describing what is taking place in the simulated world. in this scheme  users take part in the simulation by making decisions for one of the agents. the other agents respond to the situations that arise in the course of the simulation  including those that come about as a result of the user's input. simulated agents represent individuals with emotional depth and their own idiosyncratic ways of expressing their feelings. a user's task is to identify the concerns of the other agents so that he or she can interact with them in ways that successfully bring about some best-case outcome. 
   during the course of the simulation  agents are continually appraising situations that arise in their world. some of these are of concern to them  and lead to emotional states. once such a state has been established  expressions of it may be manifested within the simulation. for example  the displayed face of the agent might change  working memory representing the tolerance level of the agent for further similar situations might change  the level of attentional focus for the agent might change  or the agent might be described  in text  as laughing or turning red. 
   rudimentary personality types are configured before the simulation is run  either by default  or through user-selection of attributes. in this paper  four statically pre-determined personalities will be discussed. in general  however  the appraisal frames and expression paths represented in the knowledge base may be combined as desired  creating a wide variety of personalities. the role of an agent in the simulation determines which situations that agent will be involved in  and thus which situations might be subject to interpretation. for example  supposing that we are simulating a sales situation  a secretary agent might not be concerned with situations aris-
ing during the close  but might be concerned with situations arising during the initial greeting phase of the salesperson's visit. 
   as in real social situations  the state of an agent changes over time. for example  a client might gradually become bored  especially attentive  warm  or hostile. users must respond in quasi-real time to the situations that arise. if a user does nothing  or responds too slowly  then agents might take the initiative  because their concerns are not being addressed. 
1 the problem 
1 . 1 	p r o b l e m s u m m a r y 
for the work reported in this paper  the attempt was made to model a set of four client types identified as part of a training program designed to teach novice account executives how to sell telephone-book advertising  cf.  kass et a/.  1  . these four types  here referred to as dominant  political  steady  and wary  were used to characterize the typical sorts of clients one might expect to encounter in the field. the definitions were both practical and operational: they were described in a manner congenial to use in training systems  rather than as set of formal psychological dimensions  and they were partly defined by the the way in which such client types might be expected to respond to particular actions of a salesperson. 
   descriptions were given in two ways. first  the client types were partially described by a set of rules prescribing what the salesperson should and should not do in sales situations with different kinds of clients. one rule  for example  says that if one  takes charge  with a dominant client  then one should expect to succeed only in making the client angry. approximately 1 such rules were given for each client type. second  the personality types were described in terms of their observable behavioral styles  e.g.  laconic or talkative  approximately 1 such style characteristics were given for each client type. 
   the given task was not to build a full sales-training system  but rather to explore the representational power of the theory-based architecture in a practical domain. for this reason no attempt was made to model those processes that had nothing to do with either personality or the generation or expression of affective states. additionally  the exercise was further constrained by using only a very simple conceptualization of negotiation. 
1 . 1 	r e p r e s e n t i n g s i t u a t i o n s a n d a g e n t s 
for this exercise  a sales episode was broken down into seven steps:  1  the greeting   1  the fact-gathering sessions   1  the making of the proposal   1  support for the client's decision   1  the client's agreement or disagreement   1  the negotiation process  and  1  the parting. each of these steps was represented as one or more simulation events. step  1  had four different instantiations depending on whether or not the client agreed with the proposal  and on whether the salesperson wished to modify the client's stance. in some instances it caused a loop back to step  1 . 
   the four client types represented were:  1  dom  a dominant personality who prefers logical  rapid decisions   1  pol  a political personality who likes to socialize and is very status conscious   1  pas  a passive personality who does not express objections  but who might act on them  and  1  war  a wary personality who often tends to be anxious about anything unfamiliar. 
   to illustrate these different client types  let us consider how each of the them might be expected to appraise the salesperson's style at the opening of the interview. d o i n holds a principle that the salesperson should be brief  specific and to the point. rambling will waste her time  violating that principle and interfering with her goals  thus  ultimately  incurring anger. p o l has a preference for social niceties. he has a goal of denning roles in the social structure. to rush immediately into the business at hand thwarts this goal and will not please him. pas is not comfortable with rushing into business either  but  unlike pol  he is primarily seeking to establish that the salesman has a genuine interest in his needs and preferences. w a r   like dom  prefers getting right to business. unlike d o m   however  she wants all the steps laid out methodically. in war's case  the introduction is especially important in setting the tone for the session. war tends to imagine the negative consequences of suggested courses of action  and it is important that the opening of the interview set her at ease. 
   the simulated agents also tend to express their emotions differently. d o m   for example  had activated action paths for evaluative 1el}-directed attributions tending towards superiority  competence  intelligence  an obsessive attentional focus on goals  and so forth. by contrast  war had paths emphasizing evaluative self-directed attributions tending toward inferiority and powerlessness  tendencies to reappraise a situation m a negative light  and so on. 
1 . 1 . 1 	u s e r c h o i c e s 
   the user  taking the role of the salesperson  affects the course of the simulation. 	at each stage during the simulated interview the user has menu choices for what to do next. once the user selects an option  a frame representing the features of the user's choice is posted to the simulation queue and executed. these and other simulation events give rise to situations to which the simulated agents respond in accordance with their concerns. 
   new situations  and the agents' responses to them  arise as a result of the user's choices  e.g.  attempting to  close  too soon might lead to anger on the part of dom  but anxiety on the part of war   in response to actions on the part of the simulated agents  e.g.  when d o m is angry she might terminate the interview   or by default  e.g.  if the user does nothing pas grows uncomfortable  and dom gets angry . 
   in addition to the user choices that arise at the different stages in the course of the interview  there are also additional user choices representing the overall style of the salesperson. for example  the user might set pacing  moderate  slow-tutorial  fast-hyped   tone  friendly  cool   attitude  deferential  take-charge   style  brief-summary  anecdotal  extremely-detailed   and so forth  which also can affect the course of the interview. the style of the salesperson is dynamically configurable as the simulation progresses. 
1 . 1 	c o n c l u s i o n s 
on the overall representational task there were mixed results. 
the approach was successful in giving agents the ability to appraise situations so that their concerns led to emotions consistent with their intended personalities. eighty-six rules specifying  what to do  and  what not to do  were successfully represented within the simulation. the rules could all be directly related  for each of the client types  to appraisals of situations that arose in the course of the simulation. this was the most effective component in the a r   with respect to the constrained representational task. 
   to account for the content of the 1 sales domain rules  each was first analyzed with respect to the way in which it uniquely characterized the associated personality type. for each rule  typical emotions such as anger  joy  fear  and so forth  could be inferred from the clients' stated or implied reactions to the salesperson's initiatives. working back from these emotions  it was possible to determine high-level frames for goals  principles  and preferences which would lead to the associated emotion types. from there  lower-level appraisal frames suitable for interpreting the actual emotion-eliciting situations within the simulation could be identified. these were then used as the basis for building the interpretive personality for that particular client type. for example  from the rule that says never talk down to pol  the political client type  we might infer that pol could grow angry when treated this way. within the constraints of the theory  this would be true if his personal goals involved maintaining a certain status within interpersonal relationships  and his principles said that salespeople should be aware of this. 
   by contrast  there was less success in representing the given behavioral styles of the client types within the a r . the manifestations of these styles fell into three groups. the first group contained those characteristics that suggested certain actions. for example  harsh might suggest that  when angry  a client might be blunt  or shout. the second group contained those behavioral styles directly related to appraisals  such as judgmental  perfectionist  and excitable. the third group contained those behavioral styles that were ubiquitous in the client types' respective dispositional manners. for example  clients were described as dependable and persistent. 

ally comprehensible by people without further specification. however  it seems likely that the ar's representation of this trait as a tendency toward other-directed emotion modulation falls short of the mark. one might argue that manipulative people behave as they do quite independently of their emotions. 
   the second group of behavioral styles was readily represented as part of the interpretive personalities of the agents. for example  for an agent to be judgmental simply meant that either the thresholds for invoking standards leading to negative emotions were lowered  or that more appraisal frames leading to those emotions were in place. 
   the manifestations of behavioral style in the third group were not amenable to representation in this architecture. for example  being slow to make decisions probably does not routinely have an affective origin. the best the ar could do was to represent those emotional reactions an agent might have  for example  when under pressure to make a decision quickly. 
   as illustrated above  because the ar's expressive component is designed strictly as a set of categorical responses to simulated emotions  it is not well suited for representing dispositional behaviors rooted in more cognitive motivations. a better solution would have to additionally integrate some representation of individuals' long term planning and survival strategies. 
   another problem was in making the personality types accessible to the casual user. the intuitive grouping of appraisal frames into sets that form identifiable components of complete interpretive personality types is a hard problem on which little progress was made. standard personality distinctions from personality theory in psychology  e.g.   digman  1   were felt to be unhelpful because the constructs they employ are not likely to be generally accessible to most users. in addition  attempting to use them to identify the types of rudimentary personalities represented in the ar seems pointless because there is so much about a realistic characterization of personality for which no attempt at modeling was made. it would be difficult  for example  to adequately characterize the relationship between sociability  or extraversion  and the interpretation of a salesman's greeting. 
   from this modest exercise the following conclusions may be drawn:  1  the affective reasoner is well suited for representing the interpretive disposition of simulated agents in social simulations   1  it is capable of representing some aspects of the intended behavioral styles of such agents   1  it is awkward at best  in its current form  for representing the numerous commonly understood behavioral style characteristics which have little to do with emotional states  and  1  it is capable of creating many internally consistent rudimentary personality types  but that subcomponents of these types are difficult to characterize in a way meaningful to users. 
acknowledgments 
   i would like to thank greg siegle  and robin burke for their editorial comments on this paper. i would especially like to thank andrew ortony for not only his editorial comments  but also for his support and advice throughout the development of this research project. 
