 
the paper attempts to establish a basis upon which it could plausibly be said that knowledge level models typically used in the development of at systems such as expert systems could have psychological import. various modelling methodologies are set out  and it is shown that these methodologies cannot supply psychological explanations of expertise on the basis of ordinary realist assumptions about the mind  since the knowledge level primitives cannot supply the right sort of links between tasks and ai methods. in contrast  an anti-realist  interpretative view of mind is set out  and it is shown how ai modelling methodologies could  in that context  be of psychological value. finally  a short example gives some concrete expression to these ideas. 
1 introduction 
a significant area of research in ai is the field of model-based approaches to knowledge engineering  the field of developing knowledge-based systems which  in some sense  depict the target domain of the system. influential examples of this sort of approach are the kads methodology  wielinga et al.  1   the generic task methodology  chandrasekaran  1   the problemsolving method approach  puerta et al.  1   and the components of expertise approach  steels  1 . these approaches have a number of core assumptions in common. for example: 
1. knowledge acquisition is not a process of transferring knowledge from the expert to the machine. the task to be performed should  instead  be modelled at the knowledge level. 
1. where possible  generic modelling structures should be available  to facilitate reuse of  parts of  models. 
   the question which we wish to address in this paper is: what is the relationship between the modelling apparatus provided by approaches such as these  and a vocabulary suitable for psychological explanation of the 
expertise  can it be the case that models developed under the rubric of one of these approaches can play the dual role of the chief determinant of an implementation combined with a psychologically plausible description of expertise  
   the conceptual separation of the model and the implementation means that there is  in all these approaches  a distinction to be made between the description of the task to be solved and the methods used to carry out that task. what we wish to do in this paper is to examine the status of the knowledge level entities that are postulated by the various approaches  in contrast to the lower  implementational apparatus that they provide  and try to sketch the requirements which have to hold if these modelling views are correctly to be seen as descriptions of the experts' problem-solving. 
   if we define a task roughly as a classification of a problem  the difficulty arises that a rich task vocabulary has grown up over the years  generally in non-knowledge engineering contexts. these classifications are generally vague or underspecified  which leads to a trade-off between ease of classification of a problem  and the classification of a problem's being of some help with the implementation of a system to solve that problem. merely classifying a problem as an instance of a certain task does not  all things being equal  tell you how actually to solve that problem. 
   we might- say at the outset that we are taking rather a non-standard line. standard claims for the psychological importance of the knowledge level entities postulated by kbs development methodologies generally argue in terms of 'cognitive emulation' a straight 1 mapping between expert system features and findings in cognitive research  e.g.  slatter  1  p.1  . in this paper  we will not attempt to defend such a close association between the two fields; we shall explore some conditions that make .some sort of association possible  and plausible . our claim is that  in knowledge level modelling methodology development  it need not be the case that psychological explanatory power is lost when 'psychological' considerations are suppressed in favour of knowledge engineering considerations. 
1 ai methods and their constraints 
the problem-solving method community tends to address this problem by producing a theory of tasks  the purpose of which is to constrain the number of methods available for the performance of the tasks under scrutiny. hence  conceptualizing a problem as open to solution by performing such and such a task will radically reduce the search space among possible methods. 
   so  for example  the early work of chandrasekaran on generic tasks  chandrasekaran  1  associated control structures and forms of knowledge with each task  defined with an input/output specification  - perhaps the strongest connection between the task and the method. this approach had a number of nice properties. the generic task methodology as originally set out by chandrasekaran had the effect of giving you the knowledge representation and control for free. the knowledge and its use  both in terms of its computational manipulation  and its wider function - the input/output relation that in part determined the content of the generic task  were both bundled together into the generic task. once each generic task was allied to a special purpose knowledge representation language  the result was  in effect  a special purpose shell. the generic tasks thus defined were nicely reusable  could be used to provide explanations  and were of great utility for system development. 
   on the other hand  the early work in kads made a conceptual separation of knowledge and implementation  wielinga et al  1 . however  the problem of assigning methods to tasks was made simpler by the provision of a library of interpretation models  a skeletal model at a high level of abstraction  which could  suitably instantiated  be used as a governing model over a number of domains. to be sure  these interpretation models were seen as tools which could be used to develop the conceptual models which are the products of the anal ysis phase of kads; nevertheless  the existence of a library  suitably taxonomized  had the agreeable effect of cutting down the knowledge engineer's options  which would then ameliorate the transition from conceptual model to implementation simply by its regimentation of the conceptual models that got produced. the amelioration was further enhanced by the insistence that the conceptual model  or at least the model of expertise  was a functional specification of the problem-solving part of the target system -- i.e. the model of expertise was not explicitly a cognitive model of the expert  but was biased towards the intended function of the target- system. hence the conceptual separation of the knowledge and the system design was never as great as it might have been. in this way  kads was able to go some way towards tackling what chandrasekaran calls the interaction problem  the problem that the representation of knowledge should be related to its use. 
   nevertheless  that separation was there chandrasekaran's early version of generic tasks and the kads methodology occupy opposite ends of a spectrum. the conceptual duality characteristic of kads has been seen as having advantages and disadvantages. the chief advantage was the freedom the knowledge engineer was given to model the expertise; the disadvantage was the dual -- since the conceptual models were not executable  necessarily   implementation remained an extra step. however  the preferred methodological point of view of the kads project was that the design step was structure preserving. this methodological stipulation was re-
garded as unnecessarily strict in some quarters  where the systems designer was to have maximal leeway to mangle the conceptual model in the cause of efficient implementation   but had four clear advantages. firstly  the design step was rendered easier than  for example  starting from scratch. secondly  the provision of knowledge level explanations by the system would be thus facilitated. thirdly  the conceptual model could be used to guide the use and deployment of knowledge acquisition tools  this possibility was explored to a greater depth in the acknowledge project  shadbolt and wielinga  1; van heijst et a/.  1; o'hara  1  . and fourthly  the conceptual model could be used as a debugging aid - problems could be traced back to inconsistencies in the conceptual model. hence even the kads project  at least on its preferred methodology  induced a fairly strong connection between the knowledge level description of the expertise  and the structure of the developed system. 
   a similar story could be told for the other approaches in this field. if the early generic tasks of chandrasekaran could be seen as 'black boxes'  steels' approach  steels  1  is to construct what he calls 'white boxes'. here  applications are described at the knowledge level  but the knowledge level components have associated with them execution level objects. hence  when the application is being developed  the application need only be specified at the knowledge level  while these decisions will have repercussions at the lower levels via an interactive graphical workbench. 
   the latest view from ohio on generic tasks sees them rather more as loose assemblages of methods  rather than as method-specifying. task structure analysis  chandrasekaran  1  redraws generic tasks as useful combinations of tasks  methods  and  recursively  subtasks. tasks are seen as families of instances of a type of problem; methods are more or less abstract specifications of classes of objects and operators which can solve problems. on the basis of experience and research  methods can be associated with tasks. so  for example  deciding to perform a task with a particular method will to an extent at least dictate the subtask structure subtasks may be required to isolate the objects and operators that would be appropriate in the particular context. 
   as a final example  the problem-solving method view at the knowledge systems laboratory at stanford developed the following hierarchy of concepts. at the top there is the task; this is an activity in the real world   puerta et al.  1  gives the examples of word processing and job scheduling . then there is the method  which is a 'procedure that implements an abstract model of problem solving and that is applicable to a class of tasks'. below that is the subtask  identical to a task except in its occurrence in task decompositions  and finally there is the mechanism  which is a method which does not decompose a task into subtasks  i.e. it is at the bottom of the tree . the criterion by which a method becomes a mechanism is a purely instrumental one: 'if decomposing a method into subtasks does not provide corresponding mechanisms for each subtask that can be 
o'hara and shadbolt 
easily reused  the method is not decomposed and it becomes a mechanism'. it is defined by three components: an input/output declaration; a collection of data structures; and a control-flow configuration  there is also an associated interface specification  but that is not integral to the mechanism . hence mechanisms are not unlike the early version of generic tasks. configuring methods to solve tasks  at least as performed by protege-ii  is done using a library of mechanisms. this library contains mechanisms as basic elements  but indexes these mechanisms on the basis of their three components using tasks  domain ontologies and task models. hence the library can provide indexing facilities enabling the retrieval of a group of candidate mechanisms for a particular task  while simultaneously helping to provide criteria for the selection of a particular mechanism from the suite available. 
1 knowledge level modelling 
primitives and their constraints 
we can see a common strand in all these approaches. 
the knowledge engineer is to be given the option at least of choosing some knowledge level primitive from a library  which in turn will have important effects upon the implementational level. hence the implementational detail can be left to one side until the knowledge analysis is done  and when the analysis is done  the result will be a partial specification of the nuts and bolts  there will always be input to technical design from areas other than the knowledge level  of course; architectural issues  managerial issues and various other non-functional issues will all impinge on the technical design  so the specification will only be partial . steels for one is prepared to claim that even non-programmers will be able to put together some systems  steels  1 . 
   now we can begin to address the question with which we began: how good a cognitive model of the expert do we get when we put together this sort of knowledge level model for the purposes of kbs development  are the modelling primitives set out by these modelling approaches general primitives for cognitive description  or are they idiosyncratic to each approach  methods available in the approach are bound to affect choices to be made at the knowledge level. if some class of algorithms is unavailable to you at the lower level in some methodology  you are hardly likely to include a knowledge level specification of that class further up. hence  we can agree that the ability to build a system is greatly enhanced by a knowledge level model of the appropriate type  but this leaves the question as to the psychological significance of these models open. 
   certainly  some of the approaches here do make strong claims for their psychological import. chandrasekaran wishes to ground the generic tasks in fundamental categories.  puerta et al.  1  notes that there is a lot of common ground between these methods  and is 'encouraged' by that fact: why be encouraged unless there is a genuine convergence on something substantial  the convergence is summed up by  wielinga et a/.  1 : 
although terminology is different  a com-
mon view appears to emerge based on the idea that different types of knowledge constitute the knowledge level and that these different types of knowledge play different roles in the reasoning process and have inherently different structuring principles. 
   the idea seems increasingly that there is a knowledge level reality which is constituted by primitives such as are developed in the approaches under discussion. 
   is this idea sustainable  the problem in sustaining the idea stems from the requirement that the knowledge level models should constrain the lower level  implementational  possibilities it is not clear whether the locus of the posited knowledge level reality is in knowledge engineering practice or in the competence of experts. let us define some sort of generic vocabulary. let us call a task a real world conceptualization of a problem - tasks might include design or classification  construed independently of any of the modelling methodologies of the type we have discussed above. the idea is that this notion captures the requirements of the prior notion of task  independent of ai methodologies. let us call a method a conceptualization of a problem that renders its solution practical  e.g. some sort of implementation module . finally  let us call a knowledge level primitive  klp  a technical term of an approach that attempts both to conceptualize a problem in the real world  and to constrain the methods appropriate for that problem. our question is: can klps give an account of tasks while simultaneously satisfying the requirement that they enable a suite of methods to be assembled to solve problems1 
now we see the difficulty we have in maintaining that 
klps can attach themselves firmly both to tasks and methods. a task can be done in an unlimited number of ways; all a task is is a means of referring to a problem in a general way. typically  criteria for calling a problem an example of one task rather than another are various  and will include social factors  contextual factors  historical factors  how similar problems have been solved before   and so on  as well as general input/output constraints. when the question arises as to how to solve a problem computationally  the problem will still have to be configured into a structure of klps. this configuration may or may not depend on the problem's conceptualization in terms of the task vocabulary. suppose the configuration does not depend on the terms of the task vocabulary. then it is hard to see that klps have anything to say about tasks. 
   but equally it is difficult to see how the configuration can depend on the terms of the task vocabulary. the klps abstract away from a large number of the issues relevant to task identification  in order to be able to concentrate their fire on constraining the available methods clancey has been alive to this point for some time  clancey  1  p.1 . the results of the sisyphus problem  and the different configurations thereof  make interesting reading  gaines  1 . the room allocation task  the benchmark of the sisyphus experiments  can quite easily be read as the problem of applying a classify klp to classify workers by the rooms they ought to have  or of applying an assembly klp to assemble a series of consistent hypotheses about where workers ought to go  for example. doubtless there are many more ways of conceptualizing the original problem. the significance of this point should not be underestimated - there is a tenuous connection only between tasks and klps. 
   on the other hand  in the downward direction  the connection between klps and methods is a very strong one indeed. this is how a klp-approach can constrain methods. a k l p will determine a class of methods that can be used - possibly a singleton class  but nevertheless a small class. the result of this is that klps can be indexed by the methods they legitimize - the content of the klp  what the klp will do  will depend crucially on the methods underlying it. it is not clear how any other consideration can possibly have a bearing on the content of the klp. suppose  for example  the klp was partially indexed by the tasks it was used to solve. then  since a task can be solved by a number of methods  and a method can be used in the solution of a number of tasks  if the past experience of the use of a particular klp in the context of a particular problem conceptualization was to count for too much  the result may well be that the klp wouldn't get used in different tasks where it might be efficacious  none of this is intended to entail that one should not take note of where and how a klp has been successfully used  and therefore not learn from that experience . 
   kads  perhaps  might be excepted from a number of these points  since it is the methodology which most enables the knowledge engineer to pursue an attempt to describe and formalize a real-world task without being 'shackled1 by the klp/method identification. however  although it does allow a conceptual model to be constructed without recourse to interpretation models  which are but 'tools'   the kads methodology shorn of interpretation models is the kads methodology without its most distinctive aspect  not forgetting the link between interpretation models and the interaction problem  as discussed above . 
   in short: klps can be defined by the methods that they employ. tasks cannot. 
1 an alternative view of tasks and methods 
we have attempted to establish that someone who wishes to make strong psychological claims for the knowledge level models she has developed in the course other kbs development will be impaled on the horns of a dilemma. the dilemma for her is this: how strong a connection should there be between the psychological primitives being used and the klps of her preferred problem-solving approach  the first horn of the dilemma is that she claims that klps are psychological primitives  and  say  generic tasks or interpretation models are  inter aha  actual 'descriptions' of psychological structures employed by and instantiated in the expert in problem-solving. the claim here is that we actually solve problems in this way. but we don't  for example  generally solve a design problem using exactly those methods chandrasekaran sets out in his analysis of the generic task design  chandrasekaran  1  - and even if we did  there would still be the possibility of a radically new way of designing being used in the future that would not be entailed by the generic task theory of design. the second horn of the dilemma is that klps are not psychological primitives. so  say  the generic task design just cuts across the explananda of psychology - this is suggested by the possibilities of reconfiguring problems in terms of different combinations of klps. hence the explanandum - real world design is just in a different category from the loose collection of methods grouped together under the rubric of the generic task of the same name. so on the first horn of the dilemma  the klp is taken as a potential  and inadequate  definition of the task; in the second case  the klp is taken as a model of a pre-existing structure  and its inevitable implementational bias renders it incapable of fulfilling that function. 
   how can this dilemma be avoided  the key is to note that the dilemma is premissed on the assumption that the explananda of psychology beliefs  desires  complexes are determinate  genuine  real and independent of outside interpretation. when a psychological theory is produced  the truth or falsity of the theory can be 'read off' the psychological structures that are empirically determinably there. this is not to say that there might not be problems in interpreting the empirical data of reaction times  etc.; but does mean that these problems are in principle at least surmountable. 
   this psychological realism allows only two possible views of ai. the first view is that al has no interesting psychological value al may receive input from psychology  but will provide no output into psychology. if an ai system works it works. if it doesn't it doesn't  and there's an end on't  as dr johnson would say. this is a highly instrumental view that makes no psychological claims at all. however  this view is a very unambitious view we might say that it is unfortunate to do all this modelling of experts without getting any feedback into psychology at all. we avoid the dilemma sketched above  but at the cost of surrendering any independent interest for our expert models. this is the official kads line  wielinga et al.  1  p.ll   but note the tension with the quote in section 1. 
   the second view is a cognitive realism that might claim that experts really do manipulate such things as knowledge sources and metaclasses  for example. chandrasekaran makes analogous claims as hypotheses  chandrasekaran  1  p.1   but we have attempted to establish that these claims are implausible. the cognitive realist is impaled on our dilemma. 
   the alternative suggestion we wish to make for avoiding the above dilemma is to endorse a cognitive antircahsm. under this view  the explananda of psychology 
are no more nor less than by-products of the process of interpretation that must take place in order for any social intercourse to flourish  and therefore are functions partly of the interpreters  or the environment  of the ob-
ject system. 
   in the current context  we wish to claim that the realist has the wrong picture. the realist postulates three spaces: a task space  a klp space and a method space 
o'hara and shadbolt 

figure 1: the realist view of tasks  klps and methods 
 fig.1   where a space is to be understood as objectively organized and indexed. klps work by being determinate filters on the method space. they then have psychological significance if tasks are determinate filters on the klp space. our contention is that tasks are absolutely not determinate filters on the klp space. if a task space is to be posited  the result will be the sort  of cat's cradle envisaged in fig.1. 
   the anti-realist solution to the problem is to maintain that the task space  in this objective sense  is illusory. there are too many influences on the shape of a task for it to remain a coherent entity in all circumstances; there is no simple  determinate structure for a task in wittgenstein's terminology  the notion of'task' is a family resemblance concept  wittgenstein  1   i.e. every example of a particular task bears a strong connection to some other example of that task  but there is riotnecessarily any condition which will determine the extension of the terms. certainly one could concoct some huge disjunction to cover all the past examples  but even that will not necessarily determine the status of any future examples. nevertheless - and we emphasise this - despite the lack of necessary and sufficient conditions here  there is stability and unity here  and that stability and unity is of vital importance when it comes to the reliability of knowledge engineering practice. 
   so the psychological significance of a klp comes about as follows. if psychological phenomena are socially constructed and functions of context  then one has to take notice of the context in which cognitive models of the sort in question arise. specifically  the reason that one wants a model of the expert in ai is that one wants to build something that will produce the same behaviour  there may be more constraints than this  of course; one may want something that will  say  manipulate the same information in producing that behaviour . in this context  it just is the case that no psychological explanation could provide any more germane information. the real-

figure 1: the danger of assuming the existence of a task space 
ist can agree with that  of course. we  however  wish to maintain that  further  there is no psychological explanation whose context of evaluation is distinguished or privileged  and therefore no psychological explanation that can be seen as being the 'correct/ explanation. 
   this anti-realist view leaves open the possibility of a sliding scale of psychological significance. at one end  there is the significance a model would have if it allowed a simulation of the target expertise to be built. at the other  there is the significance a model would have if it turned out to be impossible to built such a simulation without using that model. in the middle  there are various degrees of significance  which might depend  for example  on whether the machine simulation reproduced various empirical conditions  e.g. reaction times  patterns of error  sufficiently well. all these notions define different senses of 'psychological significance1; any one might be appropriate for various purposes. 
1 example: abstraction 
we can illustrate the import of these ideas by considering a component of a well known klp  that of heuristic classification  first characterised in  clancey  1   where clancey was careful to relate components of the model to supposed psychological processes and categories of problem solving. the klp component of the heuristic classification model which we shall consider is abstraction1. this is the process by which observations or data are transformed into abstract observations or findings. the process of trcinsformation can be effected by a number of means. one of these is the process of qualitative abstraction. a famous example is shown below - here we move from a quantitative observation to a qualitative finding. 
¡¡if white blood cell count   1 then low white blood cell count 'note that a klp can be composed of other klps. 
   we may ask the question: what has the abstraction step in such models to do with any psychological explanation of problem solving  it is our contention that we can find a variety of interpretative stances that make sense of this abstraction  all of which can lay claim to psychological import. 
   suppose that a rule such as that shown above was the result of a knowledge engineer's analysis of a behavioural protocol. such a knowledge level description arises as a result of third person interpretation of a problem solving trace. this is a classic form of psychological data - although not without methodological concerns  the status of such traces and their interpretation has a long and respected history in psychology  ericsson and simon  1 . 
   however  the same rule might have been derived from a self report session with an expert. here the expert explicitly describes the rule. of course  first person reports are also beset with methodological problems. nevertheless they have often been taken as legitimate accounts of psychological processes. 
   a third way in which the rule might have arisen could have been via one of the contrived methods of knowledge acquisition  shadbolt and burton  1 . for example  the repertory grid technique  shaw and gaines  1  is a method in which an expert  makes rating and ranking judgements. these judgements are then used as a basis for determining implicit structure. a rule such as that of abstraction could be induced through the process of repeated ranking of elements  perhaps individual case histories  along dimensions which are elicited from the expert. one might say in this case that the knowledge of the rule is tacit. nevertheless it has realisation just in so far as the expert makes consistent categorisations which always place patients with a white blood cell count within a certain range labelled as  low . 
   finally we might consider the case in which we construct a neural network account. this might succeed  given a set of training instances  in determining various output classes one of which might  be  low white blood cell count'  in this case we might claim that we have an account which is defined only in terms of a mechanism  perhaps neurologically plausible  that delivers the  right  response. again such accounts have been offered as having a psychological status. 
   these examples illustrate how the same structure can serve as a locus for a variety of accounts which can all deliver domain level content. at the same time these accounts all have some psychological pedigree -- they could serve as the ingredients of various types of psychological explanation. the interpretative stance with respect to these matters is pervasive. it is important to disentangle these various threads in the growing discussion surrounding the accounts of problem solving methods in kbs and al work1. 
