 
our aim is to clarify which nonmonotonic consequence relation  given by a set 
of  supernormal  defaults  i.e. defaults of the form 
there are in fact a number of proposals for 
 e.g. the skeptical and the credulous semantics . in this paper we look at the space of all possible default semantics and try to characterize the known ones by their properties  especially the valid deduction rules. 
for instance  it seems reasonable to require that any useful semantics should coincide with the original cwa if this is consistent. we might also want to allow proofs by case analysis. then we get the skeptical semantics  assuming some other very natural deduction rules . 
our results are in fact completeness proofs for  natural deduction systems  based on different default semantics. 
1 introduction 
in this paper  we consider  supernormal   brewka  1l  defaults  i.e. defaults of the form  true : 
             these are r k i t e r ' s cwa-defaults which formalize the common implicit assumption of negations. but we allow any quantifier-free formula for  e.g. 

the intuitive semantics is that this rule should be assumed for as many x as possible. although these defaults are very simple compared to the full default logic  reiter  1   surprisingly many examples can be formalized with them. this restriction was suggested and investigated in  poole  1; brass and lipeck  1  brewka  1; delgrande and jackson  1; dix  1 . the advantages are that the definitions are much simpler  certain abnormalities can be avoided  and there 
   *this work was partially supported by the cec under the esprit working group 1  1s-core  information systems - correctness and reusability   coordinated by 
amilcar sernadas. are reasonably efficient theorem provers  przymusinski  1; ginsberg  1; baker and ginsberg  1; brass  1a; brass and lipeck  1 . 
¡¡of course  it is also possible to specify axioms ¦Õ  i.e. formulae which have to be fully satisfied  and usually there are many more axioms than defaults . in the flying ability example  the following axioms could be used: 
one can answer 
queries 
  which birds can fly   . now a correct answer is a substitution  for the variables of the query  e.g. 
such that the corresponding instance of the query follows from the axioms and the defaults  i.e. 
of course  the consequence relation respecting the defaults  still has to be defined. 
   in the above example  it seems clear that any reasonable semantics should allow to conclude flies tweeiy  and not flies polly . but as soon as we have conflicts between defaults  e.g. because of disjunctive or incomplete information  there are different solutions. probably everybody knows the credulous and the skeptical semantics  but there are other possible definitions of   see section 1 . and  of course  we have to ask whether there are reasonable semantics which we do not know yet. 
¡¡therefore we try to approach this problem in a more abstract way  and look at the space of all possible default semantics. we can classify them by means of the valid deduction rules  and other properties  such as the preservation of consistency . there is a rich literature on nonmonotonic consequence relations  e.g.  gabbay  1; shoham  1; makinson  1; kraus et al  1; 
brass  1; dix  1; makinson  1    but our way of deriving a default semantics from given properties seems to be novel. 
   of course  the soundness of certain deduction rules has been proved or disproved for the known default semantics. the aim of this paper is to show the completeness 





	table 1: validity of deduction rules 



   note that here reference is made to so we cannot simply take the set of derivable formulae as the standard semantics. other properties require that something should not be derivable  e.g.  false   or give more indefinite information about the derivable formulae  e.g.  the expansion property  brass  1  . with such properties it might be possible to show that there is only a unique default semantics satisfying them - or none at all. 
acknowledgments 
i would like to thank u d o llpeck for suggesting the development of a system for natural deduction with defaults. he supervised my doctoral thesis which contains similar results to the ones presented here  among other things . 
¡¡i would also like to thank j u r g e n dix  whose comments were most helpful. 
