 
this paper presents a classification scheme that articulates the categorisation of subject matter. two basic classificatory devices are introduced:  a  a feature representing the resulting category characterised by a property that the feature denotes   b  a dimension representing a perspective that partitions the universe of discourse  uod  or a category. 
　　a classification based on a dimension can be further classified into the categories it has formed. dimensions can be juxtaposed to form a classification based on multiple perspectives. the classificatory devices of features and dimensions  which form a classification network  support a 
　　wide range of subject organisation types  viz.  a  conceptual organisation   b  procedural organisation and  c  theoretical organisation. the purpose of the approach is to support the clarity  simplicity and maintainability of large scale general its development. 
　　some simple course organisation examples using classification networks are also presented. 
1. background 
in the intelligent tutoring systems  its  community  there have been very few discussions about methodological issues such as the kinds of knowledge that can be used for what design purposes. in particular  when dealing with larger scale its developments  there is a tendency to confuse two different design processes:  1  prescribing the curriculum  what should be there for pedagogical purposes   and  1  representing content knowledge  what should be there for the running of the tutoring system  . curriculum prescription is a human-based design process  specifying what is important and which material is more important than the other. the  partial  ordering of the subject categories is subject to the emphases of the course and the student background. the representation of content knowledge is also a design process  but it is based on both human understanding and machine efficiency  epistemological adequacy . from the its designer's point of view  curriculum prescription and content knowledge 
thomas j. richards 
department of computer science and computer engineering la trobe university 
bundoora  vic 1  australia 
representation are two distinct processes serving different purposes and they should be clearly separated. 
　　the possible confusion mainly stems from one major source  i.e.  there are no separate knowledge representation schemes for these two important processes. curriculum prescription is usually regarded as a part of the knowledge representation. a classical example is carbonell's scholar where the south american geographical knowledge was structured using the semantic network formalism. there were some elements of curriculum organisation in scholar  e.g. south america has geographical features comprising rivers  mountains  etc.   but the knowledge was primarily structured to respond to the student's questions. along this line of thinking  the knowledge structuring of subject matter in conventional itss needed to take into consideration three major factors: 
 1  the student's initiative   1  the subject matter and  1  the machine's coding. the indiscriminate consideration of diversified factors tended to be an impediment to large scale its developments. 
　　in the mid-eighties  bonar et al.  proposed an object-oriented organisational approach  representing pedagogical issues  burton & brown  1  and tutoring functionalities as classes. tutoring functionalities formed the superclasses of the curriculum issues. in one respect this organisational approach widened the dimension of manipulation for curriculum structuring. the relations between curriculum objects were reduced to the partial classsubclass ordering  which gave the its developer a much simplified handle for curriculum prescription. 
　　lesgold  pointed out that a curriculum structure should serve the following educational purposes:  1  ordering subject content for teaching   1  providing coherence that  glues  together content knowledge. conventional curriculum structures emphasised the presentation order of subject matter  but they generally failed to specify clearly the  glue  connecting subject contents. in conventional itss  the coherence between content knowledge was neither taught nor used to diagnose the student errors. 
　　the major concern of this paper is the formalisaiion of the curriculum structure in terms of lesson features  major pedagogical issues . the curriculum designer specifies the features and feature relations that categorise subject matter. an automatic program that traverses the network of features and feature relations  called the classification network  in a 
	yum and richards 	1 

top-down manner is then applied to collect the subject categories  called topics  for teaching. since each topic is characterised by some combination of features  called index feature pattern   the teaching of a topic may then include the teaching of the index feature pattern. the index feature pattern is the  glue  that connects the topics. 
1. the epistemological hierarchy of the subject matter 
we may follow reigeluth and stein's   zoom lens  metaphor to illustrate the significance of the organisation of the subject matter. studying a subject is similar to viewing a scene with a movie camera. one starts with a wide-angle view which allows one to sec the major ideas but without any detail. then one zooms in on a part to get a finer view. zooming-in can be selected  downward   one level of finer detail  or  across   jumping from one idea to another  but keeping the level unchanged . the earlier ideas are those that are crucial for the later development and they have to be presented at an earlier stage of teaching so that the later presentations can depend on them. following this metaphor  one may see that a subject may consist of many top-level ideas. each idea may be refined into many second level ideas and so on. these ideas depend on certain perspectives from which the subject matter is  viewed . based on the general type of subject knowledge  three types of organisation structures are possible  reigeluth & stein  1j: 
 1  conceptual organisation shows superordinate/ coordinate/subordinate relationships among concepts; subsuming concepts are always near the top level of the knowledge hierarchy; 
 1  procedural organisation shows relationships between steps of a procedure; the order may be derived from procedural steps or decisions about procedural applications; 
 1  theoretical organisation shows change relationships among principles; the order may be derived from the chains of interrelated descriptive principles or the chains of prescriptive principles that optimise 
or influence some desired outcome. 
1. organising curriculum using features 
subject knowledge can be considered at two levels:  1  instance level and  1  category level. instances correspond to factual knowledge and categories correspond to conceptual knowledge  procedural knowledge or principles. the set of all instances forms our universe of discourse  uod . subject categories for learning are not decided arbitrarily. 
on the one hand  they must be compatible with the nature of the subject and the student understanding; on the other hand  they must conform to some obvious  important categorisation conventions: 
related categories are formed from some perspective that divides and groups the items for learning.1 for example  in the subject of set enumeration  the perspective of  set representation  differentiates between two categories:  member-listing  and  property-listing . there are only a few categories formed in a perspective but there must be at least two such categories.1 all categories in a perspective must be non-empty. not all items in the uod can be categorised in a perspective  but those items that can be categorised in a perspective must be exhaustively classified. all categories formed under a perspective must be mutually disjoint  i.e. there is no common item shared between any two categories . 
　　organising curriculum is a process of categorising subject knowledge in a variety of perspectives. by representing categories and perspective as some linguistic elements  we may formalise the subject categorisation as follows: 
   feature. a feature denotes a property that is possessed by all knowledge instances in a category. thus a feature is a 
   name referring to a property as well as to a category. for example  the feature member-listing refers to the category  member-listing  mentioned above. 
   feature pattern. features represent only primary categories. sometimes we need to consider complex categories such as the union and the intersection of categories. a union of categories is represented by  o r 
featurei 	. . . 	featuren   	and an intersection of 
categories is represented by 	 and 	featurei 
featuren   where feature! denotes some  primary  categories   l i n  l n . a logical expression of features like these arc called feature patterns. feature patterns of and- and or- types can be further combined to denote the union of intersections  and so on. 
   dimension. the categorisation in a perspective is formalised as a dimension  a data structure consisting of a list of features denoting the categories that are classified in a perspective. such features are called the differentiation features of the dimension. there are only a few differentiation features in a dimension  but there must be at least two such features. all categories named by features in a dimension must be non-empty. not all items in the uod can be categorised by the differentiation features in a 
   dimension  but those items that can be categorised by the differentiation features of a dimension must be exhaustively classified. all categories formed by the differentiation features must be mutually disjoint. although it is not absolutely necessary  dimensions are conveniently referred to by names. graphically  the differentiation features are listed top-down in a column. they are put next to a left bracket 
1 perspective is the ability to think clearly and sensibly about a situation and consider it in relation to everything else  collins cobuild english language dictionary  1 .   a perspective is a view for categorising and differentiating. if there is only one category grouped in a perspective  there is no need for that perspective. 
e the number of  teeth  in the bracket should match the number of differentiation features. for example  in a subject matter related to the teaching of electricity  a curriculum developer may find it appropriate to consider the subject matter organisation according the dimension law. under the dimension law  one may want to introduce two basic laws  ohm's law and kirchoffs law  and contrast them with each other. in that case  the differentiation features {ohmslaw  k i r c h o f f slaw} is good for the purpose. since the subject matter can be viewed from different perspectives  one may consider parallel dimensions  e.g.   a  law   b  problemtype  each of which has its own distinct differentiation features  figure 1 . 
   context. each dimension has a part  called context  denoting the category to which the categorisation perspective applies. there are two types of dimensions:  a  primary   b  non-primary. a primary dimension represents the classification that is carried out on the whole uod  not on any category. in that case  we attribute a pseudo-feature nep  network entry point  as the context. for example the dimensions law and problemtype do not have any context. 
   a non-primary dimension represents the classification that is carried out on a proper category of the uod. it's context is a feature pattern representing the category to which the classification applies. for example  in the above electricity teaching scenario  one may consider the dimension ri-vi for the teaching of the qualitative relationships: resistance-current and voltage-current. such differentiations of feature can only happen to those subject items categorised under the features ohmslavt and qualprob  i.e. the qualitative nature of ohm's law . in this case  one has to include in the dimension  i.e. ri-vi  the context   a n d ohms la w qua i p r o b     which represents a category grouped under both features ohmslaw and qualprob. the dimension ri-vi offers two differentiation features {ri  vi}  figure 1 . 
   finally we summarise a graphical notation for the representation of parallel dimensions and contexts as follows. parallel dimensions having the same context are 
joined together by a conjunctive joint-platform. a conjunctive context has a conjunctive receiving-platform: 

   dominance. a feature a is dominant over a feature b if the feature a exhibits whenever the feature b exhibits. for example  the feature b a s i c - w a v e - b e h a v i o u r is dominant over the feature l i g h t - b e h a v i o u r because the feature basic-wave-behaviour exhibits whenever the feature exhibits l i g h t - b e h a v i o u r . a dominating feature must be a feature mentioned in the context of a dimension; it dominates all differentiation features of that dimension and all features in the dimensions that follows it. 

1. instances and characterisations 
from now on one may consider a declarative approach of forming basic categories by exhaustively and exclusively listing all features possessed by all instances in that category. given a classification network  a basic category is a non-empty category that can be formed by listing in a set all features which every instance in that category exhibits  but not features that some instances in that category do not exhibit. 1 the set of all such features is called a characterisation of that basic category. more precisely  if every instance in a basic category exhibits a feature  then the characterisation of the category consists of that feature; otherwise  the characterisation of the category does not consist of that feature. referring back to the electricity lesson in figure 1  the features arc considered from 
{ohmslaw  k i r c h o f f slaw  qualprob  quantprob  relprob  ri  v i   . the category represented by  and ohmslaw qualprob ri  is a basic category because all features possessed by all instances in the categories are listed in the set lohmslaw  qualprob  ri   while all other features  viz. k i r c h o f f slaw  quantprob  relprob  and vi are not features possessed by the instances in that categories. the set {ohmslaw  qualprob  ri} is the characterisation of a basic category. 
   the notion of characterisations provides two important properties that helps the organisation of curriculum: 
    1  the collection of all basic categories associated with characterisations form the finest classification of the uod.1 for example  the problem  given that the voltage across a & b is 1 volts  if the resistance between a & b is increased by two times  how does the current between a & b change   is an instance problem from the characterisation 
 ohmslaw  qualprob  ri . all other categories can be described as unions of basic categories. 
1
  not all categories are basic categories. for example  the category  and ohmslaw qualprob  is not a basic category. 
1  if there is a finer category  it must exhibit some extra features  but this is impossible as it has been assumed in the definition of a classification that all features have been included. 
	yum and richards 	1 

    1  the syntax of classification networks provides constraints on the occurrence of features in characterisations. one may define a feasible feature combination as a set of features that is collectively possessed by all instances in a category of the uod  and a maximal feasible feature combination as a feasible feature combination a such that for any feasible feature combination  the partial ordering of subsets restricted to the set of all feasible feature combinations has a one-to-one correspondence with the partial ordering of supersets restricted to the set of all corresponding categories in the . that is  if a and b are feasible feature combinations  and a' and b' are their corresponding categories  then  if and only if 
   a characterisation is a maximal feasible feature combination: it is a feasible combination because all constraints on features dimensions in the classification have been satisfied in the characterisation; it is maximal because all features that occur in the classification network are exhaustively and exclusively listed. while a characterisation has been defined semantically as a reference to a basic category  its property of being a maximal feasible feature combination allows us to consider the syntactic constraints of features imposed by the classification network  availability of features . based on such constraints  one may build tools  the classification network editor  to help the input  the consistence checking of the classification network  and the generation of characterisations. further detail about the mathematical foundations of the classification network and the building of the classification network editor can be found in  yum  1 . 
   when using the classification network to categorise a subject  only features and characterisations are of operational significance. that is  classification operates only at the syntactic level of of features and characterisations  not at the semantic level of categories and instances. knowledge categories that are useful for teaching are represented as a 
   general tutorial structure of topics. specific content knowledge such as tasks and problem instances is separately represented. tasks and problem instances are indexed into the topic hierarchy using two keys:  1  their names  and  1  their context of applications in terms of feature patterns. 
1. forming topics 
a topic is a generic unit tutorial structure which contains materials for instruction. all topics together form a lesson. topics and the lesson are the only curriculum structures considered in this paper. topic structuring is a process of creating topics for presentation. 
   topics in this paper are categories characterised by the ordering of features and dimensions in a classification network. a classification network makes explicit the following classificatory criteria: 
    1  dominance: simple ideas form dominating features which are the context of some classificatory dimensions. 
    1  differentiation: refined ideas form the differentiation features of some dimensions. 
    1  default ordering of differentiation features and parallel dimensions: differentiation features and parallel dimensions are arranged in ascending order of difficulty. 
    1  key features: not all features included in the classification network are important or significant enough to deserve the opening of a topic for presentation. features that are worth teaching are marked as key features. non-key features serve only as the conceptual scaffolding used to link up the key features to be introduced later. pictorially  a key feature is typed italic bold font  as distinct from the non-key features which are in plain font. in figure 1  the differentiation features in the dimension problemtype are all non-key features. all other features are key features. 
   the basic idea of topic structuring is to preserve the hierarchical ordering of the key features already made explicit in the classification network. this requirement restricts the topic collection algorithm to two basic alternatives: a depthfirst search or a breadth-first search on the network. topics are subject categories that are characterised by the index 
feature pattern collected in the following manner: 
nep forms the topmost topic of the topic hierarchy. dominating key features form dominating topics and dominated key features form dominated topics. differentiation key features of a single dimension are used to form  parallel  topics at the same level. key features from parallel dimensions are grouped to form a topic. 
   each topic is represented as an object  in the sense of object-oriented programming  having the slots:  1  indexfeature-pattern  a feature pattern that characterises the topic    1  breakdown-index-feature-pattern  a feature pattern for further breakdown    1  features-to-teach  features that should be taught in the topic    1  dimensionsto-teach  dimensions that should be taught in the topic    1  characterisations  the collection of all characterisations that should be covered in that topic    1  subordinate-topics  topics are subsumed under this topic  and  1  superordinatetopics  the topic that subsumes this topic . there are some other additional slots for housekeeping purposes  but these are not the major concern of this paper. 
   figure 1 shows the topic hierarchy generated from a depth-first traversal using the classification network in figure 1. the reader may notice that the ordering of topics 
1 and 1 are is the reverse of that of the differentiation features ohmslaw and kirchoffslaw. this is because the ordering of differentiation features takes into account the number of key features that may follow these differentiation features. in this particular case  the number of key features that follow kirchoffslaw is 1  and the number of key features that follow ohmslaw is 1. therefore  the topic with fewer key features to follow  i.e. topic-1  is generated first. in real teaching situations  kirchoff s law is harder than ohm's law and there should be more key features to follow than in ohm's law. the ordering of topics 1 and 1 should not happen. 

figure 1 topics formed from the classification network in figure 1  where 'ifp' stands for 'index feature pattern'. 
1. using the classification network 
it has been a major theme in the its community that itss should be driven by  intelligence . in order to show the intelligence'  the development of curriculum structure is also associated with specific tasks  e.g. wusor  goldstein  1   eurohelp  breuker  1  . this view opens up a possible confusion between knowledge structuring for pedagogical purposes and content knowledge representation for designing the  intelligence  part of the system. in order to structure knowledge for pedagogical delivery  one has to consider the task specifics at the very beginning of its development. this is a major obstacle on the path towards large scale its development. 
　　practical teaching shows otherwise. experienced teachers need only skeletal guidance from the curriculum; they do not need detailed examination of subject content in order to  prepare  the lesson. they know the detailed content knowledge very well beforehand. in lesson preparation  they organise only the presentation skeleton of the subject. 
　　based on this observation  we divide its design into three major phases.  1  designing generic tutorial strategies in terms of generic tutorial structures like the lesson  topics  tasks  problem instance generators and task steps.  1  specifying the curriculum structure  the topic hierarchy  in terms of features and feature relations.  1  representing content knowledge  tasks and instance generators  and indexing the content knowledge elements according to their names and their contexts of application. these three phases are primarily independent of each other. the reader may find a high level description of these three phases in  yum & richards  1a  1b . further detail can be found in  yum  1 . 
   the approach of feature based curriculum structuring has a deep implication in its development. apart from formalising the curriculum structure  features can be used in lesson delivery and student diagnosis as follows: 
indexing subject tasks by feature patterns that represent the contexts of application of the tasks; teaching the feature patterns that characterise the topics; teaching the contexts of task application; 
  	diagnosing student performance in terms of features. 
   indexing tasks using features is a key to the link-up of the curriculum module and subject content knowledge. since topics are connected by feature relations  one can design tutorial strategies to remind the student of those learned features that are most relevant to the current learning. at present  the tutorial objectives do not include any consideration of teaching the contexts of task application or diagnosing student performance.1 
1. related work 
bip  for basic instructional program  organised its curriculum information network at three levels  barr et al.t 1 . at the top were technique units which must be ordered in advance according to the prerequisite relation. at the middle level were skill units which were linked to the upper level of techniques and to the lower level of tasks that exercised the skills. bip's student model was defined in terms of skills. problems are selected to exercise the greatest number of skills without including any skills beyond the student's reach. 
   bip-ii  wescourt et al. 1  refined the organisation of the skill units in bip's curriculum information network. the skills required for one technique were connected by links representing a variety of relations like subtype relations  whole-part relations  functional dependence  difficulty levels  etc. since the skill elements had been made explicit  the construction of the skill sets in bip-ii was more precise than that in bip. the skill elements of bip-ii were used only for lesson delivery; the use of these elements in student diagnosis was only mentioned 
   alan lesgold  formulated a more refined curriculum structure  which has three layers of knowledge. the bottommost is the knowledge layer that contains the representation of the knowledge that the system is trying to teach. this layer corresponds to the tasks in this paper. the middle is the goal lattice layer that contains the 
 learning goals  which describe various kinds of learning associated with the knowledge layer. it is the combination of these  learning goals  that gives the tutor a sense of coherence in teaching  and allows the tutor to determine the similarities and differences of the present and the previous learning. by and large  this layer corresponds to the feature relations presented in a classification network. the topmost layer is the metaissue layer  which contains a number of  viewpoints  grouping together various learning goals to form a lesson. roughly the metaissue layer corresponds to our topic hierarchy. like bip-ifs curriculum structure  lesgold's metaissues  goals and knowledge layers are interconnected explicitly by the developers. unlike the curriculum structure of bip-ii  which is mainly used for lesson delivery  lesgold's curriculum structure is used to teach the lesson as well as to do student diagnosis. 
1. summary 
we have presented a classification scheme that makes explicit the curriculum skeleton. the major emphases of the classification network are:  1  supporting humanoriented design  focusing on educational consideration rather than on machine performance ;  1  separating the often confused conceptions of curriculum design and content knowledge representation;  1  enabling the tutorial strategies to include the teaching of topic coherence;  1  allowing specific knowledge to be indexed into the curriculum skeleton;  1  logically separating the design issues of  what is it to be used    classification networks and topics hierarchies   who is using    instructional objectives  and  how is to be used    specific knowledge and methods . the purpose of the approach is to support the clarity  simplicity and maintainability of large scale its delivery. 
at present  we have implemented a small its based on 
reigeluth's elaboration theory of instruction  reigeluth & 
stein  1 . the subject of the its was a procedural domain of elementary set theories. topics were organised using the classification network. implemented tutorial strategies included:  1  topic orientation   1  teaching features that characterise the topic   1  presenting individual tasks in an expository manner  merrill  1 . we expected to use two student models to capture the dynamics of the teaching. the first student model was designed for the diagnosis of learning a single task. the current implementation used only a simple overlay student model. the second student model was intended to be used to diagnose inter-topic transition in learning. to date  we have not yet started on the second student model. 
