 
according to the utilitarian paradigm  an autonomous intelligent agent's interactions with the environment should be guided by the principle of expected utility maximization. we apply this paradigm to reasoning about an agent's physical actions and exploratory behavior in urgent  time-constrained situations. we model an agent's knowledge with a temporalized version of kripke structures-as a set of branching time lines described by fluents  with accessibility relations holding among the states comprising the time lines. we describe how to compute utility based on this model which reflects the urgency that the environment imposes on time. since the physical and exploratory actions that an agent could undertake transform the model of branching time lines in specific ways  the expected utilities of these actions can be computed  dictating rational tradeoffs among them depending on the agent's state of knowledge and the urgency of the situation. 
1 introduction 
reasoning about actions and their effects is a central issue in artificial intelligence. agents that are to be successful in their interactions with the real world have to be able to plan their actions and execute them efficiently in timeconstrained situations  without having complete knowledge about the state of their environment  and hence  about its future development. 
　our approach to these issues is strongly motivated by the utilitarian paradigm for designing autonomous intelligent agents  see  doyle  1  for convincing arguments supporting this view . according to this paradigm  an agent's rationality is equivalent to its ability to choose among its possible behaviors so as to maximize its expected utility. the possible behaviors of even a mildly sophisticated agent could include: information gathering  informative  actions  like scanning; computational actions  like inference and planning; and physical actions that directly influence the agent's 
   ＜this research was supported  in part  by the golda meir fellowship and the alfassa fund administered by the hebrew university of jerusalem  and by the national science foundation under grant iri-1 and py1 award iri-1. 
distributed ai environment. in this paper  we concentrate on physical and informative actions. we present a preliminary framework to model an agent's uncertain knowledge about the temporal evolution of its environment. the model  essentially a temporal kripke structure  is based on sets of branching time lines  mcdermott  1 . we augment a set of time lines with accessibility relations to represent the knowledge of the agent evolving in time. the time lines are described by fluents  that is  by attributes with time-varying values. 
　our model depicts an agent's knowledge about its actions as how those actions transform the structure of the possible time lines and the accessibility relations among them. we further provide the definitions needed to compute the expected utilities of these actions based on our model  and show how the important notion of urgency  or the value of time  naturally arises from our approach. urgency  in some cases  makes it rational for an agent to undertake immediate physical action despite uncertainty that could be resolved by an informative action  it can  leap before looking  . we believe that the same basic tradeoffs exist in the problem of whether it is rational to  leap before thinking   that is very much in the middle of the debate of deliberative versus reactive planning. 
　our work builds on a large body of previously reported research on utility-based approaches in ai  doyle  1 . the work by haddawy and hanks  haddawy and hanks  1; hanks and firby  1  is similar to ours  but it differs in its emphasis on symbolic goals as the basis for utility calculations  suggesting that these goals are imposed on the agent during operation. we  on the other hand  sec utility as a reflection of general preferences  maybe more appropriately called values  that arc inherent in any truly autonomous agent. we also believe that it is possible to represent explicitly the tradeoffs among sensing  acting  and planning  and thus to decide among them in a principled way. further similarities exist between our model based on branching time lines and the probabilistic temporal projection described in  hanks  1  and although our approach is  at this point  more knowledge-theoretic  the practical methods outlined in  hanks  1  are relevant to our model as well. 
　models similar to branching time lines have also been examined as a basis for temporal probabilistic logics for actions and planning  haddawy  1; pelavin  1 . our contribution in this paper is to show how these models can be used to rationally guide action and perception  in addition to providing semantics of probabilistic temporal logic. further  while the logical language capturing various forms of action is useful  these logics by themselves are not capable of fully supporting purposeful choice among alternative behaviors  doyle  1. 
　other related work on formal  logically oriented approaches  moore  1; morgenstern  1  is based on similar intuitions to ours  but lacks the utilitarian perspective. in particular  we argue that  in realistic settings  an agent will never possess enough knowledge about the state of the world to be able to prove that executing any particular action  such as dialing a phone  will be successful. further  from a strictly logical perspective the lack of knowledge is  taken by itself  no obstacle to acting at all. if  for instance  an agent wants to reach someone by phone without actually knowing the telephone number  other than that it contains 1 digits   the agent can simply dial all possible seven digit numbers in sequence  being quite convinced that eventually it will get through. the part that is missing  of course  is the relative value of lime and other resources wasted in the process  but that is precisely what makes this an issue in economics  rather than in logic  doyle  1 . it is in this context that one can understand why looking up a number in the phone book actually pays off. 
　yoav shoham also relies on branching time lines to represent an agent's uncertain knowledge  its evolution  and the effects of action  shoham  1 . the major difference between his work and ours is that his does not include the clement of expected utility  and therefore does not address the crucial issue of motivation and choice of action  doyle  
1   referring instead to the logically-motivated work of cohen and levesque  cohen and levesquc  1 . further  
shoham envisions the evolution of the agent's knowledge as a series of time line structures  while we represent it as accessibility relations within one such structure. he also seems to include the uncertainty about the agent's own future actions as branching in his model  while we forbid it. 
　finally  our work builds on the enormous body of research done over the years in the fields of mathematical economics  and utility and decision theories. we refer to it in the text of the paper as we go. 
　in the following sections of the paper  we first introduce our branching time lines model of knowledge. we then describe how the model can be used to reflect results of physical and informative actions  and how expected utility calculations can be performed on it. we then give examples of expected utility calculation for plans involving physical and informative actions  and show how our approach naturally gives rise to the notion of urgency as the value of time. we end with conclusions and further research directions. 
1 modeling temporal knowledge by branching time lines 
branching time lines were proposed by mcdermott as a model for temporal logic of processes and plans  mcdermott  1  and they provide a basis for various logics of probability  time and action in other related work  haddawy  1; pelavin  1; dean and wellman  1 . we have adopted this model here  and augmented it with accessibility relations so that it forms a temporalized version of the kripke structure  for details on kripke structures  see  halpern and moses  1; halpern and moses  1  . the branching time lines are composed of chronicles consisting of totally temporally ordered states. a chronicle is intended to represent a possible course of events in an agent's environment  and it can be described by a set of fluents  i.e.  attributes with values changing over time fginsberg  1; mcdermott  1 . 
　loosely speaking  the current uncertainty in an agent's knowledge about the possible past courses of events is represented by the fact that the time lines branch off into the past; the uncertainty of the agent's knowledge about the present state of the world is represented by the fact that there are many branching time lines at the present date  now; and the current uncertainty in the agent's knowledge about the future evolution of the world is represented by the fact that the time lines are branching off into the future. in this paper  we are interested in the utilities of the optional future actions of the agent  and therefore we only consider the representations starting at now and extending into the future. 
　thus  the branching time lines represent the current uncertainty in the agent's knowledge. to complement the picture with the knowledge that the agent may have about its future knowledge  we introduce the accessibility relations that can hold among the time lines and the branches in the model. we say that if one of the time lines in the model is accessible from another line  then the agent situated in the world evolving according to the first time line will consider the evolution of the world according to the other time line as possible. if two time lines are accessible from each other then the agent will not be able to tell if the world evolves according to one or the other.1 
　the model of branching time lines introduced above corresponds precisely to a temporal sequence of classical kripke structures. let us also note that if the accessibility relations defined above form a partition of possible slates of the world at any given time into a set of exhaustive equivalence classes  then the model of branching time lines becomes identical to what in the economics literature is called the information structure of the agent  radner  1. 
　in our graphical representation  the accessibility relations  depicted by dotted arrows  will be assumed to hold for the whole section of the time line between the nearest points  which can be either branching points  or temporal marks on the time lines. as an example  let us take the case of an agent sitting by his desk in his office not knowing whether the building is on fire  but having some indication that it might be  burning smell  commotion  etc. . the agent knows that there is a sprinkler system installed in the building  but he does not know whether the system will function properly. let us assume for the moment that our agent knows that it 
     1 this is just an intuitive description sufficient for the purpose of this paper. for now let us only note that the accessibility relation connecting two time lines defined above is  in fact  vague  since it does not specify whether each of the states in one line is accessible from each of the states in the other line  or whether it is accessible only from the state with the same date. the first interpretation corresponds to the situation in which the agent does not know what time it is  while the other corresponds to an agent equipped with a clock. in the following discussion we will use the second interpretation of the agent being aware of the exact lime  although we plan to investigate the first alternative in future research. 
	gmytrasiewicz and durfee 	1 
is positioned so that it would not notice the sprinkler system's operation. the uncertain knowledge about the present state of the world  and about the future developments that will follow  can be represented as two time lines in figure 1. according to one of the time lines  the building is on fire. this time line has a branching  b  corresponding to the agent's uncertainty as to the automatic activation of the sprinkler system sometime later  in the case of fire. the other time line presents the possibility that the building is not on fire. both of the time lines are each accessible from the other  and each is accessible from itself  with the accessibility relations depicted in figure 1 as arrows. the arrows also connect the branches of the time line according to which the building is on fire  since  as assumed  our agent would not be aware of the sprinkler system's operation in the case it is activated. these branches are similarly connected to the other time line to indicate that the sprinkler's operation would not resolve the question of whether the building is on fire for this agent. 

figure 1: agent's knowledge when it is uncertain about fire and sprinklers. 
　let us now consider a variation of the above situation that indicates how our model can represent somewhat different knowledge of the agent. in this case  we assume that the sprinkler system is also installed in the agent's office  so it will certainly notice its operation. the branching time lines model of this situation is depicted in figure 1. note that the two branches of the time line corresponding to the fire are not connected via the accessibility relation. this is because  in this situation  the cases of the sprinkler being on or off are not indistinguishable any more. further  the upper branch  according to which the sprinkler kicks in  is not connected to the lower time line  while the lower branch is. this is the representation of the fact that the sprinkler's operation would be noticed by the agent and effectively identify for it whether the building is  in fact  on fire. of course  the agent still would not be able to distinguish the case where the building is not on fire from the case when there is a fire but the sprinkler system is not operational  as indicated in figure 1. 
　in what follows  we will call the model of an agent's knowledge that does not include results of any action of this agent  although it may contain effects of actions of other agents  with their corresponding uncertainties  the base model. 

figure 1: agent's knowledge if it would notice sprinkler's operation. 
1 acting in the model of branching time lines 
as we have mentioned  an agent can construct the branching time line models that represent its knowledge of the dynamic effects of performing various activities in its environment  and then can compute the expected utility of these activities allowing a rational decision on the proper course of action. before describing this calculation  we examine how changes in the model can reflect the effects of an agent's possible courses of action. 
　let us lake the example of the agent in his office wondering about the building being on fire  as in the previous section. consider an action our agent might contemplate performing  for instance one of immediately activating the sprinkler system. the result of this action in our representation is a pair of time lines  this time with no branches  see figure 1 . the fact that the sprinkler system has been activated is true in both of them  but  according to one of the possible courses of events  the sprinkler system is extinguishing a real fire  while in the other the building is just getting sprayed. the lack of branching in the time line according to which there is a fire reflects the fact that the agent has some newly acquired certainty; it has not left matters up to an unpredictable sprinkler actuator which was the source of the branching in its model before. 

figure 1: agent's knowledge of the result of activating the sprinklers. 
let us now take an example of a different type of action 
- one aimed specifically at gathering information. let us say that it is possible for our agent to check whether there really is a fire  for instance by performing an action that we 
　
will refer to as that is expected to take time units. the result of this action is sketched in figure 1  which depicts the two time lines  as before  but now the accessibility relations between the lines have been severed after time the severance corresponds to the fact that after the has been successfully performed  our agent will know whether the building is on fire or not. the time line according to which there is a fire  however  still has a branching in it  corresponding to the agent's uncertainty about the proper functioning of the sprinkler system. 

figure 1: agent's knowledge of result of 
　the agent can also consider more complex actions  for instance those consisting of a series of simpler actions  those involving conditionals  or those with while loops  see also  moore  1; morgenstem  1  . for example  the agent might consider an action consisting of performing the action  first  and then  if the fire is burning  on turning 
the sprinkler system on. the effect of this composite action is depicted in figure 1. we still have two time lines corresponding to the cases of the fire burning and not  that are accessible from each other for all times before the action  has been completed  but not accessible afterwards. also  at the time  the agent activates the sprinkler system in the upper time line  as indicated in figure 1. 

figure 1: agent's knowledge of the result of activating the sprinklers if the result of  is positive. 
    recall that the accessibility relations depicted graphically hold only between the nearest branching points or time marks. 
1 computing utilities in the model of branching time lines 
in this section we show how utility associated with the model of branching time lines can be defined. the definition will require that we enrich our model with probabilistic information  supplementing the possibilistic information represented by the model presented so far. thus  we assume that an agent's knowledge about the likelihoods of time lines  tl   in its model can be represented by probability distributions  ptl . the states that comprise each time line are in total temporal order  and each of them can be described by the propositions stating the values of the fluents  f t   in this particular stale. the descriptions  f t   can be then used to assign a numerical value  utlr t   to the state  representing the state's desirability to the agent  see  keeney and raiffa  
1  for details on combining the effects of several fluents  or attributes  using a multiattribute utility calculation . 
　the expected utility  e u t l   t     associated with a set of states belonging to the time lines at time t  can be defined as a probabilistic mixture of the utilities  utl t   of states on each time line i at time t: 
		 1  
where ptl  is the probability of the time line tli. 
　in practice  the part of a set of time lines  1l  used by the agent to compute the expected utilities of its optional actions lies between the point in time called now  corresponding to the current date  and the point that lies in the infinite future  
 consequently  we define the expected utility  evtl of this set of time lines  as: 
is the discount rate. the definition 
above accepts the simplifying assumption of simple additivity of the expected utility over the states  see  keeney and raiffa  1; mckenzie  1  for discussion . 
　the problem of existence for eutl  that is  the convergence of the integral in eq. 1   can be overcome by demanding that the discount rate  be large enough. we find this demand counterintuitive at times  and for cases where convergence is a problem  as when  = 1  we use the method developed in  ramsey  1   which advocates shifting the utility scale to force the convergence of the integral  or the method introduced in  weizsaecker  1   which uses the so-called overtaking criterion  based on comparing finite partial integrals over time. a somewhat ad hoc way of dealing with the nonconvcrgence of the integral in eq. 1 would be to introduce a finite time horizon  which might be a legitimate simplification at times  but we will not use it here. 
1 utilities of physical and informative actions 
having defined the utilities for the branching time lines model above  it is quite straightforward to define the utilities 
　　　1the discount rate corresponds  roughly  to the agent's possibly preferring to receive a payoff sooner rather then later. see  keeney and raiffa  1  for more details. 
	gmytrasiewicz and durfee 	1 
　
shortly . 
1
approach. 
1
　


figure 1: depiction of the fluents; firesize and gettingwct  describing the results of a : immediate action of activating the 
　
sprinklers  and b : testing for the fire before. 
i.e.  have imparted value to time. to make the above insight more precise: 
　definition: the urgency  uhg t   or the value of time function  is defined as the negative of the expected utility   of the base model of the agent's knowledge  rep-
resented by the set of branching time lines  tl  as defined in equation 1. 
　recall that the base model is the model of branching time lines that represents the agent's knowledge about the evolution of the events in the world but does not include any of the agent's own actions. the above definition  therefore  formalizes urgency as the rate of accumulation of disutility to an agent  if it delays physical action. 
　for instance  for the base model in the example of the agent in the office building that is possibly on fire  the urgency for the points in time now and afterwards1 is:  utiles/sec. 
　clearly  the fact that time is valuable forces rational agents to be time-effective in executing physical actions  and crucially impacts on the viability of non-physical action  as shown in the example above of the action  which becomes ill-advised if it takes too long and the situation is too urgent. 
　possibly the most important non-physical action that the urgency of the situation could make ill-advised is  of course  the agent's reasoning  and  in particular  planning. we anticipate that the approach we have taken can prove fruitful in addressing the issue of reactive versus deliberative behavior in rational agents; we will investigate this in our future research. 
1 conclusions and future work 
in this preliminary report we have presented an application of the utilitarian paradigm  maximization of expected utility  to reasoning about knowledge and action. in our approach  an agent's knowledge is represented as a set of branching time lines  with probability distributions describing the agent's knowledge about the likelihoods of possible courses of action  and with accessibility relations connecting the lines and branches describing the future states of the agent's knowledge. the rational agent can use this model to investigate the expected utilities of the various courses of action it could take  and behave rationally based on this calculation. we have investigated examples of physical action and informative action. the utility of the latter was due to the fact that it would enhance the efficiency of the agent's physical action. 
　we showed how the important notion of urgency  or the value of time  arises from our approach. urgency has the intuitive property of favoring immediate physical actions  sometimes making non-physical actions  such as sensing and reasoning  ill advised. our result here goes along other work previously reported that treats time as a resource fboddy and dean  1; dean and boddy  1; dean  1; horvitz et al.  1; russell and wcfald  1   but our contribution is the rigorous derivation of the value of this resource. 
　in our future work  drawing on our earlier investigation  gmytrasiewiez and durfee  1   we will address the issue of representing the temporal uncertain knowledge of agents in multiagent situations  in which recursion in models arises due to agents' modeling others modeling them  and so on. we will attempt to apply this framework to the process of coordination and communication in dynamic and uncertain multiagent situations  gmytrasiewicz etal.  1a; gmytrasiewicz et a/.  1b . further  we will develop a suitable language of knowledge and action  drawing on previous work in  mcdermott  1; moore  1; morgenstern  1 . finally  we plan on investigating the issue of rationality of reasoning under time pressure in an attempt to address the issue of rational choice among sensing  reasoning  and physical actions in time-constrained domains. 
references 
 boddy and dean  1  mark boddy and thomas dean. solving time-dependent planning problems. in proceedings of the eleventh international joint conference on artificial i nielli gence  pages 1  detroit  michigan  august 1. 
	gmytrasiewicz and durfee 	1 
　
 cohen and levesque  1  philip r. cohen and hector j. levesque. intention = choice + commitment. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  july 1. 
 dean and boddy  1  thomas dean and mark boddy. an analysis of time-dependent planning. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  st. paul  minnesota  august 1. 
 dean and wellman  1  thomas l. dean and michael p. wellman. planning and control. morgan kaufamnn  1. 
 dean  1  thomas dean. planning under uncertainty and time pressure. in proceedings of the 1 darpa workshop on innovative approaches to planning  scheduling  and control  pages 1. november 1. 
 doyle  1  jon doyle. rationality and its role in reasoning. computational intelligence  1-1  1. 
 ginsberg  1  matthew l. ginsberg. computational considerations in reasoning about action. in proceedings of the 
1 darpa workshop on innovative approaches to planning  scheduling  and control  pages 1  november 1. 
 gmytrasiewicz and durfee  1  piotr j. gmytrasiewicz and edmund h. durfee. logic of knowledge and belief for recursive modeling: preliminary report. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  july 1. 
 gmytrasiewicz et al.  1a  piotr j. gmytrasiewicz  edmund h. durfee  and david k. wehe. the utility of communication in coordinating intelligent agents. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  july 1. 
 gmytrasiewicz et al.  1b  piotr j. gmytrasiewicz  edmund h. durfee  and david k. wehe. a decision-theoretic approach to coordinating multiagent interactions. in proceedings of the twelfth international joint conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1. august 1. 
 haddawy and hanks  1  peter haddawy and steve hanks. issues in decision-theoretic planning: symbolic goals and numeric utilities. in proceedings of the 1 darpa workshop on innovative approaches to planning  scheduling  and control  pages 1  november 1. 
 haddawy  1  peter haddawy. a temporal probability logic for representing actions. in proceedings of the second inter national conference on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning  pages 1  1. 
 halpern and moses  1  joseph y. halpern and yoram moses. a guide to the modal logics of knowledge and belief. technical report 1  ibm corporation. almaden research center  1. 
 halpern and moses  1  joseph y. halpern and yoram moses. reasoning about knowledge: a survey circa 1. technical report 1  ibm corporation  almaden research center  1. 
 hanks and firby  1  steven hanks and r. james firby. issues in architectures for planning and execution. in proceedings of the workshop on innovative approaches to planning  scheduling and control  pages 1  november 1. 
 hanks  1  steven hanks. practical temporal projection. in proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  july 1. 
 horvitz et al.  1  e. j. horvitz  g. f. cooper  and d. e. heckerman. reflection and action under scarce resources: theoretical principles and theoretical study. in proceedings of the eleventh international joint conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  detroit  michigan  august 1.  keeney and raiffa  1  r. l. keeney and h. raiffa. decisions with multiple objectives: p