 
starting from the thesis that the audience expects the speaker to mean the most typical case of the described class of events or situations with respect to the communicated context  we explain a mechanism for representing and using typicality distributions of static spatial relations which is related to herskovits' analytical framework. extended to restrictions of speed and temporal duration  this mechanism also allows us to construct dynamic mental images corresponding to the referents of objective sports reports. 
1 	introduction 
the project v i t r a which started in 1 as part of the german special collaboration programme sfb 1  ai & knowledge- based systems  examines the relations between speaking and seeing: a completely operational 
form of reference semantics for what is visually perceived is to be developed. c i t y t o u r and soccer are two systems constructed in v i t r a which broadly speaking - demonstrate the transformations of visual perceptions into language. here  we will concentrate on soccer and its listener model a n t l i m a  for c i t y t o u r cf. 
 schirra el al.  1  . 
1 	soccer and a n t l i m a 
soccer simultaneously analyses and describes short soccer scenes in german similar to a live radio report  i.e.  simultaneously and in an objective manner  to an audience which is not able to see the game. as input  soccer receives data which is generated by the motion analysis system actions from the signal of a video camera  cf.  herzog et al.  1  . this mobile object data - mod - consists of the set of the two-dimensional spatial locations and the velocity vectors of every mobile object perceived in the soccer field from a bird's eye view. at every time quantum  actions delivers such a set. 
at present  all mobile objects are perceived as mere ideal points. the m o d implicitly refers to the geometry of the 
   *this is an abridged version; the original text is available as vitra-report no. 1; 
football field and its parts given to the system as static background stab. 
   soccer does not know the whole scene at once. like a radio reporter  it has to consider the events during its occurrence. therefore  all processing steps have to be done incrementally in a kind of pipelining: a selection of already recognized events is verbalized simultaneously with further event recognition. beside actions  the architecture of the system consists  broadly  of the core system including three components  cf. fig. 1   herzog et a/.  1   and  andre et al.  1  : the component for event recognition produces a set of propositions interpreting the given 'percepts' as instances of spatial and spatio-temporal relations - the former essentially correspond to static spatial predicates like 'being to the left o f   the latter to predicates of motion events  e.g.  'doing a double pass'; the component selection chooses some of those event propositions while planning the continuations of the report; the component 

figure 1: extended architecture of soccer 
generation transforms the selected event proposition to an utterance in german coherent to the preceding text  thereby occasionally asking for further information for filling optional deep cases. whereas the core system recognizes purely spatio-temporal events  soccer  has been extended by the component replai which recognizes plans and intentions of the observed agents  cf.  retz-schmidt  1  . 
¡¡in this presentation  we are interested essentially in another component of soccer   namely its listener model a n t l i m a . in order to follow  price's cooperative principle  make your conversational contribution such as is required  at the stage at which it occurs  by the accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange in which you are engaged   cf.  grice  1     a speaker 
has to know how his utterance is understood by the listeners in the present context. that means he needs a model of the audience  e.g.  to make sure that the listeners are still able to recognize all the relevant information even from elliptic descriptions. such a model allows him to balance between the divergent demands of economy and completeness -  make your contribution as informative as is required  but also not more informative than is required  - since the speaker can rate how much explicit information actually is required in the given case  and what may be additionally inferred as implicature. 
   correspondingly  soccer also needs a component that can construct and maintain a model of the listeners' knowledge of the events that have already been described. this listener model enables the system to continue its description in a cooperative way by anticipating the listeners' understanding of the utterance just planned. with these anticipations  the understandability and plausibility of that utterance in the context already known can be rated and used in an anticipation 
feedback loop to the component  selection for improving the coherence  cf. fig. 1 . wte assume that the understanding of the audience is explained similarly to the text generation of the speaker by reference semantics: the generation of the report depends essentially on the speaker's perception of the referents. therefore  the listeners also have to represent mentally the referents of the report  albeit referents which they in fact cannot  perceive. as a german linguist wrote in 1   the radio reporter has solved his task only if he describes the reality of a sports event so vividly and obviously to the listener that the listener believes he sees that reality.   cf.  dankert  1  p. 1  . the reporter should induce 
- so to speak a cinema in the heads of his audience. i.e.  if the listeners want to have a 'deep' understand ing of an utterance  they should be able following the approach of reference semantics - to create  visual  mental images corresponding to the speaker's percepts  cf.  schirra  1a  . 
   correspondingly  the listener model of soccer  named a n t l i m a - anticipation of the listeners' 1magery -  must be able to construct visual pseudo-percepts - albeit in the limited sense of soccer as mod and stab. the abstractly described situation must be concretized again. it is our thesis that those pseudo-percepts 
generated by a n t l i m a correspond to the listeners' vi-
1 	cognitive modeling 
sual mental images  and that they can be used to explain the coherence of the text produced. in the context of listener modeling  the concept 'mental image' in fact participates in two alternative but related frameworks  cf.  schirra  1  : conceived as the mental representation of the understanding of the previous text   it  allows for explaining the success or failure of acts of reference: an np be it anaphoric or elliptical can only be used if it uniquely identifies its referent in the image. for example  the np 'the goal' in a sentence like 'miller runs toward the goal' is ambiguous if the context does not provide relevant information about the concrete position and direction of movement of miller which selects one of the two goals of the soccer field. therefore  the modeling of the listeners' mental images plays an important role for generating adequate noun phrases  especially in the form of elliptical definite descriptions and anaphora   schirra  1  . 
   conceived as the speaker's anticipation of the listeners' understanding of a sentence still to be uttered  the concept 'mental image' makes possible to explain the se lection of the predication: whereas the identification of referents makes use of information assumed to be known already by the audience  the selection of the predication to be communicated is concerned with what the audience presumably does not know yet. the corresponding situation has first to be established in a mental image  thereby elaborating implications specific to the given context. it is this framework and its central question how to construct a mental image corresponding to some given predications which we shall examine in this paper. 
   a n t l i m a starts with the event proposition chosen by the selection component of soccer  as the core of the planned utterance: in order to be made concrete  this proposition has to be analysed down to the primitive propositions: the definition of the considered event concept  i.e.  its subevents with their temporal relations  must be expanded and adapted to the situational constraints in order to achieve spatio-temporal coherence between the required spatial restrictions of the involved objects during each phase of the event and the context   schirra  1b  . further constraints given by optional deep case fillers also have to be associated to the appropriate phase of the event  cf.  marburger and wahlster  1  and  sablayrolles  1  . the construction of a corresponding dynamic mental image is performed in two steps: first  the duration of the elementary subevents are fixed; this results in the propositional elementary structure  the temporally ordered sequence of sets of elementary spatio-temporal relations. each set restricts the scene for exactly one instant  time quantum   describing  so to speak  a 'snapshot'. this data is transformed in a second step to a sequence of mod relative to the given stab by fixing particular locations and velocities for all objects considered for each time quantum successively. 
¡¡in order to rate the understandability of the considered continuation of the report  the generated 'mental image' should not be compared coordinate by coordinate with the original percept of soccer: we cannot expect that the listeners will reconstruct the very 




   for constructing an adequate mental image  i.e.  a maximally typical representation of the situation de-
scribed or restricted - by a proposition  we first have to generate the valid distribution of typicality for all possible mental images. in a n t f i m a   such distributions are called typicality potential fields  typofs   functions mapping locations to typicality values.1 they are used to find the optimal positions: all objects to be located  ols  are moved to a position with maximal typicality by means of a hill-climbing algorithm  d.  yamada e al 1  . figure 1 illustrates an exemplary typof 
corresponding to a proposition of the type 'player in front of the goal area'. the typof is represented graphically by means of grey values: the darker the position  the more typical it is.1 note that different starting posit ions result in different end positions: this influence of the context of course is a very desirable effect which here is given without additional effort. furthermore  although not demonstrated in the figure   if the reference object a 
of an ol b is also located with respect to a third object  the typof of b is moved with a: b is pulled along with a until all objects have reached their optimal positions. 

figure 1 typicality distributions of  in front of  extrinsic  use  for two different kinds of objects 


figure 1:  graphical representations of the typicality 

	schemata of'at 	 near   and  distant from 
each typof encodes t h e typicality distribution corre-

sponding to one kind of proposition  i.e.  it depends not only upon the spatial relation used as predicate but also on the arguments of the proposition. although the typicality distributions of propositions with the same spatial relation  like 'being in front of'  but different sets of arguments are more or less similar  the kinds of objects and especially their dimensionality  size  and shape modify the typof of a particular proposition  stretching it  and 
   'in antlima  the typicality values are from the rational interval  1 ..  .   ; the 't-value' l.o is associated with all locations with maximal typicality; 
1
	ln fig. 1  	the black parts in fact represent typicality 
values   1; the propositions used in the exemplary approximation are shown in the status-pane on the right side of the figure  in the window on the lower side of the picture  the final two approximation steps for player s1  black-1  are traced; for a complete list of typofs cf.  blocher et al.  1 ; 
1 	cognitive modeling 
adaplmg it to the shape of the objects  cf fig. 1  illustrating the typofs for a player to be in front of player s1 as seen from the left penalty spot  and for a player to be in front of the right goal area as seen from a viewpoint marked with the star . similar to the system of 'ideal meaning' and geometrie description functions' in the analysis of herskovits  cf.  herskovits  1    we separate the influence of the objects from the core meaning of the predicate: the assumed particular influence of the arguments  i.e.  the objects involved  has to transform the proposed general influence of the spatial relation by adapting it to the shapes  sizes  and possibly also the parts and the functions of the objects involved. to cover the similarity between all instances of a spatial relation  we assume one function which describes the typicality distribution not like typofs with respect to the coordinates of the objects  but with respect to what we call 


figure g: typofs of players' speeds 



figure 1: typops of balfs speeds 
ing the range of typical locations: those not reachahle for the concerned object within one time quantum inn by maximal speed may l e optionally faded out' in an i lima. 1 
1 	conclusion 
with a n t l i m a   the systematic application of the reference semantics approach for combining vision and natural language systems can be studied: the reconstruction 
of perceptually absent  referents in the form of mental images is to be used in a listener model for anticipat ing what the audience can comprehend  with the goal of increasing appropriately the coherence of the generated text. we have demonstrated herein the basic principles of such a reconstruction  the system is presently realized on clos and clim ; on this foundation  furl heist tidies  especially concerning the treatment of threedimensional objects  the conceptualization of movements as deformable one-dimensional objects called 'trajectories1 and their use  cf.  hays  1    and the re-analysis of the images with the feedback to text planning and generation  are currently in progress. 
