 
in this paper  a method of theorem proving dual to resolution method is presented in brief. the investigated method is called backward dual resolution or bd-re solution  for short. the 
main idea of bd-resolution consists in proving validity of a formula in disjunctive normal form  by generating an empty tautology formula from it; it is shown that the initial formula is a logical consequence of the obtained tautology. an idea of the theorem proving method is outlined  and its application to checking completeness of rulebased systems is investigated. a formal definition of completeness and specific completeness are stated and an algorithm for completeness verification is proposed. moreover  a generalized bd-resolution aimed at proving completeness under intended interpretation is defined. 
1 	introduction 
resolution theorem proving has gained a great popularity after it was first described by robinson . the method combines in a single rule the power of other rules  and  due to its uniformity  can be easily implemented for automated theorem proving with computers. 
　in this paper  an idea of a theorem proving method dual to classical resolution is investigated in brief. the method can be related to the inverse method of maslov  maslov  1   see also  maslov  1  for the most complete presentation   and according to  kuehner  1  it can be derived from the inverse method; in fact  it falls into the class of localized inverse methods  kuehner  1; maslov  1 . however  it seems most straightforward to introduce the investigated method as one dual to classical resolution. 
　the presented method is called backward dual resolution or bd-resolution  for short. the proposed method 
   *this research was supported by state committee on scientific research within the project computer systems of control and decision making - elements of theory  formal tools and computer aided design  grant no. 1; a first version of this paper appeared as a technical report of laboratoire d'automatique et d'analyse des systemes  laas du cnrs  no. 1  toulouse  france  1. 
1 	automated reasoning 
is analogous to resolution method. instead of checking unsatisfiabiltty of a set of clauses we rather try to prove validity of a given formula in disjunctive normal form. thus  the initial form is in fact dual to the one in resolution method. further  the proposed method works in fact backwards. this means that during the process of derivation one generates new formulae from parent formulae starting from the initial formula to be proved - but with regard to logical inference  the alternative of parent formulae is a logical consequence of the derived formula! thus  at any step of reasoning the derivation process is reversed with regard to finding logical consequences. the process of derivation is successful if it eventually ends up with an empty tautology formula which  here  is always true - in this case  the initial formula  as a logical consequence of it  is proved. since the method is dual to resolution  all but necessary technical details and proofs are omitted here; one can find them in  lige.za  1b .1 
　the motivation for bd-resolution follows from logical investigation of rule-based control systems. throughout this paper  by a rule-based control system  knowledgebased control system  we shall understand a system designed to control some object and consisting of a set of rules defining the possible control actions. a rule-based control system is assumed to operate according to the following scheme: the current state of the controlled system is observed  then a rule with satisfied preconditions is selected  and the specified by this rule control action is executed; the basic cycle is repeated in an  endless loop  until it is stopped  either by some of the rules or as a result of some external interrupt . such systems were discussed in  tzafestas and lige/za  1  and more thoroughly in  lige za  1b . 
　bd-resolution was initially introduced as a basic reasoning paradigm for knowledge-based control systems  ligeza  1a; ligeza  1b . there are at least three standard issues concerning logical investigation of such systems; these are:  i  checking if logical description of the current situation satisfies the formula defining preconditions of a rule  i.e. checking if a rule can be fired    ii  checking if some two formulae defining preconditions of two rules may be simultaneously satisfied  i.e. check-
　　1 a copy of this report should be available from documentation service  l.a.a.s. du c.n.r.s.  1  av. du colonelroche  1 toulouse cedex  france. 
ing if some two rules can succeed for the same state in such a case the system is indeterministic and there is a need for conflict resolution   and  iii  checking if the alternative of precondition formulae of all the rules constitutes a tautology  i.e. checking if the control system can react in any state an so it is complete . the above tasks can be approached with use of different inference mechanisms  including the classical resolution   but it seems that bd-resolution fits best the purpose. the advantage of bd-resolution consist in the possibility of direct reasoning with formulae describing situations and preconditions in a most natural way. further  in case of incomplete systems formulae defining specific completeness are directly generated. here we investigate only the possible application of bd-resolution concerning completeness verification of rule-based systems  problem  iii  . the other problems and related issues are presented in some details in  ligeza  1b . 
   the problem of logical checking of completeness  consistency  and related issues seems to be of both theoretical interest and practical importance  but simultaneously largely ignored in the literature. a comprehensive recent review providing a recapitulation of the problems and summarizing current results is given in  andert  1 ; almost complete list of problem literature can be found there as well. 
   with regard to completeness of rule-based systems two basic approaches can be noticed. the most popular one consists in  roughly speaking  an exhaustive enumeration of possible input data and systematic inspection of a given set of rules versus a table containing all possible parameters and conditions combinations. this kind of approach can be called an exhaustive completeness check  andert  1 . some examples of this approach are presented in  suwa et a/  1; cragun and steudel  1 . a basic approach   suwa et al  1   consists in finding all parameters used in con-
ditions of rules  generating a table displaying all possible combinations of parameter values  and checking the set of rules against the table so as to verify completeness and detect missing rules. this kind of approach can be also referred to as static verification of the set of rules. 
   the other approach consists in a run-time validation and verification of the expert system with use of selected set of test cases  tepandi  1 . the selected example problems should also provide an exhaustive list of possible cases. some other approaches of this kind are also discussed in  andert  1 . methods of this sort can be referred to as dynamic verification of rule-based system. 
   in this paper another logic-based approach is proposed. the approach neither requires the generation and use of tables containing possible condition/parameter combinations  nor it is based on exhaustive test of possible cases. note that  in case of use of full first-order logic for building preconditions of the system rules an exhaustive check would seldom be feasible  since even for a language containing only one function symbol the herbrand universe   chang and lee  1   is infinite. 
   the proposed approach can be applied directly to systems in which rules are constructed with use of predicate logic notation such that conjunction is the basic connector between facts  conditions ; more complex formulae are built with use alternative. the negation is to be expressed explicitly  i.e. facts of the form p and -p should be used. the method can be used for rules constituting a  single-layer  of reasoning  i.e. during reasoning one of the rules from a considered set is to be selected and fired; thus  the proposed approach is especially convenient for knowledge-based control systems  ligeza  1b; tzafestas and lige za  1 . 
1 	bd-resolution 

   is a valid formula. in classical resolution method  instead of proving  1   one takes the negation of it  i.e. 
		 1  
and tries to show that  1  is unsatisfiable. in practice 
 1  is transformed into so-called clausal form  i.e. to a set  conjunction  of clauses  disjunctions of literals . now  in order to show that a set of clauses is unsatisfiable  one attempts to derive from it an empty clause  here: always unsatisfiable . the derivation is carried out with use of resolution rule  which preserves logical consequence. thus  any newly derived clause is a logical consequence of its parent clauses. if an empty clause is eventually derived  the unsatisfiability of the initial set of clauses is proved. 
   a great advantage of the classical resolution method consists in leaving the set of axioms almost unchanged. in most of practical cases there is a set  conjunction  of separate axioms  and each of them can be converted into clausal form independently from the others. this approach saves computational effort and fits most of classical problems in a naturally efficient way. however  from theoretical point of view  one can also try to prove validity of  1  directly. below  we present the basic idea in some details. 
   first  instead of converting a formula to its clausal form one can transform the initial formula to a dual form  consisting of an alternative of conjunctions of literals. now we shall need the two following definitions. 

	ligeza 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 


	ligeza 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 

　note that with use of generalized bd-resolution one can directly generate 1 from p1  1 and 1. in 
fact  by putting 
level input 1  medium   and 
we have where / is the assumed interpretation. the direct application of generalized bdresolution simplifies the proof and makes it shorter. 
　in case of incomplete systems  bd-resolution can be used for generating formulae which describe the states for which there are some actions specified  i.e. for proving specific completeness. some other application examples can be found in  ligeza  1b . 
1 conclusions 
the proposed approach based on first order logic and theorem proving dual to resolution method provides theoretical bases for improving the design of knowledge based systems. it suggests a possibility of checking the system for completeness based on first-order logic rather than simple exhaustive inspection of possible parameters/conditions combinations. however  as shown in the above examples  it is likely that for practical applications the proposed algorithms should be equipped with domain-specific knowledge concerning the intended interpretation. moreover  hierarchization mechanisms and possibly - heuristics would further improve the efficiency of this method. 
　the advantage of bd-resolution over classical one with respect to completeness verification consists in direct application of the method to formulae describing situations and preconditions in a simple  consistent with intuition way. moreover  in case of incomplete systems  generation of formulae describing specific completeness  the states actually served  is straightforward. 
　the approach can be applied to rule-based systems  where precondition formulae are in the form of normal formulae defined here. logical explicit negation should be used rather than the implicit one. for practical reasons  the proposed generalized bd-resolution taking the advantage of knowing the intended interpretation is proposed; its application can improve efficiency of the proposed paradigm. 
　the outlined method is primarily aimed at application to  single-layer  rules  such as the ones applied for control in knowledge-based control systems - see  for example  tzafestas and ligcjza  1  lige.za  1b  ; however  it seems that it can be useful for other systems with chaining rules if a hierarchization with regard to a context similar to the one of  cragun and steudel  1  is performed. further  it is likely that the combination of the described approach with methods based on exhaustive test can be promising. 
