 
the truth conditions for conditional sentences have been well-studied  but few compelling attempts have been made to define means of evaluating iterated or nested conditionals. in particular  most approaches impose very few constraints on the set of conditionals an agent can hold after revision of its belief set. in this paper we describe the method of natural revision that ensures the preservation of con-
ditional beliefs after revision by an objective belief. our model  based on a simple modal logic for beliefs and conditionals  extends the agm theory of belief revision to account for sentiences of objective revisions of a belief set. this model of revision ensures that an agent makes as few changes as possible to the conditional component of its belief set. adopting the ramsey test  natural revision provides truth conditions for arbitrary right-nested conditionals. we show that the problem of determining acceptance of any such nested conditional can be reduced to acceptance tests for unnested conditionals  indicating that iterated revision can be simulated by virtual updates. we also briefly describe certain reductions to  sometimes tractable  propositional inference  and other informational properties. 
1 	introduction 
subjunctive conditionals have recently attracted much attention in the knowledge representation community. it has been pointed out that counterfactuals may play a large role in planning and diagnostic systems  ginsberg 1   that subjunctives may be used to capture knowledge base update and revision  katsuno and mendelzon 1; boutilier 1b   and that they are intimately related to the conditionals used in default reasoning  boutilier 1c; makinson and gardenfors 1 . we denote by a   b the subjunctive conditional  if a were the case then b would be true.  various subjunctive logics have been proposed to account for properties of the connective    stalnaker 1; lewis 1 . 
from the point of view of knowledge representation  acceptance conditions for a   b are especially impor-
tant. under what conditions should an agent assent to the conditional  a widely endorsed acceptance test for conditionals is the ramsey test  stalnaker 1  p.1 : 
first add the antecedent  hypothetically  to your stock of beliefs; second make whatever ad-
justments are required to maintain consistency  without modifying the hypothetical belief in the antecedent ; finally  consider whether or not the consequent is true. 
　the key step in the ramsey test is the revision of the belief set. the notion of revision adopted will determine which conditionals are accepted and rejected. conversely  given a fixed  complete  set of accepted conditionals  the revision function adopted by an agent will also be determined: revising by a is simply a matter of believing those b such that a   b is accepted. consequently  the study of revision and  subjunctive  conditional logic are virtually the same if one accepts the ramsey test. 
　the most prominent theory of belief revision is that put forth by alchourron  gardenfors and makinson  1  and expounded by gardenfors  1 . within this framework many people have explored the connection to conditionals  gardenfors 1; gardenfors 
1; rott 1; boutilier 1b; boutilier 1c . the agm theory  which we describe in the next section  imposes various constraints on acceptable revision functions. roughly  a revision function preserves as much information as possible. unfortunately  the agm theory has little to say about revision sequences. if we accept the ramsey test as determining conditional beliefs  this means that the conditionals accepted in the new belief set need not be related to those in the first set. thus  while information content is  preserved  with respect to objective beliefs  the information content of conditionals is ignored. 
　it is this problem of preserving conditionals under revision that we investigate here. the semantic model of agm revision  for propositional belief sets  we describe in the next section orders possible worlds according to their plausibility  or  degree of consistency  with a fixed belief set k. while this ordering guides the selection of a revised belief set k*a  which incorporates a into k   this agm model fails to provide a new ordering suitable 
	boutilier 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


	boutilier 	1 


figure 1: general constraints on the revised model 
                                                                   figure 1: natural revision of a model drawback of such a general model is that just about all 
of the ordering information  capturing an agent's conditional beliefs and judgements of entrenchment  is  potentially  lost in this mapping  see figure 1 . there is something unsatisfying about this model. the ordering relation r is intended to reflect the informational content or importance of beliefs. when certain beliefs must be given up  it seems natural to try to keep not only important beliefs  but as much of the ordering a possible. a revision should not usually change one's opinion of the relative importance of most sentences. 
1 	the semantics of natural revision 
instead of arbitrary mappings from m to m*a  we will propose a class of natural mappings that preserve as much ordering information as can be expected. this determines the class of natural revision functions  that tend to preserve the entrenchment information and conditional beliefs found in an extended belief set. it is important to note that the model we propose is not completely general  for it permits only a subset of those revision functions  on extended sets  allowed by the arbitrary mappings above. however  it is a very natural 
subset  suitable for determining the result of propositional revision sequences  or the truth of right-nested conditionals  when the general model has little to offer. 
　the conditionals accepted by an agent are determined by its ordering of plausibility. if we insist that revision preserve as much of this ordering as possible  then  for the most part  the relative entrenchment and plausibility of sentences  hence conditional beliefs  will remain intact. let m =  be the revision model reflecting some extended belief set e. given a propositional revision a of e  or the associated k   we must find a revision model m*a = such that r' reflects the minimal mutilation of r. 
　if w  min m  a   by the basic requirement w must be minimal in r''  and these must be the only minimal worlds in r'. for any such w the relationships wr'v and vr'w are completely determined by membership of v in min m  a   independently of their relationship in r. figure 1 illustrates this. for w  v not in min m  a   this picture leaves wr v completely unspecified. if r is to be left intact to the largest possible extent then the most compelling specification is to insist that vr'w iff vrw. 
1 	knowledge representation 

	boutilier 	1 




thus  a revision sequence a1 ...an causes a nondecreasing change in  information  in a belief state. no belief set further along in the revision sequence can be smaller than an earlier belief set. this suggests that  as we process a revision sequence  our revision model becomes more and more informationally complete. given  enough  revisions  a model approaches the point where each cluster becomes a single world  since clusters are only broken apart by revision  not put together - then k and k*a become complete theories. 
　we need not have complete information to reason about natural revision. from a set of premises we can reason in c o * about  constraints  on natural revision  without perhaps determining complete theories. however  there are methods of  completing  an incomplete set of conditionals  for instance  pearl's  1  system z. in  boutilier 1  we show how such a completion can be expressed compactly in co*. in the full paper  we show that if a revision model has a finite number of clusters each corresponding to a propositional theory  as in system z   then only propositional  sometimes tractable  inference is required to compute natural revision. 
   extensions of this work we are currently exploring include the application of this model to more quantitative types of conditionals  e.g.  probabilistic degrees of belief and the j-conditionalization of  goldszmidt and pearl 1  . we are also looking at applications to diagnosis  where a stream of observations must be reconciled with expected knowledge. simply conjoining observations is not feasible if they conflict. planning also requires a notion of revision as an agent must change its beliefs in response to new information  and changes in the world  requiring that we account for belief update  winslett 1; katsuno and mendelzon 1 . finally  arbitrary nesting is explored in  boutilier and goldszmidt 1   where we extend natural revision to include new conditional information  how one can revise an extended belief set to include new conditional information a   b. 
acknowledgements 
thanks to veronica becher  moises goldszmidt and mirek truszczynski for discussing these ideas with me. 
this research was supported by nserc research grant ogp1. 
