 
the dempster-shafer theory gives a solid basis for reasoning applications characterized by uncertainty. a key feature of the theory is that propositions are represented as subsets of a set which represents a hypothesis space. this power set along with the set operations is a boolean algebra. can we generalize the theory to cover arbitrary boolean algebras   we show that the answer is yes. the theory then covers  for example  infinite sets. 
the practical advantages of generalization are that increased flexibility of representation is allowed and that the performance of evidence accumulation can be enhanced. 
	in 	a 	previous 	paper 	we 	generalized 	the 
dempster-shafer orthogonal sum operation to support practical evidence pooling. 
in the present paper we provide the theoretical underpinning of that procedure  by systematically considering familiar evidential functions in turn. for each we present a  weaker form  and we look at the relationships between these variations of the functions. the relationships are not so strong as for the conventional functions. however  when we specialize to the familiar case of subsets  we do indeed get the wellknown relationships. 
1 	introduction 
uncertainty is a feature of our experience and observation of the world. finding suitable means of representation and manipulation of uncertainty of information and knowledge  bell 1  is a challenge which will have to be met if computerized decision-making based on imperfect input is to be contemplated. an understanding of the effect of uncertainty on evidence appraisal  and ultimately on the behavior and properties of agents is essential. this paper contributes to this understanding and to the practical handling of evidence. it addresses the extension  in both practical and theoretical terms  of a numerical system which enables computer applications to reflect some aspects of uncertainty. 
1 	knowledge representation 
   the theory of evidence which originated with dempster and shafer underpins a method which has been shown to be a promising tool for making judgements when confronted with uncertainty in numerical evidence. it generalizes bayesian theory which is itself a popular theory of uncertainty. 
   the generalization of evidence theory in turn is the subject of this paper. it involves moving away from the standard finite set based derivation of theoretical and computational results underpinning the dempstershafer approach. conventionally propositions are represented as subsets of a collection of all possible values of a target variable. this particular representation of the hypothesis space  is not the only way to represent propositions. most obviously we can think of leaving the propositions as they are  avoiding their transformation into subsets. this is of immediate interest in reasoning applications  because propositions are familiar and can be used to represent arguments  hypotheses  etc. 
   if this were done we would still be dealing with a structure which has an important similarity to the previous space - both are boolean algebras. this leads to the question: can we generalize evidence theory to general boolean algebras   if we can  this allows us to choose a representation - we can use subsets  propositions  and other means to represent hypotheses and their relationships  as appropriate  in the hypothesis space. it can also allow us to establish a theory which covers infinite hypothesis spaces and evidence spaces by this extension. 
¡¡this representational and theoretical advantage of the generalization is our focus of attention in this paper. however we have argued elsewhere  guan & bell 1a   and supported our arguments by defining operations  that many applications can achieve improved performance through using more appropriate representations. we demonstrated that by generalizing the orthogonal sum operation so that hypotheses could be represented directly as propositions  such a performance enhancement could accrue. using this representation  all the subsets of the hypothesis space   i.e.  subsets  need not be considered  as they would in standard dempstershafer theory . by focusing on relevant propositions only  the time complexity may be reduced to well below the previous  time. 
¡¡to these advantages of representational and manipulative flexibility and efficiency for applications  we can 


	guan and bell 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 


	guan and bell 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


1 	summary 
most important spaces in artificial intelligence are boolean algebras  for example  power sets and proposition sets. the dempster-shafer theory originally addressed only the power sets. this paper generalizes the theory to boolean algebras. 
   we investigate all the most important kinds of belief functions on an algebra to enable us to choose the most suitable belief function to represent evidence  according to the particular situation presented. the generalization enables us to choose the most suitable algebra to represent knowledge and reason efficiently. 
we introduce weak bayesian  probabilistic  functions  
bayesian  probabilistic  functions  weak belief functions  and belief functions. we show that bayesian functions are weak bayesian functions; and bayesian functions and belief functions are weak belief functions. 
   mass functions  commonality functions  plausibility functions  and doubt functions are also introduced. 
in the case where  is a finite set  we 
show that weak bayesian functions are bayesian functions and vice versa. moreover  weak belief functions are then belief functions and vice versa  and weak nested belief functions are nested belief functions and vice versa. 
