 
the combination of induction axioms is investigated. it is shown how a pair of competing induction axioms  which e.g. are suggested by a heuristic of an induction theorem prover on a specific verification problem  are combined yielding a new induction axiom. the relation implicitly defined by the new axiom is the set-theoretic union of the well-founded relations implicitly defined by the induction axioms initially given. the proposed approach is non-heuristic but safe in the sense that an induction proof with the new axiom can be obtained whenever an induction proof with one of the given axioms would have been successful. based on a result of bachmair and dershowitz for proving term rewriting systems noctherian  a commutation test is developed as a deductive requirement to verify the soundness of the combined axiom: it is shown how so-called commutation formulas can be derived by machine from the given axioms such that a verification of these formulas  e.g. by an induction theorem prover  guarantees the well-foundcdness of the relation defined by the combined axiom. examples are presented to demonstrate the usefulness and strength of the proposed technique. 
1 	introduction 


¡¡however  the union of well-founded relations is not necessarily well-founded  so well-foundedness of has to be verified to guarantee the soundness of the approach. we therefore demonstrate how formulas can be derived by machine  the truth of which entail the soundness of the combined induction axiom. thus  new and useful induction axioms arc computed  leaving the verification of their soundness to the induction theorem proving system. 
¡¡our proposal to compute new induction axioms can be integrated into all induction theorem provers based on the explicit induction paradigm  e.g. the systems described in   aubin  1; boyer and moore  1; bundy et al.  1; biundo et al.  1. it is currently being implemented in the inka induction theorem prover  a system under development at the technische hochschule darmstadt. 
1 	computing induction axioms 
the operation of an induction theorem proving system based on the explicit induction paradigm can be sketched in the following way  see  walther  1  for a more detailed account : after some function is defined by the user of the 
	walther 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 

	walther 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 
1
 the falsification of those formulas usually is trivial  at least if some facility looking for counterexamples for system-computed conjectures is applied  cf.  protzen  1   yielding here x=1 as a counterexample. 
	walther 	1 
	1 	concluding remarks 
there are cases where commutation with a type may not help because quasi-commutation with a type is not a necessary requirement for quasi-commutation  which in turn is not a necessary requirement for the well-foundedness of the union of well-founded relations. if all commutation tests fail  then the termination proof facility of an induction theorem prover has to be used  cf.  boyer and moore  1; walther  1   hoping that it can prove the wellfoundedness of the separated union. however  this should always be the ultimate resort. such direct well-foundcdness proofs usually are much more difficult than the proofs necessitated by the commutation tests  as it easily can be observed from the examples presented above. this is because the latter deduction problems embody the knowledge that the given relations are well-founded and  therefore  quite often can be proven by propositional reasoning and case analysis only. 
