 
a variant is proposed of the preference-based semantics for nonmonotonic logics that was originally considered by shoham  1; 1 . in this variant it is not assumed that preferences between standard models arc aggregated into one preference order. this allows the capturing of all main nonmonotonic formalisms  including default logic oi reiter . the preferential models introduced in this paper are motivated from an cpistemic point of view  and are therefore called cpistemic preference models. the consequence operations induced by cpistemic preference models are characterized. further  the view is defended that the rationality of cumulative monotonicity does not imply thai nonmonotonic logics have to be cumulative  but only that a rational agent should not believe a set of default rules that induces a noncumulative consequence operation. 
1 	introduction 
shoham  1; 1  introduces preferential semantics as a possible unifying framework of nonmonotonic logics. in this framework  a nonmonotonic logic is reduced to a standard logic plus a preference order on the models of that standard logic  and nonmonotonic entailment is considered to be preferential entailment  where t preferentially entails φ iff  p is true in every model m such that  1  v is true in m and  1  r has no model n which is preferred to m. 
　in this paper we propose a generalization of shoham's framework which is obtained by allowing  not necessarily transitive  preference relations between sets of models. from a technical point of view  considering sets of standard models is not an essential generalization  since sets of models of a standard logic l induce a partial variant of l  which is again standard. however  using arbitrary preference relations instead of preference orders is essential  since it allows more freedom to express preference. 
　the investigations were supported by the foundation for philosophical research  swon   which is subsidized by the netherlands organization for scientific research  nwo . 
1 　a consequence of the additional freedom is that in our approach default logic of  reiter  1   which is one of the major nonmonotonic formalisms  can be given a preferencebased semantics  whereas in shoham's original approach this turned out to be difficult  if not impossible. however  our relaxation of the constraints on preference-based semantics is not an ad hoc move solely motivated by the need to capture default logic  but it follows from our interpretation of the preference relation. 
　we interpret the preferences between  sets of  models as cpistemic preferences  of an ideally rational agent  between world descriptions. since an agent usually has only partial information about the world  cpistemic preferences are most naturally captured by preferences between sets of models  corresponding to partial world descriptions. in our view  an agent has in general cpistemic preferences of different kinds  which are not always easily combined into one preference order. for example  an agent may have preferences induced by factual information  induced by default information  or induced by lack of information: 
example 1 consider an agent with the following beliefs:  1  typically  it does not rain in california   1  it now rains in california. on account of beliefs  1   the agent prefers world descriptions in which it does not rain in california. however  this default preference is overridden by the preference induced by the factual belief  1  that it does ram. since the agent does not have any  factual or default  beliefs about the weather conditions in kansas  he prefers world descriptions which leave undecided the question whether it rams in kansas. 
　in our analysis of the situation  an agent has a preference for the less specific or more ignorant world descriptions  unless there is some  default or factual  information to the contrary. this leads us to consider the lexicographic aggregation oi strict partial orders  which itself is in general not a strict partial order.  see section 1 below.  requiring the aggregated preferences of an agent to form a strict partial order should in our opinion be considered to be a rationality requirement on the  default and factual  beliefs of the agent and should not be interpreted as a requirement on nonmonotonic logic. similar remarks hold for the smoothness condition of  kraus el al.  1   the boundedness condition of  makinson  1   etcetera. we return to this issue in section 1. 


	voorbraak 	1 

1 

	voorbraak 	1 


1 

if the person would not prefer f to g  either knowing that the event b obtained  or knowing that the event ~b obtained  then he docs not prefer f to g.  savage  1  p. 1  
　the sure-thing principle is closely related to the ability to reason by cases  and if one does not allow  defaults with  prerequisites  then it is indeed possible to reason by cases in default logic. 
　an obvious objection againsi the translation of defaults into free defaults is that a rule like bird tweety  : fly tweety  / fly tweety  is supposed to  fire  only whenever it has become known that tweety is a bird and it is supposed to be ignored in all other cases. but this objection implicitly interprets default logic as the logic of some agent or system for which computational issues might matter  and not as the logic of an ideally rational agent. 
1 	conclusion 
default logic can be given a preferential semantics  provided shoham's original requirement that the semantics has to be based on a strict partial order on the set of standard models is dropped. default logic can be captured by episiemic preference models  for a some standard logic l   in which a  not necessarily transitive  preference relation on the set of  partial  world descriptions is defined. these epistemic preference models for l characterize the class of nonmonotonic consequence operations for l  which satisfy inclusion  cumulative transitivity  and gil-invariancc. 
　cumulative monotonicity can be considered to be a rationality requirement on consequence operations  but this docs not imply that noncumulativc logics arc necessarily inadequate formalizations of the  nonmonotonic  reasoning of an ideally rational agent. instead  cumulative monotonicity can be seen as a constraint on the set of defaults a rational agent might believe  and in the context of default logic this constraint is for example satisfied sets of normal defaults without prerequisites. 
