 
several formalizations of cognitive state that include intentions and beliefs based on normal modal logics  nmls  have appeared in the recent literature. we argue that nmls are not an appropriate representation for intention  and provide an alternative model  one that is representationalist  in the sense that its semantic objects provide a more direct representation of cognitive state of the intending agent. we argue that this approach results in a much simpler model of intention than does the use of an nml  and that  moreover  it allows us to capture interesting properties of intention that have not been addressed in previous work 
1 	introduction 
formalizations of cognitive state that include intentions and beliefs have appeared in the recent literature 
 cohen and levesque  1a; rao and georgeff  1; shoham  1; konolige and pollack  1 . with the exception of the current authors  these have all employed normal modal logics  nmls   that is  logics in which the 
semantics of the modal operators is defined by accessibility relations over possible worlds. this is not surprising  since nmls have proven to be a powerful tool for modeling the cognitive attitudes of belief and knowledge. however  we argue that intention and belief are very different beasts  and that nmls are ill-suited to a formal theory of intention. 
　we therefore present an alternative model of intention  one that is representationalist  in the sense that its semantic objects provide a more direct representation of cognitive state of the intending agent. we argue that this approach results in a much simpler model of intention than does the use of an nml  and that  moreover  it allows us to capture interesting properties of intention that have not been addressed in previous work further  
   'supported by the office of naval research under contract no. n1-c-1. 
supported in part by a national science foundation 
young investigator's award  iri-1   by the air force 
office of scientific research  contract f1-1-j-1   and by darpa  contract f1-c-1 . 
1 	distributed al 
martha e. pollack+ 
dept. of computer science 
univ. of pittsburgh 
pittsburgh  pa 1 
the relation between belief and intention is mediated by the fundamental structure of the semantics  and is independent of any particular choice for temporal operators or theory of action. this gives us a very direct  simple  and semantically motivated theory  and one that can be conjoined with whatever temporal theory is appropriate for a given task. 
　in the next section  section 1   we make the case for a representationalist theory of intention. section 1 constitutes the technical heart of our paper: there we develop our formal model of intention. finally  in section 1  we draw some conclusions and point the way toward further development of our logic of intention. 
1 	the case for representationalism 
as we noted above  nmls have been widely and suc-
cessfully used in the formalization of belief. it is largely as a result of this success that researchers have adopted them in building models of intention. however  we ar-
gue in this section that these logics are inappropriate to models of intention: 
  the semantic rule for normal modal operators is the wrong interpretation for intention this rule leads to the confusion of an intention to do with an intention to do any logical consequence of called the .side-effect problem  bratman  1 . a simple and intuitively justifiable change in the semantic rule makes intention side-effect free  and nonnormal . 
  normal modal logics do not provide a means of re-lating intentions to one another. relations among intentions are necessary to describe the means-end connection between intentions. 
　nmls are closed under logical consequence: given a normal modal operator l  if  is true  and it follows that  is true when l represents belief  consequential closure can be taken to be an idealization: although it is obviously unrealistic in general to assume that an agent believes all the consequences of his beliefs  it is reasonable to assume this property of an ideal agent  and this idealization is acceptable in many instances. 
　however  consequential closure cannot be assumed for intention  even as an idealization. it is clear that an agent who intends to perform an action usually does not intend all the consequences of that action  or even all the 

consequences he anticipates. some of the consequences are goals of the agent  while others are  side effects  that the agent is not committed to.1 
　because nmls are subject to consequential closure  and intention is not  several strategies are used to make the logics side-effect free. they all involve relativizing the side-effects of intentions to believed consequences. the thesis of realism is that all of an agent's intended worlds are also belief worlds  cohen and levesque  1a   that is  a rational agent will not intend worlds that he believes are not possible. given the realism thesis  whenever the agent intends a and believes a  b  he will also intend 1. cohen and levesque  cohen and levesque  1b  adopt the realism thesis  and rely on claims about way an agent may change his beliefs about the connection between an intended proposition and its consequences to make their theory side-effect free. in their case  an agent who always believes that a b is always true will incur the side-effect problem when intending a. also  any analytic implication  i.e.  when a b must be true in all possible futures  will cause problems. two special cases are abstractions  e.g.  making a dinner is an abstraction of making a spaghetti dinner  and conjunctions  intending a  b implies intending a and intending 1 separately . 
　rao and georgeff  rao and georgeff  1l  point out that by relaxing realism  intentions can be made sideeffect free. weak realism is the thesis that at least one intended world is a belief world. there can thus be intention worlds that are not belief worlds. now  even though the agent believes a b  b is not an intention  because there is an intended world in which a is true but not b. weak realism seems inherently less desirable than realism  how is it possible for an agent to intend worlds he does not believe possible    and it is still not fully side-effect free  since it is closed under conjunctions and abstractions. 
　these problems do not mean we have to abandon possible worlds. in fact  with the right semantics  possible worlds are an intuitively satisfying way of representing future possibility and intention for an agent. we note that intentions divide the possible futures into those that the agent wants or prefers  and those he does not. consider the diagram of figure 1 the rectangle represents the set of possible worlds w. the scenario for a propo-
sition a is the set of worlds in w that make a true: the shaded area in the diagram. an agent that has a as an intention will be content if the actual world is any one of those in the shaded area  and will be unhappy if it is any unshaded one. the division between wanted and unwanted worlds is the important concept behind scenarios. for example  consider another proposition b that is implied by a  for concreteness  take a =  1 get my tooth filled   and b -  1 feel pain   if we just look 
   *for example  an agent may intend to go to the dentist to get his tooth filled  believing that he will feel pain as a consequence  without being committed to feeling the pain. if he discovers that the dental work is painless  he will not seek to experience the pain nonetheless. see bratman  bratman  1  and cohen and levesque  cohen and levesque  1b  for further discussion. 

figure 1: a venn diagram of two scenarios 
at interpretations within the shaded area  a and 1 both hold  and so cannot be distinguished. but the complement of these two propositions is different. a world in the area  in which the agent feels pain but does not have his tooth pulled  is an acceptable world for the intention 1  but not for a. so the interpretation rule for intention must take into account the complement of the intended worlds. as we will see in section 1  this makes intention a nonnormal modal operator. it also makes it side-effect  abstraction  and conjunction free  whether we choose realism or weak realism. 
　the representationalist part of the model comes in representing the mental state of the agent using scenarios. cognitive structures  containing elements representing intentions and the relationship among intentions  are used for this purpose. 
1 cognitive structures 
our model of intention will have two components: possible worlds that represent possible future courses of events  and cognitive structures  a representation of the mental state components of an agent. we introduce complications of the model in successive sections. to begin  we define the simplest model  a static representation of primary or  top-level  intentions. primary intentions do not depend on any other intentions that the agent currently has* 
1 	possible futures 
the concept of intention is intimately connected with choosing among course of future action. in the model  courses of action are represented by possible worlds. each possible world is a complete history  specifying states of the world at all instants of time. we assume there is a distinguished moment now in all worlds that 
　　　1this is a bit of an overstatement  since an agent's intentions change over time  and an intention that begins life as primary may later also be used in support of some other intention. in such cases we say that the intention has been overloaded. overloading is a cognitively efficient strategy for an agent to employ  pollack  i1l . for the moment  however  we will not worry about primary intentions that later are overloaded. 

   1 this definition of possible worlds is the one usually used in the philosophical literature  but differs from that of moore in  moore  1   where possible worlds are identified with states at a particular time. 
   1in this paper  we deal only with the single agent case  and thus we neither explicitly indicate the name of the  unambiguous  agent associated with any cognitive structure  nor include an agent argument in our intention or belief predicates. 
   1this enforces the condition of logical omniscience  levesque  1j on the agent's beliefs  which is not a realistic assumption. we could chose a different form for beliefs  say a set of sentences of that is not closed with respect to consequence; but it would obscure the subsequent analysis. 
1 	distributed al 





1 	distributed al 


　　　figure 1: means-ends intentions and belief. and nontrivial. 

this semantic constraint has the immediate consequence that all by-arguments are conjoined intentions  and share in all their properties. proposition 1 

but there is an additional constraint on the elaboration of intentions  having to do with their means-end relation. an agent should believe that if the elaboration is achieved  the original intention will be also. consider the diagram of figure 1  in which the agent has the intention to achieve a by achieving b; for concreteness  take the example of calling the telephone operator by dialing 1. there can be possible worlds in which b does not lead to a: for example  in using the internal phone system of a company. the correct rationality condition for an agent is that he believe  in the particular situation at hand  that achieving 1 will achieve a. this is represented by the set  of belief worlds  in which b a holds. 
　we call a model embedded if it satisfies this constraint on belief and intention structure. 
definition 1 a cognitive structure is embedded iff whenever 
it can be easily verified that this condition leads to the following theorem. 
proposition 1 in all embedded cognitive structures 

　while the embedding graph semantics is simple  it leads to interesting interactions in the statics of intention and belief. for example  in plan-recognition it can be used to determine if a recognized plan is well-formed. it is also critical to the theory of the dynamics of intention and belief. we have a preliminary theory of this dynamics expressed as a default system. 
1 	conclusion 
we have concentrated on the static relation between intention and belief  and shown how the relationship between these two can be represented simply by an appropriate semantics. the static formalism is useful in task such as plan recognition  in which one agent must determine the mental state of another using partial information. 
　more complex applications demand a dynamic theory  which is really a theory of belief and intention revision. the formalism of cognitive structures can be extended readily to time-varying mental states  by adding a state index to the model. however  the theory of revision is likely to be complicated  even more so than current belief revision models  gardenfors and makinson  1   and will probably involve elements of default reasoning. 
