 
problems of liveness and fairness are considered in multi-agent systems by means of abstract languages. different approaches to define such properties for the agents and for a multi-agent system as a whole are discussed. it turns out that the properties of a multi-agent system need not correspond to separately definable properties of the agents  e.g. a community of fair agents need not constitute a fair multi-agent system . in general  analysis and verification need the consideration of the whole system  and the agents have to be considered in the context of the system  too. the results are not unique  there are different results for deadlock freedom  liveness and fairness  respectively. 
keywords: multi-agent systems  deadlock  liveness  fairness 
1 	introduction 
problems of liveness and fairness have been studied intensively for concurrent systems. but related considerations are missing for multi-agent systems nevertheless they have been inquired e.g. already in  bond and gasser  1  . this does not mean that there are no attempts to reach fairness conditions in the multi-agent systems  e.g. by scheduling   but there is also a need to consider general problems of liveness and fairness for such systems. 
　this paper is an attempt to fill this gap from a view point of abstract languages. a first problem is the definition of deadlock-free  live or fair agents  respectively  and of deadlock-free  live or fair multi-agent systems. 
　the next problem is the relationship between e.g. fair multi-agent systems and fair agents. are the properties of a multi-agent system given by the properties of its agents  does a community of fair agents constitute a fair system  
　the last question is also of interest with respect to the analysis and verification of multi-agent systems. if the properties of a system are determined by its components  then the analysis can be done by analysing these components. but a real benefit is given only if the component analysis can be done separately for each component without regarding the whole system. 
　the latter implies that it must be possible to define the properties of the agents  locally  without  globally  referring to the whole system. in the paper  we shall introduce two approaches to the definition of properties for the agents in a multi-agent system. the  local  one fulfills this restriction but may be sometimes misleading with respect to the intuitive meaning of the properties we want to define. the  global  one on the other hand may sometimes better reflect the intuitive meanings  but it needs the consideration of the whole system. 
　the  global  notions permit also in more cases the transformation of properties of the agents to the whole system - but as stated above  this is of only limited value for a componentwise system analysis. such phenomena are well known for the verification of concurrent systems  cf. e.g.  owicki and gries  1    where in many cases only a global analysis is possible after the construction of the whole system. 
　it is interesting that the properties of deadlockfreedom  liveness  impartiality and fairness which are considered in the paper lead to different results concerning the  locally  and  globally  defined properties of agents. this can be seen as a further hint that both approaches are of interest. under certain conditions both approaches can coincide  thereby the behaviour of an agent must be in some sense independent of the rest of the system. 
　as a result  the study and the analysis of properties in multi-agent systems need in general the consideration of the system as a whole. liveness and fairness properties must be analysed for the whole system and not separately for single agents. it turns out that the behaviour of an agent should not be defined as a  stand-alone  behaviour  it must be defined and considered in the context of the underlying multi-agent system. 
　the paper is organized as follows: the properties of deadlock-freedom  liveness  impartiality and fairness are defined on the base of abstract languages after this introduction. 
　then multi-agent systems are introduced in the next section. again  abstract languages are the base for the consideration of the behaviour for both the system and the agents. the top-down approach may be the main difference to other approaches : we start with a defini-
	burkhard 	1 
　
1 	distributed al 
　
given an initial state and a sequence of actions  the resulting state can be computed if a transition table is known  but for the consideration of liveness and fairness properties the states are not obligatory. 
　in the consequence  it is sufficient to consider and to describe the systems by their behaviour  i .e. a system is given only by some prefix closed language l over a finite alphabet t where t is the set of atomar actions  or events  and l is the set of all possible action sequences  histories  which could appear in the system. concurrent behaviour is described by nondeterministic interleaving. 
　by a we denote a finite set of agents a. each agent a has a set ta of its individual actions. this is re-
flected by the following definition of multi- agent systems  burkhard  1  . 
	burkhard 	1 
　
agents arc independent of  the rest  of the system  but in the caae of not disjoint sets ta this does not mean the independence of other agents at all  cf. proposition  1  below . the problem can also be considered under the aspect of communication between agents  cf. eg.  durfee et a/.  1; genesereth et a/.  1  . then to be self-determined does not mean the absence of communication  which can be given by the common actions in the sets ta . 
　several distinctions between  locally  and  globally  defined properties of agents  cf. section 1  will disappear for self-determined agents. as a first result we can show that for a self-determined agent the infinite behaviour in the mas is in fact determined by its behaviour la in the mas: 

1 	distributed al 
to some extent on other agents. the only exception are systems were the agents act totally independent from each other  but those systems are of limited interest. 
1 	properties of agents 
concerning the question if individual properties of the agents correspond to global properties of a multi-agent system  we are obliged to define the individual properties from the individual view point of the agents. we shall discuss this in the following. 
　according to our definitions from above the properties concerning multi-agent systems can easily be defined: 

　

	burkhard 	1 
　

　if we do not regard self-determined agents then the results are mostly negative concerning the correspondence between properties of a system and properties of its agents  where the last ones are not defined using the behaviour of the whole system  otherwise several correspondences are trivial . 
the situation changes for self-determined agents. 
but then the problem of the context of an agent is only transfered since the notion of a self-determined agent itself may depend on the multi-agent system as a whole. 
1 	conclusions 
we have collected results concerning the correspondence between individual  local  properties of the single agents and the related properties of a multi-agent system. the question was if the properties of the whole system are given by the properties of its parts and vice versa. the answers to these questions are not unique. they depend on the properties in mind and they depend on the way of defining the individual properties of the agents. as less as these definitions make use of the context  i.e. of the behaviour of the whole system  as less exists a correspondence between the properties of the agents and the properties of the system. 
　in the consequence  an analysis of system properties has to consider in general the behaviour of the whole system  it can not be done by analysing the parts of the system without regarding their context given by the system. in the same sense the construction of systems with special properties can in general not be broken down only to the construction of related components. 
　there are different reasons to neglect approaches such as e.g.  build a fair system by cooperation of fair agents . thereby these reasons are of different meaning depending on the choosen approach. 
　the first reason is the problem to transform the  fair behaviour  of a  stand-alone  agent into a  fair behaviour  of the agent in the context of a multi-agent system as mentioned in section 1. the next reason are the problems to describe the fair behaviour of an agent without referring to the whole system  section 1 and 1 . the last reason is that the combination of fair agents need not lead to fair systems  section 1 . 
1 	distributed al 
　all these reasons are in the one or other form relevant for the different properties under different conditions. thus we conclude that system properties can not be achieved only by the interaction of agents  with this property . in the same tendency  the analysis of system properties can not be realized by a separate analysis of the single agents. in general a system must be analysed as a whole. 
　but there may be special conditions and laws of interaction and cooperation which permit the composition of special agents in order to obtain special system properties or which allow a separate analysis  respectively. 
