 
　we consider the question of whether or not a successful attempt to simulate human  rational  thought on a computer can contribute to our understanding of the mind  including perhaps consciousness. the now fashionable concept of  emergence  may turn out to be more appropriate  but still does not seem to provide a final answer. 
1 	introduction 
　the field of artificial intelligence  and cognitive science in general  has had many great and celebrated acliievements over the years  but  at the same time  it has brought about quite a few controversies and heated debates about the adequacy of the computational metaphor and constructivistic methodology to our understanding of the real human mind. 
　it is not the aim of this paper to profess the author's support to one or another position in the dispute or to find one more flaw in any particular scholars argument. rather  in hope of alleviating the tensions between various existing camps  i intend to propose certain conceptual distinctions which may help us find some common themes among the various claims made by scholars about the nature of thought and mind. 
　to make this long story short: i believe that a distinction between two types of mentalistic terms will serve the ai community well  one less resistant to the adjective  artificial  than the other. i have chosen  perhaps irresponsibly   thought  as the former term and  mind  as the latter term. my strategy is to include into the generic concept of thought  even those processes which can be externally and objectively described  and thus they are acceptable for an intentional constructive procedure. 
　in this respect it appears useful to consider various scales of magnitude  or levels of analysis  on which a given entity has a meaning. the distribution over scales seems to oiler a sharp distinction between complex entities in nature  like organisms or brains  
1 	invited speakers 
on the one hand  and artifacts on the other hand  cf. also  havel  1  . 
　recently  with the cormectionist boom  in addition to  artificial   a new adjective is becoming fashionable:  emergent . there are certain reasons to grant it an intermediate status between  natural  and  artificial  but for some other reasons these three concepts are hard to compare. anyway  it is too premature  i think  to argue for or against talking about emergence in connection with the mind. thus the second part of the title of this talk suggests a challenge to  more than a project for  the ai community. 
1 	making things think 
　in their textbook about ai  rich and knight 1  define this field as  the study  of  how to make computers do things which  at the moment  people do better . a simple statement  each term of which  however  needs to be discussed further. let me focus on the phrase  to make  computers  do . obviously  it refers to two different activities  making do and doing. the nature of  and difference between  these two activities should be taken into account whenever one says that some entity  object or process  is. or may be  artificial 
　the concept of the artificial presumes  firstiy  that there is some natural entity which logically admits duplication  in our case it will be the process of thought  in the generic sense of the term ; secondly  that a natural  person   the designer  has a prior intention to construct a duplicate of the natural entity in question  and. thirdly  that there has to be an intentional project  i.e. a coherent and methodical series of intentional steps leading from the prior intention to the realization of the intention. 
　the distinction between prior intention and intention in project is similar to searle's  distinction between prior intention and intention in action. if i play randomly with pieces of cloth and wire and suddenly - lo and behold! - something that looks like a ttower appears in my hands  i should not  i believe  claim that i have made an artificial flower. certainly i 
　would not say this if  let us say  in playing with the cloth and wire a wind  instead of me  had created the flower. what was missing was the prior intention to 
　
make a flower. but such an intention alone is not a sufficient condition either: even if rny random playing with the cloth and wire  or my waiting for the wind to do it for me  were accompanied with my best conscious hope that a flower would sooner or later emerge  i would still hesitate to call the flower artificial. what would be missing then is the intention in project. 
　a project not only requires a prior intention  but also an explicit design specification  i.e.  an external and objective description of all the relevant properties of the intended final product. external  because construction  unlike  for instance  learning  is an external activity; objective  because anyone else should be able  in principle  to reproduce the project in order to achieve the same outcome. 
　in terms of our definition of a project and the external and objective condition which a project demands  we can ask whether it makes sense to conceive of a project to create artificial thought  that is  to try to make something  perhaps computers  think. my claim is that any project of al would require an external and objective description of the process of thought. this is a strong requirement  indeed  and if it were satisfied there would not remain  in our age of computers  too m u c h more to do. 
1 	thought and mind 
　i have promised to propose a conception of thought that will lend validity to the project of ai  to the project of making computers think. curiously  i achieve this goal by a simple trick: by proposing a sufficiently general concept of thought. 
　tentatively  let us define thought as the act or process dealing with conceptual objects  concepts  thoughts  in an intelligible and meaningful way. 
　this requires some clarification. first  by a concep tual object we mean a representation of any entity  individuum. category  property or situation  either derived from direct experience in the real world or constructed in the course of past processes of thought. the seeming circularity  viz.  reference to thought  is harmless; it actually allows for a gradual enrichment of the process. 
　second  intelligibility means understandability by intelligent observers  for instance  by  us  . that is. the inherent overall logic of the process should be understandable  although it is not necessary to grasp the details  or the real causes of particular actions. 
　and third  the word meaningful should exclude randomly disordered  chaotic behavior on the one hand  and inert  stagnant or boringly repetitive behavior on the other hand. 
　these explanations betray the slight of hand of our simple trick: the definition does not mention causal microstructure. nor does it state an explicit requirement of a presence of an identifiable individual agent or  executor  of thought  nor does it require subjectivity or consciousness. thus  for instance  conscious thought'  artificial thought'  and 'collective thought' may be three different  perhaps related  types of realization of thought. let me illustrate the point by several examples. 
　 1  assume  first. john s.  sitting in the famous chinese room isearle  1  and manipulating chinese characters. if he understands chinese he can carry on a genuine chinese conversation. such a real conversation involves a real conscious thought. 
　 1  now assume he does not understand chinese. he can still perform a thought process  but it is much less sophisticated and has a different intention  namely  to manipulate the chinese characters  for him meaningless squiggles  according to the prescribed instructions. even this thought process is  normally  conscious but with consciousness playing a relatively insignificant role in the process itself  john 
s. could be easily substituted by a machine.  
　1  in the previous situation  john s. and the chinese room  the instructions included  perform jointly still another thought process. with the help of prescribed instructions for manipulating chinese characters  symbols whose meaning is implicitly stored in tiie instructions  they behave as if they understood chinese. i would classify this process as artificial and 
 most likely  not conscious.  here again john s. could be substituted by a machine . 
　 1  now a somewhat different case. consider the set of thinkers who have worried themselves over the chinese room problem  who talk  write  and debate about it. together they realize a collective thought process  not artificial and not conscious  unless we believe in some sort of higher  collective consciousness  '. 
　now  everything that was deliberately left aside or not mentioned in our  definition  of thought should be included in the concept of the mind. relatively vague otherwise  our concept of mind should include  in particular  all important properties ascribed to it by philosophers: intentionality  rationality  free will  mental causation  subjectivity  and  above all  consciousness. 
1 	the difference between conscious and artificial thought 
　in recent years there has been a noteworthy shift of interest in cognitive sciences and analytical philosophy towards the issue of consciousness. although in a recent monograph on neuropsychology   kolb and whishaw  1   the term  consciousness  does not 
1 i concede a certain degree of vagueness in using the adjectives conscious'  artificial'  collective'  etc.. to describe a thought process: it is not clear  for example  whether the adjectives are to be understood as different brands of process or as different brands of realization of thought processes. both interpretations are sound provided we do not take the latter alternative as meaning that all thought processes admit all brands of realization. 
	havel 	1 
appear in the index  an increasing number of scientific and philosophical books are concerned with this topic  e.g.  dennett. 1. marcel and bisiach. 1. mcginn. 1. searle 1| . whether an author grants a privileged ontological status to consciousness or whether he intends to eliminate reference to consciousness altogether  it is quite clear that ai cannot completely ignore this recalcitrant concept. 
　consciousness is a part of our inner subjective experience and as such it is not  in principle  accessible to the outside observer. therefore those functions of the mind  like conscious thought  that are intimately and inseparably connected to consciousness cannot be fully described and presented in an external and objective language without sacrificing some essential component. as we have argued above  without an explicit design specification there is no project  and without a project there is no sense in talking about something being artificial. 
　however  if we restrict ourselves to those thought processes which can be objectively described  recall our sufficiently general concept of thought   there should be no objection to anyone venturing into the project of realizing them artificially. in fact  when the description is sufficiently precise  complete and unambiguous  as it is in the case of formal algorithms  there are well-known standard tools for executing such a project  namely  programming systems and computers . there are limitations due to undecidability and complexity of certain tasks  but these limitations are not what we here consider. 
　i have argued that  in principle  conscious thought cannot be  without a substantial loss  converted into artificial thought  which claim may be taken as a re-
jection of a thesis analogous to the strong ai thesis isearle. 1| . what about the converse: is artificial thought convertible to conscious thought  in a certain sense and in certain cases the answer is. obviously  yes. the sense is the following: processes of thought which admit artificial instantiations admit  in principle  also instantiations with conscious control. recall case  1  above  manipulating meaningless squiggles in accord with a prescribed set of instructions . 
　one may argue as follows. if there are instances of artificial thought processes realizable as conscious thought processes  does it not follow  contrary to the above claim  that at least some conscious processes  namely those just mentioned  can be realized artificially  
　this argument is valid  but not philosophically interesting. our claim does not deny the possibility of extracting certain parts or certain components of conscious mental activity and converting it into  say  a computer program  with the behavior or functional structure equivalent to the behavior or functional structure of that mental activity. there are two possibilities. either the presence of consciousness is not essential for the mental activity in question  as in example  1  above  in which case the equivalence  being trivial  does not say anything at all about artificial realizability of consciousness or consciousness is essential for the mental activity  which may be the case of 
1 	invited speakers 
example  1   in which case extracting the programmable component will yield an entirely different thought process. 
　the issue of inner  first-person  conscious mental life as opposed to an outer  third-person  point of view has been thoroughly discussed by several authors  most recently by searle  1. my aim in the rest of this article is to concentrate on another aspect of mental processes or on their  natural or artificial  realizations. this other aspect is related to the variety of scales of magnitude relevant  or essential  to these processes. for this purpose  and for those who prefer the visual metaphor  let me first introduce a new imaginary  dimension  corresponding to varying scales of space and time. 
1 	scale dimensions in nature 
　perhaps we can best start with an example: consider ordinary  geographical. 1-d maps of the same region but of different scales  superimposed one on top of another  with larger-scale maps on top of smaller-scale maps. 
　we can imagine scales  expressed  say. by real numbers  without limits both  downward   to the small  microscopic and submicroscopic scales  as well as  upward   to the large  astronomical scales and beyond. assuming  moreover  a dense sequence of scales we obtain a continuum represented by a special coordinate axis. let us call it the scale axis and the corresponding dimension the scale dimension. 
　somewhere in the  middle  of the scale axis exists our habitat  the scale-local world of human magnitudes  our  scale-here . unlike the ordinary spatial  here   the natural  scale-here  has the same position on the scale axis for all people  and perhaps for animals of about our size . both spatial  here  and scale  here  are smeared and cannot be exactly localized to a point. 
　in the same way as we introduced the scale dimension for space  we can introduce the scale dimension for time representing various magnitudes or  speeds  of time. again there exists a natural  scale-here  for time scales  corresponding to the rhythms of human life and thus  under normal circumstances  common to all people. in particular  our thought processes span the interval roughly between milliseconds and 
hours.1 
1 things  events  and artifacts: their distribution over scales 
　the scale-local objects  entities of size/or duration basically accessible to humans  are a special case of 
　
objects that i shall call scale-thin  i.e. objects  occuring  in a limited range of spatial or temporal scales. we are used to organizing real-world entities according to tlieir relauvely specific position on the spaual and/or temporal scale axis and according to the m u tual relation of their positions into several categories the most common of our organizing concepts are things and events. 
　by things  we intuitively and typically mean those enuues which are separable  with identifiable shape and size  and which persist over time. events  on the other hand  typically have a relauvely short duration and are composed of the interaction of several  perhaps many things  of various sizes . however  in the world of all scales there is no essential difference: things are just long-lasung events and events arc just short-lived things  where  long  and  short  are relative with respect to our temporal scale perspective . many other entities  vortices  clouds  flames  rivers  networks  sounds  bubbles  winds  ceremonies  meetings  wars  have an intermediate character. 
   it is customary  when describing concrete phenomena in the world  to treat tlieir spaual structures  shape and internal composiuon  and their temporal structures  internal dynamics and behavior  separately. this separation  together with our scale-thin language and our scale-local perspective  helps conceptually  but  at the same time considerably narrows our perception of reality  in a way reminiscent of the baconian  idola tribus  - idols of the tribe . 
　for illustrauve purposes  let us restrict ourselves to the case of spatial scale dimension. the reader is invited to make his own generalization to the temporal scale dimension. 
　various  typical objects that we observe in nature can be categorized according to their  distribution  over scales. let me explain what  here  distribution is. first  for each such object we identify various scales relevant to its spaual features  like  for instance  sizes of its components and relative distances between interacting components. obviously  the scales cannot be identified sharply so that a continuous function over the scale axis with salient peaks or elevations around certain scales would result. let. us call this function the relevance junction or the {spatial  scale spectrum of the object. 
   now  according to the distribution of peaks in the scale spectrum we can  in a first approximation  idenufy four basic  even if not sharply separated  categories of objects. first  there are single bodies  stars  stones  dust parucles  with only one salient peak in   the scale spectrum  if we ignore the lower  molecular and atomic structure . second  there are clusters  galaxies  clouds  heaps  with two or more sparse peaks third  there are complex systems or organisms  typified by a large number of relauvely dense but still distinguishable peaks spread over a certain interval of scales  i shall return to this category later . fourth  there are scale-homogeneous structures  i.e. objects wiui continuous spectra  in a certain interval  of relevant scales. these last structures are relauvely rare in nature; examples are fractal shapes and also fluids near uieir criucal points. 
　up to now  we have classified natural objects. to extend the concept of scale spectra to h u m a n artifacts  tools  engines  computers  houses  cities   we have to reinterpret the notion of  scale  relevance. obviously  what matters here is m u c h less the relevance  of various scales  for those objects themselves than the relevance for  or from the point of view of  those who conceive  construct and use them. there are  often only a few  relevant  in this sense  scales for such ob-
jects  occasionally separated by large gaps. 
　consider  for instance  the computer as a physical object. the most important spaual scale is the local scale of users  it is the scale on which the computer is designed and meaningful . then there are several well-known relevant scales  of hardware architecture  processing units  logic circuits  semiconductors  down to the scale of quantum phenomena   each associated with a special engineering discipline and with a special design and specificauon language.1 
　whatever the scale spectrum in the designers' perspective is  there is always one and only one relevant scale  peak in the spectrum  for most artificial objects  including computers. it is the local scale  here  of us  the users  where the meaning of the object is located. 
　basically the same holds for any natural or aruficial language and  in general  for any symbolic representation  provided humans can read the language and can interpret the symbolism . symbols  symbolic patterns  and syntactic objects are suitable for conveying meaning only within a narrow range of scales  beyond which narrow range they are incomprehensible. we should bear this in mind when discussing differences between artificial and natural thought. 
1 	levels and their hierarchies 
　in the case of complex objects  there is a close relationship between their distribuuon over scales and a hierarchy of their structural  functional  or descripuonal levels. in many situauons in which we find it convenient to talk about various levels  we can also distinguish corresponding scales or ranges of scales  spaual as well as temporal. accordingly  salthe  uses the generic term scalar hierarchy whenever the levels are characterized by different scale  as opposed to the specification hierarchy with levels based on degree of specification or generality. while a scalar hierarchy may be based on the part-whole distinction. a 
　specification hierarchy is typically based on the token-type disuncuon. 
　if a certain structure or object has disunguishable salient peaks or elevauons in its scale spectrum  it is natural for us to associate with such peaks and elevauons appropriate levels of a scalar hierarchy. moreover  because our languages are not suitable for large 
* in actual computing  the temporal scale spectrum may be more important. 
	havel 	1 
scale span  we develop specific descriptional languages for particular levels. 
　to illustrate this point  let us consider a cluster  for instance a cloud of dust. such an object may be studied on the global level  for example  in terms of its overall shape and size and in terms of its global properties  like opacity  or on the level of its components  the dust particles  their individual properties  such as distribution  density  and interaction . 
　one may. of course  ask about the actual reality of levels as such. do they exist independently of our analysis and description of objects and events  i believe that sometimes they do. at least partly  but that sometimes they are  again partiy  our mental constructs. the scale-thin world of our ordinary perceptions and thoughts makes it difficult for us to grasp more than a certain limited range of scales at once. for this reason  and other reasons  we tend to decompose objects of our concern into structural levels and events  and processes  into functional levels. obvious differences of individual levels yield different descriptions  different languages and. eventually  different disciplines. if all is done properly  the decomposition may match something which approximates the real differentiation of nature. 
　there is one problem whicb may be crucial for our understanding of complex systems: whether and how can distinct  possibly distant  levels of a system directly interact. in the following section  i shall make a few comments on this problem. 
1 	interaction across levels 
　the scalar hierarchy is commonly treated in systems science with the tacit assumption that  constitutive dynamics at different scalar levels are largely screened off from each other  non-transitivity of effects across levels    isalthe. 1|  p.1   and with the resulting belief that  three contiguous levels should be sufficient to understand most of the behavior of any real system   p.1 . this assumption and belief are  in fact  included already in the term 'hierarchy'  in contrast to 'heterarchy' . according to system scientists  occasional influences from distant levels are generally considered as  perturbing fluctuations  that need not be included in a dynamical description of the system in question. i think this view is inherently connected with the explanatory role of causality in science. 
　scientists base their understanding of the processes of nature mostly on causal interaction; it is the principal explanatory apparatus yet the scale-thin conceptual field restricts our experience and intuition more or less to an infra-level  left-right  causation: we refer to an earlier event to explain a later event. therefore  the ease of treating the inter-level  micro-macro causation as unproblematic  indeed the only acceptable  type of interaction between levels  searle  1| is somewhat surprising. 
　of course  there are cases in which it is quite legitimate to employ causal explanations between levels  usually from one level to an adjacent higher level. for 
1 	invited speakers 
instance: the properties of molecules cause the growth of a crystal to a specific global shape  the disorganized movement of molecules causes brownian motion of larger particles  etc. but one has to be careful about generalizing this way of thinking to everything. for example  to say that  mental phenomena are caused by neurophysiological processes in the brain and are themselves features of the brain   searle  1  suggest too liberal an interpretation of the term  are caused   even if we agree  for the sake of understanding  on a strong assumption  namely  that there is a natural hierarchy of levels above the neurophysiological one with some higher level attributable to the mental phenomena. 
　one of the few theories in science that deal with inter-level interactions is gibbs-boltzmanns statistical physics  thermodynamics and the study of collective phenomena  it succeeds rather by eliminating the lower  microscopic  level from the macroscopiclaws through decomposition of the phase space to what is considered macroscopically relevant subsets and by introducing new concepts  such as entropy  which is  of course  a wonderful trick . as an indirect result we obtain  for example  an  explanation  of macroscopic asymmetry of  physical  time. can we  however  really say that the time asymmetry is caused by behavior of particles  
there is a well-known technique of renormalization 
 cf.e.g..  wilson. 1   which deals with problems that have multiple scales of length. it is particularly suitable for phenomena near critical points and has applications in various branches of physics. but it is not a descriptive theory of nature and  therefore  has little ontological relevance. 
　another relevant area is the study of deterministic chaos. here people become more and more used to situations in which extremely tiny fluctuations are almost instantaneously amplified to a macroscopic scale. what seems to be a purely random event on one level appears to be deterministically lawful behavior on some lower level. this is  mathematically  a recurrent situation. we can  therefore  take the deterministic description as something permanently hidden behind the scale horizon  albeit always available formally for explanatory purposes. 
　particularly interesting  and surprisingly m u c h neglected  is the compelling question of the asymmetry of interactions with respect to the scale axis. why is the arrow of putative causality  or of other natural influences  usually assumed to have a direction from lower levels to upper levels  is it the heritage of the clock-work mechanistic conception of the nature or one of its inherent asymmetries   it should be noted that not everybody excludes the idea of  downward  causation  popper and eccles  1  . 
　in this respect  we can find some inspiration in the notion of information  as an ontological category; cf. bolim's concept of active information  bohm  1   and  even perhaps  in the notion of the mind  cf section 1 . 
　
1 organisms and brains: multilevel interactional structures 
　we have used  in sec. 1  the term organism for natural objects with many relevant scales in a large interval; alternatively  we can talk about a relatively dense hierarchy of structural and/or functional levels. moreover  in living organisms  tliere is a strong m u tual interaction between particular levels. both density and interaction are crucial features here. in the computer  for example  tliere are several prominent levels and tliere is  some  interaction; but there is no density. in the fractal tliere may be density but there is no  physical  interaction. 
　let us state our key question: is it not the very existence of such a hierarchy of interacting levels that makes living organisms  and brains  diflbrent from computers  clouds  and fractals  is it not perhaps just this property that makes it so difficult to submit their behavior to a mechanistic explanation  
　1 doubt that the function  meaning  and actual being of living organisms can be associated with some particular level  or scale . each of these aspects takes place equally well on the level of molecules as on the levels of cells  organs  individuals  social groups or ecosystems. it comes about at many dilferent scales of space as well as time. 
　consider the following opinion of the physicist barrow    p.1 :  there exists a form of hierarchical structure in nature which permits us to understand the way in which aggregates of matter behave without the need to know the ultimate microstructure of matter down to the tiniest dimensions.  i am afraid that in order to accept this statement we would have first to restrict considerably the meaning of 'understand' and 'behave'. otherwise  if we wanted to apply barrow's statement  to so complex an organism as the brain we would r u n into problems of identifying the depth below which further levels cease to be significant. 
　in fact  there is a growing number of works suggesting a certain relevance to the brain activity of all levels down to the quantum scale. for instance beck and eccles  propose a mechanism whereby the probability of exocytosis of synaptic transmitters is  by means of a quantum-mechanical tunneling process  influenced by mental events. incidentally  if the lower level quantum effects happen to have a certain important role in the conscious mind  this may yield an argument for the unique scale location of the overall size of the brain. 
　in general our considerations do not favor reductionism in biology and psychology. indeed  to understand life and the mind does not mean to reduce it to some basic components  but rather to appreciate various influences  bounds  and interactions between all structural and functional levels  close as well as remote with respect to the the scale dimension. 
1 	the location of the mind 
　perhaps a similar expansion of the scope of view might help us to understand better the nature of the mind and consciousness  or at least to avoid certain persistent fallacies. one such fallacy is the belief  held by some cognitive scientists  that the mind is nothing but a collection of processes occuring on a certain privileged level above the level of neurophysiological processes in the brain. this fallacy is probably caused by at least two misconceptions. 
　the first rniconception may be the overjudgement of the computer metaphor. if someone maintains that the brain is a  sort of  computer equipped with programs and that the mind is a collection of such programs  or processes controlled by them   then he is immediately drawn to the language metaphor  that the programs may be  written  in some language . and  since languages happen to be scale-thin  cf. sec. 1   it is natural to take mind to be scale-thin too  i.e. restricted to a specific level namely the same as the level of  human  communication. 
　the second misconception may be the confusion of the intentional content of mental states with those states themselves. this content  i.e. topics of our beliefs  objects of our perceptions  images of our fantasy  and goals of our plans  are primarily tilings of ordinary size -  things wliich a baby can handle and  preferably  put into his mouth   popper and eccles  1. mental states are believed to be neurophysiological states; because it is absurd to think that neurons can handle the same things as babies  it is taken for granted that the mental level is sufficiently above the neuronal level a similar attitude is held even by some of those philosophers of the mind who are bravely opposing eliminative and reductionistjc materialism. for instance  searle  claims that  conscious states are simply higher-level features of the brain   p. 1 . 
　but is it proper  in the context of mental phenomena  to talk about  levels  at all  even if we did not restrict ourselves to the scalar hierarchy  cf. sec. 1   it would be a mistake  i believe  to treat mentalistic terms as something that should be  by their use  carefully confined to a certain  level    domain  or  subject area . 
　hofstadter  was one of the first authors who discussed the connection between mental phenomena and a hierarchy of levels. he rightly pointed to the importance of inter-level interaction on distance  including loops  but he wrongly embedded mental levels into the scalar hierarchy of functional levels of the brain and lie confused the latter with the specification hierarchy of indirect reference  p. 1 . moreover  his functional  holism  is not quite consistent with his own warning against the use of nonditterentiated language for dilferent levels of description  to which use he ascribes the many confusions in psychology. 
　it may well be the other way round. perhaps all these confusions come from precisely such strict fragmentation of concepts into levels. if  for instance  consciousness is to be understood as a property of a body  it certainly should not concern certain some or another single level but the whole living organism  penetrating  through many mutually interacting and cooperating levels  including  perhaps  even the level of quantum physics. 
	havel 	1 
　
1 	the emergence of emergence 
　i suggested that we can limit the use of the term  artificial  to those cases in which there is a clear distinction between the project and the designer  and where an external design specification is possible and both a prior intention and an intention in project are present  sec. 1 . this applies very well to the traditional logical-symbolical-computational ai  nicknamed gofai - good old-fashioned ai . 
　recent advances in connectionist architectures suggest an alternative strategy which blurs the above distinction and in which there is no presumption of an a priori external description of the structure of the task  havel  1 . one may construct a complex dynamical system in the form  typically  of a large number of mutually communicating units  and then patiently wait for an appearance of some complex emergent phenomena that might support certain processes of thought. of course  this type of thought would be somewhat alien and incomprehensible to us  and it would not fall  in our terms  into the category of the natural nor of the artificial. indeed  it would not be  entirely  natural because the requisite dynamical system  connectionistic or other  is artificial and it would not be  entirely  artificial because there is no intention in project  cf. sec. 1 . 
　this alternative strategy brings us to the idea of emergent mind. the concept of emergence  especially in the context of mental phenomena  deserves a separate study there are actually three meanings of this word  not always easy to distinguish. the traditional meaning in evolutionary theory  g. h. lewes in mid-1th century  c. lloyd morgan in early 1th century  emphasizes the temporal aspect: the rise of a system that cannot be predicted or explained from antecedent conditions  e.g. the emergence of life  of man  etc. 
　in its second meaning  the word emergence has recently been increasingly used for phenomena that appear to be natural on a certain level of analysis  but somewhat resist  though not completely exclude  their reduction to an appropriate lower level. typical examples of this are collective or mass properties: the liquidity of water  a molecule of h1o is not liquid  or democracy in society  one person cannot form a democratic system . often this type of emergence is only apparent when caused by the intractable complexity of the lower-level structure. 
　the third meaning is inspired by the second and is used often as an argument against reductionism. a property  specified by a certain theory t   is said to be  properly  emergent if it has real instances  if it is cooccurent with some property recognized in a reducing theory t1  but which cannot be reduced to any property definable in t1  cf.  churchland  1   p. 1 . property dualism is characterized by the conviction that  even if the mind is the brain  the qualities of subjective experience are nevertheless emergent with respect to the brain and its properties   ibid  p. 1 . 
   let us consider the thesis that thought occurs as an emergent phenomenon on some higher level of a hierarchical system  with low levels being purely mechanistic. this thesis would help materialistic monism avoid the concept of the soul as an unknown ghostly substance  which is regarded as flowing or flying in another world. however  if the motivation for tills avoidance is the mere resistance to accepting an unknown or unknowable entity  then not even the concept of  proper  emergence will help  at least until something more is known about the matter. for instance  as 1 pointed out earlier  there is little or no u n derstanding of interaction between different levels. 
　on the other hand  the ernergentist thesis cannot be easily refuted and we can tentatively accept it for the sake of discussing the chances of connectionist ai. 
1 	collective phenomena 
　global behavior of a connectionist system can be viewed as a specific case of a much more general concept of a collective phenomenon. collective phenom ena typically occur in large collections of individual units  the behavior of each unit being partly dependent on the behavior of some other  neighboring  units. the remaining  autonomous part of this behavior may be based on a random and/or rational individual decision. 
　the connectionist model is an example of a one-level system  all units at the same level of description . in contrast  the concept of a hierarchical collective sys tern incorporates the idea of an iterated division of larger tasks to smaller subtasks. this idea is natural for the top-down ai strategy   minsky  1    but at the same time it may support emergent collective phenomena. 
　according to the weight of the autonomous part of behavior of individual units  we can distinguish two opposite modes of global behavior or  using the language of statistical physics  two phases: 
　 1  the rigid  bureaucratic system of primitive obedient agents  low autonomy   and 
　 1  the chaotic  anarchic system where everyone does whatever he likes. 
them a sort of evolutionary stability. 
1 	invited speakers 　 cf.  dennett  1   chapter 1 . various disciplines  from physics to the social sciences  oiler many examples of mixed or intermediate cases. for instance  we may have a system of initiative agents  competing for recognition  each with his own idea  while at the same time all are attentive to the ideas of their colleagues. in a rigid system  a good  new idea can occur only with great difficulty; in the chaotic system  it is always lost; but  in the intermediate system  it may propagate easily through large areas of the network. in physical systems we encounter similar situations near phase transitions  little  1 . a great deal of attention has been recently paid to the intermediate case  called the edge of chaos  featuring interesting properties  among collective systems with highly parallel activity are interesting alternatives to classical serialcomputational models. dennett  uses the idea of multiplicity of competing agents  called homunculi  in his theory of consciousness. collective systems have extremely large combinatorial complexity  the number of global states grows exponentially with the number of units . such a complexity is not  however  a disadvantage. it yields redundancy and redundancy supports self-organization and self-improvement. 
　another interesting collective phenomenon is the emergence of islands of cooperative behavior or altru ism in a large set of egoistic individuals  axelrod. 1 . 
1 	towards a scale holism 
　let me conclude with a few more or less speculative remarks. 
　i cannot resist a suspecting that the term  emergence  is currently used mostly to conceal our ignorance of links between entities on a certain  relatively well-uderstood level  and entities observed or assumed on the next higher level  for reasons to be seen soon let us call it the first-order emergence . there is nothing wrong with such using the term provided it is just a first step in future reserach  at least in two directions. 
　one direction could be to study more thoroughly the nature of those links. we may ask  for instance  to what extent is the first-order emergence  from lower to upper level  reducible to phenomenona studied in nonlinear dynamical systems theory  like  let us say  greatly amplified fluctuations. 
　a second direction could be  i believe  of more critical importance  especially if we want to study such evasive entities as mental phenomena. i have argued above  in sec. 1  that certain complex systems  organisms  brains  should not be understood as scale-thin objects  but  rattier  as structures penetrating through many scales and featuring interactions through many levels. this argument suggests good reasons for introducing a new type of emergence that i shall call the second-order emergence. an entity is second-order emergent if it is not associated with some particular level but arises from global interaction of many levels of some scale-extended complex system. 
　my thesis is that  if the mind admits of physicalistic or naturalistic understanding at all  then such understanding should be in terms of the second-order emergence rather than the first-order emergence. this applies also to its essential components  consciousness for example.1 
one particular example might illustrate the point. 
one of the most important components of the mind is memory. this  originally mentalistic  concept is now more and more used as a feature- of a physical system - either the brain or the computer. in fact  the 
1
  i am not concerned here with the question of subjective nature of the mind. 
knowledge-memory distinction is an interesting variation on the mind-body distinction. if knowledge were emergent on a certain specific level of the scalar hierarchy  the next lower level would play the role of a substrate for syntax: it would house meaningless structures with combinatorial features allowing sufficient differentiation and assignment of atomic units of meaning. not only this assignment but even the combinatorial features can be specified only by means of an external activity  of a designer or observer  which cannot be an outcome of spontaneous emergence.  in this respect cf. isearle 1|.  
　therefore a truly emergent knowledge has to have an extended presence over many levels or over many scales with smooth downward degradation of a local semantic content. this can take place in a rather r u dimentary form already in distributed connectionistic systems  where very low-level objects  units and connections  are bearers of a minimal semantic content  undetectable but  ampliflable   typically through the cooperation of many objects  havel  1 . 
　some researchers hope that by incorporating the connectionistic or cooperative approach into ai  one may achieve substantial progress in the general project of the artificial mind. perhaps the introduction of these approaches can be considered as progress  not  however  towards anything artificial and probably not significantly towards what is essential about mind. 
　as i have tried to clarity  the artificial involves both intention and project  and the project involves both specification and solution. now  overcoming the specification issue  lack of descriptive means  by constructing only a lower-level substrate  for instance an artificial neural net  and  then  by letting emergence work is a great idea. however  this strategy tends to eliminate the designer's intentional component. moreover  such  hybrid  methodology works only in the case of first-order emergence. if it turns out that the second-order  scale-holistic  emergence is a necessary component of the mind  the hybrid methodology will fail  unless  of course  we discover the means for  creating  scale-extended objects - real organisms. 
