 
instead of trying to compare methodologies for reasoning about action on the basis of specific examples  we focus here on a general class of problems  expressible in a declarative language a. we propose three translations  p  r and b from a  representing respectively the first order methods of reasoning about action proposed by pednault and reiter and the circumscriptive approach of baker. we then prove the soundness and completeness of these translations relative to the semantics of a. this lets us compare these three methods in a mathematically precise fashion. moreover  we apply the methods of baker in a general setting and prove a theorem which shows that if the domain of interest can be expressed in a  circumscription yields results which are intuitively expected. 
1 	introduction 
most of the past work in reasoning about action has been done using nonmonotonic logics. several nonmonotonic formalisms have appeared in the literature  mccarthy  1; reiter  1; mcdermott and doyle  1; moore  1j and a number of technical results about these have been obtained. moreover  there has been a 
flurry of formalisms which are variations of the above which were designed to handle instances in which the original formalisms yield counterintuitive results1. however  the focus of most of this work has been on formalizing specific problems. this makes it very difficult to compare the different approaches as to the range of applicability of each. 
   there also have been attempts recently to reason about action in first order logic  pednault  1; schubert  1; reiter  1l . again  most of the work has been in terms of specific examples. 
   in this paper  we focus on a general class of problems  which are expressible in a simple declarative language 
   *this work was partially supported by national science foundation under grant iri-1. 
 
¡¡¡¡the most notorious among such instances is the yale shooting problem  hanks and mcdermott  1   for which a large number of solutions have been proposed. 
1 	knowledge representation 
a  introduced in  gelfond and lifschitz  1 . in that paper  the authors also define a translation from a into the language of extended logic programs and prove its soundness. our work is similar in that we provide simple translations from a into three different methodologies which have been proposed in the literature  but we prove both the soundness and completeness of the three translations relative to the semantics of a. our motivation is to precisely characterize the strengths and limitations of various formalizations of action and in that  our work is is related to that in  lifschitz  1; lin and shoham  1 . 
   the first two translations we provide use the first order methods for reasoning about action  suggested by pednault  pednault  1  and reiter  reiter  1 . the third one is the nonmonotonic formalism of circumscription. the soundness and completeness of the three translations is interesting since it lets us compare these three methodologies in a mathematically precise fashion: we get the result that they are equivalent in the sense that they all faithfully capture the semantics of a. many problems which have been discussed extensively in the literature  such as the yale shooting problem  are special cases of the formalization presented here. thus  our work yields three classes of successful formalizations of wide applicability. unlike other approaches like that in  shoham  1   in addition to reasoning forward in time  the formalizations support reasoning backwards in time as well. they also let us deal with incompletely specified initial situations. 
   the technically most difficult part of this paper is the formalization based on circumscription. it is based on the following idea of baker  baker  1 : when the abnormality predicate ab is circumscribed  the result function and the situation constant corresponding to the initial situation  so are allowed to vary. a theorem is proved which shows that the circumscription yields results which are intuitively expected. this result shows how to apply the methods in  baker  1  in a general setting. the theorem is proved in a fashion which makes it plausible that the methods of proof can be employed in other situations as well. 
   in the next section  we describe the language a which is used to formalize the domain of actions. section 1 describes pednault's approach and a translation of actions described in a which uses his scheme. section 1 presents 


	kartha 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 

	kartha 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 


1 	summary and discussion 
in this paper  we have shown that the methods in  pednault  1; reiter  1; baker  1  are applicable to a large class of problems. these methods support reasoning forward as well as backward in time. we have also compared these methods in a mathematically precise fashion. moreover  we have shown how to apply the methods in  baker  1  to reason about actions using circumscription  in a general setting. the results of this paper  in combination with the soundness theorem for the translation into logic programming from  gelfond and lifschitz  1   suggest that the computational mechanism of logic programming can be used for implementing the theories of action proposed by pednault  reiter and baker. 
   one major assumption we make is that the problem domain under consideration can be formalized in a. as is pointed out in  gelfond and lifschitz  1   a is rather limited in its expressive power. for instance  we assume here that the fluents are all independent. this means that we are spared the task of coping with the  ramification problem  . another issue we do not address here is the qualification problem. 
   it seems  however  that the methods outlined in this paper will prove capable of being extended to more complex domains. this is the topic of our ongoing research. 
acknowledgements 
i wish to thank vladimir lifschitz for discussing this work with me and for his help with the contents and presentation of this paper. i also wish to thank michael gelfond  norm mccain  jeff rickel and thomas woo for comments on an earlier draft. 
