 
in  del val and shoham  1  we showed that the postulates for belief update recently proposed by katsuno and mendelzon  l1l  can be analytically derived using the formal theory of action proposed by lin and shoham  l1l . the contribution of this paper is twofold; 
  whereas in  del val and shoham  1  we only showed that our encoding of the update problem satisfied the km postulates  here we use an independently motivated generalization of the theory of action used in that paper to provide a one-to-one correspondence between our construction and km update semantics 
  we show how the km semantics can be generalized by relaxing our construction in a number of ways  each justified in certain intuitive circumstances and each corresponding to one specific postulate. it follows that there are reasonable update operators outside the km family. 
1 	introduction 
katsuno and mendelzon  l1l  have recently proposed a characterization of belief update in terms of a set of postulates that every update operator should satisfy. though these postulates are similar in spirit to those proposed by gardenfors and colleagues  alchourron et al.  1; gardenfors  1  to characterize belief revi-
sion  one of the most novel aspects of the km proposal is the suggestion that update and revision should be seen as two distinct types of belief change. loosely speaking  the latter says that the beliefs may have been wrong and in need of revision  whereas the former says that the beliefs were correct  but the world has in the meanwhile evolved and the beliefs must be updated. according to this proposal  therefore  the problem of update is fundamentally one of reasoning about change  a problem which has received substantial attention over the years in research on non-monotonic temporal reasoning 
모the question we set out to answer in  del val and shoham  1  is the following: why should the km postulates be accepted  our answer was based on the 
1 	knowledge representation 
idea that since the basic intuition underlying update was one about change  it should be possible to reduce the km proposal to a theory of action and change. specifically  the logic behind our answer was as follows: 
  we began with an independently motivated the-ory of action  namely the one proposed in  lin and shoham  1 . 
  we provided a natural encoding of the update prob-lem in this theory of action. 
  finally  we showed that this encoding allowed us to analytically derive the km postulates. 
모this argument can be subject to a number of critic isms  some of which have been articulated by gold-
szmid! and pearl . 
  the construction of  del val and shoham  1  sat----- the postulates  but so do others  e.g.  goldszmidt and pearl  1 . the km proposal  however  seems to be more general. 
  it can be argued that the representation theorem for km operators   katsuno and mendelzon  1   reviewed in section 1  provides sufficient validation for the km proposal. 
   these are quite reasonable concerns  and our goal in this paper is to meet them. we retain the intuition that theories for reasoning about action and change should be at the basis of a solution to the problem of update  but try to answer a more general question than in  del val and shoham  1   namely: under what circumstances should the km postulates be accepted  our answer has two parts: 
  using an independently motivated generalization of our construction  in a nutshell  allowing the set of facts that  persist by default  to depend on the current state of the world   we strengthen our previous results so a s to identify a class of theories of action which stands in a one-to-one correspondence with the family of km operators. we thus address the first potential concern. 
  we show that this correspondence is only achieved by imposing certain arbitrary restrictions on the theory of action. each of the restrictions we will consider corresponds to exactly one postulate  and thus the km proposal can be seen as embodying 

these same restrictive assumptions. we will show how relaxing these assumptions leads to reasonable update operators outside the km family. we thus address the second concern. 
   in addition to answering these concerns  our construction will also allow us to shed some light on the predicate frame  which plays a key technical role in a number of papers in reasoning about action  lifschitz  1; lin and shoham  1   but whose intuitive meaning was somewhat unclear. 
   one final question concerns our specific choice of a given formal framework to encode update. admittedly  our formalization of update is comparatively complicated  but we believe the added complication is worth the price in that we can thereby make explicit the temporal evolution of the database  provide greater flexibility for update operators  and explicate the impact on update of some fundamental problems in reasoning about change. as regards to language  we use the situation calculus  which allows us to make explicit the temporal evolution of the database in a relatively simple way  and with the convenience of using fol. more generally  the idea of encoding update using techniques from reasoning about action and non-monotonic temporal reasoning is justified because these techniques have proven fruitful in formulating  and then proposing solutions to  some key problems in reasoning about change. to illustrate the connection between non-monotonic temporal reasoning and update  suppose we have a database of facts about university life  and that we want to update the database with the fact that smith is enrolled in cs1 this quarter. clearly  this new fact should not affect many other facts in the kb  such as the composition of the faculty or the color of the university buildings. on the other hand. it. should have an effect on  say  her schedule and the total number of units she is taking  and these changes can in turn have other indirect effects  e.g. on whether she is a full-time student and the amount of tuition she has to pay  which in turn may depend on other factors such as whether she is an undergraduate  etc. these are clear instances of the frame and ramification problems. in particular  it would be unreasonable to require the database user to specify in advance all what  should or should not change as a result of the update 
   we believe  therefore  that any proposed update semantics must be defended in terms of its abilits to provide solutions to these problems  as lias also been argued by reiter  l1a . the theory of action of  bin and shoham  1   has some well established properties in this regard in the case of actions with deterministic  direct and indirect.  effects  and our generalization of it appears to provide enough flexibility to deal with these problems in the context of indeterministic actions1. in principle  any other satisfactory solution to these problems could provide a foundation for update  but the generality of the results presented in this paper provides strong evidence for the reasonableness of our encoding 
	the structure of this paper is as follows 	section '1 
 
모모see section    for examples of how indeteniiinisiie actions can complicate the frame problem 
reviews katsuno and mendelzon's approach to update. section 1 encodes the update problem in situation calculus. sections 1 and 1 provide the one-to-one correspondence between km semantics and a class of theories of action. section 1 considers the consequences of relaxing some of the restrictive assumptions on the theory of action  thus generalizing the km proposal. related work is discussed in the concluding section. 
1 	update in propositional languages: review 
katsuno and mendelzon proposed eight postulates that should be satisfied by update operators. let o be an update operator for a propositional language c with a finite number of propositional variables vc the km postulates are the following: 

1 	the update problem in situation calculus 
the basic idea of our encoding of update is discussed in more detail in  del val and shoham  1 . although update is supposed to reflect changes that have taken place in the world over time  the update problem  like t hat of belief revision  is almost always formulated using a language incorporating no model of time or change. our approach consists in translating the update problem into the richer language of situation calculus  so as to make explicit this temporal information. the initial 
	del val and shoham 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

	del val and shoham 	1 

   as in the representation theorem for propositional update  this can be seen as selecting for each state of the original theory  for each model  in the propositional case  the set of closest states  models  satisfying the update formula. similar characterizations can be obtained without the sdp condition  in which case several partial orders will be associated to each state  corresponding to the various specifications of persistent at that state consistent with the persistence axiom  and for sequences of updates. using these characterizations  we can obtain the converse of theorem 1: 
t h e o r e m 1 suppose the pds  sdp  and tl conditions are satisfied. then the update operator o of definition 1 satisfies postulates  ul - us . 
1 	beyond km semantics 
so far we have achieved half the goal of this paper  with theorems 1 and 1 providing a very tight correspondence between theories of action and km semantics as said  though  since our intuition is that theories of ad ion should form the basis for update  we believe that further insight can be achieved by relaxing some of the assumptions embodied by the theories of action we have considered. the km postulates identify an interesting class of operators  but there are important operators outside this class. specifically  it can be shown that postulates 
 ul    u1    u1    u1  and  us  still hold if we lift the sdp  pds and ti assumptions from theorem 1. but the remaining postulates are lost. 
   how reasonable is  u1   consider the following example  due to goldszmidt and pearl . suppose we order a robot to paint a wall in blue or white. if the wall is initially white  then  u1  entails that it will remain white after the action. if the robot has no way of knowing the original color  however  there is no reason wh  the color of the wall should persist after the action for another example  suppose we know that fred decided today whether to leave his current job to accept another offer  but we do not know his specific decision; according to  u1   the result of updating the database current-job with current-job v new-job should be that fred rejects the offer! in both cases  the problem arises because  v'1  requires the database to remain unchanged when a dis-
junctive update arrives and the disjunction is already satisfied by the database. 
t h e o r e m 1- in the presence of ti  the operator o satisfies  u1  iff the pds condition holds 1. 
   both goldszmidt and pearl  and katsuno and mendelzon  have a possible solution to this type of problem  the latter through the operation of  erasure  . in our view. the key issue is whether certain facts should persist or not when disjunctive updates arrive; our construction allows for an explicit axiomatization of default persistence. and thus we suggest that it will provide the greatest flexibility in handling this problem. 
   1throughout this section  o is assumed to he based on definition 1. without ti  pds is still sufficient for  u1 . but is only necessary if restricted to states of the database that are  reachable  as a result of some sequence of updates 
1 	knowledge representation 
   the ti condition can also result overrestrictive in forcing the set of persistent fluents at any state to be independent of past states. this assumption is connected to postulate  u1   according to which the update of equivalent databases with equivalent formulas should produce equivalent results. in the timeless framework in which the update problem is formulated in the km proposal  the postulate appears to encode a principle of syntax independence. if we consider the evolution of the database  however  it is clear that it implies more than that. suppose the database is represented by 뷍 1at some time 1  is updated with ji to yield a database 뷍'1  and after a series of updates the database ends up at time t in a state in which it can be represented by some formula 뷍1t which is equivalent to 뷍1 according to  u1   updating 뷍t with /i should result in a database equivalent to 뷍1-
	clearly  this is not always reasonable. 	myers and 
smith  present a number of examples in which the reasonableness of treating a fact as persistent by default depends on the way in which we came to know that fact. similarly  it is easy to find examples in which some fact should be treated a s persistent or not in virtue of what causes it. for example  the practice of mountain climbing results in a high risk of injury  but the risk will disappear as soon as the practice is given up; whereas the professional practice of tennis might result in a high risk of  elbow  injury long after the practice is quit. thus  whether  high injury risk  needs to be treated as persistent depends on the circumstances that cause the risk. 

t h e o r e m g the update operator o satisfies  u1  iff it is based on a theory of action which is update equivalent 1o a theory of action satisfying the ti condition. 
   finally   u1  is connected to sdp. intuitively  a  nontrivial  violation of sdp corresponds to situations in which we do not regard our knowledge of the domain to be sufficient to uniquely determine which facts are likely to persist  or in which we want to consider the effects of alternative assumptions about persistence. this is a perhaps rare but certainly conceivable circumstance. which is not covered by k m . we have: 
t h e o r e m 1 
/. if the sdp condition holds then o satisfies  u1 . 
1. if o satisfies  u1   and the pds condition holds  then o is based on a theory of action which is update equivalent to a theory of action satisfying sdp. 
there appears to be some subtle interaction between 
 u1  and  u1   which is why the pds condition appears to be needed in order to derive sdp from  u1  in the second part of the theorem. 
1 	discussion 
in this paper  we have shown that there is a very tight correspondence between a certain class of theories of action and the class of update operators satisfying katsuno and mendelzon's update postulates. in addition to providing a one-to-one correspondence between these two classes  we have shown that there are reasonable operators that do not satisfy all the postulates  and thus that the km semantics can sometimes be too restrictive. the failure of each of the postulates than can be violated in our construction  furthermore  can be directly traced to an specific assumption on the specification of the set of facts that should  persist by default . we hope to have demonstrated that the greater complication of our construction in comparison with the km approach is worth its price in the expanded expressivity and flexibility to be gained from it. 
   reiter  1b; 1a  has proposed an account of database update in terms of recent proposals for solving the frame problem. the relation between his approach and ours is still unclear  as it is based on a slightly different theory of action. the theory that reiter uses appears vulnerable to the ramification problem  though it is too early to say whether this is a fundamental limitation; in contrast  we can handle ramifications in exactly the same way as in  del val and shoham  1   without a need to explicitly list all the conceivable circumstances in which a fluent can change its value as a result of an action or update. goldszinidt and pearl  have also provided an alternative  in this case probabilistically motivated  account of database update satisfying the km postulates  under some special handling for disjunctive updates. time is only implicit in their proposal  and. as any other km operator  theirs is covered by our construction if disjunctive updates are handled as required for km compliance. 
   our results show that important insights can be obtained by encoding the problem of database update in a theory of action. we are currently investigating whether similar insights can also be obtained for database nvision  an area in which we expect to report positive 
results in the near future. 
