 
we introduce and use a new methodology for the study of logics for action and change. the methodology allows one to define a taxonomy of reasoning problems  based in particular on the properties of the actions in those worlds where the actions take place  and on the autoepistemic assumptions that are being made. for each of a number of previously proposed logics  we have identified a corresponding class in the taxonomy  and proved that for reasoning problems within that class  the logic is guaranteed to obtain exactly the intended set of conclusions. 
1 logics of action and change: a problem of verification 
there has been much research in recent years on methods for reasoning about actions and change  and on finding solutions to the so-called  frame problems . new variants of nonmonotonic logics for common-sense reasoning have been proposed  only to be quickly refuted by counterexamples. unfortunately the results that have been obtained in this fashion are notoriously unreliable. according to the standard research methodology in the area  the evidence in favor of a proposed logic should consist of intuitive plausibility arguments and a small number of scenario examples for which the logic is proven  or claimed  to give the intended conclusions and no others. 
　clearly there is a need for more systematic results  where a proposed logic is verified for a whole class of reasoning problems and not only for single examples. recently  lin and shoham ls1l   lifschitz lif1l   and reiter rei1l  have reported such correctness results for several nonmonotonic logics which are based on the situation calculus. their approach has been to relate a nonmonotonic theory over a certain set of  common-sense  axioms  to a monotonic theory over a larger set of axioms. 
　in this paper i present another approach which differs from these previous authors in three ways. it addresses logics with explicit time  such as the integers  and not only the situation calculus. this allows one to deal with actions with extended duration  and to analyze plans 
1 	knowledge representation 
where the order of the actions is indetermined. also it is based on an underlying semantics which captures basic notions of intelligent agents. this is hoped to facilitate the use of these results for the design of practical autonomous agents. finally  rather than starting with a fixed class of reasoning problems and analyzing whether a single  proposed logic is correct or not for that class  i start by defining a taxonomy of reasoning problems. for each of several different logics i can then identify some class of reasoning problems within the taxonomy wherein the logic is provably correct. 
　the use of the taxonomy allows us to compare the range of applicability of different proposed logics. it is not clear that a broader-range logic will always be preferred  since a logic with a more narrow range of applicability maybe allows a more efficient implementation. however in order to make use of it one must have precise knowledge of whether it is correctly applicable for the application one has at hand. 
　the underlying semantics captures the basic a.i. intuitions  similar to the  agent model  of genesereth and nilsson  gn1 . in particular the notion of inertia is built into the underlying semantics. the semantics is used both for defining the taxonomy of reasoning problems  and as the basis for the assessments of applicability. 
　the definition of correctness for a logic is that for a specified class of reasoning problems  the set of intended models  as defined by the underlying semantics  equals the set of selected or preferred models. it is therefore a soundness-and-completeness condition and not only a soundness condition. 
　the present paper summarizes the current results in this research  and is by necessity quite brief. for the full account please refer to the much more detailed presentation in a forthcoming book hereafter referred to as  the book . a preliminary version is available as a departmental technical report san1 . 
1 	surface logics 
before proceeding to the underlying semantics we shall outline the logic as such  with respect to its syntax and surface semantics. the logic is essentially a two-sorted first-order logic  with  time-points  and  physical ob-
jects  as the two sorts. in addition there is a type of  features  and one or more types for the value domains 

of features. these latter types are second class in the sense that it is not possible to quantify over them  and their domains are held fixed across interpretations. 
　a statement such as  the color of box 1 is green at time 1  would be expressed as 
which can be understood as a syntactically sugared variant of 
here color *1  is an expression whose value is a feature  and g for green is a member of the value domain for the feature. propositional features such as  alive  or  loaded  are treated as features whose value domain is {t f}. 
　the temporal prefix may use an integer timepoint such as 1 or a timepoint constant symbol such as t1. it may also refer to an open or closed interval rather than a single timepoint  for example 
represents the fact that the object is green at each individual timepoint between times 1 and t1 inclusive. terms such as #1 refer to specific physical objects  and are analogous to integer timepoints in that they are the 
same across all interpretations. one may also use object constants whose values are specified in each interpretation  e.g. 
actions are expressed using action symbols which may have arguments  e.g. as in 
in such a case the same action does not apply over subintervals or superintends of  1 . ordering relations between timepoints are expressed in the natural way  for example as in t1   1. 
　the surface semantics is straightforward: for a given object domain 1  an interpretation / is a pair  m r   where m assigns values to temporal and object con-
stants independently of time  and r assigns a value to each combination of feature and timepoint. for a feature symbol with arguments such as color above  there is one feature for every choice of the argument as an ob-
ject name  e.g. #1  in the given object domain. i will write 
　the set of all features will be denoted t. a state r is a mapping from features to feature values in the appropriate domain for each feature. the set of all states will be denoted h. 
　the full details of the syntax and semantics are given in the book. 
	1 	underlying semantics: the game 
the underlying semantics is intended to capture the intuition of situations where there is a world with inertia  so that features do not change value unless there is a positive reason why they must or may do so  and agents which may perform actions that override the inertia for some of the features. it is defined in two steps  first as a 
	sandewall 	1 
action laws in a are rules for translating that language to the main language. 
	1 	intended models 
the correctness of a logic was defined above in terms of equality between the sets of intended and selected models  and we can now finalize the definition of the intended models. if a chronicle {o  a  scd  obs  is given  then the set of intended models is defined using the set of infinite developments obtained as follows. select an arbitrary world w which is exactly described by a  and select also an arbitrary ego and an arbitrary initial state. gen-
erate all possible developments which can be obtained in games between them. add an arbitrary m component  mapping from constant symbols to corresponding values  to each development. then restrict the set of developments to those where all formulas in scd u obs are satisfied  and where there is a one-to-one correspondence between actions in the development and action 
statements in scd. finally extract the m and r components from the remaining developments  obtaining a 
set of interpretations  m  r . this is the set of intended models for the given chronicle. 
1 	the ontological and epistemological taxonomy 
i will characterize classes of systems using a set of letters  where each letter indicates the presence of some special property or  speciality . basic inertia or the classical frame problem is denoted as ia  where i stands for inertia as such  and a represents  alternative results : the results of an action are conditional on the starting state  for example as when firing the gun in the yale shooting problem. c represents that concurrent actions are al-
lowed  l that actions may have delayed effects  resulting changes that occur after the period of the action itself   
etc. 
　the trajectory semantics defined above corresponds to the ontological family i a d   where d represents dependencies between features. the simpler case ia is obtained by imposing the following restriction on the trajectory semantics. for each action there must be a range of influence for the action  consisting only of those 
objects which occur as the action's arguments. the result of the action may only depend on features where all arguments are in the action's range  and only those features can have their values changed by the action.  therefore ramification is in the i a d family . 
　in addition there is a need to introduce sub-specialities which provide additional detail in the taxonomy and which will be written with a small letter. for example is denotes the subfamily of i systems where all actions take a single time-step. id denotes the subfamily where in every action and for every feature affected by the action  the feature makes a single change from its old to its new value. ad denotes the subfamily of a where all actions are deterministic  and so on. 
　all of these subspecialties can be precisely defined in terms of the trajectory semantics. for example is is characterized so that every member of trajs a r  is a 
1 	knowledge representation 

trajectory of length 1  for every a and r. ad is characterized so that trajs yi r  is a singleton for every a and r  and so on. the full catalogue of specialities and subspecialties  with their exact definitions  are in the book. 
　there is also a need to characterize the epistemological assumptions  for example regarding complete information about actions. i will use k to denote the basic assumption of full knowledge about actions  as defined above. q will represent the weaker case that is often used in planning  i.e. that for each action there is a known precondition  and in case the precondition is satisfied there is full knowledge about the possible effects of the action  otherwise not. ks represents that in addition there is full knowledge about the initial state  time 1   and kcp that there are no observations about any timepoint after the initial one. the combination of the last two conditions is written as ksp. 
　a combination of an epistemological and an ontological descriptor is formed as for example ac-is ad. such a combination characterizes a class of systems that one may wish to reason about  in this case single-step and deterministic actions  and a specific requirement on how a chronicle may describe a set of developments. such combinations are used for characterizing the applicability of logics for action and change. if a logic is stated to be correct for chronicles in the kp-isad family  it means that if one chooses an arbitrary chronicle which is formed according to the syntactic restrictions in kp  then the set of models that the logic obtains for that chronicle is essentially equal to the set of infinite developments that are obtained by the following process: 
  choose an arbitrary world  described by the trajec-tory semantics  which satisfies the is ad restrictions and which is correctly described by the a component of the given chronicle; 
  choose an arbitrary ego; 
  obtain all the possible games between the chosen world and the chosen ego  from arbitrary initial states; 
  among the developments in those games  select those which are correctly described by the given chronicle according to the requirements of kp. 
1 assessments of some simple nonmonotonic logics for action and change 
the following are the assessments of some currently proposed logics for action and change. for the full proofs and for some fine points regarding the conditions  please refer to the book. throughout it is assumed that the schedule part of the chronicle is constructed so that the 
actions are necessarily sequential. 
1 	original chronological minimization 
the original chronological minimization  ocm  according to kautz kau1  is correct for acsp-isad. in other words  the initial state must be completely specified  there must not be any observations for times later than the initial one  and all actions must take a single timestep and be deterministic. it is easy to find counterexamples when any of these restrictions is violated. 
1 	prototypical chronological minimization 
with a minor correction  ocm can be changed to prototypical chronological minimization  pcm  which is correct for kp-isan. here the initial state does not have to be completely specified  but still there must not be any observations for times later than the initial one. all actions must take a single timestep and satisfy the condition of  necessary change   which is weaker than the deterministic requirement. for example if a feature with three possible values red  yellow  green is influenced by an action  then the action is allowed to nondeterministically change the value from red to yellow or red to green  but it is not allowed to choose between switching from red to green or keeping it red. 
　the analysis of lin and shoham  which used another methodology  compare section 1   considered the kp-is ad family of reasoning problems  and they proved that pcm is correct for that family. the present result for pcm confirms and subsumes theirs. 
1 	prototypical global minimization 
the original proposal by mccarthy mcc1   which 
hanks and mcdermott formulated in general form and gave a counterexample for in their yale shooting problem paper hm1   can be characterized as prototypical global minimization of change  pgm . it is correct for consistent linear chronicles in the ac-isuan family. here there are no restrictions on the timepoints that observations refer to  but actions must be singlestep  is   satisfy the necessary change condition  an   and satisfy uniform change  iu . the last condition says that inf1 a  r  must be independent of r  i.e. the set of features that change as the result of the action must be independent of the starting state. this means that only delay actions  having no effect except the passage of time  and toggle-type actions are allowed. even an action such as loading the gun  if the gun was unloaded it becomes loaded  if it was already loaded then nothing happens  does not satisfy uniform change. 
　the definition of linear chronicle is roughly speaking that the temporal order of all actions and observations must be the same in all classical models of the chronicle. 
　the k-isuan family is very restricted. however it does not seem possible to strengthen the result: even in a slightly broader family there are counterexamples where pgm gives incorrect results. it is a surprising fact that pgm is restricted to single-step actions. 
1 formal definitions of p g m   o c m   and p c m 
the formal definitions of the three entailment criteria that have been discussed so far are as follows. let a chronicle  1  a scd obs  be given  and let w be the set of those classical models  m  r  for a scd  u obs where o is the object domain. then select a subset of w  which will be called the selected models  defined as the minimal ones according to the preference relations 
	sandewall 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


1 	syntactic approaches 
schubert sch1  and reiter rei1l   following a proposal by haas  have recently analyzed a  monotonic  approach to reasoning about action and change  called explanation closure. this approach works by incrementing the ax-
iom set with additional axioms. it therefore represents a syntactic method for reducing the intended model set  as compared to the semantic method in the logics discussed here. the explanation closure approach is monotonic once the additions to the original axiom set have been performed  but as seen from the original axioms it is still a nonmonotonic method. 
   schubert's and reiter's analyses are restricted to situation-calculus formalizations  and it remains to obtain a more general analysis for all cases offered by the use of explicit time and the trajectory semantics. 
1 	summary 
the results of this paper are on two levels. a new  systematic methodology was defined in the first half of the paper. the second part of the paper presented a number of hard results which have been obtained using this methodology. in particular we have shown that although several widely accepted temporal reasoning methods are not correct for unrestricted use  for certain classes of reasoning problems they are provably correct. in several cases we have also found that the methods were more restricted than what was previously known or intuitively obvious. 
   the systematic methodology has made it possible to identify and validate the c a m o c entailment criterion which has been proven correct for all k-ia problems i.e. all problems with simple inertia. work is in progress for assessing additional  existing logics using the same methodology  and it seems that the other classical aspects of the frame problem  such as ramification  can be analyzed by extension of the results described here. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 gn1  michael r. genesereth and nils j. nilsson. logical foundations of artificial intelligence. morgan-kaufmann publishing co.  1. 
 hm1  	steve hanks and drew mcdermott. nonmono-
tonic logics and temporal projection. artificial intelligence  1 :1  1. 
 kau1  henry kautz. the logic of persistence. in proc. a a a i 1 1   pages 1  1. 
 lif1l  vladimir lifschitz. toward a metatheory of action. in international conf. on knowledge representation and reasoning  pages 1  1.  ls1l  fangzhen lin and yoav shoham. provably correct theories of action  preliminary report . in national  u.s.  conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  1.  mcc1  john mccarthy. applications of circumscription to formalizing common sense knowledge. in proc. of the nonmonotonic reasoning workshop  pages 1  october 1. 
 new1  allen newell. the knowledge level. artificial intelligence  1 :1  1. 
 rei1l  ray reiter. the frame problem in the situation calculus: a simple solution  sometimes  and a completeness result for goal regression. in vladimir lifschitz  editor  artificial intelligence and mathematical theory of computation  pages 1. academic press  1.  san1  erik sandewall. filter preferential entailment for the logic of action in almost continuous worlds. in proc. international joint conf on artificial intelligence  detroit  usa  1.  san1  erik sandewall. features and fluents. review version of 1. technical report lith-idar-1  linkoping university  department of computer and information science  1.  sch1  lenhart schubert. monotonic solution of the frame problem in situation calculus. in henry e. kyburg  ronald p. loui  and greg n. carlson  editors  knowledge representation and defeasible reasoning  pages 1. 
kluwer  1. 	sandewall 	1 
