the logic of cognitive action 
johan van benthem 
institute for logic  language and computation 
university of amsterdam 
plantage muidergracht 1 tv amsterdam 
the netherlands 

1 cognition = representation + transformation 
human intelligence resides in our continually displayed cognitive skills  such as inference  learning  planning or searching  rather than in some static treasure house of accumulated knowledge. hence  the logical structure of cognitive activities themselves is at least as important as that of their propositional or otherwise encoded products. this general epistemological view has a long philosophical pedigree dating back to the work of  amongst others  wittgenstein  popper and toulmin  who have emphasized language games  learning strategies by trial and error  or juridical procedures as typical models for cognitive behaviour. since the seventies  such dynamic views of cognition have found a more technical expression in philosophy and linguistics  witness various formal paradigms introduced by hintikka  stalnaker  gardenfors  and the current  dutch school  in dynamic logic. we shall discuss this movement  showing how both static and more dynamic aspects of cognition can be profitably studied from a logical point of view. 
1 logical models for cognitive activity 
there are at least three major formal models for bringing out the logical structure of cognitive activities. perhaps the oldest proposal uses ideas of game theory  witness the work of lorenzen and hintikka  where winning strategies for logical games constitute the core of succesful inference or interpretation. another important dynamic model is that of proof theory  especially in its  constructivist  guises  which has acquired explicit computational overtones in its recent development by authors like martin-lof  girard and gabbay. but the prevalent paradigm so far has been what may be called programming theory  drawing upon the ideas of program and process structure found in dynamic logic 
 hoare  pratt  or process algebra  milner  bergstra & klop . what matters in all these approaches is the  software    rather than the  hardware  of cognition which is often enshrined in the popular  but misleading emphasis on turing machines. these three paradigms share some broad logical features  but they also highlight different aspects of human intelligence  all of them crucial to the above project. 
1 	invited speakers 
1 key issues in the logic of cognitive action 
in these various logical models of dynamics  several major issues may be identified. first  what is the logical structure of cognitive action  an answer would call for a fundamental set of operators creating complex procedures  whose possible universal status might give rise to an  intensional  version of church's thesis. next  what are the basic varieties of inference  there are surely different styles of reasoning involved in different cognitive activities   with their logical properties  
and how do these relate to other cognitive skills  such 
as general problem solving or memory search   finally  what kind of  architecture  will integrate the various inferential components of the resulting logical systems  ensuring their meaningful cooperation  just as humans find it easy to switch their repertoire  eventually  these individual concerns should be lifted to the many-agent case too  since a large part of human intelligence seems located in our social behaviour  for which games or distributed protocols may provide specific logical models . 
1 illustrations in artificial intelligence 
we shall demonstrate the potential impact of these general considerations in some specific current issues in ai  viz.  1  non-monotonic logic  default reasoning and the dynamics of preference   1  general proof theory of search procedures and problem solving   1  planning with dynamic logic and process theory. these examples also suggest further links between artificial intelligence and more standard areas of computer science. 
