 
we introduce a new approach to ga  genetic 
	algorithms  based problem solving. 	earlier 
gas did not contain local search  i.e. hill climbing  mechanisms  which led to optimization difficulties  especially in higher dimensions. to overcome such difficulties  we introduce a 
 bug-based  search strategy  and implement a system called bugs1. the ideas behind this new approach are derived from biologically realistic bug behaviors. these ideas were confirmed empirically by applying them to some optimization and computer vision problems. 
1 	introduction 
this paper introduces a new ga  genetic algorithms  based approach to evolutionary learning. the purpose of our research is to apply artificial life systems to practical problem solving or to establish problem solving from nature. 
   traditional gas optimize functions by adaptive combination  crossover  and mutation of coded solutions to problems  i.e. points in the problem's search space   goldberg1 . these genetic search mechanisms often suffer from optimization difficulties cased by premature convergence  schaffer1  or hamming cliff  caruana1 . although some recent works intend to realize local search operators for gas  ackley1  muhlenbein1   it is very difficult to switch gradually from global search to local search by adaptive methods. moreover  as shown in  rechenberg1   for search in higher dimensions typical in computer vision applications  e.g. see the 1 dimensional search space of fig.1  there is little hope in using random search or simple recombination methods. however  even for a higher dimensional space  in general the essential search dimensions are relatively few. thus the best way is to climb up the gradient hill in these essential dimensions. 
　to solve these difficulties  we present an evolutionary learning system  called bugs1. in our earlier paper  we described the implementation of bugs  a bug-based search system using gas  iba1a . the basic idea of bugs is that the ga chromosomes represent directional control codes rather than positional vectors and that selection criteria is based on cumulative fitness. these 
1 machine learning 
hugo de garis 1 	taisuke sato 1 
1 brain builder group  
atr human information processing research laboratories  
1 hikari-dai  seiko-cho  soraku-gun  kyoto  1  japan. degaris hip.atr.co.jp 
are derived from evolutionary learning models of predatory behaviors  iba1c . bugs1 extends bugs by incorporating more biologically realistic bug behaviors  such as sexual/asexual reproductions  variable size of population  resource sharing and resource competition. in the extended strategy an analogy is made between the value  at a given point  of a function to be maximized  and the density of bacteria at that point. as a result  the usual ga adaptive search method is integrated more naturally with hill climbing search. these ideas are empirically confirmed by applying them to optimization and computer vision problems. 
1 evolution of predatory behaviors using genetic search 
this section introduces the fundamental idea that our 
bugs1 program is based on. we experimented with the evolution of bugs which possess  predatory behaviors   i.e. the evolution of bugs which learn to hunt bacteria. the original motivation for these experiments was derived from  dewdney1 . bugs learn to move to those regions in the search space where the bacterial concentration is highest. since the bug concentration is set up to be proportional to the local value of the function to be maximized in the search space  the  stabilized  bug concentrations are proportional to these search space values. hence the bugs learn  ga style  to be hill climbers. 
1 	bugs hunt bacteria 
fig. 1 a  illustrates the world in which our bugs  large dots  live  a 1 cellular grid . they feed on bacteria  small dots  which are continually being deposited. normal bacterial deposition rate is roughly 1 bacterium per  ga  generation over the whole grid. each bug has its internal energy source. the maximum energy supply of a bug is set at 1 units. when a bug's energy supply is exhausted  the bug dies and disappears. each bacterium eaten provides a bug with 1 units of energy  which is enough to make 1 moves  where a move is defined to be one of six possible directional displacements of the bug as shown in fig.1. 
　a bug's motion is determined by coded instructions on its gene code.vsix directions a bug can move are labeled f  r  hr  rv  hl and l for forward  right  hard right  reverse  hard left  and left. the ga chromosome format for these bugs is an integer valued 1-vector expressed 

in their order  f r hr rv hl l   e.g.  1 1 1   as shown in the window on fig. 1 a  . when a bug is to make a move  it will move in direction di  e.g. d1 = hr  with a probability p d    which is determined by the formula where ai is the i-the component value of the 1-vector  e.g. a1 = 1 above . once a move is made  a new directional orientation needs to be made. fig.1 shows the new fnext directions  e.g. if the move is r  new forward direction will be to the right  i.e. east . for instance  a bug with a gene code of  1 1 1  turns frequently in direction r that it is highly likely to move in a circle. 
　after 1 moves  i.e. when it attains an  age  of 1   the bug is said to be  mature  and is ready to reproduce if it is  strong   i.e. its energy is greater than some threshold value of 1 energy units . there are two types of reproduction  asexual and sexual. with asexual reproduction  a strong mature bug disappears and is replaced by two new bugs  in the same cell on the grid . each daughter bug has half of the energy of its parent. the genes of each daughter bugs are mutated as follows. one of the components of the directional 1-vector is chosen with uniform probability. the value of the direction is replaced by a new value chosen with uniform probability  over the integer range of e.g.  1  . sexual reproduction occurs when two strong mature bugs  meet   i.e. they move within a threshold distance from each other called the  reproductive radius  . the distance between two parents is defined as the euclidean distance between the two parents. the reproductive radius is set at 1. the two parents continue to live and are joined by the two daughter bugs  where one daughter is placed in the grid position of one of the parents and similarly for their other daughter. each parent loses half its energy in the sexual reproductive process. as a result  two children are born  whose energies are half of the average of parents' energies. the children's genes are obtained by applying mutation and uniform crossover operators to the parents' genes. thus these reproductions are constrained with probabilities. 
　fig. 1 b  shows the results of the first simple experiment. the simulation began with 1 bugs with random genetic structures. most of the bugs jittered from side to side unpredictably and are called  jitterbugs . they are likely to starve to death because they eat up most of the food in their immediate vicinity and are unable to explore more widely. in time  cruiser  bugs evolve  which move forward most of the time and turn left or right occasionally.  note that if a bug hits an edge of the grid  it stays there until an appropriate move displaces it away from that grid edge.  these  cruiser  bugs succeed in finding food and thus dominate the entire population. a typical chromosome for a  cruiser  bug is shown in the sub-window of fig.l b ; i.e.  1 1 1 . the remarkable features of this chromosome  1-vector  are as follows. 
	iba et al. 	1 

1. the forward gene  f  is large  1 . 
1. the reverse gene  rv  is small  1 . 
1. one of the right  r   left  l   hard right  hr  and hard left  hl  is of middle size  1 . 
the second feature is important because bugs with large 
 reverse   rv  gene values create  twirlers  which make too many turns in one direction. such unfortunate creatures usually die. the third feature is also essential  because intelligent bugs have to avoid loitering around wall edges. 
eden  the jitterbugs were more rewarded for their jittering around small areas. thus two kinds of  species  evolved  i.e. cruisers and twirlers   fig.1 c  . note how typical gene codes of these two species differed from each other. in this second experiment  we compared three different strategies  asexual reproduction  sexual reproduction  and sexual reproduction within reproductive radius  in four different situations. the aim is to evolve a mix of bugs  namely  cruisers  and  twirlers . we test two initial conditions; a  randomized initial bugs and b   cruisers  already evolved. in addition  the influence of 

1 	an empty area in which no bacteria exist is investigated. 
obviously this empty-area condition makes the problem easier. the results of these experiments are as follows:-
machine learning 


	iba et al. 	1 

asexual reproduction can only occur with a probability p 
asex 
　the bugs1 version of the genetic algorithm bugsga t  is shown in table 1. 
this subroutine works in much the same way as a real 　instead of raw vision data  we use data pre-processed by smoothing techniques such as the  median filter   nevatia1 . the parameters for experiments are as follows. we used a selection process to weed out hopeless  i.e. low fitness  bugs  selection period and selection rate . is based on the cumulative fitness  i.e. the energy  see  1  . to summarize  the difference between a usual real valued ga  wright1  and bugs1 is as follows :-table 1 parameters 
fig.1 d  shows the results for three-line fitting problems. valued ga  except that it operates on the directional code  dx   and not on the positional vector  x . positions are thus untouched by the adaptive process of the ga  and are changed only gradually as a result of dx increments. on the other hand  the fitness is evaluated using the positional potential  which is the same as for a real valued ga. furthermore  chromosome selection 
each small  streak  in the  r  1 -plane represents one bug. the tail of each bug represents dx  length and direction  and the dot size indicates fitness  the larger fitness  the bigger dot . bugs share resources and compete with each other appropriately  which means they hill-climb over the r - 1 plane. fig.1 c  illustrates the approximate search space which maps the fitness f r 1   vertical axis  in the r - 1 plane. note that different  species  of bugs correspond to these optima. 
　in a second experiment  we tried to derive a model description using  super quadric forms from vision data  normals and positions . the  super ellipsoidal shape model is represented in total by these eleven independent parameters. fitness value is defined using the error-offit measure in depth and surface orientation. the results  such as shown in fig.1  were so satisfactory that we have confirmed the effectiveness of bugs1. see  iba1a 1d  for more details of this experiment. 
	1 	discussion 
we conducted further experiments to show how the bugs in our bugs1 program evolved  and how they were used to solve certain optimization problems  iba1a . to facilitate comparison with earlier ga optimization solutions  we used several  benchmark  optimization problems  such as traveling salesman problem  tsp   n-queen problems  and dejong's standard functions  booker1 . these empirical studies highlighted the advantage of 
bugs1 over usual ga approaches:-
1. direction-based gas establish an effective  coarse to fine  search approach. this is realized by tail-shrinking mechanisms  in which directional code vectors dx are adaptively changed over the generations  so as to switch from global to local search. 
1. energy-based selection integrates ga search with hill-climbing mechanisms. 
1. for search in higher dimensions  using direction-based gas  with energy-based selection  lead to adaptive acquisition of only the essential search dimensions  which are known to be relatively few in general  rechenberg1 . 
　therefore we believe that bugs1 can be applied to wider and more practical areas. furthermore  this direction-based evolution is somewhat similar to the 
machine learning 


	iba et at. 	1 

strategic learning of a meta-ga. informally  a metaga's search control can be regarded as a generalization of the adaptation of the bugs' directions. current work involves extending the bugs1 approach to a more structured  hierarchical  form of strategic learning  e.g using meta-gas  iba1b . 
1 	conclusion 
this paper has described a system called bugs1 which has combined the adaptive nature of traditional ga type search  with a hill-climbing mechanism. the basic idea of this combination is derived from the simulation of bugs which learn to hunt bacteria. we experimented with a  bug searcher  program as a preliminary study  and found that bugs evolve different types of search strategies for different niches. in order to show how well bugs1 performs  we undertook several experiments  e.g. line fitting  and the recovery of shapes in a computer vision application. to improve the evolution of the behavior of the bugs  we introduced some ideas for making the bugs more biologically realistic. 
   we believe that our bugs1 system can be applied to broader and more practical areas  such as symbolic learning or the acquisition of meta-strategies. further research on these ideas is currently under way. 
acknowledgment. 
we have profit ted from many suggestions and discussions with members of our section and laboratory. we also would like to thank thomas weigert for helping us to improve the english of this paper  sumitaka akiba for helping us with the graphical implementation of bugs1 and yumiko owada for rearranging figures. 
