 
a counterpart to von neumann and morgenstern' expected utility theory is proposed in the framework of possibility theory. the existence of a utility function  representing a preference ordering among possibility distributions  on the consequences of decision-maker's actions  that satisfies a series of axioms pertaining to decision-maker's behavior  is established. the obtained utility is a generalization of wald's criterion  which is recovered in case of total ignorance; when ignorance is only partial  the utility takes into account the fact that some situations are more plausible than others. mathematically  the qualitative utility is nothing but the necessity measure of a fuzzy event in the sense of possibility theory  a so-called sugeno integral . the possibilistic representation of uncertainty  which only requires a linearly ordered scale  is qualitative in nature. only max  min and order-reversing operations are used on the scale. the axioms express a risk-averse behavior of the decision maker and correspond to a pessimistic view of what may happen. the proposed qualitative utility function is currently used in flexible constraint satisfaction problems under incomplete information. it can also be used in association with possibilistic logic  which is tailored to reasoning under incomplete states of knowledge. 
1 	introduction 
standard approaches to decision under uncertainty are based on maximum expected utility theory. the expected utility criterion is particularly appealing since it can be justified on the basis of an axiomatic approach  von neumann & morgenstern  1 . however  its application requires that both numerical probabilities and utilities about the consequences of actions are available. the representation of incomplete states of knowledge has led artificial intelligence to introduce non-probabilistic models ot  uncertainty such as shafer's theory of evidence  possibility theory  and nonmonotonic logics. these approaches seem particularly suitable for the representation of states of partial ignorance in an unbiased way; see  dubois et al.  1c  for a discussion. on the basis of a careful distinction between reasoning tasks  where consequences of the actual state of information are only propagated  and decision tasks  where 
choices are elaborated taking into account both uncertainty and preferences   it can be advocated that the probabilistic approach can still be used at the decision level even if another framework is used for knowledge representation and reasoning purposes; thus smets  has proposed a socalled  pignistic  transformation for computing meaningful probabilities  in a decision-theoretic perspective  from belief functions representing the available information. 
¡¡possibility theory provides a faithful representation of partial ignorance  but its core is also qualitative in nature since it only requires a scale where max  min and order-reversing operations can be defined. this qualitative nature agrees with the fact that only poor and incomplete information is available in many practical situations. in order to cope with such situations  several proposals for a qualitative decision theory have been recently presented by pearl   tan & pearl  1a b  on the one hand and by boutilier  on the other hand. both approaches are connected with default reasoning for the handling of uncertain pieces of knowledge; the former  which relates to spohn  ordinal conditional  kappa  functions  requires the use of scales where the sum or the product are meaningful  while the latter somewhat gets rid of uncertainty by considering the most plausible states of the world only  when making a decision. the possibilistic approach which is presented in this paper is different in various respects. first  possibilistic utility obeys a series of axioms which may be regarded as a qualitative counterpart to von neumann & morgenstern  axioms. second  uncertainty and preferences are both estimated on ordinal scales where the only meaningful operations are max  min and the reversing of the ordering. third  the proposed decision theory is closely associated with an approach to the modelling of uncertainty  here the theory of possibility introduced by zadeh . fourth  a kind of commensurateness assumption between possibility levels and preference levels is made  such that a decision rates all the better as it makes undesirable states of affairs less possible. this assumption leads to a framework where decisions under incomplete information can be completely ordered  although without resorting to numerical representation. 
¡¡the next section presents the axioms proposed as a basis for qualitative utility when uncertainty is modelled by means of possibility distributions. section 1 establishes the existence of a qualitative utility function and explains how to compute it. section 1 provides a brief discussion of the qualitative expected utility which has been obtained. section 1 illustrates the usefulness of the qualitative utility function in order to estimate the degree of satisfaction of a flexible constraint under uncertainty. section 1 discusses how uncertainty and preference can be jointly handled using possibilistic logic and possibilistic utility theory. 
1 	axioms for a qualitative utility theory 
let x be a set of situations  states of the world   supposedly finite. after savage   an act is a function f from x to c  the set of possible consequences of the act. this function is attached to a particular decision and specifies what is the consequence of being in situation x when the decision is made; f x  is sometimes interpreted as the expected pay-off of the act  when x€ x is the situation. it is supposed that 


	dubois and prade 	1 



	dubois and prade 	1 




	dubois and prade 	1 

in the above example  the rules are not conflicting. in the case of conflicting rules one may use the method developed by benferhat et al.  for encoding exception-prone rules in possibilistic logic. 
1 	c o n c l u d i n g r e m a r k s 
we have proposed a utility-based  axiomatically-grounded  decision theory which only requires ordinal scales for the assessment of uncertainty and preferences. the proposed approach opens the road to a genuine decision theory in the framework of possibility theory  a long term goal which was already at the basis of the work of the english economist shackle . it can be applied in problems where the information is very rough and qualitative  including decision-theoretic planning. if we can afford scales with a somewhat richer structure  we may  for instance  as suggested at the end of section 1  use a product-based rather than a min-based approach. due to the equivalence between  max-product  possibility theory and spohn 's ordinal conditional  kappa  functions up to a rescaling  see  dubois & prade  1    it would lead to a decision-theoretic framework for kappa functions  whose axiomatization could be investigated both in the possibilistic setting and in the von neumann-morgenstern framework  with infinitesimal lotteries . this is a topic for further research. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 benferhat et al.  1 s. benferhat. d. dubois  and h. prade. representing default rules in possibilistic logic. in proc. 1rd inter. conf. on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning  kr'1   pages 1  cambridge  ma  1. 
 boutilier  1  c. boutilier  toward a logic for qualitative decision theory. in proc. 1th inter. conf. on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning  kr'1   j. doyle et al.  eds.   pages 1  bonn  germany  1. 
 dubois  1  d. dubois. generalized probabilistic independence and its implications for utility. operations research letters  1 :1. 1. 
 dubois & prade 1  d. dubois  and h. pradc. fuzzy sets and systems. academic press  new york  1. 
 dubois & prade  1  d. dubois  and h. prade. possibility theory. plenum press  new york  1. 
 dubois & prade  1a  d. dubois  and h. prade. aggregation of possibility measures. in multiperson decision making 
using fuzzy sets and possibility theory  j. kacprzyk  and m. fedrizzi  eds.   pages 1  kluwer academic publ.  dordrecht  1. 
 dubois & prade  1  d. dubois  and h. prade. epistemic entrenchment and possibilistic logic. artificial intelligence  1-1  1. 
 dubois et al.  1  d. dubois  j.c. fodor  h. prade  and m. roubens. aggregation of decomposable measures with application to utility theory. tech. report irit/1-r  irit  univ. p. sabatier  toulouse  1. to appear in theory and decision. 
 dubois et al.  1a  d. dubois  h. fargier  and h. prade. propagation and satisfaction of flexible constraints. in fuzzy sets  neural networks  and soft computing  r.r. 
yager  and l.a. zadeh  eds.   pages 1. van nostrand reinhold  new york  1. 
 dubois et al.  1b  d. dubois  j. lang  and h. prade. automated reasoning using possibilistic logic: semantics  belief revision  and variable certainty weights. ieee trans. 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 
on knowledge and data engineering  1 l :1  1. 
 dubois et al.  1c  d. dubois  h. prade  and ph. smets. 
representing partial ignorance. in: tech. report irit/1-r  irit  univ. p. sabatier  toulouse  france  1. also in ieee trans  on systems  man and cybernetics  to appear. 
 dubois et al.  1  d. dubois  h. fargier. and h. prade. fuzzy constraints in job-shop scheduling. to appear in j. intelligent manufacturing  1. 
 freuder 1  b.c. freuder. partial constraint satisfaction. in proc. ilth inter. joint conf. on artificial intelligence  ijcai'1   pages 1  detroit  michigan  1. 
 hougaard and keiding  1  j.l. hougaard  and h. keiding. representation of preferences on fuzzy measures by a fuzzy integral. institute of economics  university of copenhagen  1. 
 inuiguchi et al.  1  m. inuiguchi  h. ichihashi  and h. 
tanaka. possibilistic linear programming with measurable mulliattribute value functions. orsa j. on computing  1 :1  1. 
 pearl. 1  j. pearl. from qualitative utility to conditional 
 ought to . in: proc. 1th inter. conf on uncertainty in artificial intelligence  d. heckerman  and h. mamdani  eds.   pages 1  morgan & kaufmann  san mateo  ca  1. 
 savage  1  l j . savage. the foundations of statistics. dover. new york. 1. 
 shackle  1  g.l.s. shackle. decision  order and time in human affairs.  1nd edition  cambridge university press  cambridge  uk. 1. 
| smets  1  ph. smets. constructing the pignistic probability function in a context of uncertainty. in 
uncertainty in artificial intelligence  vol. 1  m. henrion et al.  eds. . pages 1  north-holland  amsterdam  1. 
 spohn  1  w. spohn. ordinal conditional functions: a dynamic theory of epistemic states. in causation in decision  belief change  and statistics  w.l. harper  and b. skyrms  eds.   pages 1  kluwer academic publ.  1. 
 sugeno  1  m. sugeno. theory of fuzzy integrals and its applications. doctoral thesis. tokyo institute of 
technology  1. 
 tan & pearl  1a  s.w. tan  and j. pearl. specification and evaluation of p