peoplefinder: a multimodal multimedia communications tool for interconnecting office staff 
innes a. ferguson and james d. davlouros 
knowledge systems laboratory  iit  
national research council 
ottawa  on  canada 
	innes ai.iit.nrc.ca; 	james cais.dsm.sp-agency.ca 

a b s t r a c t 
the peoplefinder is a knowledge-based tool to assist users in determining the whereabouts of other staff located in an office or network environment. the tool makes use of several modes of input and output  as well as employing a number of interface and communications media with which to present information and interconnect geographically distributed system users. the accompanying video contains example uses of the tool which help illustrate some of its functionality. 
peoplefinder 
the peoplefinder employs agent-oriented design techniques as a way of integrating a variety of heterogeneous applications running on a number of different computing platforms and operating systems. specifically  the peoplefinder's functionality is carried out by a collection of coordinated software agents which can 
1. assume user-delegated tasks  e.g. interpreting spoken commands  invoking email and voice recording tools  dialing out on a phone ; 
1. perform a number of application level tasks  e.g. updating the graphical user interface  applying heuristics to decide whether and/or how system users want to be contacted ; and 
1. carry out a number of lower level operating system level activities  the majority of which will be beyond the level of expertise of most casual system users  e.g. translating between different speech encoding formats  establishing which users are logged on to the various multi-platform computer networks throughout the building . 
　the agents used in the peoplefinder application are based on the calvin open agent framework  ferguson and davlouros 1  which in turn is an extension of the touringmachine architecture  ferguson 1 .l this framework provides application developers with a powerful set of agent programming tools 
*the communicating agents living vicariously in 
networks 	 calvin  	architecture is 	an 	agent frameincluding libraries of intra- and inter-agent protocols  e.g. kqml 1    sensory and effectory apparatus  internal behavior apis  persistent storage management  and  currently under consideration  corba compliance. 
　besides providing an added level of flexibility and robustness to the overall system behavior  ferguson 1   the existence of multiple autonomous - and  therefore  concurrently operating - agents also facilitates the application of multiple channels of interaction between human and system  faure and julia 1 . a number of similar benefits and issues have been identified in the application of the open agent architecture  cohen et al. 1  to the management of email; in particular  the roles of such agent skills as delegation   the ability to receive a task to be performed without the user's having to state all the details    datadtrtcttd execution   the ability to monitor local or remote events  such as database updates  os  or network activities    and communication   the ability to enlist other agents ... in order to accomplish a task  . in addition  the peoplefinder can be seen to offer a number of desirable features which are characteristic of technology for telepresence; that is  technology which provides  despite geographical or temporal distance  a sense of social proximity - a kind of social prosthesis for overcoming gaps and weaknesses with an organizational structure  giachino 1; buxton 1 . 
　briefly  some of the key design features of the peoplefinder include: 
  agent-oriented design. the system is based on a number of coordinated autonomous agents  each specialized in one or more system tasks  a number of which have been mentioned above. 
  m u l t i m o d a l interaction. the system makes use of various input and output modalities for human-
work developed at the national research council's knowledge systems laboratory. see www page http://ai.iit.nrc.ca/calvin/title.html for more details. 
1
　　the knowledge query and manipulation language  kqml  is a protocol intended to support interoperability among intelligent agents in distributed applications  finin et al. 1; werkman 1  
	ferguson and davlouros 	1 

computer interaction; in particular  the keyboard  mouse  and speech for input  and audio and screenbased feedback for output. 
  multimedia presentation. the system makes use of a number of different media for humancomputer interaction; in particular text  graphics  animation  and prerecorded video  the latter acting as a  cheap   but nevertheless very effective  substitute for in-office video cameras and/or active badges1  
  communications-oriented capabilities. the system enables transparent communication across different computer platforms  macintosh  unix  and facilitates the interconnection of system users via telephone  email  and voice messaging. 
　a number of features of the calvin architecture have proven useful for developing multimodal applications that integrate a number of distributed media resources. in particular  rapid responses to users' commands are facilitated through integration of appropriate reactive behaviors in the system's interface and user agents  ferguson and davlouros 1 ; in addition  blending of complementary input modalities is facilitated through the execution of multiple concurrent agents  which in turn are able to execute multiple concurrent  task-specific behaviors . 
　current work already underway includes porting the graphical user interface portion of the peoplefinder to both pc and unix platforms  in the interest of extending the tool's audience and ensuring a more thorough testing and empirical evaluation phase of the project ; integrating a number of other software applications such as teleconferencing  voice dictation  and video camera-based face recognition; extending agents' capabilities for autonomously resolving run-time conflicts resulting from shared access to the different presentation and communications resources used by the system  see werkman's kbn negotiation-based conflict resolution work for related issues  werkman 1  ; and formalizing the various rules used by the peoplefinder to combine multiple media with multiple modalities for both hum an-computer interaction and computer supported human-human communication  much along the lines of the work of arens et al  arens et al. 1  on allocating multiple media. 
　the tool is implemented using a variety of different scripting languages  applescript  quickeys  and cshell  and runs on a macintosh quadra 1 av. the tool also makes use of the macintosh's apple phone tool and geoport telecom adapter for performing its various computer-telephony integration tasks. 
