the logic of dynamic systems 
	m i c h a e l 	t h i e l s c h e r 
intellektik  i n f o r m a t i k   t h d a r m s t a d t 
alexanderstraiie 1  d-1 d a r m s t a d t   g e r m a n y   mit intellektik.informatik.th-darmstadt.de 

a b s t r a c t 
a formal theory of actions and change in dynamic systems is presented. our formalism is based on the paradigm that state transitions in a system naturally occur while time passes by; one or more agents have the possibility to direct the development of the system by executing actions. our theory covers concurrency of actions and events and includes a natural way to express delayed effects and nondeterminism. a uniform semantics for specifications of dynamic systems is developed  which enables us to express solutions to problems like temporal projection  planning and postdiction in terms of logical entailment. 
1 	introduction 
a common assumption underlying most formal theories of actions  such as  gelfond and lifschitz  1; sandewall  1   is that state transitions in dynamic systems only occur when some agent executes an action- otherwise the state of the system is assumed to be stable. as pointed out for instance in  pollack  1   this view is often too restrictive if one intends to model more realistic scenarios where one or more autonomous agents act in a complex world. in this paper  we present an alternative theory of dynamic systems that is based on a different paradigm: state transitions naturally occur while time passes by. a reasoning agent might influence and direct the development of the system by initiating actions but the system is not assumed to pause in case there are no explicit actions.1 
   the aim of this paper is to develop a logic-oriented  formal theory of dynamically changing worlds and the process of acting in them. we will show that our view provides naturally two main characteristic features. first  the notion of parallelism is an intrinsic element of our theory. this notion includes the concurrent execution of actions as well as the simultaneous occurrence of events. second  we can easily model delayed effects of actions by initiating additional independent 
1
¡¡¡¡a similar principle was recently introduced in  grobe  1  in the context of a modal logic approach to reasoning about actions. 
1 	temporal reasoning 
events which eventually trigger a particular effect. this is the case since parallelism normally means that the various changes during a state transition are simultaneously caused by several reasons. 
   when specifying a dynamic system  a major challenge is to find a compact description of the underlying causal model  which defines the space of possible state changes in the course of time. our theory includes these two fundamental concepts: first  the persistence assumption1  which enables one to state explicitly only what changes during a single state transition while everything else is implicitly assumed to remain unchanged. second  atomic causal laws are used to state relationships between single cause-effect-pairs. since usually several of these atomic laws apply to the current state of a dynamic system  a combination of such laws determines the complete transition step. the use of atomic causal relationships is especially necessary in theories which involve concurrency of actions and events. 
¡¡the major application of formal specifications of dynamic systems is to address one of the following three problem categories: 
  in a temporal projection problem  one is interested in the result of executing a particular sequence of actions starting in a particular state of the system. 
  in a planning problem  the question is whether a sequence of actions  taken as a plan  can be found whose execution in the system results in the satisfaction of a given goal. below  we will illustrate that our theory enables us to formulate more general planning problems compared to the classical ai definition of planning. we are able to specify that the properties we strive for might be distributed over several states of the system and need not necessarily be satisfied in a single final state  until otherwise required. 
  in a postdiction problem1  one is faced with a narrative which is represented by a number of observations regarding a system's development during a specific period. these observations are used to derive more information about what has happened. our theory generalizes former work such as  gelfond 
1
 also called frame assumption or inertia principle 
'called chronicle completion in  sandewall  1  

and lifschitz  1; sandewall  1  in so far as the sequence of actions performed during the period in question is not necessarily completely known. 
in the course of this paper  we will give precise definitions of all these three problem categories in terms of our theory. we will illustrate that this results in a model-based semantics for formal specifications of dynamic systems along with particular problem instances  which enables us to define solutions to such problems in terms of logical entailment. 
   the paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we define deterministic dynamic systems  where a unique successor state can always be determined provided the current state is completely known. for sake of simplicity  we focus on so-called propositional dynamic systems  where states are described by means of a finite number of propositional constants. we introduce the notion of a logical formula to describe properties of system states. such a formula can be used  for instance  to specify which combinations of truth values for the underlying propositional constants denote impossible  inconsistent  states. in section 1  we define the notions of persistence assumption and atomic causal laws; they both are fundamental for a compact and intuitive specification of the behavior of a dynamic system. we introduce a certain specificity criterion in order to resolve conflicts which occur whenever the concurrent execution of actions or the simultaneous occurrence of events  respectively  has different effects than the serial execution. in section 1  we develop a model-based semantics for specifications of dynamic systems and define the process of influencing the development of a system by means of executing actions. this allows for a precise formalization of the three aforementioned problem categories. in section 1  we extend the basic version of our theory to nondeterministic dynamic systems  where uncertainty about the successor state may exist even if the system's current state is completely known. in particular  we argue that the concept of nondeterminism provides an interesting and reasonable solution to the problem of concurrently executed actions whose causal laws propose mutually exclusive effects: instead of declaring such situations impossible  which is the standard proposal in literature 
 e.g.   lin and shoham  1; baral and gelfond  1; grobe  1    we take only the disputed effects as uncertain  c.f.  bornscheuer and thielscher  1  . 
   the reader should be aware of the purpose of this paper  which is unusual in so far as it merely consists of definitions rather than describing concrete results. we propose a formal framework to specify and to reason about dynamic systems. thus  our intention is similar to the purpose of the topical systematic approaches  sandewall  1; gelfond and lifschitz  1   namely  to provide a high-level framework which deserves adequate proof theories or can be used to assess the range of applicability of existing approaches. a brief discussion of this aspect in section 1 concludes the paper. 
1 	specifying dynamic systems 
a formal specification of a dynamic system consists of two components. first  a collection of fluents  mccarthy 


1 	temporal reasoning 

¡¡it is of course important to take into account the possibility that the simultaneous occurrence of two or more actions  or events  might have different effects than their separate occurrence. as an example  consider a table with a glass of water on it. lifting the table on any side causes the water to be spilled whereas nothing similar happens if it is lifted simultaneously on opposite sides. in terms of our theory  we can specify this situation by three causal laws  viz 
¡¡one should be aware of the fact that nonetheless it might well happen that two most specific applicable laws have mutually exclusive effects. a reasonable way to handle this problem will be proposed and formalized below  in section 1. for the moment we assume that the combination of most specific causal laws never leads to contradictory fluent values  i.e.  more formally  that 
 1  


   in the course of the development of a system  we can make observations concerning its various states. an observation can be formulated as a fluent formula associated with a particular time point. we then call a formal development in the sense of definition 1 a model of an observation iff the corresponding fluent formula is true in the corresponding state of the development: 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 let  f  ¦µ  be a dynamic system. an expression  i ip is called an observation if i € ino and   is a fluent formula. such an observation holds in a development  p  so   s1  ....   iff  a model of a set of observations is a development in  f  ¦µ  where each element of  holds. 	¡ö 
for instance  a/ive  - bullet and -alive are two observations that can be formulated in our yale shooting domain. then  this development is a model wrt the causal laws in  1 : 
   {shoot}    {alive  loaded}   
 {alive  loaded  shoot}  {alive  bang  bullet}  1  1 ...    
since we have s1 = {alive  loaded}  alive a - bullet and s1 = ¦µ |= - alive . the reader is invited to verify that not only in this development but in every model of the two observations above the additional observation  l shoot a loaded holds-hence  we are allowed to conclude that a shoot action must have taken place and that the gun was necessarily loaded at the beginning.1 
¡¡in general  we define the following notion of entailment on the space of observations; 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 let  f  ¦µ  be a dynamic system and a set of observations. entails an additional observation   written holds in each model of ¡ö 
   based on this model-theoretic formalization of dynamic systems  we can classify some important and wellknown problem categories as instances given a system  f  ¦µ    depending on what information is provided: 
1
¡¡¡¡ one referee raised the question whether one should in general assume minimality of actions being performed when trying to find models for a given set of observations. although this assumption might be helpful  if taken as preference ordering  e.g. in case of planning problems  we definitely do not want to employ this criterion as a global restriction on the notion of a model. if  for instance  we observe the gun being unloaded at the beginning and being loaded after a while  we can conclude safely only that at least one load action has eventually taken place; we ought not to disregard the possibility that the gun has been loaded and shot with several times before  because there is nothing illogical about this. besides  our definition guarantees the property of restricted monotonicity  lifschitz  1   which means that additional observations can never force the revision of previous conclusions. 
1 	temporal reasoning 
  a temporal projection problem consists of an initial state s1 along with a sequence of sets of actions p =   a 1   . . .   an  . the question is to compute the resulting state after having applied p to s1 . in terms of our theory  the problem is essentially to find a model for the particular set of observations that describes the given initial state and exactly those occurrences of action fluents which are determined by p  i.e.  

where fa denotes the underlying action fluents. 
  a classical planning problem consists of an initial state s1 and a fluent formula g   called the goal. the question is to find a sequence of sets of actions p whose application to so yields a sequence of system states containing one particular state sn which satisfies g . 
in terms of our theory  the problem is essentially to find a model for this set of observations: 
for some 
  a postdiction problem consists of a narrative given by a set of observations  along with a sequence of sets of actions p =  a 1   . . .  an  . the question is to decide whether an additional observation is a logical consequence of this scenario. in terms of our theory  the problem is essentially to decide entailment wrt the particular set of observations that includes the given ones and describes exactly those occurrences of action fluents which are determined by p  i.e.  

due to the fact that our theory generalizes several formal approaches to reasoning about actions  we are able to formulate  for instance  more general planning problems where the initial situation is only partially defined and where the goal specification is not necessarily required to hold in a single state. or  we can formulate general postdiction problems where the sequence of actions is only incompletely specified  etc. 
1 	nondeterminism 
in this section  we extend the concepts developed so far to so-called nondeterministic dynamic systems. nondeterminism occurs when uncertainty about the successor state exists even in case the current state is completely known. this is reflected in the following definition  where the causal model consists of a relation on 




1 	summary and outlook 
we have presented a formal theory of dynamic systems that is based on a different paradigm compared to standard approaches such as  gelfond and lifschitz  1; sandewall  1 : state transitions naturally occur while time passes by-the system does not necessarily keep 
stable until agents perform actions. we have illustrated that our framework allows for a natural treatment of concurrent actions and simultaneous events as well as delayed effects. based on the underlying specification of a dynamic system  we have developed a semantics for observations  i.e.  fluent formulae associated with time points. we have investigated both deterministic and nondeterministic systems  and we have integrated a reasonable way to handle the problem of concurrent actions with mutually exclusive effects. 
   the purpose of this paper was to propose a general and uniform specification language for dynamic systems in conjunction with an intuitive semantics. we have not yet tackled the question of an adequate proof theory. the problem of finding such a calculus and proving its soundness and completeness constitutes the paramount aspect of future work. our proposal is meant as a challenge: how can existing approaches be adopted to the kind of dynamic systems being specified on the basis of our theory  for instance  how could a variant of the situation calculus  mccarthy and hayes  1  be designed- called  say  state calculus-where the common successor state argument re suit {a  s  is replaced by result  s    i.e.  which no longer depends on the execution of some action  other promising directions are the adaption of resource-oriented approaches to reasoning about actions and change  grobe et al.  1   dynamic logic  harel  1   or a first-order encoding following  elkan  1 . last but not least  though in its current state it covers neither the static-momentary distinction nor specificity or nondeterminism  the modal logic approach  grofie  1  should be a candidate worth being considered since 
1
¡¡¡¡note that we are supposed to remove the set sfj from trans{v    due to the fact that all elements in confl v  are first of all added when computing trans v  s  . 
1 	temporal reasoning 
it already includes the principle of taking actions as part of state descriptions. conversely  our semantics provides a tool for a formal assessment of its range of applicability  similar to investigations carried out in  sandewall  1 . 
acknowledgments 
the author thanks christoph herrmann for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. 
