 
this paper is concerned with the problem of determining the indirect effects or ramifications of actions. we argue that the standard framework in which background knowledge is given in the form of state constraints is inadequate and that background knowledge should instead be given in the form of  causal laws.  we represent  causal laws  first as inference rules and later as sentences in a modal  conditional logic gflat- for the framework with  causal laws   we propose a simple fixpoint condition defining the possible next states after performing an action. this fixpoint condition guarantees minimal change between states  but also enforces the requirement that changes be  caused.  ramification and qualification constraints can be expressed as  causal laws.  
1 	introduction 
this paper is concerned with the problem of determining the indirect effects or ramifications of actions. the problem is usually investigated  as in  kartha and lifschitz  1   in a framework in which action domains are described in part by state constraints.  informally  a state constraint is a formula that says of a proposition that it is true in every possible state of the world.  our main objective is to argue that an adequate theory of ramifications requires the representation of information of a kind that is not conveyed by state constraints. in particular  what is required is the representation of the causal relations  or  more generally  the determination relations  that hold between states of affairs. it turns out that this is also the information that is needed for an adequate theory of derived action preconditions or qualifications. 
   previous approaches to the problem of ramifications have assumed a definition of the following kind: a ramification  roughly speaking  is a change  not explicitly 
    partially supported by national science foundation grant #iri-1. 
   * partially supported by an ibm graduate fellowship and by nsf grant #iri-1. 
1 	temporal reasoning 
described  that is implied by the performance of an action. in our approach  we substitute the word  caused  for the word  implied.  in determining the ramifications of actions  it is not enough  we say  to infer that a change must occur when an action is performed; it is necessary to infer that the action causes the change to occur. as we will see  this stronger requirement makes it possible to avoid unintended ramifications and to infer derived qualifications.  the need for the latter is argued in  ginsberg and smith  1  and  lin and reiter  1 .  again roughly speaking  our theory of qualifications is this: an action cannot be performed if the performance of the action implies a change that it does not cause.1 
   the main points can be illustrated by the following example. imagine that fred the turkey is on a walk. consider the action of making fred dead. intuitively  as an indirect effect of performing the action  fred will no longer be walking. the reason is that fred's being dead causes him to stop walking. now consider the action of making fred walk  but suppose that fred is dead. intuitively  the action cannot be performed. the reason is as follows: fred can walk only if he is alive  but making him walk does not cause him to be alive; so unless he is already alive  or something in addition is done to cause him to become alive  he cannot be made to walk. 
모the conclusions reached in the previous paragraph are supported by the following facts. intuitively  fred can be made to not walk by making him not alive  but he cannot be made to be alive by making him walk. if the indirect effects of an action are the facts made true by making the direct effects of the action true  then we 
should expect fred's not walking to be an indirect effect of making him not alive  but we should not expect fred's being alive to be an indirect effect of making him walk. 
   in general  facts about what can and cannot be done by doing something else are contingent upon underlying causal connections and other relations of determination.  for a discussion of noncausal determination relations see  kim  1 .  state constraints say nothing about these  so it is not surprising that background knowledge in the form of state constraints should prove to be inadequate. in the recent literature on reasoning about 
1
모모a similar proposal by lin  appears in these proceedings. 
action  the inadequacy of state constraints has been observed by elkan  and by brewka and hertzberg 
. 
모the central problem addressed in this paper is that of properly denning the set of possible next states after performing an action  given specific direct effects and background knowledge in the form of  causal laws. 1 
   for the standard framework in which background knowledge is given in the form of state constraints  this problem was solved by winslett . it is not clear  however  how winslett's definition should be modified to accommodate causal laws. accordingly  after an initial discussion of notation and terminology in section 1  we go on in section 1 to reformulate winslett's definition  obtaining an equivalent definition of a quite different form. on the basis of this reformulation  in section 1 we present our definition for the framework with  causal laws   represented as inference rules. in section 1  we show how ramification and qualification constraints can be encoded by inference rules. we also show that the framework with inference rules properly extends the standard framework. 
   in sections 1  we give a semantic account of  causal laws   replacing inference rules by a rule-like conditional  for which a modal  partial state semantics is defined. doing so allows us to clarify the sense in which our theory of ramifications and qualifications is a causal theory. 
1 	notation and terminology 
we begin with a standard language of propositional logic  based on a fixed set of atoms. we represent an interpretation for the language by a maximal consistent set of literals. informally  we think of an interpretation as a logically possible state of the world. for convenience  we sometimes use the word  state  to mean an interpretation. by an explicit effect we mean a set of formulas. intuitively  these are the formulas that an action is explicitly said to cause. 
모the central problem in determining the ramifications of an action is to properly define res e s   the set of possible next states after performing an action with the explicit effect e in the state s. we address this problem in frameworks in which background knowledge is given in the form of state constraints and  causal laws.  
모by a formula constraint we mean a formula. we will require every given formula constraint to hold in every possible next state  so a formula constraint functions  in this respect  as a state constraint. a standard example of a formula constraint is the formula {walking   alive   baker  1 . 
   we will write an inference rule as an expression of the form 
		 !  
where 붯 and  are formulas. informally  we will think of  1  as expressing a relation of determination between 
throughout this paper  we use the term  causal law  in 
place of the more accurate but less familiar term  determination relation.  causal laws are in any case prime examples of determination relations. 

to mean that 붯 belongs to the smallest set of formulas containing t that is closed with respect to propositional logic and closed under c. 
1 	possible next states: constraints 
the standard framework in which the problem of ramifications is addressed is one in which background knowledge is given in the form of state constraints. for this framework  the problem was solved by winslett . 
definition w for any interpretation 1  any explicit effect e  and any set b of formulaconstraints  is the set of interpretations 1  such that 
 1  s' satisfies eub  and 
 1  no other interpretation that satisfies e u b differs from s on fewer atoms  where  fewer  is defined by set inclusion. 
모intuitively   is the set of possible next states after performing an action with the explicit effect e in the state 1  given background knowledge b. as an example  let 

then 

here  - walking is a ramification. 
모it is not clear how to modify winslett's definition to accommodate background knowledge in the form of inference rules. accordingly  the remainder of this section will be devoted to reformulating it. 
모in order to explain our reformulation  we present a series of definitions in which we introduce  in successive steps  first the assumption of inertia  which is needed to solve the frame problem  and then background knowledge in the form of formula constraints. each definition will take the following form: for any interpretation 1 and explicit effect e  res e s  is the set of interpretations s' such that 1' is precisely the set of literals that are derivable from e and the available background information  possibly including information provided by 


1 	temporal reasoning 

모one advantage of definition 1 over definition 1 is illustrated by the following variation on the previous example. let 
is empty  whereas 
intuitively  res1cy e  s  is correct. since we cannot make 
alive true by making walking true  we cannot perform an action in state s whose explicit effect is { walking   because this effect implies a change  namely  making alive true  that the action does not cause.1 this is an example of a derived qualification. 
모another advantage of using causal laws is illustrated by the domain introduced in  lifschitz  1  in which there are two switches and a light. let 

then 

the second state in resb e  s  is anomalous  and results from the unintended ramification - up1. in  lifschitz  1  and  kartha and lifschitz  1   this ramification is blocked by declaring up1 and up1 to be  in the frame  and on to be  not in the frame.  by constrast  the use of inference rules in place of formula constraints makes the frame/nonframe distinction unnecessary for the purpose of limiting possible ramifications. for instance  let c contain the inference rules 

1 	ramification and qualification 
constraints 
lin and reiter  draw a pragmatic distinction between two kinds of state constraints: ramification constraints   which yield indirect effects  and qualification constraints  which yield action preconditions. as they 
observe  the same distinction was drawn earlier by ginsberg and smith . in the language of inference rules  we can give a syntactic form to this distinction. suppose that 붯 is a formula constraint. if we wish 붯 to function as a ramification constraint  we write the rule 

if instead we wish 붯 to function as a qualification constraint we write the rule 

모in definition 1 all formula constraints function as ramification constraints. the correctness of our encoding of ramification constraints is demonstrated by the following proposition. 


1 	temporal reasoning 


