skicat: sky image cataloging and analysis tool 
usama m. fayyad 
jpl  california institute of technology 
1 oak grove drive  pasadena  ca 1 u.s.a. fayyad aig.jpl.nasa.gov 

1 	introduction 
in astronomy and space sciences  we currently face a data glut crisis. the problem of dealing with the huge volume of data accumulated from a variety of sources  of correlating the data and extracting and visualizing the important trends  is now fully recognized. this problem will become more acute very rapidly  with the advent of new telescopes  detectors  and space missions  with the data flux measured in terabytes. we face a critical need for information processing technology and methodology with which to manage this data avalanche in order to produce interesting scientific results quickly and efficiently. developments in the fields of machine learning and ai can provide at least some solutions. much of the future of scientific information processing lies in the implementation of these methods. 
¡¡we present an application of supervised classification to the automation of the tasks of cataloging and analyzing objects in digitized sky images. the sky image cataloging and analysis tool  skicat  was developed for use on the images resulting from the 1nd palomar observatory sky survey  poss-ii  conducted by the california institute of technology  caltech . the photographic plates collected from the survey are digitized at the space telescope science institute. this process will result in about 1 digital images of 1 x 1 1-bit pixels each  totalling over 1 terabytes of data. when complete  the survey will cover the entire northern sky in three colors  detecting virtually every sky object down to a b magnitude of 1. this is at least one magnitude fainter than previous comprable photographic surveys. we estimate that there are on the order of 1 galaxies 1 stellar objects  including over 1 quasars  are detectable in this survey. this data set will be the most comprehensive large-scale imaging survey produced to date and will not be surpassed in scope until the completion of a fully digital all-sky survey. 
¡¡the purpose of skicat is to enable and maximize the extraction of meaningful information from such a large database in timely manner. the system is built in a modular way  incorporating several existing algorithms and packages. there are three basic functional components to skicat  serving the purposes of sky object catalog construction  catalog management  and high-level 
statistical and scientific analysis. 
1 	classifying sky objects 
the first step in analyzing the results of a sky survey is to identify  measure  and catalog the detected objects in the image into their respective classes. once the objects have been classified  further scientific analysis can proceed. for example  the resulting catalog may be used to test models of the formation of largescale structure in the universe  probe galactic structure from star counts  perform automatic identifications of radio or infrared sources  and so forth  1; 1; 1  reducing the images to catalog entries is an overwhelming task which inherently requires an automated approach. the goal of our project is to automate this process  providing a consistent and uniform methodology for reducing the data sets. this will provide the means for objectively performing tasks that formerly required subjective and visually intensive manual analysis. another goal of this work is to classify objects whose intensity  isophotal magnitude  is too faint for recognition by inspection  hence requiring an automated classification procedure. faint objects constitute the majority of objects on any given plate. we target the classification of objects that are at least one magnitude fainter than objects classified in previous surveys using comparable photographic material. the goals of the video are to introduce the machine learning techniques we used  to give a general  high-level description of the application domain  and to report on the successful results which exceeded our initial goals. we aim to point out an instance where learning algorithms proved to a be useful and powerful tool in the automation of a significant scientific data analysis task. 
   using decision tree and rule learning algorithms  1; 1  the skicat system classifies objects that are at least one magnitude fainter than objects cataloged in previous surveys. wc have exceeded our initial accuracy target of 1% . this level of accuracy is required for the data to be useful in testing or refuting theories on the formation of large structure in the universe and on other phenomena of interest to astronomers. the skicat tool is now being employed to both reduce and analyze the survey images as they arrive from the digitization instrument. we are also beginning to explore the application of skicat to the analysis of other surveys being planned by nasa and other institutions. 
¡¡in order to produce a classifier that classifies faint objects correctly  the learning algorithm needs training data consisting of faint objects labeled with the appropriate class. the class label is therefore obtained by examining the ccd frames. once trained on properly labeled objects  the learning algorithm produces a classifier that is capable of properly classifying objects based on the 
	fayyad 	1 
values of the attributes measured from the lower resolution plate image. hence  in principle  the classifier will be able to classify objects in the photographic image that are simply too faint for an astronomer to classify by inspection. using the class labels  the learning algorithms are basically being used to solve the more difficult problem of separating the classes in the multi-dimensional space defined by the set of attributes derived via image processing. this method is expected to allow us to classify objects that are at least one magnitude fainter than objects classified in photographic all-sky surveys to date. 
   by effectively defining robust features  we were able to obtain classifiers with an accuracy exceeding that of humans for faint objects  since faint objects constitute the majority of objects on any plate  this results in a dramatic increase in the number of classified objects available for further scientific analysis. in effect  this shows that the pixels contained important information that the human visual system could not extract. projection of the high-dimensional pixel space onto a powerful lower-dimensional feature space allowed us to transform the problem into one that is easily solvable by a supervised learning algorithm.by defining additional  normalized  image-independent attributes  we were able to obtain high accuracy classifiers within and across photographic plates. 
1 	conclusions 
the implications of a tool like skicat for astronomy may indeed be profound. one could reclassify any portion of the survey using alternative criteria better suited to a particular scientific goal  e.g. star catalogs vs. galaxy catalogs . this changes the notion of a sky catalog from the classical static entity  in print   to a dynamic  ever growing  ever improving  on-line database. the catalogs will also accommodate additional attribute entries  in the event other pixel-based measurements are deemed necessary. an important feature of the survey analysis system will be to facilitate such detailed interactions with the catalogs. the catalog generated by skicat will eventually contain about two billion entries representing hundreds of millions of sky objects. unlike the traditional notion of a static printed catalog  we view our effort as targeting the development of a new generation of scientific analysis tools that render it possible to have a constantly evolving  improving  and growing catalog. without the availability of these tools for the first survey  poss-i  conducted over four decades ago  no objective and comprehensive analysis of the data was possible. in contrast  we are targeting a comprehensive sky catalog that will be available on-line for the use of the scientific community. 
   for future work  we are sudying the application of clustering algorithms  e.g. autoclass   to automate discovery of new classes in the large catalog databases created by skicat  1; 1; 1  
