 
it is well known that knowledge-based systems would be more robust and smarter if they can deal with the inconsistent  incomplete or imprecise knowledge  which has been referred 
to as common sense knowledge. in this paper  we discuss fuzzy implications in the sense of common sense reasoning. firstly  we analyse the rationality of some existing fuzzy implications based on the discussion of implicational paradoxes. secondly  we present a new fuzzy preferential implication that is nonmonotonic  paraconsistent and without the general implicational paradoxes. finally  we propose sound and complete decision tableaux of such implications  which can be used as the inference engines of adaptive expert systems 
or frameworks for the fuzzy prolog. 
1 	introduction 
implication is the heart of logic. the truth value of the material implication a- b in classical logic is 
determined by the truth values of the antecedent a and the consequent b  i.e. a-*b is true iff a is false or b is true. the truth value of the implication should 
determined by the conditional relation between antecedent and the consequent. because the truth values of the antecedent a and the consequent b 
determine the causal link between a and b  there 
implicational paradoxes in classical logic  i. e. if one 
regards the material implication as the entailment and each logical theorem in the logic as a valid reasoning form  then some logical axioms or theorems in the logic  
so on  present some paradoxical properties therefore they have been referred to as 'implicational 
paradoxes' anderson & belnap  1 . for example  a - b  means 'a contradiction implies anything'   a-*  ' means 'a tautology is implied by anything'. in 1  lewis established modal logic in 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 
avoid implicational paradoxes.in 1  sugihara pointed out that a logic system is paradoxical if it has either a weakest formula   wf for short  or a strongest formula  sf for short . where a is a wf iff b entails a for any formula b.where a is a sf iff a entails b for any formula b.we call a logic system general-implicational- paradox-free  gipf for short  if it contains neither wf nor sf. in 1  ackermann pointed out: ' rigorous implication  which we write as a- b  should express the fact that a logical connection holds between a and b  that the content of b is part of that of a. ..that has nothing to do with the truth or falsity of a or b. ' during the period from the 1s to the 1s  anderson and belnap  extended the work of ackermann and proposed variable-sharing as a necessary but not sufficient formal conditon for the relevance between the antecedent and consequent of a valid entailment  i. e. if a entails b then a and b share a variable. they introduced the concept of generic implication   gi for short  which can be looked as the inference rule of the logic bystem while the material implication can be looked as a logical connective. their relevant logic has neither wf nor sf  but its semantic model is not clear and the definition of gi in it needs several axioms. 


	xiaochun  yunfei  and xuhua 	1 

　it can be proved that for any formulas g and h  if g |=fp h holds true and g and h have no sharing atom  then g is unsatisfiable and h is valid  has neither wf nor sf  1. e. |=rp is gipf. 
　property 1. the preferential implication |=cp is reflexive  paraconsistent and gipf. 
　similar to =  p   l=rp is neither transitive nor mono tonic. 
　the comparision among the above fuzzy implications is listed in table 1: 
	1 	decision 	tableaux 
the resolution procedure can be used as a decision procedure for =  in lee's system: suppose s is a bet of clauses  h is a clause  s= h iff there is a resolution deduction of the empty clause from su{~~h}  
　both mukaidono and yager  think that | = f is meaningful  lee has proved that  if both the 
	truth values of the 	parent clauses c1 and ca 	are 
greater than 1 under an interpretation i  a resolvent clause r c1 c1  derived by the resolution principle is significant  i.e. ti   c . a c x t i gkci.cj . mukaidono showed an interpretation that  even if the truth value of one parent clause is not greater than 1  a resolvent clause is meaningful in the sense of reducing 
ambiguity  i.e. ti   c a c a r i c   ca    jr   daca  under 
any interpretation i. yager also found that in fuzzy logic the resolution law doeb not hold true in its 
usual form and presented some modified inference laws  but didn't prove the completeness of these laws. liu and xiao  1j proposed operator fuzzy logic  ofd which can represent vague knowledge by fuzzy operators explicitly and without resorting to the use of intermediate truth values at the semantic level. in order to prove that 
 --resolution is a sound decision procedure for inconsistent clause set in ofl  liu introduced 
the gi that is     ' when the threshold is 1.  liu etal  
	1  	chose 	the inference rule that is 	=  when the 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 


	xiaochun  yunfei  and xuhua 	1 


1 	reasoning under uncertainty 

inconsistent  incomplete or imprecise knowledge without 
taking away any piece of knowledge benferhat etal  1 . thus it applies 	to 	the 	design 	of 	adaptive 	expert systems 	or 	very 	large 	knowledge 	bases 	where inconsistent information is often present. 
acknowledgements 
this work was supported by national natural science foundation and national high-tech program of p. r. china. 
we are indebted to the referees for suggested revisions. 
