 
a prototyped data mining system  dblearn  was developed in simon fraser univ.  which integrates machine learning methodologies with database technologies and efficiently and effectively extracts characteristic and discriminant rules from relational databases. further developments  of dblearn lead to a new generation data mining system: dbminer  with the following features:  1  mining new kinds of rules from large databases  including multiple-level association rules  classification rules  cluster description rules  etc.   1  automatic generation and refinement of concept hierarchies   1  high level sql-like and graphical data mining interfaces  and  1  client/server architecture and performance improvements for large applications. the major features of the system are demonstrated with experiments in a research grant information database. 
1 	introduction 
with the rapid growth of the number of databases and the tremendous amounts of data being collected and stored in databases  it is increasingly important to develop software tools for data mining or knowledge discovery in databases  piatetsky-shapiro and frawley  1; fayyad et ai  1 . 
¡¡data mining is the extraction of  information  or  knowledge  from data  which helps understanding data in databases and automatic construction of knowledgebases from databases. 
   dblearn is such a knowledge discovery system prototype  developed in simon fraser university between 
1 and 1  cai et a/.  1; han et a/.  1; 1 . it discovers characteristic rules and discriminant rules embedded in relational databases. the ma-
jor features of the system are speed and efficiency in analyzing large databases  interactive knowledge mining  and smooth integration with commercial relational database systems. experiments with dblearn have been performed in nserc  natural science and engineering 
   * research is partially supported by the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada under the grant ogp1  by the networks of centres of excellence program  with the participation of precarn association  under the grant iris:hmi-1  and by a research grant from the hughes research laboratories. 

research council of canada  research grant information database and in several large industrial databases with successful results and good performance. 
¡¡further extensions and enhancements of the dblearn system since 1 have led to a new generation of the system: dbminer  han and fu  1 . dbminer consists of several new functional modules besides the characterizer and discriminator in dblearn. it performs dynamic adjustment of concept hierarchies and automatic generation of numeric hierarchies. it generates different forms of knowledge  including generalized relations  generalized feature tables  and multiple forms of generalized rules. moreover  system performance has been improved  graphical user interfaces have been enhanced for interactive knowledge mining  and a client/server architecture has been constructed for industrial applications. 
1 	architecture and functionalities 
the general architecture of dbminer is shown in figure 1 which tightly integrates a relational database system  such as a sybase sql server  with the discovery module. the discovery module of dbminer shown in figure 1 consists of multiple functional modules  including characterizer  discriminator  association rule finder  classifier  evolut;on evaluator  deviation evaluator  predictor  sequential pattern miner  and future modules. this video demonstrates the functionalities of the first three modules which are described as follows. 
  the characterizer discovers a set of characteristic rules from the relevant set of data in a database. a characteristic rule summarizes the general characteristics of a set of user-specified data. 
	han  fu  and tang 	1 


  a discriminator discovers a set of discriminant rules from the relevant set s  of data in a database  a discriminant rule distinguishes the general features of one set of data  called the target class  from some other set s  of data  called the contrasting class es   
  an association rule finder discovers a set of asso-ciation rules  in the form of  a1 a ¡ö ¡ö   a a1 -  b1 a ¡ö ¡ö ¡ö a b/ 1   at multiple concept levels from the relevant set s  of data in a database. for example  it may find from a large set of transaction data an association rule that if a customer buys  one brand of  milk s/he usually buys  another brand of  bread. 
dbminer offers both graphical and sql-like interfaces. 
for example  to characterize computer science grants in the nserc1 database in relevance to discipline and amount categories and the distribution of count% and amount%  the data mining query is as follows. 
use nserc1 characterize  cs-discipline-grants  f r o m award a  grant-type g w h e r e a.grant code = g.grant code a n d a.disccode =  computer  
in relevance to disc-code  amount  percentage count   percentage amount  
   to process this query  the system first obtains the relevant set of data by processing a relational database query  then generalizes the data using an attributeoriented induction approach  cai et ai  1; han et al.  1   and presents different forms of outputs  in-
cluding generalized relations  generalized feature tables  bar/pie charts  generalized rules  to outline the number or amount distribution of computer science  research  grants according to discipline categories  such as theory  al  database  and so on   
   in the development of other functional modules  attribute-oriented induction  han et al  1; han and fu  1  also plays an essential role. it integrates a machine learning paradigm learning-from-examples  michalski  1  with set-oriented database operations and substantially reduces the computational complexity of database learning processes. 
¡¡the system also performs automatic generation of conceptual hierarchies for numerical attributes and dynamic conceptual hierarchy adjustment  han and fu  1  for 
1 	videos 
all the attributes based on the statistical distribution of the set of relevant data  which produces desirable generalized results. 
1 	further development of dbminer 
the dbminer system is currently being extended in several directions as follows. 
  further enhancement of the discovery power and ef-ficiency for data mining in relational systems  han and fu  1   including the improvement of rule quality and system performance for the existing functional module  the development of techniques for mining new kinds of rules  etc. 
  integration  maintenance and application of discov-ered knowledge  including incremental update of discovered rules  merging of discovered rules into existing knowledge-bases  intelligent query answering using discovered knowledge  and the construction of multiple layered databases. 
  extension of data mining technique towards ad-vanced and/or special purpose database systems  including extended-relational  object-oriented  deductive  spatial  temporal  and heterogeneous databases. 
