computer-aided creative mechanism design 
boi faltings and kun sun 
laboratoire d'intelligence artificielle  di  
swiss federal institute of technology  epfl  
in-ecublens 
1 lausanne  switzerland 
tel. +1-1  fax: +1-1 
e-mail: faltings lia.di.epfl.ch 

knowledge-based design knowledgebased design systems  such as icad  are currently used in the context of large engineering projects. they provide design knowledge in the form of prototypes which can be instantiated and updated automatically according to the design context. many designers are sceptical of the technique because the prototype library creates a preference for established solutions and thus inhibits innovation. 
　a popular saying claims that  innovation is 1 % inspiration and 1 % perspiration.  while it is usually very difficult to endow a computer with sufficient breadth of knowledge to provide the inspiration  tools which support innovation by automating the perspiration seem much more feasible. the goal of our research are techniques which provide such support using artificial intellligence techniques. 
　this video presents the faming system  a program which illustrates an approach to supporting creative design on the example domain of elementary mechanisms. this class includes devices such as gears  escapements or ratchets which consist of two parts and achieve their function by interaction of their shapes. they are very easy to model and simulate  but variations of part shapes give a very rich variety of designs. in fact  novel devices are invented to this day. elementary mechanisms are thus an ideal domain for studying how creative design could be supported by computer  even if the domain is too specialized for commercially viable design tools. 
innovation in knowledge-based design as innovations are by definition unknown to the designer of a computer tool  knowledge to support them cannot be very specific  but must be based on general principles which remain valid even in innovative solutions. approaches using modelbased reasoning   williams  1; neville 
and weld  1   work well whenever interactions between the individual models can be precisely identified  the no-function-instructure principle . 
　kinematic pairs achieve their function through the possible contacts between elements of the part shapes. because all contacts have to be integrated into a common geometry  they interact in very unstructured ways: any contact can subsume  inhibit  any other one and make it impossible. kinematics therefore does not respect the no-function-in-structure principle. thus  while joskowicz and addanki   joskowicz and addanki  1   have attempted to apply methods of model-based design to kinematic pairs  their method is restricted to simple cam-like mechanisms and incapable of producing devices such as escapements or ratchets. 
　humans often produce creative designs by reinterpreting known solutions in a novel way  wills and kolodner  1 . faming supports this form of creativity by two major innovations over existing techniques. the first is the use of case-based reasoning as a main source of design knowledge to handle the context-dependence inherent in geometry; faming is one of the first pro-
	faltings and sun 	1 

grams which actually generate novel devices by combining and adapting previous cases. the second is that fanihg uses a general theory of qualitative kinematics   faltings  1; 1    capable of reasoning about any imaginable qualitative function  to provide the knowledge for case adaptation and combination. 
   as input to faming  the designer provides a formal specification of the desired functions  and examples of shapes that can implement aspects of them. in agreement with common design methodology  e.g.   pahl and beitz  1    functions are qualitative and indicate an interpretation of the example device. they are specified as logical expressions with reference to an envisionment of all possible behaviors of the device they interpret. in contrast to fixed functional vocabularies used in current intelligent cad systems  this qualitative formalism can express any imaginable qualitative function including creative ideas unknown to the programmer. 
　the theory of qualitative kinematics is used to map specifications into constraints on the part shapes provided in the examples  and thus their adaptation into novel uses. the new prototypes are then added to the knowledge-based system's vocabulary   faltings and sun  1; sun and faltings  1   and can subsequently be integrated in designs using all functionalities provided by the intelligent cad tool. faking thus makes it possible to integrate creative designs in a know ledge-based cad system. 
faming results faming has successfully designed several devices of practical interest  including various types of gears and clock escapements. as an example  the video shows the design of a novel forward-reverse mechanism which is much simpler than designs found in the literature on mechanism design. the program has also been tested on design of actual products which are to be marketed in the near future  showing that using the tool can decrease design time for such mechanisms from 1 months to only 1 day. 
faming is mainly intended as a proof of 
1 videos 
concept that qualitative physics can indeed provide support for creative design. the combination of case-based reasoining with qualitative physics is applicable to many other domains which may be commercially more promising  such as nanotechnology  drug design or biomedical engineering. 
