 
we often make decisions based on our feelings  which are implicit and very difficult to express as knowledge. this paper details an attempt to acquire feelings automatically. we assume that some relations or constraints exist between impressions felt and situations  which consist of an object and its environment. for example  in music arrangement  the object is a music score and its environment contains listeners  etc. our project validates this assumption through three levels of experiments. at the first level  a program simply mimics human arrangements in order to transfer their impressions to another arrangement. this implies that the program is capable of distinguishing patterns that result in some impressions. at the second level  in order to produce a music recognition model  the program locates relations and constraints between a music score and its impressions  by which we show that machine learning techniques may provide a powerful tool for composing music and analyzing human feelings. finally  we examine the generality of the model by modifying some arrangements to provide the subjects with a specified impression. 
1 	introduction 
kansei  japanese; lit. human feelings   tsuji  1  has been analyzed using quantitative psychological analysis methods  such as the semantical differential  sd  method and multivariate analysis  which analyze human feelings. such analyses can isolate feelings associated with known objects  but cannot predict feelings for a new object  nor create a new object for the purpose of generating in the subject a specific feeling. we would like to introduce and discuss a system capable of predicting feelings and creating new objects based on seed structures that have been extracted and are perceived as favorable by the test subject  such as patterns and 
* presently at matsushita electric industrial co.  ltd. 
kadoma  osaka  1  japan 
cognitive modeling 
figure 1: melody  chords and their functions 
colors for pictures  or spectrums and their transition for sounds. until now  such emergent structures have been obtained only through a random and intractable combination of elements. in this paper  we explain how this difficulty is overcome using machine learning techniques. 
　as a representative medium  we focus on a midibased music arrangement system which is applied to automatic selection or arrangement in an online karaoke system. this system is used for automatic downloading of midi data as requested by a user  or can be used more generally for information retrieval or filtering based on emotional data. 
1 m e l o d y and chords 
we attempt to extract a musical structure based on melody and chords as shown in figure 1. in a musical piece  a function - tonic  t   dominant  d   subdominant  s  or subdominant minor  sdm  - is assigned to each chord. this paper discusses the extraction of two aspects of the structure  i.e.  each chord and a sequence of functions  from which the system derives constraints for assigning chords to a melody  supplemented by functions . 
1 mimicking arrangements 
to investigate the feasibility of generating arrangements automatically  the authors constructed a system that mimics human arrangements as shown in figure 1. 
　the chord analyzer assigns a function to each chord by parsing chord progression  and translates scores arranged by corresponding human composers into training examples. each example consists of a chord and its 


figure 1: automatic arrangement system 
corresponding function  from which the system learns  derives  constraints for automatic arrangement. the system is initially provided with a general theory of harmony  which is refined by a learner called a theory refinement system  tangkitvanich and shimura  1; numao and shimura  1; mooney and ourston  1 . each note in the score has a function  to which the automatic arranger assigns a chord. 
　figure 1 shows an example of such an arrangement. the system can assign chords based on the general theory of harmony  even though they are mediocre. theory refinement introduces some decorations to the chords and refines the techniques used in the training examples  improving the arrangement. 
　the present authors prepared a set of training and test examples by the same composer. figure 1 compares the arrangements produced by the initial and refined theories with those of the human composer  which shows that refinement based on the training examples increases the number of matched chords in the test examples. 
　verbal reports from the subjects characterized the arrangements produced by the initial theory as simple  not interesting and flavorless  while those produced using 
the refined theory are described as refreshing and novel learning using multiple scores enhances variety  but the results lack uniformity. 
　there is more demand today for professional midi arrangers than there was several years ago  since digital synthesizers  electronic pianos  piano players  online karaoke systems  etc. have become more popular. this type of arrangement system will satisfy these needs by learning and rivaling the skills of professional arrangers. 
1 	music recognition model 
the system outlined above only mimics arranged scores and does not consider human feeling  so we have attempted to develop a system for acquiring music recognition model. such a model is necessary to achieve automatic arrangement based on situation-dependent human feelings. the authors prepared some musical pieces of 1 bars  and then played them for some subjects in order to get their impressions. this was accomplished using the semantic differential  sd  method. the results were training example: 

an arrangement composed using the initial theory: 

an arrangement composed using the refined theory: 

figure 1: an example of arrangement 
utilized by an inductive logic programming  ilp  system  deraedt  1  capable of deriving a model for music recognition. 
1 	t r a i n i n g examples 
in order to categorize responses by subjects based on the musical pieces they listened to  the authors selected the following 1 pairs of complementary adjectives: bright dark  clear - unclear  fast - slow  favorable - unfavorable  stable - unstable. a musical piece is evaluated as one of 1 grades for each pair  such that 1 indicates most bright  and 1 indicates most dark in the spectrum presented by a bright-dark pair. 
let evaluation of a piece p for a pair of adjectives 
a be .  for a subject  the system generalizes melody by analyzing notes in each bar based on background knowledge described in section 1. for each piece p consisting of 1 bars: 
the system learns to evaluate a from the following 1 training examples: 
where is a sequence of  pitch-name  length . an example is considered positive if and negative if the system also weighs each learned clause according to the values of the examples used. 
numao  kobayashi  & sakaniwa 


　the system generalizes chord progression by analyzing successive chords. for each piece p with a sequence of n chords: chord1 chord1         chordn  the system learns to evaluate based on the following n - 1 training examples: 

where chordi is a combination of the following notes and their function: 
root: 
t h i r d : major  minor  suspended fourth 
fifth: fifth  augmented  diminished 
seventh: none  major sixth  minor seventh  major seventh 
function: t  d  s  sdm 
which constructs 1 x 1 x 1 x 1 x 1 = 1 combinations. the model describes the relationship among two successive chords and their functions. the high number combinations and relations results in neither neural networks nor decision trees being appropriate as learning tools. instead  what is required is inductive logic programming that learns not only attributes and propositional descriptions  but also predicates for finding useful relations in obscure combinations. in the experiment  the authors use a learner similar to foil  quinlan  1  except that its background knowledge may also be described using horn clauses. 
1 	b a c k g r o u n d k n o w l e d g e for i l p 
the model is constructed based on background knowledge - definitions of predicates that describe melody and chords. melody is considered to be a sequence of notes that have pitch and duration described by the following predicates: 
  average duration cognitive modeling 
  minimum  lowest  pitch 
  maximum  highest  pitch 
  difference between minimum and maximum pitch 
  pitch transition  rising or falling  
　chords are analyzed based on background knowledge as follows: root i  chord  : the root of chord is i. root  v  chord  : the root of chord is v. major  chord  : chord has the major third. f i f t h  chord  : chord has the perfect fifth. seventh  chord  : chord has the minor seventh. tonic  chord  : the function of chord is t. dom  chord  : the function of chord is d. subdom chord  : the function of chord is s. 
succ chordi chord1  : chordi and chord1 are successive chords. 
using the background knowledge for each adjective pair  some predicates adjective pair example  weight  are derived. e.g. bright-dark example of chords  weight  to detect bright or dark bar is learned as follows: 

1 p r e d i c t i n g an evaluation 
after the system creates a recognition model for a subject by processing the results of his/her evaluation of various pieces  it predicts the subject's evaluation of subsequent pieces  which are transformed into a set of examples for analyzing melody and chords. if an adjec-
tive-pair example  	is satisfied by 	examples  the 
evaluation for the adjective pair is calculated by 

1 e x p e r i m e n t s in recognition 
the present authors prepared 1 well-known music pieces  from which they extracted 1 successive bars without modulation. the subject evaluates 1 of the 1 pieces  and the results for adjective pairs are studied by the system to predict evaluations for the other 1 pieces. they then take an average of the results by 1 different subjects. 
　let  be a prediction of the evaluation of a piece p for adjective pair a  and n be the number of pieces. the difference between the prediction and the evaluation by a subject is shown to be: 



figure 1: average difference 

figure 1: prediction accuracy 
figure 1 shows the average difference for the subjects: when the prediction is based on chords or 
melody. figure 1 shows the percentage of correct predictions. the results show that the differences are between 1 and 1 in the 1-grade evaluation  and that on average 1% of predictions are correct  which indicates that the system is capable of predicting evaluation of new pieces by the subjects very well. for criteria fast  slow and unfavorable  the difference increases when the prediction is based on chords. this means that these impressions are based mainly on melody and particularly from the length of each note. the system predicts responses within the criteria bright and dark from chords very well. these impressions are dependent mainly on whether the third is major or minor. although the system cannot discern these impressions in melody  the authors are now attempting to detect them by analyzing sequences of notes. 
　figure 1 shows the variance of impressions among the subjects  which is relatively large in the adjective pairs fast-slow and stable-unstable. these subject-dependent pairs are learned by the system very well according to figures 1 and 1. 

figure 1: pieces with variance   1 
this level of arrangement will be employed in kara-
oke systems for generating a user model of emotional data to extract an appropriate piece from a midi database  or to select suitable background pictures or video for each title. 
1 arrangement based on the model 
utilizing the music recognition model  the system controls the arrangement process based on its overall mood. to improve the arrangement  we assume that a human arranger   or the system shown in section 1   composes the original arrangement  which is then modified slightly to result in a specified impression. 
1 	modifying a score to change its impression 
before arrangement  the system develops a music recognition model for the user. information about the mood of the user is provided in the form of a 1-grade scale for each of the adjective pairs. the chord progression of a score is modified according to the following priorities: 
1. remove any chord or chord progression whose impression is described by the opposite adjective in the pairs. 
1. to minimize differences from the original score  avoid: 
 a  modifying any chord and chord progression that satisfy the given adjective  
 b  changing any functions  and 
 c  modifying any chord and chord progression that is not in opposition to the given adjective. 
1. modify chords to minimize differences in the evaluation. 
1 	experiments in arrangement 
the authors prepared 1 well-known music pieces without modulation  from which they extracted 1 or 1 suc-
numao  kobayashi  & sakaniwa 

table 1: percentage of pieces with matching impressions 
subject bright stable favorable average a 1 1 1 1 b 1 1 1 1 c 1 1 1 1 d 1 1 1 1 e 1 1 1 1 f 1 1 1 1 g 1 1 1 1 h 1 1 1 1 average 1 1 1 1 standard deviation 1 1 1 1 table 1: percentage of pieces with improved impressions 
subject brightness stable favorable average a 1 1 1 1 b 1 1 1 1 c 1 1 1 1 d 1 1 1 1 e 1 1 1 1 f 1 1 1 1 g 1 1 1 1 h 1 1 1 1 average 1 1 1 1 standard deviation 1 1 1 1 cessive bars. the subject evaluates 1 of the 1 pieces in 1 pairs of adjectives: bright - dark  favorable - unfavorable  stable-unstable  and the results of the evaluations 
are processed by the system to modify the chord progressions of 1 of the 1 pieces in 1 criteria - bright  dark  favorable  unfavorable  stable and unstable. the subject evaluates the modified 1 x 1 = 1 pieces and the original 1 pieces without being notified of how each piece has been modified. 
　the present authors repeated the above experiment using 1 subjects. table 1 shows the percentage of arrangements whose modifications corresponded to the intended changes  as well as their standard deviation. according to the table  intended arrangements are produced on average 1% of the time. table 1 shows the percentage of arrangements for which the subjects' impression is improved and the standard deviation. 
　figure 1 shows the average percentage of pieces for which the impression is improved by the modification. according to the figure  1% of arrangements are improved for the criteria brightness or darkness. in general  if an arranger is less than proficient  the results tend to be evaluated as unstable or unfavorable. therefore  it is more likely that a piece will be arranged and evaluated as unstable or unfavorable than as stable or favorable. 
cognitive modeling 

figure 1: improvement in impression 

figure 1: impression modified  opposing criteria  
according to the figure  some arrangements are evaluated as stable or favorable  although these make up less than half of the total. this suggests that an arranger based on learning personal feelings is effective. 
　if an original arrangement was evaluated as very bright  it would be difficult to rearrange the piece for a higher level of brightness. it would be easier to rearrange the piece to less bright. figure 1 shows the average percentage of pieces successfully rearranged to cause the opposite impression. according to the figure  1% of arrangements are rearranged in this fashion. 
1 	related works 
widmer  proposed a method of accomplishing explanation-based learning by attaching harmonies - chord symbols to the notes of a melody. this task is closely related to that described in section 1. the present paper further discusses a means of controlling 

the process based on learned feelings. 
　katayose  imai and inokuchi  approached the understanding of music based on the following rules: 
melody: 
both the fourth and the seventh do not exist 
-  oriental mood 
our system not only uses this kind of rule but also creates it and applies it through a process that considers its weight. 
　most applications of machine learning related to music investigate approaches to interpretation of a music score for playing  for example  measuring the loudness of each note in a score  widmer  1; 1   or acquiring playing viola  furukawa  1; 1 . 
　neural networks have been used for dealings with problems in music  todd and loy  1 . the present authors believe that inductive logic programming offers a better means of describing music scores  in which structures are very important. to quantify feelings in music  we introduce a weight wj to each clause. a better solution is to combine logic programming and neural networks by weighting links in dynamic logical networks  as described in  numao et ai  1 . 
1 	conclusion 
we present an approach for utilizing human feeling in listening to and composing music. this approach to feelings is an interesting test of the application of machine learning techniques  and should be developed further due to the lack of practical tests to date. if background knowledge of the learner incorporates some important theories in musicology and psychology  meyer  1; hiraga  1; longuet-higgins  1   we may obtain a more powerful tool for composing music and analyzing human feelings. 
acknowledgments 
an earlier version of the system was implemented by 
takashi shirai  nintendo   koji yamaguchi  matsushita electric  and masatake saito  sony . 
