 
intelligent computer systems rely on more or less complex computational entities that represent occurrences and events in the real world. usually  such entities are formed from representational primitives called properties  attributes  features  etc. to reflect varying degrees of uncertainty  originating from human judgement and the intrinsic nature of the world  such property values occur as more or less vague linguistic symbols or exact numeric expressions. determining similarity between two properties is usually done on either the symbolic or the numeric level. this seems to be too restrictive for case-based reasoning and similar approaches as these often face mixed specifications. in this paper we propose a flexible and systematic scheme for representing crisp properties and two types of fuzzy properties. it also provides a consistent mechanism to establish similarity scores for the various instance combinations. 
1. introduction 
the main thread of this paper is that of conceptual similarity  or distance . two quotes by i. kant and w.v. quine succinctly convey the essence and significance of this idea. 'a concept without a percept is empty; a percept without a concept is blind.  and 'there is nothing more basic to thought and language than our sense of similarity; our sorting of things into kinds.' 
   many knowledge and information representation models employ the notion of a property by some means or other. for example  object-oriented database systems  attribute or atomic object   multiple criteria decision making  criterion   relational databases  field or attribute   statistics  statistical variable   frame-based systems  slot   case-based reasoning  feature   concept theory  property   and so on. properties are usually viewed as representational primitives that provide a 'vehicle' to form more complex and more abstract structures like classes  complex objects  alternatives  relations  records  tables  frames  cases  concepts  concept exemplars  and so forth. it is these higher level 
1 	case-based reasoning 
entities that are used in computer systems to represent and capture the essence of real-world occurrences and events. frequently  the underlying processes of knowledge-based and other systems require the  conceptual  comparison of such computational units. comparison methods of this kind establish similarity scores based on the similarity of such atomic properties  chen and hwang  1 . 
   intelligent computer systems involve applicationgeared people at both the knowledge acquisition stage as well as at the problem-solving and decision-making stage. the reasoning quality of such systems hinges upon the adequacy and appropriateness with which experts and users define the characteristics of properties and specify property instances. inevitably  because of human involvement and the intrinsic nature of real-world circumstances  uncertainty is manifest in the definitions and specifications of many properties  zadeh  1; klir et al  1 . 
   this work proposes the concept of a polymorphic property. it enables the specifier of instances of the same property type to choose from three value representations according to prevailing uncertainty and his or her level of expertise. further  to enable proximity-based reasoning models to take advantage of this representation device  a consistent method is presented that allows the computation of similarity between the various value combinations. this method has been developed with four objectives in mind: it should be intuitive  intellectually satisfying  easy to use  and computationally efficient. 
   the approach has been applied within a case-based reasoning  cbr  framework in the coronary heart disease risk assessment domain. the major results of this study were that 1  unassisted subjects  users  are able to specify their own case data in the presence of varying degrees of uncertainty. 1  the system can consistently process the typical cbr inference steps on cases whose property values were provided in crisp numeric and vague linguistic values. and 1  a benchmark test with 1 cases shows that the method is highly efficient. 
   it is claimed that the method's mechanisms are applicable to a wider range of systems and applications  
especially 	in 	practical 	knowledge 	engineering environments. 
   the paper is organised as follows: section 1 briefly discusses some related approaches and illustrates the need for more flexible uncertainty handling. section 1 introduces and defines the notion of polymorphic property values. sections 1 to 1 develop the various comparison methods. section 1 briefly mentions the cbr application in which this approach has been tested  and a performance experiment that has been carried out. section 1 ends with conclusions. 
1. multiple-format property values 
in cbr systems uncertainty is pervasive in  amongst other things  the features used to describe the cases  dutta et al.% 1 . in such and other systems uncertainty may originate from various sources  zadeh  1; chen and hwang  1; baldwin et al.  1 : 
  unquantifiable information  judgement of individual : e.g.  a patient's age can be easily determined while the criticality of his or her condition is not readily quantifiable  
  incomplete information  inexact measurement : e.g.  a patient's blood pressure may be measured as 'about 
1 mmhg'  but not as 'exactly 1 mmhg'  
  non-obtainable information  data too expensive to obtain : sometimes crisp data is in principle obtainable  but the cost is too high  e.g.  a patient's family history of high cholesterol. it may  however  be possible to get a useful approximation of that data  
  partial ignorance  partially known facts about a phenomenon : some facts may only be partially known  e.g.  the  average  number of cigarettes per day a patient smoked over the last 1 years. 
   various data/knowledge models handle some of these forms of uncertainty in some way or another. for example  multiple attribute decision making systems  chen and hwang  1   fuzzy sets   relational data models  buckles et a/.  1; petry  1   fuzzy sets  rough sets   object-oriented information models  george et al.  1   fuzzy sets   and  baldwin et al  1   fuzzy sets  evidence theory . and in cbr  tirri et al.  
1   bayesian    dubitzky et a/.  1a/b   fuzzy sets  evidence theory   and  dutta et al.  1   fuzzy sets . 
   common to these approaches is that a particular property may only take values of a single type. usually these values are expressed by linguistic symbols  associated with a fuzzy set or a similarity matrix   or  exclusive or!  crisp numbers. this restriction  however  does not reflect the practices in many real-world problem-solving and decision-making environments  where data are provided  mainly by people  in whatever format is appropriate or available at the time. this may result in values of a particular property type occurring in both fuzzy and crisp formats. 
   consider  for example  a printer product support help desk scenario where customers are asked how many times a certain failure had occurred. some may have actually counted the breakdowns  others may only be able to give an approximate estimate. or imagine a healthcare system asking advice-seeking users to state their blood cholesterol concentrations. some users may have recently had their cholesterol checked  and remember exact readings  or indeed a value like low reported to them by their medic . others may only be able to recall  vaguely or accurately  measurements given to them in the past. yet another group may simply come up with a more or less informed guess which is likely to be expressed linguistically rather than numerically. 
   to facilitate properties that consistently represent and process  similarity assessment  such polymorphic instance values  the notion of a property concept frame is introduced. 
1 property concept frame 
in order to equip a property  type  with the capability to have instances of different form  the property  type   and its instances  are associated with a concept frame. the concept frame provides the representation platform to model the relationships between the various value formats  thus enabling the computation of cross-format similarity scores. 
   to be more precise  a concept frame serves as a unifying representation formalism for three property value formats: real number  linguistic term  and fuzzy 
predicate. these provide a means to express property instances at various levels of certainty and expertise. the concept frame of the property cholesterol  abbreviated by chol  depicted in figure 1 should help to illustrate this idea. 

figure 1: property concept frame and three actual property values. 
   basically  a concept frame consists of a finite universe of discourse  in figure 1  the blood cholesterol concentration range 1... 1 mmol/1   and a set of predefined concepts. these concepts are represented via linguistic symbols and the corresponding membership functions which essentially define fuzzy sets. membership functions are referred to as v-functions; v stands for value. 
   so the concepts in the cholesterol concept frame example  see diagram  are defined by the linguistic terms 
	dubitzky  et al. 	1 
1. comparing polymorphic property values 
many decision-making and require the  conceptual  comparison of more or less    to specify a property value linguistically  the specifier of the value may chose any of the linguistic terms associated with the v-functions of a particular concept frame. for example   dangerous . at first glance this may appear rather restrictive. however  the concepts defined on a concept frame are carefully established according to an expert's decision-making and problem-solving experience with the property and application in question. this ensures some degree of consistency  especially when inexperienced users specify values. an additional format  see below  provides more freedom and flexibility in cases where crisp data is not available and the set of pre-defined linguistic symbols does not seem to include an appropriate symbol. 
   finally  the fuzzy predicate format. it provides a flexible mechanism to freely specify a value by introducing and defining a new concept and its semantics. he or she does so by stating a linguistic expression  naming the actual concept  and defining the corresponding membership function which characterises the meaning of the concept. an example for a fuzzy predicate value is given by the value c depicted in figure l. the intention is to equip the more experienced user  including the domain experts themselves  with a flexible and powerful representation 'vehicle' to express values more appropriately in accordance with the prevailing uncertainty. 
   definition 1 a concept frame associated with a polymorphic property defines a universe of discourse u and a concept domain c. c is composed of linguistic symbol/v-function pairs as follows: 
complex entities involved in the process  chen and hwang  1; dubitzky et al.  1b . eventually  such algorithms come down to establishing similarity or distance between the constituent properties used to describe the entities in question. so providing a system or knowledge engineer with a powerful representation mechanism  such as the polymorphic property discussed above  is not enough. one must also put at his or her disposal a scheme that allows the systematic comparison of instances of such properties. 
   because of symmetry  i.e.  sim x y  = sim y x    a total of six possible value format combinations need to be considered  namely  lt lt    fp fp    lt fp    rn rn .  rn lt   and  rn fp .  where rn = real number  lt = linguistic term  and fp = fuzzy predicate format  these can be grouped into 1  fuzzy/fuzzy format comparison:  lt lt    fp fp   and  lt fp   1  crisp/crisp:  rn rn   and 1  crisp/fuzzy:  rn lt  and  rn fp . as the method for each group is in principle the same  only one combination per group has to be investigated. 
1 comparing fuzzy properties 
here  a fuzzily formatted property value is represented via a linguistic term and a associated membership function  essentially defining a fuzzy set . this is the case for both the linguistic term format as well as the fuzzy predicate format. since fuzzy sets  or for that matter  fuzzy numbers represent many possible real numbers  with different membership degrees  they do not always yield a totally ordered set. this makes 

	comparison a non-trivial affair. 	various approaches 
1 	case-based reasoning 

	dubitzky etal. 	1 


1 	case-based reasoning 

   defining the concept distance for this fuzzy-againstcrisp case  three requirements are considered: 1  there should be no identity such that the general tendency should be preserved; this means that the distance should decrease  if non-monotonously  for values closer to the support of fhe fuzzy set representing the fuzzy value  and 1  the method  obviously  should be sensitive to the shape/location of the membership function associated with the vague value. 
   criterion 1  is achieved by deriving the distance form the sum of the  directed  basic concept distances and  of the involved fuzzy value ai .  see also  1a  and  1b    without formal proof it is evident that always holds  see figure 1b . 
   criterion 1  is inherently met by the definition of  which already reflect tendency or 
directedness. 
   and to satisfy criterion 1   the crisp score s ai - which captures the membership function's shape and location on the concept frame-of the fuzzy value ai is explicitly used. 
   definition 1 let ai be a fuzzy property value  linguistic term or fuzzy predicate   and x a real number value. then the concept distance d x ad between ai  and 
x is computed by  see also  1    1a   and  1b  : 

1. a cbr application and some benchmarks 
the method has been tested in an experimental cbr system to give initial advice to subjects on their coronary heart disease  chd  risk. the main point of this study was to have the subjects use the system and provide chd-relevant data without first consulting a medic to establish various parameters such as blood pressure  cholesterol  or anxiety. to establish some idea about the method's performance 1 cases described by 1 polymorphic properties  1 concept frames with 1 v-functions  1 with 1  and 1 with 1  have been seeded randomly with values of the three formats. on 1 different value distributions over all cases  the average time to compare all 1 cases was 1 seconds  minimum 1 sec  maximum 1 sec . the test configuration was a 1 mhz pentium pc  1 mb ram on a windows nt1 platform. 
1. conclusions 
the polymorphic property approach presented in this paper led to encouraging results. it seems pertinent to applications  e.g.  tele-medicine or help desk systems  involving a great deal of data that is provided in crisp as well as in fuzzy format. further  performance tests indicate that the method does not incur exceptional overheads. finally  the method is expected to have some appeal to practitioners as it is easy to use and understand. 
   a valid criticism of the method might be that distance scores never reach 1  but a maximum m   1  indicating total dissimilarity. also  non-technical users  if they want to make use of the fuzzy predicate format  require to obtain some knowledge on the basics of fuzzy sets. 
