 
in the paper  we consider the problem of supporting automated reasoning in a large class of knowledge representation formalisms  including terminological and epistemic logics  whose distinctive feature is the ability of representing and reasoning about finite quantities. each member of this class can be represented using graded modalities  and thus the considered problem can be reduced to the problem of executing graded modal logics. we solve this problem using a set-theoretic approach that first transforms graded modal logics into poly modal logics with infinitely many modalities  and then reduces derivability in such polymodal logics to derivability in a suitable first-order set theory. 
1 	introduction 
the general theme of this paper is the description of a novel approach to the problem of supporting the automation of reasoning in a family of knowledge representation formalisms. such a family is characterized by the fact that its members need to represent and reason about finite quantities  and it includes terminological logics  epistemic logics  universal modalities  van der hoek and de rijke have shown that all these languages can be represented using graded modalities  fattorosi-barnaba and de caro  1   cf.  hoek and de rijke  1  for a complete description of this kind of reductions . in this paper  we propose an approach to automated deduction in graded modal logics which is based on a set-theoretic translation method introduced by d'agostino et al. in  d'agostino et a/.  1  to support derivability in propositional modal' logic. 
　most inference systems for modal logic are defined in the style of sequent or tableaux calculi  e.g.  fitting  1; wansing  1 . as an alternative  a number of translation methods for modal logic into classical first-
order logic have been proposed in the literature  for a comprehensive survey  cf.  ohlbach  1  . such methods allow the use of predicate calculus mechanical theorem provers to implement modal theorem provers. compared with the direct approach of finding a proof algo-
1 	automated reasoning 
rithm for a specific class of modal logics  the translation methods have the advantage of being independent of the particular modal logic under consideration: a single theorem prover may be used for any translatable modal logic. 
　in the standard approach  the first-order language c into which the translation is carried out contains a constant r denoting the initial world in the frame  a binary relation r x y  denoting the accessibility relation  and a denumerable number of unary predicates pi x . the translation function is defined by induction on the structural complexity of the modal formula as follows: 

　efficiency concerns have motivated further investigations on the above  relational  translation method. such studies  e.g.  ohlbach  1   suggested a  functional  semantics for modal logic and resulted in a family of more efficient and general translation methods. from the computational point of view  the functional translation may still cause some problem when using a firstorder theorem prover  due to the presence of equalities in the translation of the axioms. a method for limiting the complexity induced by the introduction of equality using a mixed relational/functional translation is proposed in  nonnengart  1 . 
　a common feature of all the methods mentioned above is that  in order to be applied directly  the underlying modal logic must have a first-order semantics. all attempts to apply them to logics not having a first-order semantics have required ad-hoc techniques. moreover  if the logic has a first-order semantics  but it is only specified by hilbert axioms  a preliminary step is necessary to find the corresponding first-order axioms. the question of automatically solving this last problem has been extensively studied and algorithms have been proposed  e.g.  benthem  1; gabbay and ohlbach  1 . 
　the above analysis can be easily tailored to the case of graded modalities. the semantics of graded modalities is very natural and intuitive  but it has a disadvan-


	montanari & policriti 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 

	montanari & policriti 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 


1 	conclusions and further directions 
in this paper  we generalized the d-as-pow translation  proposed by d'agostino et al. in  d'agostino et al  1   to apply it to graded modal logic. the resulting method allows us to support automated reasoning in a large class of knowledge representation formalisms that can be reduced to graded modal logic. it can actually be applied to polymodal logics with infinitely many modalities. indeed  there are no axioms in the underlying set theory constraining the behavior of the different modalities; such a behavior is governed by  the translation of  the axioms of the considered polymodal logic. as an example  it can be exploited to execute two-sorted metric temporal logics  montanari and de rijke  1   provided that they are reinterpreted as  a special kind of  propositional dynamic logics. 
