 
can an ai program contribute to scientific discovery  an area where this gauntlet has been thrown is that of understanding the mechanisms of chemical carcinogenesis. one approach is to obtain structure-activity relationships  sars  relating molecular structure to cancerous activity. vital to this are the rodent carcinogenicity tests conducted within the us national toxicology program by the national institute of environmental health sciences  niehs . this has resulted in a large database of compounds classified as carcinogens or otherwise. the predictive-toxicology evaluation project of the niehs provides the opportunity to compare carcinogenicity predictions on previously untested chemicals. this presents a formidable challenge for programs concerned with knowledge discovery. desirable features of this problem are:  1  involvement in genuine scientific discovery;  1  availability of a large database with expert-certified classifications;  1  strong competition from methods used by chemists; and  1  participation in true blind trials  with results available by next ijcai. we describe the materials and methods constituting this challenge  and provide some initial benchmarks. these show the inductive logic programming tool progol to be competitive with current state-of-the-art. the challenge described here is aimed at encouraging ai programs to avail themselves the opportunity of contributing to an enterprise with immediate scientific value. 
1 	introduction 
programs developed under the umbrella of machine 
learning are increasingly being used for  knowledge dis-
   *now at:department of computer science  the university of wales aberystwyth 
1 	ai challenges 
u.k. 
covery  tasks. early specialised programs  for example   feigenbaum et a/.  1; langley et a/.  1   have given way to more general-purpose ones  for example  muggleton  1; muggleton and feng  1   which have been applied with some success in areas of biochemistry   king et al  1; 1; muggleton et a/.  1  . while the experimental studies reported are preliminary  they have at least one commendable feature  namely  they constitute examples of ai programs participating in true scientific discovery tasks. by  true  here  we mean problems where existing scientific knowledge is incomplete  the descriptions found automatically were unknown to experts in the field  and have been acknowledged by publication in peer-reviewed journals in the field. given the promise shown by machine learning programs in biology and chemistry  this paper describes a challenging test-bed with the following desirable features:  1  a widespread scientific interest in any new results;  1  the availability of a large database of chemicals with classifications certified by experts;  1  strong competition from methods developed by expert chemists; and  1  the opportunity to participate in true blind trials. 
¡¡the problem concerns obtaining a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of chemical carcinogenesis. this is central to the prevention of many environmentally induced cancers. one approach is to form structure activity relationships  sars  that empirically relate molecular structure with ability to cause cancer. this work has been greatly advanced by the long term carcinogenicity tests of compounds in rodents  utilising both genders of one rat and mouse strain  by the us national toxicology program  ntp  of the national institute of environmental health sciences  niehs:  huff and haseman  1  . so far  the ntp tests have resulted in a database of more than 1 compounds that have been shown to be carcinogens or otherwise. the niehs predictive toxicology evaluation  or pte  project   bristol et a/.  1   is closely associated with the ntp. the pte project identifies a group of assays that are scheduled or ongoing in the ntp. these chemicals form the  test  set for researchers. predictions for presence or absence of carcinogenicity activity are compared against true activity as observed in the rodents. the first such blind trial  pte-1  is now complete. the second  pte-1  is ongoing  and true activity levels will be available by june 1. it is the prediction of  and reasons for  carcinogenic activity in chemicals constituting pte-1 that we commend as a challenge for ai programs concerned with knowledge discovery from databases. 
¡¡this paper is organised as follows. section 1 presents the statement of the challenge. section 1 summarises the data available in the ntp database  and the chemicals in pte-1 and pte-1. section 1 sets out the evaluation criteria. section 1 describes the results obtained using the inductive loeic programming  ilp  system progol  muggleton  1 . these results are intended to provide initial benchmarks for future entries. section 1 concludes this paper including information on submitting entries to the challenge. 
1 the pte challenge 
the aim is to obtain a theory for predicting the carcinogenicity of 1 compounds currently undergoing rodent bioassays in the ntp  called pte-1: see below . the performance of the theory is to be evaluated according to the criteria described in section 1. 
1 materials 
1 	the ntp database 
a compilation of 1 chemicals is available directly from the database of the national cancer institute and ntp   huff and haseman  1   and via the internet at http://ntp-server.niehs.nih.gov/. these compounds represent all the organic chemicals that have completed ntp reports at the time of writing this paper. of the 1 compounds  1  1%  are classified carcinogenic  and the remaining 1 non-carcinogenic. carcinogenicity is determined by analysis of long term rodent bioassays. for the purposes of this challenge  compounds classified by the ntp as equivocal are considered noncarcinogenic  as this allows direct comparison with other sar predictive methods. no analysis is made of differences in incidence between rat and mouse cancer  or the role of sex  or particular organ sites. 1 of the 1 compounds in the ntp database formed the first of the blind trials  pte-1  conducted by the pte project. results from the bioassays for these chemicals are now available  and show 1  1%  to be carcinogenic  and the remaining 1 to be non-carcinogenic. further details of these compounds are available in  bahler and bristol  1 . the 1 chemicals make this database very large and diverse  making it a great challange to learn in. 
the pte-1 compounds 
the second round of blind trials  pte-1  consists of 1 compounds  of which 1 are inorganic . these are fully described in  bristol et a/.  1   where the schedule of events suggest that all bioassay results will be available by july 1. 
1 	other information available 
the ntp has recently made available a number of structural attributes  features  describing a large section of their database. these descriptions are available at http://ntpserver.mehs. nth. gov/main-pages. the other information available is in the form of the atom and bond connectivity of the compounds  including those in pte1 . this is described further in section 1. 
1 evaluation 
in  bristol et a/.  1   the goal of predicitive toxicology  pt  is summarised as  .. .the ultimate value and most important goal of pt research may lie in the development of its potential to identify  characterise  and understand the various mechanisms or modes of action that determine the type and level of response observed when biological systems are exposed to chemicals ... . given this emphasis on understandability of models  we follow  muggleton et a/.  1  in using the following definition for comparing the performance of rival theories. 
definition 1 performance comparison. // the predictive accuracies of two theories are statistically equivalent then the theory with better explanatory power has better performance. otherwise the one with higher accuracy has better performance. 
we now elaborate further on the methods for evaluating predictive accuracy and  explanatory power . 
1 predictive accuracy-
predictive accuracy is taken to be the proportion of compounds in pte-1 whose predicted classification  carcinogenic or non-carcinogenic  agrees with that rodent bioassays. significant differences in predictive accuracy are best assessed by mcnemar test for changes  bland  1 . this test exploits the fact that the different prediction methods are applied to the same data and is based on counting the examples where the methods disagree about predictions. we suggest that differences be judged to be significant at least at p = 1. 
1 explanatory power 
in the absence of an expert chemist to act as adjudicator  we propose that the simple criterion that theories are 
judged to have  explanatory power  - a boolean property - if some or all of it can be represented diagrammatically as chemical structures. the intuition underlying this is that such structural alerts form the preferred mode of discourse amongst chemists. 
1 an experiment with the ilp system progol 
1 progol 
we refer the reader to  muggleton  1  for complete descriptions of the ilp system progol. in the current con-
	srinivasan  et al. 	1 
text  progol is provided with a set of carcinogenic   positive    and non-carcinogenic   negative   examples from the ntp database together with background knowledge b about these compounds  see section 1 . the aim is to generate a theory  expressed as a set of rules  which explains all the carcinogens in terms of the background knowledge whilst remaining consistent with the non-carcinogens. to achieve this progol 1  randomly selects a positive example e -; 1  uses inverse entailment to construct the most specific hypothesis  b  e   which explains e  in terms of b; 1  finds a rule di  which generalises   b e   and which maximally compresses a set of entailed example ei; and 1  adds di  to the theory h and repeats from 1  with examples not covered so far until no more compression is possible. compression is here defined as the difference  in numbers of descriptors  between ei  and di. 
1 	background knowledge 
the generic atom/bond representation used in an earlier study  king et a/.  1; srinivasan ct al.  1  is used. this consists of two basic relations to represent structure: atom and bond. for example  the fact atom 1-1 c ar-c-1-ring 1  states that in compound 1  atom no. 1 is of element carbon  and of type aromatic carbon in a 1 membered ring  and has a partial charge of -1. the type of the atom and its partial charge were taken from the molecular modelling package quanta  although any similar modelling package would have been suitable. equivalently  bond 1-1.1  ar  states that in compound 1  atom no. 1 and atom no. 1 are connected by an aromatic bond. in quanta  a partial charge assignment is based on a specific molecular neighbourhood. this has the effect that a specific molecular sub- structure can be identified by an atom type and partial charge. this relational representation is completely general for chemical compounds and no special attributes need to be invented. the structural information of these compounds was represented by   1 facts of background knowledge. 
¡¡information was also given about the results of salmonella mutagenicity tests for each compound. the mutagenic compounds were represented by the relation ames  e.g. ames 1  states that compound 1 is mutagenic. the progol algorithm allows for the inclusion of complex background knowledge  either in the form of facts  or in the form of arbitrary prolog programs. in this study we included the background knowledge of chemical groups defined in  srinivasan et al.  1   along with the structural alerts in  ashby et al.  1 . all the information used is available in prolog form at a prescribed internet site: http://www. comlab. ox. ac. uk/oucl/'groups/machlearn. 
1 	results and discussion 
the 1 compounds comprising pte-1 were excluded and rules for carcinogenicity obtained using progol. the resulting theory consists of 1 rules. figure 1 tabulates 
1 	al challenges 
a comparative evaluation on pte-1. more details on the rules obtained are available in  king and srinivasan  1 . figure 1 tabulates the predictions made by the progol theory for compounds in pte-1. the first three entries in figure 1 have been marked out for special attention because they had access to additional information in the form of short-term rodent  in-vivo  tests. the first two entries also require a degree of expert evaluation. the ashby structural alerts are based on electrophilic attack on dna  which makes them statistically dependent on the ames test. it is also worth noting that the tipt and benigni methods rely on structural alerts derived by the ashby method for their explanatory component. case  tipt and progol are the only data-driven inductive methods  and progol is the only automated method capable of identifying new structural alerts. with these comments in place  the results in figure 1 offer significant encouragement for machine learning programs on the following counts. first  we point out that one pte-1  the results of progol  tipt and case demonstrate performance that is competitive with the current state-of-the-art - progol has marginally the highest accuracy of all methods that do not use rodent tests. second  the relatively low accuracies of all methods is primarily due to the diversity of compounds involved. it does however leave the door open for significant improvement. progol  for example  achieves its performance with a very low-level atom/bond representation of compounds. enriching this background information with the new structural descriptors available from the ntp could significantly improve its accuracy. these comments are reinforced by early results of using the progol theory to classify compounds in pte-1. figure 1 shows that tentative classifications are available from the ntp for 1 chemicals. progol's theory has correctly classified 1 of these. this should be seen in context of the performance of other theories listed in  bristol et al.  1  which shows that most chemists and automated methods have not been able to better this count. this should provide further impetus for participation by other al programs. 
1 conclusions 
the field of toxicology is a rich source of difficult scientific problems  and there is a pressing need for analysis methods that can advance our understanding of the issues involved. we believe that the predictive toxicology evaluation trials being conducted by the us national institute for environmental health sciences afford al programs a unique opportunity to participate in obtaining an improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying chemical carcinogenesis. should they be successful  it would also constitute a noteworthy example of a realistic application of al techniques. 
entering the pte challenge 
entries to the pte challenge can be submitted via http://www. comlab. ox. ac. uk/oucl/groups/machlearn/pte. 

method type  accuracy explanation performance ranking ashby  tennant et a/.  1j 
rash  jones and easterly  1  
tipt  bahler and bristol  1  chemist 
biological potency analysis 
propositional machine learning 1 
1 
1 yes yes yes 1 
1 
1 progol  muggleton  1  benigni  benigni  1  
derek  sanderson and earnshaw  1  
bakale  bakale and mccreary  1  
topkat  enslein et a/.  1  
case  rosenkranz and klopman  1  
compact  lewis et a/.  1  inductive logic programming 
expert-guided regression 
expert system 
chemical reactivity analysis 
statistical discrimination 
statistical correlation analysis 
molecular modelling 1 1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 yes yes yes no 
yes yes yes 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 figure 1: benchmarks on pte-1. methods above the central horizontal line had access to short-term rodent tests  which were unavailable to others. further  the ashby and rash methods require a degree of subjective evaluation  making them semi-automatic. the performance ranking is obtained using the combined accuracy-explanation 

criterion described earlier. 
entries are accepted here for compounds in pte-1. a submission requires the following:  a  name of entry;  b  predictions for the compounds in pte-1;  c  whether or not the theory has explanatory power; and  d  a short description of the technique used for prediction. this is sufficient to compute automatically the accuracy and performance ranking of each entry. 
acknowledgements 
this research was supported partly by the esprit basic research action project ilp ii  the serc project project ' experimental application and development of ilp' and an serc advanced research fellowship held by stephen muggleton. stephen muggleton is a research fellow of wolfson college oxford. r.d. king was at imperial cancer research fund during the course of much of the early work on this problem. we would also like to thank professor donald michie and david page for interesting and useful discussions concerning the use of ilp for predicting biological activity. 
