 
this paper presents a generic model for a cognitive agent based on the hypothesis that the cognitive activity has three main characteristics: self-organization  evolutionary nature and history dependence. according to this model  a cognitive agent presents three levels: reactive  instinctive and cognitive. each level  together with its lower levels  is intended to model a 
complete agent  each new level just increasing the behavior complexity. the generic model is instantiated into a computational architecture that integrates connectionist  evolutionary computation and symbolic approaches. 
1 	introduction 
during its forty years of existence  artificial intelligence  ai  research produced an heterogeneous set of methods adapted to solve problems in some  usually rather specific  domains. efforts geared towards an unified theory have not succeeded  even the fundamental research is divided among several uncompatible approaches  e.g.  physical symbol systems  newell  1   connectionism  rumelhart and mcclelland  1  and evolutionary computation  goldberg  1 . although methods 
from different approaches have been successfully combined in some systems  e.g.  neural networks and expert systems  fu  1    no general theory of hybrid systems is presently available. 
　this paper defines a generic model for a cognitive agent and proposes a computational architecture  coher-
ent with this model  that integrates all the approaches mentioned above. the model is based on the following basic hypothesis:  i  cognition is an emergent property of a cyclic dynamic self-organizing process  morin  1  based on the interaction of a large number of functionally 
   *the author is partially supported by conselho national de desenvolvimento cientifico e tecnoldgico  cnpq   grant no. 1-1. 
1 	cognitive modeling 
independent units of a few types  changeux  1 .  ii  any model of the cognitive activity should be epistemologically compatible with the theory of evolution. that applies not only to the  hardware  components of this activity but also to its  psychological  aspects  wright  1 .  iii  learning and cognitive activity are closely related and  therefore  the cognitive modeling process should strongly depend on the cognitive agent's particular history  piaget  1 . 
　the paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we introduce the generic model for a cognitive agent. in section 1  we present a computational architecture coherent with the proposed model. in sections 1  1 and 1  we discuss some details of the proposed architecture that are relevant to the three adopted hypothesis. finally  in section 1  we summarize our proposal. 
1 	generic model 
the proposed generic model for a cognitive agent presents three levels: reactive  instinctive and cognitive. functionally  these three levels are similar to the reactive  deliberative and meta-management components of sloman's architectures for human-like agents  sloman  
1 . the model also presents some similarities with the rasmussens's models  rasmussen  1 . the reactive level consists of an evolutionary environment  whose elements are patterns  extracted from perceptive information about some external world  effector controls that can produce some action in the same external world and a population of reactive agents that tie together perception and action. this evolutionary environment is submitted to a natural selection process where the fitness 
function is associated with the emotions of the agent  defined as a global response reflecting the agent's present state  kitano  1 . the environment complexity and the agent variety are not bounded  phenomena such as co-evolution  arms race  parasitism  symbiosis  etc are expected to occur. in particular  the agents can organize themselves in co-evolutionary groups analogous to the agencies proposed by minsky in his society of minds 

 minsky  1 . at this level  processing is totally parallel and is characterized by a rapid perception/action cycle. at the end of each cycle  the best agents in the community  according to the fitness function  are allowed to act  i.e.  to emit control commands to the body. this first level is intended to model simple animals  such as insects. the reactive level definition has many points in common with the enactive theory proposed by varela et al.  varela et al  1 . 
　the instinctive level introduces a long term memory into the model. as the evolutionary process at the reactive level proceeds and the situations repeat themselves in the world  it is possible to identify the populations of agents in the environment responsible for a useful action in a given situation. if we take  from these populations  the best and the worst agents  according to the fitness function  it is possible to abstract their properties and to obtain a general description of a given population  a kind of  genetic reserve  indexed by situation. we claim that long term memory is composed essentially by these descriptions and that the act of  remembering  corresponds to the introduction at the reactive level of new populations  whose agents are genetically encoded according to these general descriptions. once there  these new populations are  up to a certain limit  able to recreate their original enviroment  from which they were generalized. the long time effect of memory in such a model is analogous to the  breeding  and  taming  of reactive agent populations. at this level  processing is less massively parallel and is characterized by a much longer cycle that needs many repetitions of the same situation to be completed. the two lower levels together are intended to model more complex animals  such as mammals. 
　finally  the cognitive level is concerned with the manipulation of the general descriptions generated at the instinctive level. its functions are the usual cognitive functions: deduction  abduction and induction. the cognitive level is based on two complementary activities: the learning of descriptions of relevant situations - a synthetic  holystic activity - and the generation of new strategies of action - an analytical  local activity. the contents of the cognitive activity  i.e.  the contents of the short term memory  are defined to be exactly the relations between these two complementary activities. 
　although the cognitive level could be based on any adequate symbolic logic formalism  it is  embodied  in a strict sense: on the one hand  its symbolic expressions refers to  lived  situation descriptions  giving it a  real  semantic. moreover  these descriptions can be used to generate specific behavior patterns in a real world environment or in some  hypothetical  environment  simulated through the sentiments of the agent  defined as emotions induced through memories generated by cognitive activities. on the other hand  the results of its infer-

figure 1: the architecture 
ence mechanisms are intended to be useful as the seeds for new useful behaviors and not simply true theorems. these two interpretations of the symbolic expressions in the cognitive level -  i  representations of the properties of the instintive level descriptions and  ii  seeds for action skills - axe similar to the representational and functional roles of smith's impressions  smith  1 . 
　it is interesting to note that the instintive and cognitive levels together can be thought of as a more complex version of a reactive level agent  also functionally conecting perception and action. but in this case  the agent refers to an internal world: the reactive level environment. we claim that a necessary condition for the development of cognition is that this high level agent  which in some sense is the only one that we can really call  cognitive agent   be itself  embodied  in a community of similar cognitive agents. moreover  we propose that the structure of long term memory reflects a reconstruction  at the reactive level  of the relevant structures of the environment in which the cognitive agent is itself embodied  particularly its socio/ structures  neumann  1 . the agents in this cognitive environment would have two communication channels:  i  experience  they  partially  agree about the effects of actions in the external world and about the contents of emotions and sentiments  i.e.  they believe they have similar reactive levels; and  ii  language  they can share  through the representations at the cognitive level  knowledge about experience  specially that knowledge that would give rise to useful skills at the reactive level. 
1 	architecture 
the instantiation of the above model for the human cognition would rise several questions about its coherence 
	bittencourt 	1 

with respect to the known facts about human evolution  physiology and psychology. we avoid these questions and  heeding sloman's advice  sloman  1   try to explore the design space through a computational architecture for cognitive agents based on that model. the proposed architecture  presented in figure 1  has the same three levels and is intended to be a minimal implementation of the generic model. 
　the central activity of the machine is performed by the evolutionary computation module at the reactive level. it computes some kind of genetic algorithm where the genotype of the population members encode control parameters of the perception and action mechanisms  represented in figure 1 as the neural nets and fuzzy control/brooks' systems modules  respectively. the function of the neural nets module is to account for perception and the fuzzy control/brooks' systems module represents the effectors of the agent. both these technologies have interesting properties for our purposes: neural nets are able to learn how to extract patterns from raw information  even without an external supervisor  kohonen  1   reducing the complexity of the situation identification process. moreover  they can be easily coded into a genotype structure through the weights associated with the network links. fuzzy control and brooks' systems are able to control quite complex behaviors in a distributed way and can also be easily coded  because their mechanisms depend on a limited number of parameters. 
　the agents in the reactive level environment can be seen as  atomic potential actions  or  skill fragments  
joining together the perception and action mechanisms and the actual functional capability for an effective guided action in the external world. the genotype of each of these agents encodes three types of information:  i  the weights to be used in the input neural nets   ii  the parameters that define the action mechanism  e.g.  the fuzzy set definitions in the case of a fuzzy control mechanism  and  iii  a functional definition of the connection between the neural net output and the effector control input. such an agent  when it is  plugged  into the appropriate perception/action circuit  uses its encoded weights and parameters to tune the perception/action mechanisms according to its necessity  and applies its encoded function to drive the relevant parts of the external effectors through the desired action according to the present perceptual input. 
　the model supposes a fitness function that attributes a grade to each reactive level agent and can be associated with some measure of the internal state of the machine. the real actions occur at the reactive level: after the genetic algorithm is running for some generations since the last action  the best agents according to the fitness function are activated. there are no central control and 
1 	cognitive modeling 
there are lots of things happening at the same time. each action changes the internal state of the agent and the external environment  as perceived through the neural net module  and the cycle restarts. the model does not represent an  information processing machine   the perceptual input represents a restriction on the generated actions but does not determine them. furthermore  the machine may continue its activities independent of input and output  it is enough to simulate a previously learned fitness function to create a hypothetical situation. in fact  we claim that much of the machine activity would be performed during the periods of inactivity  in which it  sleeps  and  dreams . 
　to learn a fitness function  a memory mechanism is necessary. if we observe the  arena  at the reactive level and  as a situation repeats itself  collect the best and the worst agents in handling such situation  then the genetic material in these agents can be used as examples and counterexamples in an inductive learning mechanism  e.g.   salzberg  1  . the results of this inductive mechanism are general descriptions of populations  that can be associated with appropriate fitness function values. the complexity of these descriptions is proportional to the generality of the inductive learning mechanism and its underlying representation language. if this language is general enough to be interpreted as a logical description of the world situations  then we can use it to give a semantic account to a symbolic logic module  where the learned descriptions are interpreted as models of the external world. 
　finally  the cognitive level is defined as a theorem proving mechanism  although it presents some unusual features in such systems: its expressions refer to well defined structures  the general descriptions of the instinctive level  and its inference results can be used to genetically encode new populations at the reactive level  and therefore  their value as representations of the world can be tested in  real action  conditions. in our minimal model  the genetic codification module corresponds to a fuzzy control system generator  but in a more general specification it could be any control system generator  reintroducing the cybernetics view that control theory is an important part of cognitive activity. coherently with the generic model  we suppose that the machine would be  embodied  in a world where human beings and cognitive machines are joined in communities. 
1 self-organizing logic 
the connection between a symbolic theorem proving mechanism and the elements in the instinctive level of the proposed architecture deserves a more detailed treatment. the cognitive level activity could be described as follows. initially  the learning mechanism  at the instinctive level  selects the best reactive level agents. the 

genetic material of these agents encode situation descriptions and adequate actions to be performed in these situations and it is used to derive a logical description of the relevant behaviors in these situations. the process that generates these descriptions is called conceptualization. at the cognitive level  the logical descriptions are 
interpreted as possible models of the world. the main activity of the cognitive level is to assume that the learned models are all the possible models for these situations and to derive an associated factual description that has exactly those models. this mechanism is very similar to mccarthy's circumscription  mccarthy  1 . 
the usual theorem proving methods - resolution 
 robinson  1  and semantic tableaux  smullyan  1  - present some properties that make them not adequate for our purposes:  i  they present external  i.e.  meta-logical  inference rules   ii  they are not designed to generate a factual description from a set of possible model descriptions  only to the reverse  and  iii  their proof methods are local mechanisms. to avoid these problems  we propose a new inference method  based on the transformation between conjunctive and disjunctive canonical normal forms  the dual transformation  that involves only internal properties of the underlying logical system  i.e.  there is no inference rule external to the logical language  and that has a global and concurrent nature  bittencourt  1 . 
　given a logical formula w  we call a theory the two sets and that contain  respectively  the clauses and dual clauses associated with the canonical normal forms of w. the two sets and are a kind of  holographic  representation of each other. each clause in consists of a combination of all dual clauses in and  conversely  each dual clause in  consists of a combination of all clauses in 
　intuitively  the proposed inference algorithm consists in the elimination of the contradictory dual clauses  the combination of the associated substitution fragments into a set of independent substitutions  the application of these substitutions to the dual clause set and  finally  the generation  through the dual transformation  of the clause sets associated with these instances of the dual clause set. the clauses in these instances are new theorems which can be added to the original clause set and the cycle may be repeated. clearly this mechanism does not present external inference rules  all that is done is to exploit the duality of the canonical representations and their semantics. 
　the inference method is totally symmetric. it does not matter if we begin with clauses  i.e.  a factual account of a situation  or dual clauses  i.e.  a description of the possible models of the situation. analogously to the elimination of contradictory dual clauses  in the clause form it is the tautologic clauses that can be eliminated. 
therefore  the repeated transformation between canonical representations is not only able to infer new theorems but it is also able to refine the theory. 
　these theoretic properties of the inference method are enough to eliminate the two first restrictions to theorem proving methods. the third one must necessarily take into account implementation concerns. clearly  the most expensive operation of the proposed inference method is the dual transformation. to improve its efficiency  we developed a concurrent algorithm for the dual transformation  based on a geometrical representation  that  on the one hand  generates only dual clauses that are not subsumed by any other and  on the other hand  is naturally concurrent and therefore easy to parallelize. 
　according to this algorithm  a theory is represented through a n dimensional hypercube  where n is the number of predicate symbols that occur in the theory. each vertex of this hypercube can be associated with a certain combination of predicates given by those coordinates of the vertex that are not zero. a  dual  clause is associated with the vertex labeled exactly with those predicates that appear in its literals. the literals in each dual clause can be thought to represent some clauses where they appear or where there are literals subsumed by them. this information is stored in the geometric representation as integer sets associated with each literal that indicate in which  dual  clauses the literal is present. the result of this construction is that the dual transformation and the manipulations necessary to the inference/refinement mechanism can be done through local communication between neighbor  dual  clauses in the hypercube. the holographic properties of the canonical representation allow for a global effect in one form to be calculated locally in the other form  bittencourt  1 . 
　this representation allows the integration of the instinctive and cognitive levels: the learning mechanism could be thought of as concurrently 'feeding  each separate node of the hypercube with the appropriate dual clause representation of some situation. after some refinement/inference steps the new inferred model descriptions can be directly verified through the learning mechanism. furthermore  the clause representation can be used to generate new reactive level populations  whose action effects could again be verified through the learning mechanism. it is interesting to note that this kind of integration does not eliminate the robustness of the reactive level environment. in the model  the cognitive activity can influence the global behavior  but its scope is limited. 
　another interesting property of the representation is that it easily supports a special kind of higher-order logic  where the theories  with their predicate and function symbols as parameters  are considered as new 
	bittencourt 	1 

atomic formulas. this property has much in common with peirce's semiosis process  peirce  1 . according to peirce  a sign  s  represents an object  1  for another sign  the interpreter  j . this last sign - called an habit or mental law - may determine another interpreter i1  which may determine an i1  etc. the actu-
alization of the potentially infinite sequence i  i1   i1       is called semiosis. this triadic relation can be found in all three levels of the model. in particular  at the cognitive level  the memorized descriptions are the signs that represent possible models to theories and theories are signs that represent new populations to the instinctive level. moreover  theories as signs may represent possible  hypothetical  models for other theories  mediated by a meta-conceptuaiization process. 
1 	evolution 
in the proposed model  we are double committed with the evolutionary approach: on the one hand  the most important component of the model is in itself an evolutionary mechanism - the reactive level - and  on the other hand  the model is designed in such a way that the components at each level could have evolved one after the other  because both  the reactive level and the pair reactive/instinctive levels  are complete models of simpler agents. 
　the choice of an evolutionary mechanism as the base of the model is inspired by the fact that the function of the central nervous system is to integrate the most different perception and action mechanisms. this integration could be done through a genetically  wired  functional mechanism  but none would be flexible enough to adapt itself to a variable environment. a more robust solution is to use a simulation of the relevant characteristics of the external world  under the same natural selection principles  to make more secure decisions about future actions. if the real-time simulation is reliable enough  even without a memory  a reactive level agent would be able to  learn  how to act in a given situation  i.e.  the adequate reactive level agents will be  slowly  selected through interactions with the real world. the problem is that  without a memory  the range of experiences is limited to the actually lived situations and that implies that certain situations  e.g.  fatal ones  cannot be simulated. 
　in this sense  long term memory is an improvement to a previously existing mechanism. an improvement which allows off-line simulations  because memory allows the simulation of the internal fitness function associated with hypothetical situations. these hypothetical simular tions greatly accelerate the evolutionary process at the reactive level. the cognitive level is another improvement of the mechanism  because it allows the creation  through inference  of models of situations that never oc-
1 	cognitive modeling 
curred in the agents' experience  further accelerating the evolutionary process at the reactive level. but its full strength comes from the fact that it also allows the establishment of a second communication channel between agent and world: language. language may be used in the description of abstract situations  in particular  it allows one to conceptualize social situations and to reconstruct the relevant social relations into a coherent internal theory that can be suitably simulated at the reactive level. 
1 learning 
one of the central issues of the model is the fitness function to be provided and its relation with the meaning of the words  emotions  and  sentiments   loosely introduced in the model description. more formally  we call emotions an internally generated feedback mechanism  based on perception and memory  able to guide the evolution of the reactive level environment in such a way that the global agent survives. emotions are the keys for long term memory  only emotionally important learned descriptions are memorized and the same emotions are able to fetch them from memory. 
　according to the model  long term memory existed prior to symbolic cognitive activity and it was in some sense adapted to cognitive purposes. as cognitive products  models and factual descriptions  do not have in principle any emotional contents  to memorize them it is necessary to artificially create these emotional contents. these cognitively generated emotions we call sentiments. because sentiments are associated with cognitive states and therefore to language constructions  they are fundamental for the appropriate learning of social behaviors  mainly transmitted through language. the coherence between sentiments and emotions is the base for the cognitive development. if the descriptions we learn lead in fact  at the reactive level  to the emotional effects we were told they should  we can have the  sentiment  that we learned an useful thing. 
　although the theories at the cognitive level are strictly grounded in the learned descriptions  the real  meaning  of these descriptions is different for each cognitive agent  because it is defined as the effect of these descriptions when their associated populations are introduced in the reactive level  and this effect is determined by the particular history of the reactive level environment  i.e.  by the history of emotions and sentiments that guided its development. 
1 	conclusion 
in their book the embodied mind  varela et al.  varela et a/.  1  propose three questions about cognition 
and answer them from three points of view: the cognitivist research program  the emergence  connectionist  program and their own enaction theory. to summarize our proposal  we answer the same three questions from the point of view of the proposed model: 
  what is cognition   the articulation of two parallel evolutionary processes: one that occurs in an internal environment where a history of structural coupling brings forth a  physical  world  i.e.  the reactive level  and  another that occurs in an external sentimental/social/cultural environment where a history of symbolic exchanges  mainly through language  between cognitive agents brings forth  in each one  a  sentimental  world  i.e.  the cognitive level. the integration between the environments is mediated by the long term memory. 
  how does it work   the reactive level is based on an evolutionary process guided by the emotions and the cognitive level is based on a cyclic process that transforms factual descriptions into models and vice versa. the models are interpreted as memorized general descriptions of situations and the factual descriptions are used to generate new reactive level populations. cognitive theories can be communicated through language. the cognitive level can also generate sentiments  i.e.  artificial emotions  that allow it to influence memory contents. 
  how do i know when a cognitive system is function-ing adequately   when it becomes part of an ongoing 
existing physical and sentimental/social/cultural world. 
acknowledgments 
the author is grateful to all those that helped in the development of this paper  in particular the lcmi team and the anonymous referees. 
