 
the aim of the present paper is to reveal the interrelation between general patterns of nonmonotonic reasoning and multiple belief revision. for this purpose we define a nonmonotonic inference frame in which individual inference rules have been proposed in the literature but their combination as a system has not been investigated. it is shown that such a system is so strong that almost all the rules  including the supracompactness  suggested for nonmonotonic inference relations in the literature hold in it. we prove that this nonmonotonic inference frame is strictly correspendent with multiple belief revision operation. on the basis of this result we analyse a specific paradigm of defult theory which satisfies all the rules under consideration and discuss limitations of methods based on consequence relations for the study of nonmonotonic reasoning. 
1 	introduction 
in recent years much work has been done on the relationship between nonmonotonic reasoning and belief revision 
 makinson and gardenfors 1   brewka 1   nebel 
1   cravoand martins 1   li 1  gardenfors and makinson 1   boutilier 1   gardenfors and rott 1   zhang 1 . a very close correspondence between them has been found based on the following formal translation: 

¡¡the main idea is to identify revision of a belief set k by a proposition a with nonmonotonic inference from a under the guidance of the background knowledge a'. with this connection  it has been shown in  makinson and gardenfors 1   gardenfors and rott 1  that each postulate for the belief revision function * can be translated into a plausible conditions on the nonmonotonic inference relation |~; conversely  almost all the plausible conditions on the nonmonotonic inference relation in the literature can also be translated into conditions on * that are consequences of the postulates for the 

this extension is also essential because it enables a treatment of inference relation in which premises are arbitrary sets of propositions  including infinite sets. the questions arises naturally now that: 
  how the nonmonotonic inference rules on |~ are ex-tended to the infinite level so that they are still plausible for nonmonotonic reasoners; 
  how an infinite revision framework is constructed so that it is a natural generalization of the original one; 
  whether the strict correspondence between belief revision and nonmonotonic reasoning can be preserved in the setting of the extended frameworks. 
¡¡fortunately  the first question has been widely investigated in the literature  makinson 1   freund 1  
	zhang  e t a l . 	1 


automated reasoning 


	zhang  etal. 	1 


automated reasoning 

a paradigm of default reasoning 
following the general considerations of the previous sections  we now look at a specific approach to nonmonotonic reasoning. we aim to seek a 'natural' system of nonmonotonic logic which satisfies all the inference rules for the rational nonmonotonic frame. on the basis of makinson's 'satisfaction table' in  makinson 1   only 
poole's system without constraints based on finite set of defaults in the systems of nonmonotonic logic considered in that paper satisfies all the inference rules of rn except the rational monotony. there is a disadvantage of poole's approach  however  that it does not allow to represent priorities between defaults  which causes that the inference relations generated by poole's system happen to collapse into the classical one when the default set is closed.  nebel 1  developed a system of default logic  called ranked default theory  rdt   which efficiently overcame this shortage. we here reformulate nebel's system in a more general fashion. 
   let  f  d  be a default theory  where f and d are both sets of propositions  interpreted as 'facts' and 'defaults'  respectively.  f  d  is said to be a perfectordered partitioned default theory  pop dt  w.r.t. e 
1 discussions and conclusions 
we have established a very close connection between the general patterns of nonmonotonic reasoning and the multiple belief revision. this enables us to take the strategy to use methods from belief revision  set-theoretical  to contribute to a better understanding of nonmonotonic reasoning. we have seen that rn is such a strong system that almost all the rules suggested for nonmonotonic inference in the literature are the derived rules of r n . one may think that much more consequences would be derived in rn than in the classical logic from the same premises. this is clearly false when none of the pieces of background knowledge is available. precisely specking  we have 
	zhang  et al. 	1 


