 
we present a new logical approach to reasoning from inconsistent information. the idea is to restore modelhood of inconsistent formulas by providing a third truth-value tolerating inconsistency. the novelty of our approach stems first from the restriction of entailment to three-valued models as similar as possible to two-valued models and second from an implication connective providing a notion of restricted monotonicity. after developing the semantics  we present a corresponding proof system that relies on a circumscription schema furnishing the syntactic counterpart of model minimization. 
1 	introduction 
the capability of reasoning in the presence of inconsistencies constitutes a major challenge for any intelligent system. this is because in practical settings it is common to have contradictory information. in fact  despite its many appealing features for knowledge representation and reasoning  classical logic falls in the same trap: a single contradiction may wreck an entire reasoning system  since it may allow for deriving any proposition. this comportment is due to the fact that a contradiction denies any classical two-valued model  since a proposition must be either true or false. we thus aim at providing a formal reasoning system satisfying the principle of paraconsistency: in other words  
given a contradictory set of premises  this should not necessarily lead to concluding all formulas. we address this problem from a semantic point of view. we want to counterbalance the effect of contradictions by providing a third truth-value that accounts for contradictory propositions. as already put forward by  priest  1   this provides us with inconsistencytolerating three-valued models. however  this approach turns out to be rather weak in that it invalidates certain classical inferences  even if there is no contradiction. intuitively  this is because there are too many three-valued models  in particular those assigning the inconsistency-tolerating truth-value to propositions that are unaffected by contradictions. 
* previously at leria  universite d* angers  france. 
1 	automated reasoning 
torsten h. schaub* 
institut fur informatik 
universitat potsdam  postfach 1 1 d-1 potsdam 
　our idea is to focus on those three-valued models that are as similar as possible to two-valued models of the knowledge base. in this way  we somehow hand over the model selection process to the knowledge base by preferring those models that assign true to as many items of the knowledge base as possible. as a result  our approach reduces nicely to classical reasoning in the absence of inconsistency.  for the reader familiar with the work of  priest  1  we note that ours is different from preferring three-valued models having the highest number of classical truth-values  which amounts to approximating two-valued interpretations while somehow discarding the underlying knowledge base.  the syntactic counterpart of our preferential reasoning process is furnished by an axiom schema  similar to the ones found in circumscription  mccarthy  1 . another salient feature of our approach is driven by the desire to preserve existing proofs even though they may lead to contradictory conclusions. this is because proofs provide evidence for derived conclusions. we accomplish this by introducing an implication connective that reduces  inside the knowledge base  to classical implication in the absence of inconsistency  while its resulting inferences are conserved under inconsistency. 
　the paper is organized as follows. section 1 lays the semantic foundations of our approach; it presents a novel threevalued logic comprising two special connectives: the aforementioned implication and a truth-value-indicating connective  used for later axiomatization of the model selection process . to a turn  we define our paraconsistent inference relation by means of a preference relation over the set of models obtained in this logic. section 1 presents the syntactic counterpart by proposing a corresponding formal proof system. we present an axiomatization of the underlying three-valued logic and we furnish a circumscription axiom providing syntactic means for reasoning from preferred inconsistency-tolerating models. 
1 	model theory 
this section presents our semantic approach to reasoning from possibly inconsistent knowledge bases expressed in a propositional language. we use h for classical entailment wrt twovalued interpretations and cn - for classical deductive closure. for dealing with inconsistencies we rely on an extended 


	besnard & schaub 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 


	besnard & schaub 	1 

for illustration  let us return to our initial example 
1 related work 
there are a number of proposals addressing inconsistent information. at first  there is the wide range of paraconsistent logics  priest et a/.  1 . as opposed to our approach  such logics usually fail to identify with classical logic when the set of premises is consistent. there are also many approaches dealing with classical reasoning from consistent subsets. in a broader sense  this includes also belief revision and truth maintenance systems. a comparative study of the aforementioned approaches in general is given in  besnard  1 . hood is then limited to models containing a minimal number of prepositional variables being assigned o. as our approach  this allows for drawing  all classical inferences except where inconsistency makes them doubtful anyway   priest  1 . there are two major differences though: first  the aforementioned restriction of modelhood focuses on models as close as possible to 1-valued interpretations  while the one in our approach aims at models next to 1-valued models of the considered formula. the effects of making the formula select its 
1 	automated reasoning 
　the difference between our approach and  reasoning from maximal consistent subsets of the premises  is that we still pay attention to one objection motivating relevant logics  anderson and belnap  1  and that is applying disjunctive syllogism to contradictory premises. however  we do not go as far as sanctioning any classical inference not using inconsistent subformulas. that is  we still follow the principle of relevant logics that an inference rule is a priori applicable to any premise. this is in contrast with the idea of restricted access logic  gabbay and hunter  1   where all classical inference rules are admitted with some special application conditions. 
　among others  logic programming with inconsistencies was addressed in  blair and subrahmanian  1; 1 .  wagner  1  describes a procedural framework for handling contradictions that relies on the notions of  support  and  acceptance . the former avenue of research is further developed in  grant and subrahmanian  1   where it is shown how the approach of  blair and subrahmanian  1  can be extended by classical inferences  like reasoning by cases. intuitively  the corresponding entailment relations amount to logic programming in a 1-valued  and 1-valued  respectively  logic. the major difference to our approach is that compared to classical entailment  these approaches are sound but not complete  even when the set of premises is consistent . as with other approaches  this is because they aim at paraconsistent reasoning in a logic programming setting that does not necessarily coincide with classical logic. 
　our approach is clearly semantical in contrast to many other proposals to paraconsistency:  i  the idea of  forgetting  literals  kifer and lozinskii  1; besnard and schaub  
1 ;  ii  the idea of stratified theories  benferhat et al.   1 ;  iii  the idea of reliability relation  roos  1    iv  and more generally the idea of reasoning from consistent sub-
sets of the premises. in contrast to  tlirner  1   where the baseline is to analyze propositions  so as to resolve paradoxes about truth  for instance   we simply apply a system of truthvalues so that we can have non-trivial inconsistent premises. moreover  our approach is purely deductive  as opposed to argumentation-based frameworks  like  wagner  1; elvang and hunter  1 . an unusual approach to reasoning from inconsistency is due to  lin  1   who introduces the notion of consistent belief by means of modal operators. this approach fails to satisfy reflexivity  not every premise is concluded . 
1 conclusion 
we presented a semantical approach to dealing with inconsistent knowledge bases that is founded on the minimization of three-valued models. this was complemented by a formal proof system accomplishing model minimization by appeal to a circumscription axiom. the distinguishing features of our approach are  i  its desire to provide models making true  instead of true and false  as many as possible items of the knowledge base   ii  its centering on inferences drawn by modus ponens by means of a primitive implication connective  and  iii  its property of restricted monotonicity. a major further development will be lifting the approach to the first-order case. in this context  we draw the reader's attention to the fact that our approach  unlike  priest  1   does not rely on the notion of an atomic proposition  which is always problematic when passing from the propositional case to the first-order case. 
