 
belief revision and belief update are two different forms of belief change  and they serve different purposes. in this paper we focus on belief update  the formalization of change in beliefs due to changes in the world. the complexity of the basic update  introduced by winslett   has been determined in  eiter and gottlob  1 . since then  many other formalizations have been proposed to overcome the limitations and drawbacks of winslett's update. in this paper we analyze the complexity of the proposals presented in the literature  and relate some of them to previous work on closed world reasoning. 
1 	introduction 
the study of belief change has received considerable attention from the ai  databases and philosophy communities. belief change deals with the incorporation of new facts into an agent's beliefs. there are two basic forms of belief change: belief revision and belief update. the difference lies in what is the source of incorrectness  if any  in the previous agent's beliefs. 
¡¡the old beliefs of the agent may be mistaken or incomplete: in this case the usual approach is that of belief revision  captured by the agm postulates  alchourr1n et a/.  1 . on the other hand  an agent's beliefs  while correct at one time  may become obsolete due to changes in the world. the basic treatment of updates is given in  winslett  1   while a general framework is proposed in  katsuno and mendelzon  1 . 
¡¡many drawbacks and limitations of the initial proposal of winslett have been discovered. one regards how it treats disjunctive information: as in many approaches of non-monotonic reasoning  the update treats incorrectly a new piece of information that is in disjunctive form  such as x1 v x1 . the next example shows one of these situations. 
example 1 the rch company deals with computers. it stores computers not yet sold in a warehouse composed by three separated rooms. the first room contains pcs  
1 	automated reasoning 
the second macintoshes and the third suns  x-terminals etc. by accident  a fire is set up in the room that contains pcs  and all the items it contains are moved to the other two rooms. the old database is  for our pur-
poses   icontains pc  r1   contains pc'  r1   which means only the first room contains pcs. after the fire destroyed that room  all we know is that the pcs has been moved in the rooms r1 and r1. some items may have been moved to a room and some to the other one. the new piece of information to be incorporated is u - contains pc  r1  v contains pc  r1   which denotes the fact that at least one room  possibly both  must have pcs in it. the intended result of the update should be u itself  but winslett's gives instead contains pc r1 ¡Ù contains pc  r1 . this is not the intuitive result  since the possibility that some items have gone to r1 and some to rs should not be ruled out. 
¡¡another drawback of the original formulation of update is that it never allows changes to the previous states: sometimes updates lead agents to revise their knowledge about the previous state. in these cases  update is related with revision as intended in the agm framework  alchourr1n et a/.  1; dalai  1 . the next example  shamelessly stolen from  boutilier  1   shows this fact. 
example 1 we have a beaker with an unknown liquid in it. we want to determine if it is an acid or a base. initially  all we know is acid ¡Ù base: the content of the beaker may be an acid or a base  but not both. 
¡¡in order to determine which kind of substance we are dealing with  we drop a litmus paper in the beaker. after that  we discover that the liquid is an acid. updating the old knowledge base we obtain  correctly  acid a  base. the problem is that this fact is true not only after the experiment  but was also true before it: the liquid was acid before the test  although we did not know this. as a result  the initial state should be modified accordingly. however  winslett's approach modifies only the new state  and does not make any change on the belief about the previous state: using this update  we can say  about the liquid before the test  only acid ¡Ù base. 
¡¡in this paper we analyze the complexity of some of the proposals introduced so far. the complexity of the 




1 	automated reasoning is an action and f p1... pm are fluent expressions. if m = 1 the after proposition f after a  ...  am is written i n i t i a l l y f  and is called initially proposition. 
¡¡in order to formalize the belief update in this framework  we must introduce a finite set of  linearly ordered  temporal points t  and two other kinds of propositions  the happens propositions and the holds propositions. given a time point t and an action a  a happens proposition is written a happens at t  and means that the action a happens in the instant t. given a fluent expression f and a time point t  a holds proposition has the form f holds at t  and means that f is true in the time point t. 
¡¡a domain description is a set of value  effect  and happens propositions. given a domain description d  it may happen that new information  represented by a holds proposition h  has to be incorporated. due to the lack of space  we cannot introduce formally the semantics of a neither that of the belief update based on it. we refer to  li and pereira  1   where the update is introduced  for a more detailed explanation. the new holds proposition h could be not implied by d. in this case  we must find an explanation  i.e.  a possible cause of the change. formally  an explanation is a set of happens and initially propositions p such that d u p implies h. to decide whether a proposition h' is implied by the updated description  we check whether d u p implies h' for each minimal explanation p. 
1 	closed w o r l d reasoning 
in the sequel we use two formalizations of the closed world assumption  namely the generalized world closed assumption and the curb. 
¡¡given a propositional formula ¦Ì  the set of its free for negation atoms  written ffn ¦Ì   is the set of the atoms that are false in all the minimal  w.r.t. set inclusion  models of ¦Ì. the generalized closed world assumption of ¦Ì is the formula gcwa ¦Ì  = ¦Ì a ffn ¦Ì . 
¡¡the curb is introduced in  eiter et a/.  1  as a variant of the circumscription. in this paper we use a simplified version of it  the curb1  also introduced in the paper above. given a formula ¦Ì  the curb1  ¦Ì  is defined as the formula whose models are the models j of ¦Ì such that there exists a set of minimal models s of ¦Ì such that a  j contains all the models of s  and b  there is no other j1 of ¦Ì  contained in j  with the same property. 
1 	c o m p u t a t i o n a l c o m p l e x i t y 
we assume that the reader is familiar with the basic concepts of computational complexity. we use the standard notation of complexity classes that can be found in  johnson  1 . namely  the class p denotes the set of problems whose solution can be found in polynomial time by a deterministic turing machine  while np denotes the class of problems that can be resolved in polynomial time by a non-deterministic turing machine. the class conp denotes the set of decision problems whose complement is in np. we call np-hard a problem g if 


1 	automated reasoning 


c. explanations are composed only of after propositions  initially propositions are not allowed in explanations . 
¡¡in the holds propositions f holds at t we allow f to be a boolean formula on the alphabet of the fluent names  instead of a fluent expression . under these restrictions  the update is still il1 complete. 
¡¡the reason of the increase of the complexity is that  in the winslett's approach  each model of ¦µ is updated separately  and this makes easy to verify if the result of an action entails the new piece of information. 
¡¡given a model j € mod ¦µ   in order to decide if j € min mod ¦Ì    /   we have to check whether diff i  j  is minimal. each element of diff i  j  can be interpreted as an action of the kind of  b  above  that changes the value of a literal. as a result  an explanation of the change is a minimal set of actions that maps / into a model of ¦Ì. given a model i and a set of those actions  deciding whether the resulting interpretation j is a model of ¦Ì is a polynomial problem. 
¡¡in the pca  the possible causes affect the initial state d altogether: a possible explanation is a set of propositions p such that d u p implies the new fact to be incorporated. this is more complex than verifying a possible explanation in winslett's approach. 
1 	conclusions 
in this paper we have investigated some of the semantics that have been introduced to formalize changes in the world of interest. the complexity of most of them turns out to be at the second level of the polynomial hierarchy. this is quite a remarkable result: indeed  these frameworks have been proposed to overcome drawbacks and limitations of the original semantics of update introduced by winslett  but this does not seem to introduce any increase in the computational complexity. 
¡¡two approaches turn out to have a different complexity than winslett's. the first is boutilier's generalized update  that is easier  a¡ê complete   and the second is the possible causes approach by li and pereira  that is more difficult  ii1 complete . the first one is a generalization of dalal's revision  and has a slightly higher complexity. the reason of the higher complexity of the possible causes approach seems to be the globality of this operator: a change is considered not to affect each single possible initial state  but all the possible initial states altogether. this makes np complete a subproblem that is polynomial in winslett's approach. 
acknowledgments 
we would like to thank marco schaerf for revising a draft version of this paper. most of the work reported here has been done while the author was visiting at&t bell labs. we thank henry kautz for his support during this period. 
