 
we present sound and complete prefixed tableaux systems for various modal logics with enriched languages including the  difference  modal operator   and the  only if  modal operator  -r . these logics are of special interest in artificial intelligence since their expressive power is higher than the standard modal logics and for most of them the satisfiability problem remains decidable. we also include in the paper decision procedures based on these systems. in the conclusion  we relate our work with similar ones from the literature and we propose extensions to other logics. 
1 	introduction 
the definition of logical formalisms that model cognitive and reasoning processes has been always confronted to two issues: how to decrease the expressive power of existing untraceable logics in order to obtain tractable fragments and how to increase the expressive power of decidable logics while preserving decidability - this includes for instance the extension of known decidable fragments of the classical logic. these fragments include various modal logics  see e.g.  hughes and cresswell  1   if one translates them in the standard way to classical logic. the modal logics have been recognized in the artificial intelligence community as serious candidates to capture different aspects of reasoning about knowledge  see e.g.  fagin et a/.  1  . however the standard modal logics have a restricted expressive power  for instance the class of irreflexive frames is not definable by a modal formula of the logic k . 
　that is why in the literature various modal logics with enriched languages have been defined. most of the work done for these logics has been dedicated to study their expressive power  see e.g.  goranko and passy  1; rijke  1  . in the paper our aim is to analyze various features related to the mechanization of numerous modal logics with enriched languages. to do so  we define prefixed tableaux which are known to be close to the semantics of the logics and they allow a user-friendly presentation of the proofs. moreover  the use of prefixes *work supported by c.n.r.s.  france. 
1 	automated reasoning 
stephane demri 
laboratoire leibniz  
1 avenue felix viallet  1 grenoble  france. 
 see e.g.  fitting  1; wallen  1; massacci  1; governatori  1   is known to take advantage of the computational features of the logics. namely  each prefix occurring at some stage of the proof contains some information about part of the current proof. however we ignore whether a matrix characterization of the logics treated herein exist in order to avoid some redundancies in the tableaux proof search -notational redundancy  irrelevance and twn-permutability  wallen  1 . 
　the logics treated in the paper contain various operators that differ from the standard necessity operator ＆  also noted  r  : 
  the difference operator  that allows to access to the worlds different from the current world  see 
e.g. applications of its use in  segerberg  1; sain  1; koymans  1; rijke  1   
  the complement operator  -r  that allows to access to the worlds not accessible from the current world 
 see e.g.  humberstone  1; goranko  1a; levesque  1; lakemeyer  1   

　adding these operators to standard modal logics can significantly increase their expressive power. for instance every finite cardinality is definable in a modal logic whose language contains '    koymans  1 . most of the logics dealt with in the paper have a decidable satisfiability problem and we shall provide decision procedures based on our systems. however because of the expressive power of the logics our calculi have two original features: a current information c is associated to each branch of a tableau and a restricted cut rule is included in various calculi that can be viewed as a modal variant of the cut rule in the d'agostino's calculi  d'agostino  1 . 
　the rest of the paper is structured as follows. section 1 presents the logics considered in the paper. the sections 1  1  1 and 1 present the calculi for the various logics as well as the decision procedures. because of lack of space we have omitted part of the proofs as well as the possible extensions where the accessibility relations satisfy standard conditions  reflexivity  symmetry  transitivity  ... . section 1 compares our calculi with existing 


	balbiani & demri 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 

	balbiani & demri 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 


1 	concluding remarks 
the use of prefixes for tableaux systems dedicated to modal logics has been thoroughly developed in  fitting  1  whereas our treatment of the condition c  see e.g. sections 1  1  1  can be viewed as a means to parametrize our calculi by the theory of the accessibility relations. hence  the idea of theory resolution  stickel  1  in which a theory is separately dealt with from the rest of the calculus is present in our calculi. this idea is not new in the realm of the mechanization of modal logics  see e.g.  prisch and scherl  1; gent  1   but the originality of our work is related to the conditions satisfied by the accessibility relations of the models. 
   the second important feature of our calculi is the use of a restricted cut rule. recently  various works have tamed the cut rule for calculi dedicated to modal logics  see e.g.  d'agostino  1; governatori  1  . however our calculi do not have a cut rule with a branching for formulae. in that sense  the cut rule in our calculi is even more restricted than the one in  governatori  1 . 
   we have defined sound and complete prefixed tableaux calculi for the logics c  r     r       and k1  &    also for k1 and ♀  』    and decision procedures have been designed from these systems. it is worth noting that the expressive power of the modal logics with enriched languages is attractive in the artificial intelligence community since for instance the operator  』  has already been shown to be useful to reason about time  sain  1; koymans  1  or space  balbiani et a/.  1 . 
   future work could be oriented towards the incorporation of our calculi into existing tableaux-based theorem provers for modal logics and towards the definition of other prefixed tableaux for modal logics with enriched languages including for instance  the logics in the paper where standard conditions for the accessibility relations are required -reflexivity  symmetry  .... 
   a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s : the authors thank luis farinas del cerro for his encouragements. 
