 
explicit preferences on assumptions as used in prioritized circumscription  mccarthy  1; lifschitz  1; grosof  1  and preferred subtheories  brewka  1  provide a clear and declarative method for defining preferred models. in this paper  we show how to embed preferences in the logical theory itself. this gives a high freedom for expressing statements about preferences. preferences can now depend on other assumptions and are thus dynamic. we elaborate a preferential semantics based on lehmann's cumulative models  as well as a corresponding constructive characterization  which specifies how to correctly treat dynamic preferences in the default reasoning system except  junker  1 . 
keywords: nonmonotonic reasoning  common sense reasoning. 
1 	introduction 
in the absence of complete information  it is necessary to base decisions and conclusions on assumptions. if those assumptions were arbitrary  the resulting decisions and conclusions would be arbitrary as well. depending on the given information  best assumptions are chosen. 
　different ways for defining best assumptions  or default rules  have been studied in nonmonotonic reasoning. a sound and declarative method is provided by preferences on assumptions. they are e.g. used in prioritized circumscription  mccarthy  1; lifschitz  1; grosof  1  and for preferred subtheories  brewka  
1 . preferences decide which assumptions will be selected first in presence of conflicts between assumptions. in absence of conflicts  they don't have any effect. furthermore  preferences enable a preferential semantics leading to clear logical properties  as well as constructive characterizations in form of inductive definitions. finally  they allow to express the important specificity principle in inheritance systems in a clear way. all these points are difficult to achieve in alternative approaches such as default logic. a problem  however  is how to specify preferences: 
1 	automated reasoning 
1. static preferences are specified outside the logical theory to which they apply. they are given in form of priorities  mccarthy  1; lifschitz  1  or in form of a partial order on assumptions  brewka  1; grosof  1 . specifying such an ordering is a minutely work. it would be preferable to write down quantified and conditional statements on preferences in the logical theory itself. 
1. implicit preferences are used in conditional approaches  geffner and pearl  1; kraus et a/.  
1 . default rules of the form ot{  ~ ji can be  partially  ordered by exploiting specificity relations between the contexts a . however  other kinds of preference knowledge cannot be expressed. we refer the reader to  brewka  1  who argues in favour of explicit preferences. 
in order to allow a clear  explicit  and flexible specification of preferences  we embed them in the logical theory itself. as a consequence  preferences on assumptions can depend on  other  assumptions and thus become dynamic. we argue that those dynamic preferences are quite natural in human commonsense reasoning and illustrate this by the following example: 
jim and jane have the following habits: 
1. normally  jim and jane go to at most one attraction each evening. 
1. jim prefers the theatre to the night club. 
1. jane prefers the night club to the theatre. 
1- if jim invites jane then he respects her preferences  and vice versa . 
1. normally jim invites jane. 
1. an exception to 1 is saturday. 
1. an exception to 1 is jim's birthday  where jane invites jim. 
if no further information is given we conclude that jim and jane will go to the night club. when we learn that jim has birthday we revise this and conclude that they go to the theatre. however  the day in question is a saturday. hence  they should go to both attractions. finally the news tell that the theatre is closed for work. thus we again conclude that they go to the night club. 


	junker 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 


	junker 	1 

we obtain a preferential model by restricting dynamic states  w  a     to those where the set w of worlds is a singleton  i.e. contains only one world. further work is needed to adapt the constructive approach to this preferential-model semantics. 
	1 	example 
we determine the d-preferred assumption sets of our initial example. let t1 be the set of formulas 1 . - 1 and 
we consider two correct strict total orders  1 and  1 where 
due to formulas 1. and 1.  the assumptions oned  invd are smaller than the assumptions god nc  and god th . these formulas have been included to give the assumptions oned  invd a higher priority. now we consider the 
since a normal invitation c invd   implies god nc   - god th  the order  1 is not correct w.r.t. t1 since the theory t1 implies god th   - god nc  the order  1 is not correct w.r.t. t1  t1  and t1. as a consequence  each ti has a unique d-preferred assumption set  marked with a *  and we obtain the following inferences: 
the conclusions change from to to t1 since the preferences change. the change from t1 to t1 is due to the removal of a conflict. the final change is due to a new inconsistency. 
	1 	related work 
brewka has extended reiter's default logic by dynamic preferences on defaults  brewka  1 . as in our approach  defaults are named by constants and preferences between defaults are expressed by a binary predicate symbol. the additional expressiveness of default logic  however  makes it difficult to establish a preferential semantics. even normal defaults as considered in  brewka  1  do not have a cumulative-model semantics as shown by makinson. in order to compare both approaches  we restrict our attention to normal defaults without prerequisites  which correspond to assumptions. 
1 	automated reasoning 


　the example shows that cyclic dependencies between preferences and assumptions make the search for preferred assumption sets quite difficult. therefore  we interleave the construction of an order and an assumption set and we do not choose assumptions that have draw-
backs on the already chosen part of the order. 
1 	conclusion 
we showed how preferences on assumptions can directly be expressed in a logical theory. the resulting system offers a high degree of freedom for  programming  preference rules: preferences can be used in implications  in quantified statements  and can themselves depend on other assumptions. 
　finding a clear mathematical treatment of dynamic preferences turned out to be a non-trivial task. we developed a preferential semantics based on lehmanivs cumulative models and an equivalent constructive characterization. the resulting nonmonotonic logic 
1. allows to program preference rules  
1. satisfies all properties of lehmann's system c  
1. can be implemented for decidable sublanguages. 
in order to keep the presentation simple and intuitive  we considered only finite assumption sets in this paper. in a long version of the paper  we will generalize the results to infinite assumption sets and well-founded orders on assumptions. 
　thus  an important milestone in the design of an applicable and powerful nonmonotonic logic has been achieved. it can be applied to default reasoning in inheritance system  to diagnostic reasoning  and to decision making. future work will concentrate on algorithms and applications. furthermore  we will elaborate a variant of our approach in lehmann's system v which additionally supports reasoning by cases. 
acknowledgements 
i would like to thank gerd brewka  markus junker  and the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments that improved the quality of this paper. the paper would not have been written without the moral support of my wife isabelle  my son kevin  and my daughter celine. 
references 
 brewka  1  g. brewka. preferred subtheories: an extended logical framework for default reasoning. in ijcai-1  pages 1  detroit  mi  1. morgan kaufmann. 
 brewka  1  g. brewka. reasoning about priorities in default logic. in aaai-1  1. 
 brewka  1  g. brewka. well-founded semantics for extended logic programs with dynamic p