 
one issue for autonomous mobile robots operating in unknown  or partially known  domains is how to handle uncertainty in their sensor observations over time. methods such as probablistic belief networks and survivor functions are generally unsatisfactory because they require explicit models of the robot's interactions with its environment  including possible contravening events. this information is difficult to obtain  and is philosophically incompatible with reactive behaviors. 
this paper presents an approach which eliminates the need for explicit models and reasoning; instead  it relies solely on directly perceivable attributes of the robot  object  and environment. the attributes qualitatively rate whether the robot's current observations are from an inherently more informed state than previous readings  e.g.  from a better viewpoint . observations from more informed states have different rates for the accrual and attrition of belief than those taken from less informed states. this paper describes the implementation  focusing on how the information state is computed using fuzzy logic  and how the state dynamically adapts a variation of dempster's rule to generate the total belief. data from a mobile robot tracking an unknown object demonstrates that the reactive computation of belief over time performs well for six canonical accrual and attrition cases. 
1 	introduction 
one issue for autonomous mobile robots  and other agents  is how to handle uncertainty in its observations about an object or scene over time. combining uncertainty over time is problematic for formal theories of evidential reasoning  i.e. bayesian and dempster-shafer  because the current observation is not independent of the previous one. in order to generate a reasonable total belief  some means of combining the past belief with the instantaneous belief must be applied. however  such a method must take into account contradictory influences; for example  older belief tends to be less believable  drainkov and lang  1   but objects tend to persist  dean and wellman  1 . 
　methods such as dynamic belief networks  dagum et al.  1; dean and kanazawa  1  and survivor functions  dean and wellman  1  are unsatisfactory for autonomous mobile robots operating in unknown domains  both in theory and in practice. these methods assume explicit a priori models of the object's behavior  interactions with the environment  and possible contravening events in order to update the relationship between past and present belief. a robot operating in a partially known environment  e.g. mars  or in unpredictable situations  e.g.  construction of the space station  may not have access to correct models. if the robot perceives something unusual  it will need to track or continuously observe it in order to determine if it is a hallucination without necessarily knowing what it is. also  the adaptation of a probablistic belief network to a new situation involves explicit reasoning on a global level. this is incompatible with mobile robots which use a reactive or a hybrid deliberative/reactive architecture. in these architectures  sensing at a reactive level involves only local behavior-specific representations  if any  and rapid update times. attempting to integrate global models and reasoning into the behaviors both violates the principles of the architectures and could slow down execution. therefore  a mechanism is needed which can reactively adapt the combination of belief. 
　this paper presents an approach to this problem motivated by the work on direct perception done by the cognitive psychologist j. j. gibson  gibson  1 . gibson maintains that there are naturally occurring affordances for each activity of an agent. an affordance is a perceivable potentiality of the environment that supports the intended action without requiring memory  inference  or interpretation. one well-known example of an affordance is the use of optic flows to compute the time-to-contact with an object without having to identify the object. 
　by using direct perception  the combination of belief over time eliminates dependence on explicit models about the object or environment or global reasoning about events. furthermore  it is independent of the 
murphy hawkins  & schoppers 	1 recognition process. the application of the principles of direct perception to the combination of belief is conceptually similar to the shift in robotics from deliberative mechanisms to reactivity  most notably  reactive behaviors and reactive planning. 
   this paper describes the implementation of the direct perception approach using a form of dempster-shafer theory  and fuzzy logic to compute the agent's information state. the paper presents data from a mobile robot showing that the reactive computation of belief over time follows intuition for six canonical belief cases captured by three scenarios. 
1 	approach 
our approach has two central tenets. first  the information state of the agent relative to the object should determine the combination of belief about the object over time. for example  if the agent is moving towards the object and is accurately tracking it  then its current observation is now inherently more informed than its previous observations; the belief in the object from the current information state should count more than previous  less informed observations. note that the term  belief in the object  is used to mean belief that the object is what the robot thinks it is; i.e.  that it is the same object it has seen in previous observations. likewise  if the agent is moving away from the object or cannot stay focused on the object  then it has an inherently less informed vantage and so the past should weigh more than the present. 
   the information state should impact the rate of decay in belief in an object. if the object disappears  and the sensors are indeed working  then the agent's total belief that the object was there should persist for some period of time  allowing it to continue its behavior. there are many situations where the object might temporarily disappear but are difficult to reason about at the reactive level: the object may be occluded  the agent may turn to avoid an obstacle. in many cases  the agent will be able to reacquire the object if it continues with its behavior. therefore  it is of practical importance to have a reasonable decay rate. our approach assumes that if an object disappeared while the agent was at an informed state  the belief should persist for longer than if it was at an uninformed state. if the agent wasn't sure of what it was seeing  low initial belief   and did not have a particularly good vantage point  then the belief would start low  decay rapidly  and the agent would declare the ob-
ject missing more quickly than if it started with a high certainty in the object from a good vantage point. 
　the second tenet states that the information state can be directly observed  independently of the belief about the identity of the object of interest. for example  an extended kalman filter  ekf  can be used to track an unknown object as long as it has some distinguishable features  e.g.  color. the extended kalman filter has some measure of uncertainty  its tracking error; this un-
certainty reflects how well the agent is inherently able to perceive the object and make a correct identification  or 
1 	robotics 
perform the desired task . uncertainty about the quality of sensing determines the information state of the agent relative to the object  while uncertainty in the object forms the belief which is combined over time based on the change in information states. 
1 	implementation 
 murphy  1  has demonstrated an adaptive rule of combination which adapts the belief updating process based on a contextual weighting parameter  n  which can be used to represent the information state of the agentrelative to the object. however  that work did not fully develop a mechanism to compute n based solely on direct perception  nor did it demonstrate the impact of the rule for representative characteristic scenarios of belief accrual and attrition. in this paper  n represents the information state of the agent relative to the object. this section summarizes the adaptive rule of combination  and describes the computation of n using fuzzy logic and directly perceivable attributes of an unknown object. the reader is directed to  murphy  1  for a more detailed discussion of dempster-shafer theory and the adaptive rule of combination. 
1 	adaptive rule of combination 
 smets  1; wilson  1; zadeh  1  have argued that dempster's rule is only one possible rule for combining shafter belief functions  representing a set of specific assumptions.  murphy  1  proposes an alternative rule of combination  capturing different assumptions: observations are not independent  missing belief should not be an identity function  and the order of combination is important. the alternative rule is: 

　note that when n = 1  the rule degenerates to dempster's rule of combination. 
this rule has been empirically shown in  murphy  
1  to change the rate of accrual and decay of total belief from old observations compared to current belief  new observations  according to the value of n. the output of this rule differs from dempster's rule in two ways. first  the old observations are no longer treated equally with the current observation. the value of n determines whether the past or the current observation dominates the combination of belief. but the rule does not just change the relative weighting of the past with present  as the decay function in  guan and bell  1  would. instead  it modifies the rate of accrual of belief for the object and the rate of attrition separately. lower values of n cause the total belief in the landmark to accrue supporting observations slowly  past belief dominates or smooths out the accrual rate  but decay quickly 


figure 1: fuzzy set partitionings/rnembership functions for localization  viewpoint  and n.  dashed lines show impact of generally hedge . 
in the presence of missing or revising beliefs  current belief dominates decay rate . values approaching 1 produce pessimistic combinations of belief  tends to believe the worst . values approaching 1 are sensitive only to supporting observations  accruing belief quickly and decaying slowly; this is to be expected since this is converging on dempster's rule. these high values of n will be referred to as optimistic. values around 1 produce a conservative or neutral behavior  with slow accrual and slow decay. 
　when the combination of belief produces a decay in belief for a proposition  the discounted belief mass is distributed to the other propositions. this produces an averaging effect. if the agent is capable of observing only two propositions  as in the demonstrations   an unchecked decay in belief will lead to all propositions having a value of 1. this condition is equivalent to the  vacuous  belief function in dempster-shafer theory  where the belief function contains no information. 
1 	computation of n 
at this time  the information state n is computed as a function of two directly perceivable influences: local-
ization and viewpoint. localization captures the accuracy of the agent's ability to track and localize the object using the ekf. viewpoint indicates whether the agent is in an inherently more informed viewpoint to observe the object. 
　fuzzy logic was chosen to represent and combine influences for several reasons. belief from real-time sensor observations is well-suited to a fuzzy representation  since the absolute value of the belief at any given time is not critical  just the trend. also  fuzzy logic permits the addition of other variables and easy modification of the rules. another potential advantage not explored in this paper is the use of fuzzy set hedges  very  somewhat  to modify the output based on a priori knowledge or motivation. for example  if the agent ls highly motivated to find an object  the overall process should be very optimistic  resulting in a slow decay rate or a prolonged persistence of belief. 
　the fuzzy sets for localization  viewpoint  and n are shown in fig. 1. localization is partitioned into good and poor. the domain for localization is the percent error in the ekf compared to the field of view of the sensor. if the agent is unable to track the object  the region where the object could be will grow to exceed the field of view of the sensor  e.g.  1% error. if the expected occurrence of the object coincides with the actual observation of the object  the agents will be perfectly tracking the object leading to 1% error. in the demonstrations  computer vision was used to track an unknown object based on a color histogram. the ekf computed the expected locations of the upper left and lower right corners of a bounding box. 
the viewpoint variable consists of three sets: de-
grading  same  and improving. the measurement of the inherent quality of the viewpoint depends on the sensor s  and feature extraction algorithms s   for the sake of simplicity  it was computed in the demonstrations  as the change in distance  in feet  between the robot and the object since the last observation based on shaft encoder data. other methods  e.g.  optical flow  stereo range  could have been used to estimate the change in quality of the viewpoint. 
the output of n was divided into three fuzzy sets: 
pessimistic  neutral  and optimistic  n ls computed from rules encapsulated in the fuzzy associated memory shown below: 

the fuzzy hedge generally was applied to pes-
simistic and optimistic sets. generally diffuses the set  resulting in a more neutral output value of n. the rules attempt to express that if the agent is moving  viewpoint is not the same  and is unable to track the object  it should react conservatively to any new observations because the instantaneous belief may be the result of temporary occlusions which can disrupt tracking. however  if the agent is stationary and still cannot track the object  low instantaneous belief could be a sign that the wrong object has been acquired or higher quality sensors and/or algorithms should be employed. therefore  poor localization from the same viewpoint makes n generally pessimistic. if tracking is good  and the agent is moving away from the object  the instantaneous belief will generally get worse due to the degrading viewpoint  n is set to be optimistic in order 
	murphy  hawkins  & schoppers 	1 


figure 1: denning mrv1 robot tracking the object  tweety and sylvester . 
to smooth out the change in total belief by dampening the decay rate. likewise  if the agent is moving towards the object and tracking well  n is set to pessimistic in order to react to any instantaneous belief that the object is not the object that the agent was looking for. in the case where the robot is tracking the object but is stationary  the generally optimistic value of n allows the total belief to accrue somewhat due to repeated observations. defuzzification of the fuzzy rules is performed by the computing the centroid  composite moments  of the output sets. 
1 	demonstrations 
in this section  the use of direct perception for combining belief over time is demonstrated with a mobile robot tracking an object for six canonical cases. the six cases represent the spectrum of belief updating and revision activities following  dean and wellman  1  : natural accretion  natural attrition  causal accretion  causal revision  spontaneous causation  and spontaneous revision. the six cases are arranged into three scenarios  pairing the cases. 
　the demonstrations were performed on a denning mrv1 research mobile robot using a reactive move- to goal behavior. the behavior used an onboard camcorder and framegrabber to track the goal  a cardboard poster of tweety and sylvester shown in fig. 1. the robot was presented with the poster; it constructed a color histogram model  swain and ballard  1  from an initial observation  then began to track it. the shafer belief function representing the belief for the object was computed as the percent intersection of the model histogram with the observed histogram  m p  . the object image size was scaled to match the model. the percent empty intersection became uncommitted belief. this was done because the robot could not discern whether the mismatch was due to occlusion  which meant the belief mass associated with mismatch should be plausible  or was 
1 	robotics 
due to seeing features of another object  n was computed using the fuzzy sets described previously. because the demonstrations rely on a real robot operating in realtime  the data may appear to be cluttered and/or misleading. the reader is directed to  murphy  1  where the behavior of the adaptive rule for fixed values of n is described. also  the total belief using dempster's rule is not shown on the data sets to reduce clutter. in each scenario  natural accretion drives the total belief in the object to complete belief  1  in short order. 
　it should be emphasized that the move-to-goal behavior does not rely on a priori models. the robot can be initially presented with any object with a color signature distinguishable from the walls. the demonstrations have been repeated with different objects  signs  posters  and reacted with the same trends in the combination of belief. also  the color histogram could be substituted with a more rigorous recognition algorithm; this would change the belief in the object  but not affect the direct perception of the information state and reactive combination of belief over time. 
1 	natural accretion and attrition 
natural accretion is the tendency for belief in an object to accrue when there is no other source of belief or contravening event. for example  if the observer is stationary  the object is stationary  and the belief in the object at each observation is the same  then a limited increase in the total belief is reasonable due to its repeated observation. the counterpart to accretion is attrition. if there is no source for belief about an object  e.g.  missing observations   the total belief should decay. 
　in this demonstration  both the robot and object were stationary. the object was initially present  accretion phase  for 1 updates  then removed to generate missing observations  attrition phase  for 1 updates  then reintroduced and removed at different intervals. finally  the poster is removed for an extended period of time  after 1 updates . fig. 1 shows the current belief  the total belief  and the value of n computed by the fuzzy controller from the tracking error and change  delta  in position. the variation in the tracking error is from sensor noise. 
　the graph shows that the total belief does accrue somewhat  then levels out. it also shows that the total belief decays over time. in the final removal  the tracking error grew to 1%  and the belief did decay to 1  the equivalent of the vacuous belief function for the alternative rule of combination  murphy  1 . if the belief had been combined with dempster's rule  it would have almost immediately accrued to 1  complete belief  for the object  and any attempt to revise it would have been ignored by the rule of combination. 
1 	causal attrition and accretion 
causal accretion and attrition is the change in belief due to some external contravening event  either favorable or otherwise. this scenario duplicated  tunnel  experiments from child psychology  where the object moved behind a screen and reappeared on the other side. in the 


figure 1: behavior of belief for natural accretion and attrition scenario. tracking error: solid line  delta position: long dashed line  n: short dashed line  current belief: dotted line  total belief: dash-dot line. 
first demonstration  the robot was stationary to reduce the impact of tracking errors due to the combined movements of the object and robot. in the second demonstration  the robot was allowed to move to the object  essentially playing tag with it. previous work  murphy  1  has shown that different values of n  not computed dynamically  will change the decay rate  thereby changing whether the robot will abandon the tracking before the object emerges on the other side of the screen. the purpose of these two demonstration was to show the reactive computation of n and the subsequent impact on robot behavior. it should be noted that by the use of direct perception  the robot did not have to identify that a contravening event had occurred in order to combine belief in a reasonable manner. 
　the results of the first demonstration are shown in fig. 1. the data shows the object moving but being visible for 1 cycles  then disappearing behind the screen for 1 updates  reappearing and then disappearing behing the screen permanently. although the noise in the tracking error makes this graph more difficult to read  it can be seen that the total belief decays significantly when the poster disappears  but not so much that it gives up tracking. if the object remains hidden  as at the end of the scenario  the total belief will reach 1 or vacuous  and the robot will terminate the behavior. 
　the results of the second demonstration are shown in fig. 1. the robot was presented with a new  smaller object  a green poster board target  to allow it to get closer to the target before stopping due to looming. the robot is able to successfully track the object each time it reappears on the other side of the screen  because the total belief persists. 

figure 1: behavior of belief for causal attrition and accretion scenario  robot stationary  object moving. 

figure 1: behavior of belief for causal attrition and accretion scenario  both robot and object moving. 
1 	spontaneous causation and revision 
spontaneous causation and revision occur when the belief improves or degrades without a contravening event  in effect  due to the normal progress of the activity. in the demonstration shown in fig. 1  the robot moved toward a sign with a color histogram similar to the tweety and sylvester poster. as it moves toward it  the current belief should be going up since the the histograms should have a better match. this improvement in viewpoint is shown on the graph  and as per the fuzzy rules  drives the value of n pessimistic  low . therefore  the lack of improvement in current observations actually serves to decrease the total belief in the object being tweety and sylvester to the vacuous state  and the robot correctly terminates the move-to-goal behavior and turns to search for the poster. note that the combination of belief allowed the robot to determine that it was being fooled even though at each instant  the current belief was fairly 
	murphy  hawkins  & schoppers 	1 


figure 1: 	behavior of belief for spontaneous attrition scenario. 
good. 
　the case of spontaneous accretion  where the robot is able to maintain high belief as it recedes from an ob-
ject  is not shown here  because the noise in the tracking 
errors make the graph hard to read. 
1 	summary and conclusions 
this paper has shown how two affordances  e.g.  localization error and viewpoint  can be used to estimate the change in the information state of belief of object observed by an autonomous mobile robot. this change in information state modifies the rate of belief accretion and attrition  as calculated with a variant of dempster's rule of combination. this method eliminates the need for explicit  a priori models of the object's projected behavior over time  the sensitivity of the robot's sensors  and the impact of the environment on perception. another advantage of the direct perception approach is that it is reactive. as demonstrated with a mobile robot  it can be used in real-time with a behavior relying only on local representation of the object  i.e.  a color histogram . 
　the use of affordances allows belief updating and revision for objects which have never been seen before  and so have unknown properties. furthermore  since the method uses direct perception  it does not require any reasoning about possible contravening events introducing sudden changes in belief  e.g.  occlusion  sensor failure  etc. . instead  the belief combination process incorporates the impact of the belief  e.g.  low or missing belief . if the contravening event persists  the total belief will either improve or degrade over time. this total belief is used by the robot to determine what to do next; if necessary  the robot can switch from a reactive control mode to a deliberative regime. 
　current work is concentrating on an integrated implementation with the nasa/jsc robot simulator  providing more behaviors  more sensors  and scenarios. we are also examining the use of fuzzy set hedges to repre-
1 	robotics 
sent other external factors influencing the combination of belief  such as the motivation of the robot. although this method has been demonstrated only for the domain of an autonomous mobile robot operating in unknown  or partially known  environments  we believe it can be extended to other instances of situated agents. 
acknowledgments 
this work is supported in part by nasa/jsc contract nas.1  nsf grant iri-1  and arpa grant ao#b1. the authors would like to thank ken hughes  daniel shapiro  glenn blauvelt  dave hershberger  and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. 
