 
computing a consistent interpretation of the variables involved in a set of temporal constraints is an important task for many areas of ai requiring temporal reasoning. we focus on the important classes of the qualitative relations in nebel and biirckert's ord-horn algebra  and of the metric constraints forming a stp  possibly augmented with inequations. for these tractable classes we present three new algorithms for solving the problem of finding a 
solution  and an efficient algorithm for determining the consistency of a stp augmented with inequations. 
1 	introduction 
reasoning about temporal constraints is an important task in many areas of ai. allen's interval algebra  ia   and vilain and kautz's point algebra  pa   are two fundamental models for qualitative temporal reasoning  while dechter  meiri and pearl's tcsp  is a prominent approach for metric temporal reasoning. 
　given a set s of temporal constraints  two important related reasoning problems are determining the consistency of s  and finding a consistent scenario or solution for the variables involved in s. a consistent scenario is an ordering of the variables  either points or interval endpoints  in s  which is consistent with the constraints in s. a solution for s is an interpretation of the point-variables  interval-endpoint variables  in s which satisfies'the constraints in s. 
　consistency checking and finding a solution  a consistent scenario   are np-hard problems for ia  vilain and kautz  1  and tcsp  dechter et al  1   while they are polynomial for pa  van beek  1  and for some important restrictions of ia and tcsp. these include the qualitative interval relations of the ord-hbrn class  nebel and burckert  1   and the metric constraints of a  simple temporal constraint satisfaction problem   stp   dechter et al.  1 . the ord-horn class forms a subalgebra of ia  which is the maximal tractable subclass of relations in ia containing all the thirteen basic relations. the constraints of a stp are inequalities of 
1 	temporal reasoning 
the form  where p1 p1 are point-variables  
and d is any value in a dense time domain.1 is another interesting tractable class  which subsumes pa and stp. ! is an extension of stp to include inequations  i.e. constraints of the form 
 koubarakis  1; gerevini and cristani  1 . koubarakis  proposed a method for checking the consistency of a stp augmented with disjunctions of inequations  whose time complexity reduces to when the input is a  where n is the 
number of variables and k the number of inequations. 
　in this paper we are mainly concerned with the problem of finding a solution for these tractable classes. while nebel and burckert  proved several interesting strong results about their ord-horn algebra  they left open the problem of efficiently finding a consistent scenario or solution. 
　dechter et al.  proposed a simple algorithm for finding a solution of a given stp which only contains non strict inequalities  leaving open the important case in which inequalities can be strict  e.g.  
　concerning  we are not aware of any specialized algorithm for the problem of finding a solution. 
　we propose three new algorithms for solving these problems. also  we investigate the problem of determining the consistency of a given  presenting an efficient algorithm which improves the complexity bound of koubarakis' method. specifically  we will present: 
  a simple algorithm for finding a solution for a set of ord-horn relations. the algorithm requires 1 n 1   time  if the input set of relations is known to be path-consistent  and 1 n1  time in the general case  where n is the number of interval-variables. 
  an 1 n 1   time algorithm for finding a solution for a given stp including strict inequalities. 
  an 1 n1 + k  time algorithm for determining the consistency of a given 
1
　　equality constraints such as can be expressed as a pair of inequalities. 
1
　　note that when the number of input inequations  k  is limited to those required to express the qualitative point relations of pa or of the interval relations in the  pointizable 

	gerevini & cristani 	1 

1 	temporal reasoning 

	gerevini & cristani 	1 
consistency 
1. compute the d-graph d of the relaxed network of t; 
1. if d contains negative circular edges then return nil; 
1. for each inequation 	in t do 
if the label on the edge of d from v to w is d and the label on the edge from w to v is -d 
-consistency 
by proposition 1 we can extend the distance graph of nr with one inequality for each inequation of n  obtaining a graph d without negative cycles. 
	consider adding the inequation 	to n. we 
can do that consistently if we can consistently add w -
since when there is a path 
from v to w in d there is also a path from w to v  and since d does not contain negative cycles  only one of the following possibilities can hold: 
 a  all the paths connecting v and w are positive paths; 
 b  there are negative  and possibly positive  paths from w to v and only positive paths from v to w; 
 c  there are negative  and possibly positive  paths from v to w and only positive paths from w to v. 
	in cases  a  and  b  we can add 	without 
creating a negative cycle  so that by proposition is consistent. for the remaining case  c  
suppose that both the addition of w - v   d and of v - w   - d create a negative cycle. then there exists a negative path of length /  with /   1  from v to w and a positive path of length /'  with /'   1  from w to v such that d 1- i   1 and v - d   1. from these inequalities we derive / + v   1. but this means that d contains a negative cycle  contrary to the construction of d. hence  also for case  c  at least one of w - v   d and v - w   -d can be consistently added to d. it follows that w - v 』 d 
can be consistently added to n  
　the proof can be extended to include inequations w - v 』 d  d   1  excluding negative points by an analogous argument  using induction on the number of such inequations. in cases  a  and  c  we can consistently add v - w   -d  while we deal with case  b  in the same way as we did for case  c  when d   1. d 
　the previous lemma guarantees that consistency checking of a stn』  stp   can be accomplished by using the algorithm given in figure 1. 
theorem 1 stn -consistency correctly checks the consistency of a stn』 t in 1 n1+k  time and 1 n1+k  space  where n is the number of the vertices of t and k is the number of inequations. 
proof  sketch . property  1  of stns  see section 1  together with lemma 1 ensure the correctness of stn』 consistency. regarding the complexity  it is sufficient 
1 	temporal reasoning 

to observe that: the relaxed network of t can be computed in time linear over the number of the edges of t; step 1 can be accomplished in 1{n1  time and 1 n1  space  cormen et al.  1; dechter et a/.  1   step 1 in 1 n  time  and step 1 in o k  time and space. d 
　we now show that the problem of finding a solution for a given stp』 can be solved by running an algorithm which has the same complexity as stn 』 -consistency. 
theorem 1 a solution for a given stn』  stp』  can be found in 1 n 1 + k  time  if it exists   where n is the number of point-variables  vertices   and k is the number of the inequations. 
proof  sketch . we can derive an algorithm for computing a solution for a given stn』  stp』  by modifying stp-solution in the following way: 
algorithm 1: stp』-solution 
input: a stp』 t 
output: a solution for t  if it exists; n i l   otherwise 
1. check the consistency of t. if t is not consistent the return n i l and stop. 
1. let m be the stn』 computed by the following steps: 
 a  compute the minimal network v of the relaxed network of t; 
 b  add to t  the input inequations which are con-vex relative t' and compute the minimal network t  of the resulting network; 
 c  add to t  the input inequations which are nonconvex relative to t ; 
1. same as step 1 of stp-consistency  except that 1 is defined as: 
  min  if at least one interval has both the bounds finite  or the lower bound is finite and the interval is not convex  i.e  it has at least one 
 finite  point excluded; 
  any finite number otherwise  where i  j = l..n  i 』 j and  is the length of the 
first convex subinterval of the  possibly non-convex  intervals of m  e.g.  for the interval  1  1  -{1} the length of such a subinterval is 1; while for the interval  1   the relevant subinterval has length 1 . 
1. same as step 1 of stp-solution  except that m  is the minimal network of the stn resulting from m' by omitting all the non-convex inequations. 
1. same as step 1 of stp-solution. 
the proof of the correctness of stp-consistency is similar to the proof of theorem 1. concerning the complexity  note that by theorem 1 step 1 can be computed in 1{n1 + k  time  step 1 in 1 n1 + k  time  and steps 1 in 1{n1  time. 
1 	conclusions 
we have presented three new algorithms for computing a solution  scenario  for a set of ord-horn relations  for a 
given stp  and for a stp』. also  we have presented an algorithm for checking the consistency of a stp 』   which improves the complexity bound of koubarakis' method. 
　recently ligozat  1  personal communication  proved the tractability of the ord-horn algebra by using a method for deriving a consistent scenario that is based on iteratively  a  refining a path-consistent network and  b  imposing path-consistency to it. however  he does not give a detailed analysis of his method in terms of time complexity  which appears to be at least one order of magnitude worse than the complexity of our method. 