 
in this paper  as one approach for mathematical analysis of evolutionary algorithms with real number chromosomes  we focus our attention on crossovers  give a general framework of the description for the change of the distribution of the population through them  and verify the properties of crossovers based on the framework. this framework includes various crossover which have been proposed and we apply our result to these crossover methods. 
1 	introduction 
a lot of experimental and theoretical researches on evolutionary algorithms  ea  have been recently reported. in the theoretical results  most of them are ones for eas using bit strings as chromosomes  in particular  the simple genetic algorithms  sga . these are based on the theory of finite markov chain  dawid  1; davis and principe  1; nix and vose  1; rudolph  1  because the sga uses bit strings with a constant length. however  the state spaces of eas using real number chromosomes are infinite and uncountable sets and there are difficulties different from the sga to investigate the time evolution. 
　rudolph derived the conditions for the convergence in eas with general state spaces and a finite population size using the concept of markov kernel  rudolph  1 . in this result  however  the selection and mutation affects the convergence and the effect of the crossover is not considered. 
　on the other hand  qi and palmieri derived the properties of the genetic operations including a uniform crossover in eas with an infinite population size  qi and palmieri  1a; 1b . in these results  the changes of the population density in the infinite population size through the genetic operations are the main object. in this paper  we also focus our attention on the change of the population density through crossovers. 
in the case of eas using discrete value chromosomes  
booker theoretically showed the properties of crossovers based on the recombination distribution inspired by geiringer's result  a kind of the probability at which 
1 	learning 
schemata is generated by crossovers  booker  1 . our analysis in the case of eas using real number chromosomes is based on the relation between the population densities before and after crossovers  and the change of the mean values and covariances on loci. for this purpose  we have given a framework of the description for the change of the distribution of the population through crossover  called linear crossover  nomura  1 . the previous version of this framework did not include one-point  multi-point  or uniform crossover. in this paper  we extend this framework to the one which includes various crossovers which have been proposed  one-point  multi-point crossovers  uniform crossover  average crossover  davis  1   the unfair average crossover we have proposed  nomura and miyoshi  1; 1   and the r1 operator  radcliffe  1 . we verify the properties of these crossovers based on the results. 
1 general framework for description of crossovers 
1 	basic formulation 
in eas with real value chromosome  each individual is represented as a vector in the euclid space rm. given two parents x and y  e rm   we assume that crossovers produce two offsprings x' and y' from the parents. 
　in this paper  we consider the crossover represented in the following form: 



	nomura 	1 

1 	learning 

	nomura 	1 


1 	learning 

crossovers included by our framework does not change the mean values of the population density  and it proportionally changes the covariances dependent on the probability of the crossover operations. 
　as future problems  we must investigate the time evolution of the population density through the selection  crossover  and mutation. furthermore  we must investigate the change of the fitness in the population through the time  and clarify the convergence properties and the conditions for the convergence in the crossover. 
acknowledgment 
the author would like to thank dr. katsunori shimohara at atr human information processing research laboratories for support. 
