 
we present an effective generic communicating rational agent  artimis  and its application to cooperative spoken dialogue. artimis' kernel is the implementation of a formal theory of interaction. this theory involves a set of generic axioms which models  in a homogeneous logical framework  principles of rational behaviour  communication  and cooperation. the theory is interpreted by a specifically designed reasoning engine. when applied to the context of natural dialogue  artimis includes specialised components for speech and natural language processing. 
1 	introduction 
natural human-computer dialogue is obviously a challenging application for intelligent systems: a system designed ultimately to replace a human operator must satisfy stronger requirements than most computer-based tools. for example  cooperative behaviour  such as providing suggestive answers  is an obvious prerequisite for acceptance by humans. this alone favours a generic intelligent-agent-based approach to automated dialogue. futhermore  designing artificial autonomous agents to be kernels of intelligent systems requires the development of formal theories of reasoning and interaction. 
　in this paper  we describe the basic components of an effective generic communicating rational agent  artimis  applied to cooperative spoken dialogue  sadek et a/.  1 . artimis' kernel is the implementation of a 
formal theory of interaction. this theory involves a set of generic axioms that models  in a homogeneous logical framework  principles of rational behaviour  communication  and cooperation. it thus supports the rational unit of an autonomous communicating agent. it is expressed in a first-order  multi modal logic of mental attitudes  belief  uncertainty  and intention  and actions. 
　section 1 gives the context of the application  illustrated by a sample dialogue. section 1 describes the heart of the system  a rational unit  which is a generic homogeneous logical theory interpreted by a specifically designed inference engine. this rational unit embodies a real demonstration of the applicability of our generic ai approach to dialogue. section 1 describes specialised components devoted to deal with some of the problems relative to natural language input and output processing. section 1 presents a reasoning example. finally  artimis is compared to related work in the field of intelligent agents. 
1 	application and sample dialogue 
artimis is currently being used on the ags domain  sadek ct al.  1   i.e.  the spoken query  over the telephone  of information voice services directory hosted by france telecom  audiotel services . we have chosen to begin with the following restricted domain and semantic representation level:  1  the system only handles two major classes of services: weather forecasts and employment  and  1  the services are described by relevant attributes: theme  geographic area  etc. with this kind of semantic information as a background  the system accepts nearly unconstrained spontaneous language as input  and reacts in a cooperative way  with naturalsounding output . below is a sample dialogue transcription. s stands for the system  ii for the user  r for the output of the speech recogniser  and xxx for  semantic garbage . 
s1: bienvenue sur le serveur a.g.s artimis. que puis-je pour vous   
welcome to the a.g.s. artimis server. how can i help you  
u 1 : je recherche un emploi a calais. est ce que il y a des serveurs   
i'm looking for a job in the calais area. are there any servers  
r1: je xxx emploi a calais est ce que il y a xxx 
1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation no  there aren't any employment servers for calais. however  there is an employment server for pas-decalais and an employment server for lille. are you interested in one of these  u 1 
r1 
s1 pour le nord pas calais. 
for nord  not for calais. xxx nord pas calais. 
le numero 	du 	serveur 	de petites 	annonces 	d'emploi non  il n'y a pas de serveurs d'emploi pour calais. par contre  il y a un serveur d'emploi pour le pas-de-calais et un serveur d'emploi pour lille  lun d'eux vous convient-il   pour le nord est le 1 1. desirez-vous un autre renseignernent   
the phone number of the server of employment advertisements for nord is 1 1. do you want any other information  
u1: est-ce qu'il est accessible de calais   
is it accessible from calais   
r1: est ce que xxx accessible de calais 
s1: oui  il est accessible de calais. desirez-vous un autre renseignement   
yes  it is accessible from calais. do you want any other information  
u1: je veux aussi la meteo. 
1 also want the weather forecasts. 
r1: xxx xxx meteo 
s1: etes-vous interesse par la meteo generate ou par la meteo specialisee   
　　are you interested in general weather forecasts or in specialised weather forecasts  u1: la meteo specialisee. 
specialised weather forecasts. 
r1: xxx meteo specialisee s1: un serveur de quelle meteo specialisee   
a server for which specialised weather forecasts  
u1: que me proposez vous   
what can you suggest  
r1: xxx proposez xxx 
s1: ii y a huit types de meteo specialises. les deux premieres sont la meteo aerienne et la meteo cotiere. vous recherchez un serveur de quelle meteo specialisee   there are eight kinds of specialised weather forecasts. the two first are atmospheric weather forecasts and coastal weather forecasts. which specialised weather forecast are you interested in  
u1: cotiere pour le nord. 
coastal  for the nord. 
r1.  cotiere xxx nord. 
s1: le numero du serveur de meteo cotieres pour le nord est le 1 1. desirez-vous un autre renseignement   
the phone number of the server of coastal weather forecasts for nord is 1 1. do you want any other information  
u1: quel est son foumisseur   
who is the provider  
r1 quel xxx fournisseur 
s1: le fournisseur du 1 1 est meteo-france. desirez-vous un autre renseignement   the provider of 1 1 is meteo-france. do you want any other information  u1: ... 
1 	the rational unit 
the central theme of our approach is that an intelligent dialogue system has to be an intelligent system first of all. futhermore  the commonly accepted prototypical intelligent behavior is rational behavior. in a simplified way  to behave rationally is to be permanently driven  at a certain representation level  by principles that optimally select the actions leading to those futures in conformity with a given set of motivations and desires  see  e.g.   cohen and levesque  1a; 1b  and  sadek  1a; 1  . it is at this  hypothesised  knowledge level that the concepts of mental attitudes and intentional actions are relevant. 
　the rational unit is the kernel of an intelligent agent. it gives the system its dialogue abilities  which result from explicit reasoning processes  modelled by the formal theory of rational interaction. the theory itself will only be outlined here  for more details  see  sadek  1a; 1b; 1; 1; bretier  1  . 
　in regards to the formal approach for knowledge representation  the logic framework is adequate  for various reasons: homogeneity  genericity  due to its large coverage   ability to intuitively account for mental attitudes  which makes it easy to maintain   and its potential usability  both as a modelling and an implementation tool. 
　based on an integrated formal model of mental attitudes and rational action  the theory provides a unified account  expressed in a homogeneous logical framework  for the different constituents and capabilities involved in  cooperative  communication  such as the management of the logical relationships over the system's mental attitudes  beliefs  uncertainties  intentions  and plans . communicative acts are introduced as regular actions  which can be recognised and planned using general principles of rational behaviour. in this framework  dialogue is viewed as a derivable activity  which relies on more primitive abilities: it dynamically results from explicit reasoning processes motivated by the observation and the planning of communicative acts. due to the genericity of the principles  this approach achieves the robustness required by an intelligent dialogue system: to soundly react to complex situations  possibly incompletely specified when the system has been designed. 

	sadek  bretier  & panaget 	1 
ite concept defined in terms of belief and choice  sadek  1a; 1   in this paper  we only use belief and intention  intention is taken as a macro-attitude . these two attitudes are formalised by the modal operators b and i  respectively. formulae such as bip  and up can be read as  i  implicitly  believes  that  p  and  i intends to bring about p   respectively. the modelled agents are taken to be fully introspective and to have consistent beliefs. thus  the logical model for the operator b is a kd1-model. 
1 	communicative acts 
we concentrate on communicative acts but the analysis applies to rational  or intentional  actions in general. by communicative act  ca   we mean any action performed by an agent with the intention that it be observed by  at least  one other agent. 
　as for an ordinary rational action  the components of a ca model that are involved in a planning process must characterise  on the one hand  the reason why this act is  selected   and  on the other hand  the conditions that have to be satisfied in order to plan the act. we call the first component the rational effect  re  of the act and the second one its feasibility preconditions  fps . it is worth noting that the re is the effect inteded by the agent of the act ; and wether it will really take place or not  only concerns teh recipient and has not to  and cannot validly  be captured within the act model. 
　we introduce here without elaborated discussion simplified  yet operational  versions of the action models that we use later  see  sadek  1a; 1b  for a detailed analysis . the models in question are those of the act of i informing j that   and the  abstract  act of i informing j of a  referent of the term  1  or the 1  if the operator t for definite description is available : 

　rational action models  and particularly ca models  are implemented in this theory using the axioms of logical rationality presented in the next section. 
1 	principles of logical rationality 
the first property we introduce follows directly from the definition of intention  see  e.g.   sadek  1   and expresses the fact that an agent can adopt the intention to bring about a state of affairs only if she believes that this state does not currently hold: 

　axiom a1 provides an agent with the capability to plan an act  whenever she intends to achieve its re. the agents intention to achieve a goal generates the intention to perform one of the acts  1  that have the goal as re and  1  the agent has no reason for not carrying it out.1 

　axiom a1 requires an agent to search for the satisfiability of the fps of an act whenever she selects that act  by axiom a1 : 
	axiom 	a1: 	 bifeasible a  	v 
i b feasible a  . 
　obviously  an action is believed feasible by an agent when all of its fps  from the agent's point of view  i.e.  what the agent believes to be the action's fps  are satisfied. this is expressed by the following axiom: 
	axiom 	a		e p are the 
fps of action a. 
   whenever an agent considers that a given event has just occurred  she is necessarily committed to believe that its effects and persistent fps hold  from the agent's viewpoint : 
　axiom a1:  where p is an effect or a persistent fp  such as certain mental preconditions for cas  of action a.1 
　the kernel of the process which enables an agent to derive a plan is specified by axioms a1 and a1. thus  the planning process is merely a regular consequence of the rational-behaviour axioms  hence completely deductive: no extra planning algorithm is needed to implement the ca models. 
1 mental-attitude transfer & cooperative behaviour 
in the part of the theory that we have outlined so far  nothing constrains an agent to adopt the beliefs of another agent  or her intentions in order to be cooperative towards her  such as merely answering a question for her . for this to be possible  we need axioms to allow the transfer of mental attitudes. 
　a form of belief transfer appears when an agent i thinks that an agent j wants to communicate to her some mental attitude  in this case  and this is the first preliminary principle for cooperative behaviour  agent i comes to believe what she thinks that j wants to communicate to her  unless she believes the contrary: 

　the second preliminary principle for cooperative behaviour states that an agent i will adopt some intention 
   1  this property extends and formalises the principle of rationality proposed by newell  p. 1: /f an agent has knowledge that one of its actions will lead to one of its goals  then the agent will select that action. 
   1  concerning communicative acts  the effect in question is the intentional effect  i.e.  the intention an agent attempts to make public in performing the act. for example; the intentional effect of agent i asserting p towards agent j is 
1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation iibjiibjp. 
 or goal  of an agent j  if she does not have the opposite intention: 

　the theory provides several other axioms and derived properties for cooperative behaviour.1 the following axiom  which formalised the harmony with other agents  will be used later: 
axiom a1: where t characterises the 
 right  circumstances  which  in some cases  depending on the instantiation of   can be merely reduced to true. 
1 	implementation 
to implement this kind of theory  two approaches can be adopted: either automate the inference process formalised by the theory  or use the theory as the formal specification of an effective system. we have adopted the first approach since it satisfies  in a more direct way  adequacy  genericity  and maintainability criteria. the inference engine  bretier  1; bretier and sadek  1   based on a first-order modal logic  namely quantifiedkd1  with respect to the belief modality   involves other modalities representing uncertainty  intention and action. inference is automated using an extended resolution method  where formulae are represented in their syntactical form and where the instantiation of axiom schemata uses sub-formulae unification. 
1 	specialised components 
when applied to natural dialogue  the artim1s system includes two isolated subsystems to deal with natural language input and output. currently  algorithmic bottlenecks  especially the size of the search space for the input side  prevent the direct logical specification of these processes in our forward-chaining theorem-proving framework. however  both are meant to be eventually integrated as logical theories in the rational unit. 
1 	natural language input 
the natural language interpretation subsystem features both syntactic and semantic robustness using islanddriven parsing and semantic completion. island-driven parsing simply means finding small syntactic structures in the text  with as few long-range dependencies as possible. example: 
input sentence: 
　i'd like the weather forecast for the cotes-d'armor area recognized: 
　ldjike x weather forecast x x cotes d armor area concepts: 
		weather 	.forecast 	cotes d armor 
　the result is a set of mentioned concepts  or a list of possible alternatives when overlapping phrases yield nondeterminism. each of these hypotheses is then fed 
　1  for example  axiom an agent to behave sincerely; axiom  leads an agent to try to correct what she thinks to be erroneous beliefs of another agent  by corrective answers . 

1 	natural language output 
the natural language generation subsystem  panaget  1  contains a linguistic act planner and a linguistic realiser  see also  appelt  1  . the former is concerned 
with how the intentions of the system  i.e.  communicative acts  are communicated to the user. the latter is concerned with realising the acts specified by the planner as a well-formed utterance. 
　linguistic acts serve as an abstract representation of utterances or parts of utterance. two families are distinguished: surface speech acts and referring acts. surface speech acts are used to deal with the fact that:  1  different communicative acts can be realised by the same utterance and  1  a single utterance can verbalise a complex sequence of communicative acts. linguistic acts are defined in terms of their effect and their preconditions of feasibility. the effect of a surface speech act is the verbalisation of communicative acts whereas the effect of a referring act is the reference to objects of the world. preconditions are used to express that:  1  the accomplishment of a linguistic act must be relevant to the context in which the utterance will be used and  1  there exists a well-formed part-of-utterance. an interesting point is that the second type of precondition establishes explicitly the communication channel from the planner to the realiser. 
　the linguistic realiser satisfies the second type of precondition by constructing the most relevant parts-ofutterance and utterances according to the context and to its linguistic knowledge. during the construction  when the realiser requires a noun phrase  a pronoun or a proper name  it asks the planner to select a referring act. this mechanism establishes the second direction of the communication channel. 
	sadek  bretier  & panaget 	1 
　for example  if the system wants to inform the user that there is a  provider  relation between the cotesd'armor weather forecast server and meteo-france  the generator can produce  according to the context  either a simple declarative sentence with a proper name and a noun phrase  a positive answer with a pronoun and a proper name or an elliptical sentence: 
 meteo-france is the provider of the cotesd'armor weather forecast server.  
 yes  it is provided by meteo-france.  
 meteo-france.  

a possible world represents. in  cohen and levesque  1a   and also in  konolige and pollack  1   a world is a time-line representing a sequence of events  temporally extended infinitely into the past and the future. in  rao and georgeff  1   a world is a branching-time structure with a single past and multiple futures. in both  a temporal index is used to identify a particular point in the course of events. in our framework  a possible world is a single point in the course of events  and the possible worlds are related to each other by eventdependent accessibility relations. the resulting structure is a branching-time structure with a single past and multiple futures. even though these three possibleworlds models seem to be nearly equivalent  they determine the intuitive interpretation of the formalisation. 
　concerning the definition of mental attitudes  our model is similar to cohen & levesque's  1a . however  there are some significant differences between the two models  particularly in the definition of intention. for example  in c&l's model  an agent can have an intention to bring about a proposition without necessarily having this proposition as an achievement goal. so  the primary interest of an agent is not the end result of her intention but that she will achieve this result by herself. in our definition of intention  the primary interest of an agent is the end result of her intention  the definition explicitly imposes on the intended property to be a persistent goal . moreover the achievement of the proposition in question may result from a multi-agent sequence of events  that is  it should be possible that the actions of other agents be a part of the agent's plan. 
1 	theories of rational agency 
significant developments in rational agency have been elaborated in  cohen and levesque  1a; rao and georgeff  1; konolige and pollack  1; shoham  1; traum  1; wooldridge  1 . the methodological frameworks proposed are of great interest for analysing the concept of intentional action. however  except for  cohen and levesque  1a   none of them provides an explicit formalisation of action  or of communication and cooperation principles. moreover  while c&l's account of communicative act models is intended to be part of a theory of rational  inter action  it lacks needed precision on when and how the act models can be used by an agent when carrying out a planning process. 
　in our case  we show that rationality principles can and need to be clearly specified within a unified logical framework of a rational action theory  in order for communicative acts to be planned as regular actions. moreover  we show that  interagent communication  planning can be a fully deductive process  which naturally derives from the mere application of rationality principles to  communicative  act models  without any external devices. 
1 	implementations 
several agent-oriented tools have been implemented. 
1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation the agento language  shoham  1  allows the pro-
gramming of agents in terms of commitment rules. 
in  lesperance et ai  1   golog  an agent programming language based on situation calculus is introduced. other researchers directly implement their logical theories with theorem provers  thus giving the implemented systems a precise semantics. concurrent metatem  wooldridge  1  is a multi-agent language based on the execution of a temporal belief logic by a tableaux-based decision procedure. rao & georgeff  rao and georgeff  1  also present tableaux-based provers for bdi logics. 
　however  except for rao &: georgeff  none of these analyses the interaction of the modal operators. our system is specifically designed to implement a first-order modal logic which includes axioms formalising the interaction between modal operators for belief  intention  and action. moreover  our system is the only one which does not need external devices to implement planning or communicative/cooperative behaviour. these features are naturally obtained by formalising mental attitudes  actions  and rationality principles  in the same homogeneous logical framework. 
1 	conclusion 
the artimis system runs on a single sun ultrasparc 1 workstation. an isdn interface handles phone calls  getting the standard  speech input. 
speech processing is realised by a hmm-based speakerindependent  continuous-speech recogniser  using a bigram language model  dupont  1; jouvet et ai  1  and a psola-based t t s system  bigorgne et ai  1 . 
　artimis displays advanced human-computer cooperative spoken dialogue abilities. this dialogue technology  based on the concept of communicating rational agent  is expected to be experimented  in the short or middle term  in context of real services. the results of an evaluation of the first version of the system can be found in  sadek et ai  1 . 
