 
this paper describes an improvement in the performance of transfer-driven machine translation  tdmt  by the use of extralinguistic information. in evaluating what constitutes natural speech  particular attention was paid to word usage that depended on the extra-linguistic information from the context  situation  environment and so on. we discuss what types of extra-linguistic information a spoken-language translation system requires to create naturally communicative dialogs. we then propose a method of improving the precision of translation by utilizing this extralinguistic information. preliminary experimentation showing performance improvements in tdmt makes us believe that the proposed scheme can improve the performance of dialog mt. 
1 	motivation 
we have been developing a method of transfer-driven machine translation  tdmt   furuse et ah  1  furuse and iida  1  in producing an efficient multilingual spoken-language translation system. systems that deal with spoken dialogs generally require different techniques than systems that deal with written languages. the main requirements for the former are techniques to handle 1  spoken languages containing ungrarnmatical expressions  1  real-time translation to avoid the interruption of smooth communications  sumita et al.  1   and 1  appropriate expressions under environmentally influenced situations. 
in tdmt  constituent boundary patterns  furuse and 
iida  1  are applied to an input  which contrasts with the linguistic manner of applying grammar rules. the result of doing this provides for robust parsing that can even handle ungrammatical phenomena such as derivations in metonymical relationships  lida et al.  1 . additionally  by dealing with best-only substructures utilizing empirical knowledge  the explosion of structural ambiguities is significantly constrained. accordingly  robust and efficient translation of spoken-language input can be achieved. 
　in this paper  we primarily review an interim evaluation of the performance of a tdmt prototype system  i.e.  a multi-lingual spoken language translation system in order to establish a criterion for subsequent performance improvements. 
　additionally  in handling situationally appropriate expressions required by spoken-language translation  particular attention is paid to word usage that depends not only on the linguistic information  e.g.  linguistically referred context  but also on the extra-linguistic information from the context  situation and environment in order to achieve natural communications. 
in particular  the selection of euphemistic expressions 
1
   depends solely on the situational influences. however  although a conventional mt system provides a largescale dictionary  it gives little information on word usage selection for appropriate situations or contexts. the analysis process works only for individual sentences  separating them from the context. 
　thus  we describe extra-linguistic information  such as the speaker's role  social rank  and gender  which the system can use to naturalize communications with respect to word usage. we will also propose a method to improve the translation accuracy by utilizing such information. 
　from the performance improvement of a t d m t system that utilizes our method in comparison with the conventional tdmt system  we can state that our proposed scheme can be expected to improve the performance of dialog mt systems. 
　the next section presents an overview of tdmt and its advantages in comparison with related research efforts. section 1 describes the performance evaluation of a conventional tdmt prototype system. section 1 presents our proposed method for improving the system's performance together with preliminary experimental findings and evaluations. in section 1  we state our conclusions. 
     1  in this paper  we define euphemistic expressions as expressions paying one's respects to the hearer indirectly  such as by offering superficial choices to the hearer even if the real intention is a command. for example  it is more polite to say  i would appreciate it if you could help me  rather than saying  will you help me   when you ask something of your superior  in general. 
	mima  furuse  & iida 	1 
1 	t d m t and related research 
in attempts to develop a multi-lingual translation system  lavie et al.  1  frederking and brown  1  wahlster et al.  1   an interlingua-based approach has been studied as a theoretically efficient mechanism. several schemes have been proposed recently based on this approach. the semantic pattern-based parsing in janus  levin et al.  1  lavie et al.  1  uses frame-based semantics  goddeau et al.  1  with a semantic phrase grammar  and the operation of the parser is viewed as phrase spotting. in this scheme  a recognized speech input is paraphrased actively into a concrete and simple expression that conforms to one of the system's internal representations  which can make the utterance's meaning easy to understand. 
　although the above inference schemes are powerful in explaining a speaker's intention or the propositional content of an utterance even from a keyword or phrase  plausible default values have to be prepared for achieving heuristic inference while extracting the meaning of an input sentence. for example  it is impossible to accept a sentence that includes a metonymical expression like: 
  1   a cheap and clean election is nice.  without preparing features able to bridge the semantic gap between cheap  clean  and election a prion. 
　therefore  such an approach may work well within a certain domain  but less scalability may be the result when trying to extend a prototype system in practice. additionally  even if a semantic concept unit for at least three languages were to be defined  designing a basic generation mechanism able to bridge the semantic gap between languages would still remain one of the more difficult problems. 
　on the other hand  it is generally accepted that people learn source-to-target expression pairs when they learn a foreign language. therefore  it would seem practical to design reasonable pairs of expressions for each pair of languages based on a common mt mechanism. in other words  to achieve a practical multi-lingual translation system  it would be reasonable to analyze the source language to suit the target language. 
   from this point of view  tag  tree-adjoining grammar -based mt  abeille et al.  1  and tdmt share many important properties for the successful implementation of practical mt systems. both schemes f roduce translations based on the synchronization shieber and schabes  1  of the source and target language structures. however  the algorithm for tag has a worst-case time complexity of 1  g n1   where  g  stands for the size of grammar g and n is the length of the input string. with regard to the speed required for smooth communications  it is unrealistic to apply tagbased parsing to practical spoken-language translation systems. 
in contrast  tdmt has the advantages of: 
  the existence of an efficient parsing algorithm; 
  the capability to handle various linguistic phenom-ena by utilizing translation examples with a simple best-first mechanism. 
tdmt's constituent boundary parsing  cbp  can be implemented according to bottom-up left-to-right chart parsing algorithms  furuse and iida. 1  whose worstcase time complexity is merely 1 n1 . 
　in addition  using best-first syntactic/semantic similarity would make tdmt more flexible  sumita et al.  1 .for example  tdmt can accept the previous example sentence  1  by utilizing a similar example like  a cheap and clean room would be good  - . 
　therefore  tdmt can achieve both scalability and efficiency in multi-lingual spoken-language translation. the transfer module  which is an essential component of tdmt  is a common part of the translation mechanism for every language pair  whereas language-oriented modules  such as morphological analysis and sentence generation  are provided for each source/target language. furthermore  transfer knowledge is provided for each source/target language pair. tdmt has already been applied to three language pairs: japanese-english  japanese-korean  and japanese-german. 
1 	evaluation of t d m t 
the tdmt system  whose domain is travel conversation  is implemented in lisp and runs on unix-based machines. a system dealing with spoken-languages requires a quick and accurate response  rather than a grammatical response  in order to provide smooth communications. moreover  since every process  including speech recognition  translation and speech synthesis  runs automatically from start to finish  there is no room for manual pre/post-editing of input/output sentences in order to make the sentence easier for either the translation process or the user to read. in other words  assuring both efficiency and acceptability in spoken-language translation are the most crucial tasks in devising such a system. therefore  we evaluated tdmt for both speed and acceptability of translation and analyzed the evaluation results from this point of view. 
1 	the evaluation procedure 
we evaluated tdmt's translation quality by separately using morphological analysis  a translation module  including a generation module  and a parsing scheme  cbp . manually analyzed morpheme sequences were used to avoid errors and unknown words in testing the translation module itself. this allowed us to assess how well the tdmt would function individually. details of the evaluation on the morphological analyzer are not described here1. 
　table 1 shows the conditions of our experiment and evaluation. the reader should note that as the jg and 
1
　　although 'room' and 'election' are semantically rather distant  their syntactic similarity enables tdmt to translate the first example sentence into acceptable japanese while preserving the metonymical nuance of the meaning. 
1
the success rate in perceiving morphemes was more than 
1%  and that in assigning linguistic categories was more than 1% while the analysis speed was less than 1 second for each source language measured using a sparc station 1 workstation. 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

table 1: experimental conditions. 	table 1: evaluation results. 

kj translation project have just started  the transfer knowledge will not always be of the same quality for all language pairs. in addition  though the quality of the thesaurus for each language is an important topic for example-based frameworks  according to our experimental results obtained by applying some kinds of thesauruses into tdmt  no remarkable differences in the translation quality were observed except for a difference in the number of translation outputs. 
　translations for 1 unseen dialogs  about 1 unseen different sentences  were manually evaluated by assigning a grade. two or three native speakers of each of the target languages performed the assessments; all of the examiners were also familiar with their respective source language in order to judge the correctness of the information. 
   we used the same dialogs for all of the translations whose source language was japanese: .ie  jk  and jg translations. this allowed us to compare the differences in the training  patterns  examples  etc   the linguistic distance between languages  and so on. each sentence was assigned one of four grades for translation quality:  a  perfect - a fluent translation with all information conveyed correctly;  b  fair - a translation that makes it easy to understand the expressions but with some unimportant expressions missing grammatical elements;  c  acceptable - an acceptable translation;  d  nonsense  wrong sense - an unacceptable translation or where important information has been translated incorrectly. the parse structure of each source sentence was also manually evaluated by assigning it a grade indicating:  1  success or  1  failure. the translation speed was measured on a sparc station 1 workstation. 
1 	results 
table 1 shows the evaluation results for the tdmt  where  acceptability  is the sum of the  a    b  and  c  grade sentences. the translation speed does not include the time needed for morphological analysis. all ratios are taken from the average of two or three examiners. as the table shows  almost 1% acceptability was achieved in the je result  and almost 1% acceptability was achieved in the ej result; remarkably  more than 1%  acceptability was achieved in the jk translations  although the jk translations needed less transfer knowledge  table 1  than the others. this observation can be explained from the viewpoint of linguistic similarity; while the japanese-english  german  language pair is linguistically distant  the japanese-korean pair is rather close. 
　the main problem in the translations involved insufficient examples for cbp. however  an increase in the ratio with the number of examples can be observed in the results. thus  the total accuracy and acceptability should improve in proportion to an increase in the transfer knowledge 1. this trend was observed in the parsing quality results. however  in spite of the rate of false parsing  the quality of both the jk and kj translations were very high. we consider this finding to be due not only to the linguistic distance between the languages but also to the tdmt pattern-based approach having the ability to translate phrases while preserving the nuance even for ungrammatical input sentences. 
　in addition  some sentences were judged as of the  d  grade because of their lack of adequate politeness in the ej translation. 
　although the speed depends on the amount of knowledge and sentence length  the average times remain less than 1 sec; thus  tdmt can be seen as an efficient translation mechanism. 
1 	improving conversational naturalness 
1 	extra-linguistic information 
as we have already mentioned  the selection of euphemistic expressions generally depends solely on situ-
     1  this is accepted in general for the example-based framework  since the exact match ratio is certain to increase in proportion to the increase in translation examples. in fact  a total accuracy of more than 1% was achieved in our closed test evaluation for over 1 sentences for ej tdmt translation. however  we have to ascertain the practical satiation limit  or how much the transfer knowledge can be expanded. 
	mima  furuse  & iida 	1 

ational influences. similarly  japanese donatory auxiliary verbs such as 'ageru' have multiple possible expressions depending on the speaker's honorific attitude to the hearer1. maeda et al. presented a unification based approach to japanese honorifics  maeda et al.  1 . any contextual constraint should be described in a certain domain  that is  in a sub-language  and the real utterance should be expressed based on the appropriate usage under every situation  fig. 1 . consequently  a spoken dialog translation system must work in situations where the following are understood: speaker properties  role  gender  and rank   focus in the utterances  dialog domains  objects mentioned  actions mentioned  and derivational forms of the words used. 
   however  whereas a conventional mt system provides a large-scale dictionary  there is little information on word usage under typical situations or context. the analysis process works only on individual sentences by separating them from the context without considering information on the current environment. 
　in this section  several examples show the typical extra-linguistic information that a dialog translation system can utilize to resolve contextual ambiguity with respect to word usage selection  zero-subject resolution  and so on  in order to naturalize conversations. furthermore  we propose a scheme for utilizing this information in dialog mt systems to enable preferences appropriate for varying types of communications to be established while preserving the efficiency. 
1 	social role and dialog domain 
in the travel dialog domain  a clerk in a hotel  as opposed to a traveler  is usually not dining  boarding or using a tourist-oriented transportation system. such information can constrain the possibilities of word selection with respect to polite remarks. for example  the word 'eat' can be translated into japanese as 'taberu'  'meshiagaru-honorific'  or 'itadaku-humble'. however  if the dialog domain is travel  and the speaker is a clerk but not a traveler  'eat' is never translated into 'itadaku-humble'. in the same way  we can consider the translation of 'your' in the following sentence: 
 1   could you please tell me your telephone number   if the speaker's social role is a clerk and the listener's is a guest   your telephone number  should be translated as  o-kyaku-sama-no o-denwa-bangou  guest-poiite-possessive telephone-number-polite . 
　in addition  it is well-known that the subject tends to be omitted in spoken japanese. thus  having this knowledge would clearly be helpful in predicting the english for missing japanese subjects. for example  if a cook says  
 1   moshi o-meshiagaru no 	deshitara  	sugu 	tsukurimasu  
 if eat-honorific  immediately cook-polite 1 
　　the complexity of word usage selection for verbs of giving and receiving is presented on the web at http: //central  itp.berkeley.edu/  eal/jpnotes/donatory-verbs.html. 
　　in this paper  sample japanese sentences are romanized in italic based on the hepburn system  and the corresponding 

figure 1: determination of an utterance in a situation 
it is appropriate to translate this by supplying   i   as the subject of  eat  and  you  as the subject of  cook . 
1 	gender 
there are several differences between male expressions and female expressions in japanese. for example  men can use 'boku' or 'ore' to mean   i   . however  women never use these words in standard japanese. it has also been reported that women usually use euphemistic expressions more frequently than do men  and likewise women tend to use softer expressions than do men. therefore  information on whether the speaker/listener is male or female allows the translation system not only to assign the correct honorific title  such as mr. or ms.  but also enables the translation to preserve expressions appropriate to the speaker's gender. 
1 	social rank 
there are various types of expressions: polite  honorific  humble  and euphemistic. these expressions are used depending on the social interactions between speakers1. for example  in making a hotel reservation  
  1   how many people will there be   
'will there be' can be translated into japanese in at least two forms  'i-masu-ka' or 'irasshai-masu-ka'. if the listener in this case is at a socially higher position than the speaker  e.g.  the relationship between a guest and a clerk   the latter expression would be preferred as it bears more esteem. in the same way  
  1   then  we will confirm your reservation.  should be translated into: 
 1'  	 yoyaku-o 	kakunm-sasete-itadaki-masu  
      'reservation-objective'  'confirm-euphemism'  by using the euphemistic alternative. 
english words with usage modifiers follow in parentheses. 
　　although this type of word usage selection seems a little bit japanese  or korean  oriented  the authors thought that handling this kind of difference between languages is very important for smooth dialog translation such as in the case of diplomatic meetings. in fact  some sentences were judged as incorrect translations only because of their lack of adequate politeness  in our experimental evaluation with an ej translation system. 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

1 
	mima  furuse  & iida 	1 

extra-linguistic parameters manually to independently evaluate this scheme. in order to evaluate the effectiveness of t d m t while utilizing the word usage preferences  we used 1 of the  clerk's  sentences previously graded  b  c  d  from the evaluation results shown in table 1. 
   translation examples of an utterance from the clerk to a guest  modified by    compared to the same utterance from a guest to the clerk  modified by '   are shown as follows. 
 1   we have a question for you.  
 1'  	guest-to-clerk: 	 shitsumon-ga 	ari-masu  
 'question' 'we-have-poiite'  
 1   	clerk-to-guest: 	 o-kyaku-sama-ni 	go-shitsumon-ga go-zai-masu  
 'you -guest-role-polite-objectivel 
'question-polite-objective1  'we-have-humble-polite'  
the following results were obtained in the evaluation. 
  1  1%  sentences were changed into other ex-pressions. 
  1  1%  sentences were improved by at least one grade. 
  the rest of the changed sentences were still assigned the same grades because of different problems. 
by upgrading all results having a  d  grade  the total acceptability can be improved by about 1% using this scheme  indicating that these results are fairly good. however  one problem is the possibility of constructing overly polite expressions in japanese. this basically derives from the fact that the current generation of this software does not yet have sufficient knowledge to treat collocational constraints of politeness between constituent boundary patterns. nevertheless  the problem can be easily overcome by using statistical/stochastic methods such as n-grams or the co-occurrence of phrases. consequently  it is clear that the proposed scheme should be able to improve the performance of a dialog mt system. 
1 	conclusions 
for handling the situationally appropriate expressions required for spoken-language translation  we have discussed contextual constraints on word usage that utilize extra-linguistic information. furthermore  we have proposed a method to improve the accuracy of translations by utilizing this information. preliminary experimentation of our new t d m t has shown that the proposed scheme can be expected to improve the performance of dialog mt. 
   one important area of future research will involve a method to extract the extra-linguistic information from a situation efficiently. some information types  such as a speaker's social role  should for now be assigned manually in the system. other information types  such as various preferences for social position  gender and conversational domain  can potentially be found in large corpora of linguistic expressions with some kind of stochastic information  such as usage frequency and word usage n-grams. thus  the automatic extraction of extralinguistic information from dialogs by utilizing statistical/stochastic approaches is one area of interest for future work. 
