 
although many formalisms for reasoning about action exist  surprisingly few approaches have taken computational complexity into consideration. the contributions of this paper are the following: a temporal logic with a restriction for which deciding satisfiability is tractable  a tractable extension for reasoning about action  and np-completeness results for the unrestricted problems. many interesting reasoning problems can be modelled  involving nondeterminism  concurrency and memory of actions. the reasoning process is proved to be sound and complete. 
1 	introduction 
although many formalisms for reasoning about action exist  surprisingly few approaches have taken computational complexity into consideration. one explanation for this might be that many interesting ai problems are  at least  np-hard  and that tractable subproblems that are easily extracted  tend to lack expressiveness. this has led a large part of the ai community to rely on heuristics and incomplete systems to solve the problems  see e.g.  ginsberg  1  for a discussion . this holds  in particular  for the area of reasoning about action  where the very expressive logical formalisms provide difficult obstacles when it comes to efficient implementation. 
　we feel  however  that the tractability boundary for sound and complete reasoning about action has not yet been satisfactorily investigated. we prove this by introducing a nontrivial subset of a logic with semantics closely related to the trajectory semantics of sandewall   for which satisfiability is tractable. our logic can handle examples involving not only nondeterminism  but continuous time  concurrency and memory of actions as well  thus providing a conceptual extension of sandewall 's framework. the reader should note that our main concern is computation  as opposed to modelling. 
　this paper is organised as follows: section 1 is an informal overview of the technical results  where also two examples are presented. in section 1 we present the syntax and semantics of the basic temporal logic and the extension for reasoning about action  and in section 1  we present the following: three intractability results for these formalisms  and the main results: the tractable subclasses of the temporal logic and its extension1. 
1 	overview 
in section 1 we develop a temporal logic  a  which is syntactically related to the propositional temporal logic tptl  alur and henzinger  1 . the temporal domain is the set of real numbers and temporal expressions are based on relations  between linear 
polynomials with rational coefficients over a set of temporal variables. the semantics of this temporal logic is standard. the formalism for reasoning about action is narrative based  which means that scenario descriptions are used to model the real world. scenario descriptions consist of formulae in the temporal logic  observations  and action expressions which are constructs that state that certain changes in values of the features  propositions  fluents  may occur. we write action expressions as is the precondition for the action  the effects  a a temporal expression denoting when the effects are taking place  and inf 1 is the set of all features that are influenced by the action. the influenced features are not subject to the assumption of inertia  i.e. we allow them  and only them  to change during the execution of the action. 
　it turns out that deciding satisfiability is np-complete  both for the temporal logic and the scenario descriptions. interestingly  the problem is np-complete for scenario descriptions that only include horn clause observations  unconditional and unary action expressions  this terminology is explained later   and no stated relations between temporal expressions. 
　to extract a tractable subset from our formalism we rely on a recent result in temporal constraint reasoning by jonsson and backstrom in   also discovered independently by koubarakis  . they have identified a large tractable class of temporal constraint reasoning  using horn disjunctive linear relations  horn dlr's  
     1  due to lack of space  proofs of most theorems are omitted. however  they can all be obtained from the authors  until published . 
	drakengren & bjareland 	1 

which are relations between linear polynomials with rational coefficients. we make use of their result by restricting formulae in our scenario descriptions to be horn and then by encoding scenario descriptions into horn dlr's. for the temporal logic this is fairly straightforward. for the scenario descriptions  it turns out that we have to put some constraints on the temporal relations and actions in the scenario descriptions. 
we will use the following two examples: jump into a 
lake with a hat  giunchiglia and lifschitz  1  and soup bowl lifting  gelfond et a/.  1 . below we informally describe the examples. 
example 1   j u m p into a lake w i t h a hat  j l h   if you jump into the lake you will get wet. if you have been in the water at some time point it is unclear if you still have your hat on. this is an example of nondeterminism and of memory of actions. 
example 1  soup b o w l lifting  sbl  if we lift either side of a soup bowl at some time points  the content will be spilled  unless we lift both sides at the same time point. this is an example of simultaneous concurrency. 
both examples stated above can be handled by the tractable subset of our formalism. note that we are not confined to simultaneous concurrency; actions may partly overlap. 
1 	scenario descriptions 
we introduce a semantics that is a simpler variant of sandewall's features and fluents framework  sandewall  1   in that the effects of an action can only occur at one and the same time point for a given action  and we use only propositional values of features  similar to the work of doherty   however  in some respects this formalism is more flexible than sandewall's: we use a continuous time domain  we allow concurrently executing actions  and effects of actions can depend on other states in the history than the state at the starting time point of the action  this implies memory of actions  in sandewall's  terminology . one example of a formalism having memory is that of gustafsson and doherty . 
　initially  a basic temporal logic is defined. the computational properties of this logic will be exploited by the scenario description logic  i.e. ultimately  in section 1  the scenario descriptions will be transformed into formulae of the basic temporal logic. 
1 	syntax 
we begin by defining the basic temporal logic. 
　we assume that we have a set  of time point variables intended to take real values  and a set f of features intended to take propositional values. 
definition 1 a signature is a tuple  where 
t is a finite set of time point variables and t is a finite set of propositional features. a time point expression is a linear polynomial over t with rational coefficients. we 
1 	temporal reasoning 


	drakengren & bjareland 	1 

unconditional and unary  only horn observations are allowed  and no relations between time points may be stated. 
proof  sketch : a reduction from 1sat. 
we now present the key to tractability  which is a linearprogramming approach to temporal constraint reasoning  by jonsson and backstrom . 
definition 1 let be linear polynomials with rational coefficients over some set x of variables. then a disjunctive linear relation  dlr  is a disjunction of one or more expressions of the form 
 a dlr is horn iff it contains at most one disjunct with the relation =    or  . 
　an assigment m of variables in x to real numbers is a model of a set t of dlr's iff all formulae in t are true when taking the values of variables in the dlr's. a set of dlr's is satisfiable iff it has a model. 
the following result is the main result of jonsson and backstrom . 
theorem 1 let t a be a set of closed horn formulae. then t is satisfiable iff c t  is satisfiable. proof  sketch : straightforward: the key is to use the correspondence equations. 
corollary 1 deciding satisfiability of sets of closed horn formulae is polynomial. 
proof: it is clear that the transformation c is polynomial. the result follows from proposition 1. 
now we have the results for the proofs of membership in np for the satisfiability problems of  and of scenario descriptions. 
theorem 1 deciding satisfiability of a set  is np-complete. 
p r o o f  sketch : by proposition 1  it remains to prove that the problem is in np. this is done by letting the set of all literals used in t which are true in a model serve as a polynomial representation of the model. furthermore  satisfiability of such a set is polynomial  by corollary 1. 


proposition 1 deciding satisfiability of a set of horn 
1 	temporal reasoning 

	drakengren & bjareland 	1 

proof  sketch : the key is that the sets t  force features to have values being satisfied in any intended model  and vice versa. 
theorem 1 deciding satisfiability  and entailment  for restricted scenario descriptions is polynomial. 
1 	discussion 
one piece of related work is the approach by schwalb et al.  to reasoning about propositions being true at time points. their choice for obtaining an algorithm is to code both propositions and temporal relations into propositional logic  whereas we do the opposite. however  their tractable inference algorithm is not complete  and they define no measure on when the correct inferences will be obtained  so it is very difficult to relate it to our approach. furthermore they cannot handle inertia adequately: there  propositions may always change when actions are performed  but certainly this is undesirable if actions which do not affect all features are used. 
　in this paper our concern has been computational complexity for reasoning about action. it is important to note that although we have provided polynomial algorithms for the reasoning tasks  these can hardly be considered efficient. the important results  however  are that there exist polynomial algorithms; the next obvious step is to also make them fast. for efficient implementation  there is one direction we are particularly interested in investigating: since the technique used for achieving tractability can be described as an encoding of our logic as temporal constraints for which there is a tractable algorithm for determining satisfiability  it should be possible to do something similar for other tractable temporal algebras  for example those identified in the papers  drakengren and jonsson  1; 1 . also  an algorithm for a purely qualitative scenario description language  i.e. not involving metric time  would probably have a faster satisfiability-checker. 
　we have shown that satisfiability of scenario descriptions is np-complete within our formalism. we feel that it would be a mistake to interpret this negatively. on the contrary  one could argue  in lines with  gottlob  1   that this would imply that many approximations  powerful heuristics and non-trivial tractable subsets of problems for reasoning about action remain to be found. this paper is a step on the way in this endeavour. 
1 	conclusions 
we have presented a temporal logic and an extension for reasoning about action from which tractable subsets have been extracted. this has been done with an encoding of the logic to horn dlr's. the formalism is narrative based with continuous time  and the world is modelled with scenario descriptions consisting of action expressions and observations. it is possible to model nondeterminism  concurrency and memory of actions. time is represented with linear polynomials with rational coefficients over real valued variables. 
1 	temporal reasoning 
acknowledgements 
thanks to simin nadjm-tehrani  peter jonsson  patrick doherty  lars karlsson and erik sandewall for help and comments. 
