 
the paper addresses the concept of cognition starting from the role of a sensor basis in the design of robots. the field of robotics forces the discussion to be pragmatic which is considered to be advantageous. in addition  we introduce the notion of cognitive basis in order to discuss the cognitive abilities of an artificial creature. as cognition cannot be fully separated from action and acting  we present finally the notion of motor-schema basis. this basis involves actions and acting as integral parts of cognition. 
1 introduction 
discussions about robotics/artificial life as well as about 
 human  perception/mind show the prominence of the concept of cognition. in general  the process of cognition relies on many - in a certain sense autonomous - perceptual mechanisms. researchers in the fields of robotics and artificial life tend to adopt a point of view about perception and  mental activities  which stresses the actiondriving aspect. such a viewpoint conflicts with what is called symbolic ai. symbolic ai is concerned with  high-level  cognition which is usually equated with  formal  symbol-structure manipulation. this outlook ignores any necessary connection between perception and action. our purpose is to provide a more actiondriven perspective on cognition and intentionality. we take our starting point in the field of robotics as it enforces a rather pragmatic approach to the action-driving aspect of cognitive creatures. one has to take the design stance  and is not so much bothered by questions about the truth/validity of cognitive hypotheses. 
　in the seventies  robotics passed through a flourishing period while designing technically sophisticated robots for quite pre-structured environments. however  transferring the robots into more 'real life' environments led to an incommensurable series of problems. the end of the eighties shows an offshoot in the robotics community  which is particularly marked by brooks paper of 1. experimentalists acknowledged the limitations when robots have to deal with realistic environments  and concentrated on implementing low-level reactive systems. we denote this approach by sensory-based robotics 
1 	robotics 
peter j. braspenning 
university of limburg 
jacobstraat 1 
1 lb maastricht the netherlands 
 design  after  lyons et al.  1   or generally as  behaviour oriented ai   steels  1 . the new approach includes motor-schema's  arkin  1   a notion originating from psychology. it refers to a pattern of  knowing-how   to execute an action   and incorporates a  mental  motor-image  decety  1  as well. in robotics  a motor-schema comprises certain activation patterns of the effectors and is triggered by sensor data. moreover  the schema's performs rather autonomously: when triggered they invariably result into an action. 
sensor data arrive as a flow of values. human beings 
 and robots designers as well  seem to have inherited perception mechanisms which emphasise patterns and disguise many irregularities. so  artificial perception is rather non-intuitive for human observers. they are easily led to misinterpretations  when they discuss other types of cognitive creatures. hence  it makes sense to explicitly distinguish between frames of reference  for instance  that of the designer and that of his robot. we introduce the notion of cognitive basis  which helps to distinguish frames of reference in a discussion of cognition and intentionality. moreover  using this notion  one can compare how different  types of  creatures are  carving up the world  through their sensors. 
　present day technology challenges many qualitative theories of cognition by providing working mechanisms  robots  computers etc.. indeed  one is led to the conclusion that action and acting are among the concepts deeply related to cognition. 
　in section 1  the notion of cognitive basis is introduced  and illustrated by means of an ultra sonic sensor. in section 1  we discuss perception problems  i.e.  the interpretation of the sensor data. we focus on actions as an element of cognition in section 1. we connect the notion of intentionality with performing a motor schema. finally  we attempt to define more formally what we like to call a motor-schema  or motor-image  basis. the result and novelty of our treatment is that  potential  actions are included into the notion of cognition. 

1 cognitive basis 
1 robot design 
a robot consists of effectors or actuators  sensors and what we metaphorically call - the wiring between them. the actuators are the foundation of any robotic design  because they determine  and constrain  what the robot might do  i.e. they circumscribe its 'raison d'etre'. 
　our discussion stays mostly at the conceptual  logical  level so that we really address a logical actuator  which is any combination of  mechanical  hardware and software that can transform the state of the robot and its environment. similarly  for sensors we introduce logical sensors: any combination of hardware and software which measures the state of the system and the environment  henderson  1 . the actuators and the sensors are connected through a wiring consisting of the logical  or influential  connections between them. at an elementary level a simple wiring might do. the more sophisticated the aims of the designer  the more complex these  wirings  might be so that one may even speak of an  intelligent  wiring. intelligent  not because the wiring itself is that smart  but because the designer looked for  smart  connections. our analysis addresses the realisation of these connections. 
　a motor-schema involves sensors  wiring and actuators and is a building block for  the design of  a robot. it consists of rather simple perceptual and motor activities. each motor-schema has its own dedicated sensors. a logical sensor suits a motor-schema if it enables discrimination of the situations for which the schema has to become active. complex actions may be orchestrated with the help of several motor-schema's. a complex situation is thus decomposed in line with the specific observations allowed by different sensors. 
1 	definition 
we introduce the notion of  sensor basis  analogous to the notion of  knowledge basis  in  rauszer  1   for convenience in explaining the definition we use the term  knowledge   at the end of this section we redefine the term. suppose an agent r  has at its disposal a set of logical sensors which measure certain attributes the sensors can assign an attribute a with a value to an object o in the universe of discourse u. 

an attribute need not discriminate between any two objects  which is expressed by  rauszer defines an indiscernibility relation for agent r  as: 

ind ar  is an equivalence relation and the set of equivalence classes is a partitioning of the universe u. thus  if two objects fall within the same equivalence class  o  a r   it means that the agent cannot distinguish one from another. the set of all equivalence classes : 
is called the knowledge basis of an agent over the universe of discourse u  determined by its set of attributes ar as handled by its set of logical sensors. the knowledge basis indicates which objects can actually be distinguished by the agent. hence  it provides the base for any knowledge the agent can have about its environment. we discuss some further notions illustrating the useability: 
　the positive knowledge of r about set x consists of the set of equivalence classes generated by the elements of x: 

x is positively known by r  if the positive knowledge ir x  = x. this means that r can  positively  distinguish each element of x from all other elements of x. 
　the negative knowledge ir  x'  consists of the objects in x'  x's complement  of which r can determine that they are not in x. the knowledge of r about the knowledge of r about x is complete 
knowledge if 
　the idea of positive knowledge is the most relevant for our purposes. we  as designers  can describe the environment of a robot as consisting of a set x of objects  but the positive knowledge of a robot indicates which of these objects it can  possibly  observe. one has to be careful in concluding that the environment is positively known by the robot: sensors do not always discriminate objects as we would like them to do  a topic which is discussed in the next section. 
　in a robot design different components are brought together. above  we distinguished sensors from the wiring; consequently the above definitions apply twice. that is  call s the set of attributes for which the logical sensors produce values  then ind s  is the sensor basis  of the agent  an example is given below . we retain the title knowledge basis while applying the definition to the wiring. calling c the set of logical connections or  information processing functions  implemented in the wiring  then ind c  is the knowledge basis  any robot comprises both bases. 

figure 1  an ultrasonic sensor image penders & braspenning 1 
　example: in  bomhof et al.  1  a mobile robot with an ultrasonic  us  sensor is described. the sensor readings are an angle under which the object is spotted  and a distance. the sensor basis  consists of cones which either are occupied from a certain distance onwards or empty  see 
　figure 1 . any information picked up in the environment represents a compound of such cones. in the next subsection we treat the relationship between the sensor basis and the knowledge basis ending up in the definition of the cognitive basis. 
1 	sensor and knowledge basis 
the information flows from the sensor basis to the knowledge basis  hence  i d e a l l y a n d fit 
to one another. as in information theory  one can determine how much information the sensors forward to the wiring. the basis is the number of states known to be possible at the source which is called entropy in information theory. the amount of information forwarded is  moreover  bounded by how many of these possibilities can be excluded at the end of the channel. the source is the sensor basis the end of the channel i s f o r proper processing needs to respect relationships existing in ; e.g.  if the sensor basis is as in figure 1  adjacent cones of need to be treated as adjacent in formally  this is expressed by requiring that maps by a homomorphism t o i f   by mistake  there is no proper mapping  no real information can be exchanged.. moreover  if  can be mapped onto 
  the mapping is a surjection  the sensory system provides the maximum of information which the wiring  is able to process and we say that the sensor basis is suitable to the knowledge basis. the other way around  if can be mapped onto the wiring can process the maximum of the information originating from the sensors. 

1 	robotics 

1 	artificial perception 
1 	sensors and objects 
in figure 1  the us sensor does not discriminate the two situations and the robot cannot find the corridor. one might try to refine the angle readings by adding an infrared  ir  sensor. an ir sensor can emit fairly precisely directed light beams  as reading is based on the reflection of the light  measuring distances is more complicated with this technique  and we will not consider it . on the face of it such a sensor might be used to increment the angle measurements. the aim is to extend the cognitive basis  but such an extension is not straightforward at all. the behaviour of a light beam is quite different from a sound beam. whereas cloth reflects a sound beam rather well  it can completely absorb light beams  and some objects are not detected at all by the ir sensor. simply adding ir data  e.g.  that no object is found  to the us data may cause inconsistency. 
　an elementary notion in symbolic ai is that of an  individual  object. this is true for most apparently suitable logical systems - such as  rauszer 1  as well. objects  however  pose a problem for artificial perception. the existence of individual objects has to be extracted from the sensor information. but this goes far beyond a simple interpretation of the sensor data. the sensors deliver only series of values of attributes  but from which objects the values originate is not detectable from the sensor signal itself. the idea of a perception basis was already given in  george  1 . his basis is indeed generated by simply joining the data of different sensors in extra dimensions. still  this provides no answer as to how to  interpret  the sensor data. 
　in the definitions given above  the cognitive basis is constructed starting from external objects. the equivalence classes  are sets of attribute values observed when sensing a particular object. within the cognitive basis the  objects  are but sets of observed properties  i.e.  in advance of any cognitive activity the creature has to be  taught  about the objects. the designer has to determine which attribute value combinations do indeed count as a certain object. in any case  for whatever approach  there remains an intriguing practical problem of determining which combination of attribute values belongs to the same  object . this is essentially the problem of sensor data fusion. any theory of cognition will be plagued by the problem of object identification. 
1  t induces an isomorphism  that is a one-to-one homomorphism  between the sensor basis and  a part of  the knowledge basis. 

1 	the frame of reference 
to recognise an object  the robot designer has to teach his robot. here  frames-of-reference are interwoven. a robot is guided by its internal processing. inputs from the sensors change the internal state of the creature. call the set of possible internal states of the creature n. a certain sensor input makes the internal state  of the creature change into  we use the cognitive basis to assign a meaning to this processing. the cognitive basis is stated in antropomorphic terms  the symbols in the cognitive basis are  representational  shorthands for human  designer's  statements about the world. the question is whether it is really legitimate to ascribe a cognitive state to the creature.  rosenschein  1  in developing his theory of situated automata  gives the following definition: 
 iv  agent x is said to know a proposition in a situation where its internal state is v if holds in all possible situations in which x is in state  v . 
we will not discuss whether in  iv  the term  know  is the most ideal. our interest is in whether  iv  captures a useful cognitive notion. let's first note that the definition covers unintended cases. e.g.  consider a tree trunk:  if a tree trunk has 1 rings then it indicates that the tree is 
1 years old   stalnaker  1 . the tree trunk satisfies  iv   but we are reluctant to ascribe a cognitive state to it! 
　definition  iv  has a more serious defect in that it does not lay down any causal or process-like relationship between v and the consequence is that  if agent x is in state v but doesn't hold  the conclusion can only be that the observer made a mistake while interpreting v. in fact  the relationship between v and proposition  is not  much  more than that between the tree trunk and the proposition that  the tree is 1 years old . taking this route  one can  in a certain sense ascribe as much cognition to a creature as one likes  but it does not clarify the cognitive state of the creature.  we are in a certain sense commentating our own state of mind . 
1 actions 
1 	intentionality 
above we were going through perception and ended up observing that definition  iv  is too liberal to delineate a creature's inherent cognition. the essence and the intriguing aspect of robot design is that ultimately some actions must result. concerning robotics  arkin  1  notes:  perception is meaningless without the context of motor action . we need to change the perspective a little: we observe a robot which is acting and try to capture patterns of actions that are obviously aimed at bringing about certain results. this  purposeful  bringing about of changes in the environment is often called 
 intentionality . 
　example: as an illustration we consider a robot provided with an obstacle avoidance procedure and a goal finding procedure. it interprets the sensor data of figure 1 as an artificial potential field. occupied cones are considered as a source of resistance  while the goal  given by co-ordinates in the same map  is taken as an attractive source. the magnitude of these forces decreases with increasing distances.  to visualise it one often represents the potential field as a landscape in which the repulsive sources form mountains and the attractive sources are valleys.  the robot steers itself along a route of low resistance  i.e. through valleys in the landscape. this and similar procedures work rather well in implementing obstacle avoidance  khatib  1  penders et al.  1 . 
　we might infer that the robot has the intention to avoid obstacles  but the avoidance of obstacles is not directly implemented. there is no point in the internal processing  where it is concluded  this is an obstacle   so  avoid it . within the cognitive basis  we cannot draw this conclusion  since  as seen already  the sensor readings do not allow for it. the potential field procedure is a  trick  implemented to obtain this result1. 
　for convenience  we identify a motor-schema with the internal state v which it tends to bring about. for the robot using the obstacle avoidance motor-schema 
 implemented with the potential field procedure   v is an  equilibrium  state  from which no  new  impulses will reach the actuators. the performance of the robot is generalised in the following statement: 
 vi  performing motor-schema v: in a situation where the sensor inputs do cause the mechanism to be in an internal state different from v  it performs until its same sensors cause v to occur. 
definition  vi  describes a causal process. moreover  it refers only to internal features of the creature  the definition is directed inwards the creature. however  performing a motor-schema does change the environment  something that is not explicitly mentioned in  vi . 
　as external observers  and robot designers  we want to express what happens in the environment within our frame of reference. we ascribe an intention to the motorschema. 
 vii  a motor schema v is said to be an implementation of intention  if in a situation where  is not  yet  the case  motor-schema v is triggered and  under normal conditions  motor schema v brings about a situation in which holds. 
the robot with the potential field procedure avoids obstacles rather successfully  though  obstacle avoidance  is defined only in our frame of reference. we  external observers  ascribe the attitude to the creature  and assign a sense  to the motor schema v. 
　we required in  vi  that a motor-schema performs until a state v occurs  v should be caused by sensor inputs of the same type as that which caused  thus a motor-schema must have an end definable in terms of its sensor inputs. the internal state v  which characterises the motor-
1  the idea of an artificial potential field procedure is derived from physics  where its implications arc rather different. 
	fenders & braspenning 	1 
schema  must correspond to some  for the creature itself observable  feature of the future state of the environment. if this requirement is dropped we can have  for instance  a robot which releases a balloon whenever its sensor detects something. the robot has no feedback on its own actions  that is on releasing the balloon   or more precisely  it has no feedback of the type which originally forced it to perform. such a robot seems rather close to the tree trunk above  which indicates the age of the tree. 
　in robotics  it is straightforward to question:  what is the sense of collecting information  if it isn't used in action   a robot isn't but an acting device! for living species one might ask a similar question  separating perception from action and setting perception apart as an independent phenomenon. 
1 	motor-image 
sensory-based robotics uses motor-schema's as the primitive building blocks with which an architecture of a robot is set up. a motor-schema in robotics is the analogon of the psychological concept of a motor-process  called motor-schema as well . in psychology it denotes the complex mechanism which links senses to the central nervous system and the effectors. the motor processes  incorporated in the schema  result in the execution of an action. motor-schema's work like cybernetic loops or servomechanisms  berthoz  1 . 
　the dual of a motor-process is a motor image.  motor imagery can be defined as a dynamic state during which a subject mentally simulates a given action  decety  1 . a motor image implies a subject feeling himself performing an action  and imagined and executed actions share central bodily structures. the motor image is the  symbolic  content of the imagery  annett  1 . motor imagery is said to comprise the activation of an action plan. the motor image  though based on the sense and motor data  is an abstraction from these data. motorschema's provide the foundation for the motor image. 
　example: at the age of 1  my son was speaking to his friend  slightly older  about stairs. we were living at the second floor  our stairs were straight and very steep. the friend said  you have a long stair-case  pointing with his arm sloping upwards. my son agreed. the friend lived at the fourth floor  and their staircase rose in a spiral of eight separated staircases connected by landings.  our stairs are like this ..    the boy said  spiralling down with his finger and extending the movements with his arm and body.  yes   my son shouted:  like this...    starting a great turning movement and while doing so  he whirled downwards  laughing. 
　a flight of stairs is an example of a concept consisting of motor-images; it is hard to define what a flight of stairs is without referring to bodily movements. the boys show the connection of motor-images with motor-schema's. 
1 	motor-schema basis 
we noticed earlier the difficulty of identifying objects. for analysing a robotic design the cognitive basis as defined  seems sufficient because the robot designer provides the necessary frame-of-ieference. however  when 
1 	robotics 
discussing natural  human  beings no external frame-ofreference is available  and the ability to perceive distinct objects needs to be founded somewhere within the being. the importance of motor imagery in cognition suggests that motor imagery needs to be incorporated within the definition of the cognitive basis. as a preliminary attempt we propose an extension to the definitions of cognitive basis above. 
　an agent r  has at its disposal a set ar of input channels or logical sensors and a set of motor-schema's nr. the sensors  input channels   assign one or more motor-schema's to an object o in the universe of discourse u. 

as before we can define an indiscernibility relation for a certain agent. in words  the definition will allude to: ob-
jects are distinguishable from one another only if they trigger one or more different motor-schema's. 

so  we can define a motor-schema or motor-image basis as the set of equivalence classes of objects which trigger different sets of motor schema's. hence  if two objects fall within the same equivalence class it means that the agent  re- acts similarly when observing them. the motor-schema or motor-image basis is the set of equivalence classes: 

in  ix  the inputs are taken as mapping objects directly into motor-schema's. each motor-schema incorporates  parts of  the perception and knowledge basis as previously defined. as in section 1 one may define mappings between the motor-schema basis and the perception  knowledge and cognitive basis. roughly  what might be deleted of the latter bases are precisely those parts which do not trigger a motor schema. 
　we accent that definition  ix  is rather preliminary and may contain some  not yet foreseen  technical flaws. besides this  we have to emphasise some more principle points. the definition starts from objects  but as we have seen  objects do not have a universal  cognitive  status shared among all cognitive creatures. another principle point is that objects must have an intentional  significance  for the creature under consideration. by requiring that a motor-schema be triggered  a rather basic type of intentionality is implicitly incorporated in definition 
 ix . 
　for practical applications  it will be a problem to discriminate between different motor-schema's and in particular motor-images. however  we achieve with definition  xi  a demonstration of a way to incorporate actions as basic elements into the concept of cognition  and  intelligence  . suppose an agent that can only perform motor-schema's  a robot for instance  and that misses the ability to form images. this agent cannot but act on ob-
serving an object. in fact  practitioners in  for instance  biology make reference to actions when they are comparing intelligence of one species with another one  there are no alternatives. 
1 interaction 
individuals of the same species share the same types of senses and the same types of motor-schema's  and motorimages . thus  we have groups of agents that share much of their cognitive and motor-schema bases. in this case one can easily define a common cognitive and motorschema basis. the definitions of cognitive basis and motor-schema basis are indexed by the agent r; by letting the index range over the group  the shared common bases are obtained. the common cognitive and motor-schema bases are the intersection of the individual bases. the shared bases allow to define interaction and communication. recall that  according to information theory  the amount of information carried by a signal depends on how many alternatives the receiver knows to be possible at the source of the signal. creatures of the same  species  with limited bases  have few possible interpretations for observations. moreover  if they can only perform motor-schema's  no imagery  they quite straightforwardly interact with each other. some define such interaction as low-level communication:  a structural coupling between entities resulting in co-ordination of their actions necessary for their mutual viability   maturana  cited in  stewart  1  . 
1 	conclusions 
approaching the cognition concept from the engineering  or design  perspective of robotics  we were advantageously enforced to be quite pragmatical. we introduced formal notions like sensor  knowledge  and cognitive bases. with them one is able to pinpoint one's frame of reference from which artificial cognitive creatures are viewed. moreover  the whole issue of intentionality is clarified as belonging pre-dominantly to the frames of reference of the observer or designer. the situationaction perspective leads us to rethink the idea of a cognitive basis. the spectrum of  possible  actions becomes an integral part of a more encompassing idea of cognition. in this idea  motor-schema's  and possibly associated motor images  become just as important for the designer as they are for natural scientists studying living nature. in a sense  aj has just begun to assess the importance of such notions for artifically living creatures. 
