 
although much has been said about parallelism in discourse  a formal  computational theory of parallelism structure is still outstanding. in this paper  we present a theory which given two parallel utterances predicts which are the parallel elements. the theory consists of a sorted  higher-order abductive calculus and we show that it reconciles the insights of discourse theories of parallelism with those of higher-order unification approaches to discourse semantics  thereby providing a natural framework in which to capture the effect of parallelism on discourse semantics. 
1 	introduction 
both higher-order unification  hou  approaches to discourse semantics  dalrymple et al.  1; shieber et a/.  1; gardent et a/.  1; gardent and kohlhase  
1  and discourse theories of parallelism  hobbs  1; kehler  1  assume parallelism structuration: given a pair of parallel utterances  the parallel elements are taken as given. 
　this assumption clearly undermines the predictive power of a theory. if parallel elements are stipulated rather than predicted  conclusions based on parallelism remain controversial: what would happen if the parallel elements were others  and more crucially  what constraints can we put on parallelism determination  when can we rule out a pair as not parallel   
　in this paper  we present a theory of parallelism which goes one step towards answering this objection. given two utterances  the theory predicts which of the elements occurring in these utterances are parallel to each other. the proposed theory has one additional important advantage: it incorporates hou as a main component of parallelism theory thereby permitting an integration of the hou approach to discourse semantics with discourse theories of parallelism. the resulting framework permits a natural modelling of the often observed effect of parallelism on discourse semantics  lang  1; 
michael kohlhase 
computer science 
universitat des saarlandes 
saarbriicken  germany 
kohlhaseqcs.uni-sb.de 
asher  1 . we show in particular that it correctly captures the interaction of vp-ellipsis and gapping with parallelism. more generally however  the hope is that it also provides an adequate basis for capturing the interaction of parallelism with such discourse phenomena as deaccenting  anaphora and quantification. 
　our approach departs from  grover et al.  1  in that it genuinely can predict parallel elements. although both approaches rely on a sorts/types hierarchy and on some kind of overwriting to carry out this task  our approach readily extends to gapping cases whereas as we shall see  cf. section 1   grover et al.  1  doesn't. 
　we proceed as follows. first we present a sort-based abductive calculus for parallelism and show that it predicts parallel elements. we then show how this abductive calculus can be combined with hou thus yielding an integrated treatment of parallelism and discourse semantics. we then conclude with pointers to further research and related work. 
1 	defining discourse parallelism 
in linguistic theories on discourse coherence  kehler  1   ellipsis  dalrymple et a/.  1   henceforth dsp  and corrections  gardent et a/.  1   the notion of parallelism plays a central role. in particular  the houbased approaches presuppose a theory of parallelism which precomputes the parallel elements of a pair of utterances. for instance  given the utterance pair jon likes golf. peter does too  dsp's analysis of ellipsis presupposes that jon and peter have been recognised as being parallel to each other. 
　similarly  discourse theories of parallelism also assume parallelism structuration. according to  hobbs  1; kehler  1  for instance  there is a class of discourse relations  the resemblance relations  which involve the inferring of structurally parallel propositions and where arguments and predicates stand in one of the following configurations: 

where a b represent argument sequences; ai bi are any elements of these sequences; and s- and t-ent are the propositions entailed by the two  source and target  parallel utterances. furthermore  entities are taken to be similar if they share some reasonably specific property and contrastive if they have both a shared and a complementary property. 
　again  the parallel elements  a; and bi  are taken as given that is  the way in which they are recognised is not specified. in what follows  we present a computational theory of parallelism which predicts these parallel elements. the model is a simple abductive calculus which captures hobbs and kehler's notions of parallelism and constrast as they are given above. we make the simplifying assumptions that contrast and parallelism are one and the same notion  we speak of contrastive or cparallelism  and that the properties p used in determining them are restricted to sorts from a given  domainspecific sort hierarchy. thus we can use sorted type theory  kohlhase  1  to model similarity and contrastive parallelism. 
1 	sorted logic 
sorts correspond to the basic cognitive concepts. logically they can either be seen as unary predicates or as refinements of the types. the intuition behind this is that the universe of objects of a type a is subdivided in subsets which are represented by sorts a  b .... since these can in turn be subdivided into subsets  the sorts are ordered by a partial ordering relation   in a so-called sort hierarchy1 
　just as in the case of types  every formula has a sort  that can be computed from the sorts of the constants and variables occurring in it. in fact  formulae can have multiple sorts  corresponding to the fact that the intersection of the sets represented by their sorts can be non-empty. 
　for this paper we assume a fixed finite set of sorts for each type. for the base type e  we will use the following sort hierarchy in our examples. 
　note that the intersection of the sorts m a l e and doc; is non-empty  since the constant spot has both sorts. if we want to make this explicit  we can give spot the intersection sort m a l e & d o g . even though we assume the simple sorts  i.e. the non-intersection ones  to be non-empty  the intersection sorts can in general 
1
　　for the purposes of this paper  we assume the sort hierarchy to be given. for applications  hierarchies could be generated from domain representations in kl-one like formalisms commonly used in nl systems. 
figure 1: sort hierarchy of type e 
be. for instance  the sorts animate and inanimate are disjoint  since they are complementary. the existence of complementary sorts allows us to model the requirements for parallel elements quite naturally. two formulae a and b  of any type  are similar if they have a common sort; they are contrastive  if they have a distinguishing sort d  i.e. if a has sort d but b has sort -d or vice versa and finally they are c-parallel  iff they are both. 
　for instance jon and mary are parallel  since both are of sort h u m a n   but jon has sort m a n   whereas mary has sort woman = - m a n & h u m a n & f e m a l e   - m a n and therefore mary also has the distinguishing sort 
- m a n . this supports dsp's analysis of 

1 	c o m p u t a t i o n of parallelism 
given the above analysis  the relations support and oppose are c-parallel  since they have both a common 
	gardent & kohlhase 	1 

sort  social  and a distinguishing sort  friendly . further  in 
jon supported clinton  but mary opposed him. 
parallelism theory should predict that the full first utterance jon supported clinton is c-parallel to the second namely  mary opposed him. however  the sort t does not have subsorts that license this. rather than dividing /. into cognitively unplausible sorts  we propose an abductive equality calculus that generates all possible explanations  why a pair of formulae could be c-parallel  based on the respective sort hierarchies. the calculus manipulates two equalities =s for similarity and =p for c-parallelism. the inference rules given in figure 1  give the derivation from figure 1 that explains the parallelism in terms of assumed contrastivity and similarity of the components. we have put the justifications of the abducibles in boxes. note that this calculus gives us the 

figure 1: the abductive calculus for parallelism 
explanation that jon supported clinton is c-parallel to mary opposed him  since jon is c-parallel to mary and support is c-parallel to oppose and finally  we can make clinton and him similar by binding him to clinton. 
of course  there is a similar derivation that makes 
mary and jon similar and finally one that makes support and oppose similar but mary and jon c-parallel. thus we have the problem to decide which of the different sets of abducibles is the most plausible. 
　for this it is necessary to give a measure function for sets of abducibles. for instance the three pairs 

are obviously ordered by increasing plausibility. we observe that this plausibility coincides with the distance  the length of the connecting path  from the least sorts of the objects to common sort. therefore  our approach is to derive plausibility values for abducibles from the justifications of abducibles by calculating distances in the sort hierarchies. 

figure 1: jon supported clinton  but mary opposed him. 
1 hou with parallelism 
in recent approaches to ellipsis  dalryinple et a/.  1  and deaccenting  gardent et a/.  1; gardent  1   both parallelism and higher-order unification are central to the semantic analysis. for instance dsp analyze a vp-ellipsis such as 
jon likes golf  and mary does too. 
as being represented by  where r represents the ellipsis does  whose semantic value is then determined by solving the equation r j  - l j g . the motivation for having j occurr in the left-hand side of the equation is that j represents a c-parallel element. this is where parallelism and the assumption of parallelism structuration come in. on the other hand  higherorder unification is also essential in that it is used to solve the equation and furthermore  it is shown to be a crucial ingredient in attaining wide empirical coverage  in particular  it is shown to successfully account for the interaction of ellipsis with quantification  anaphora and parallelism . 
　however  it is also known that a pure form of hou is too powerful for natural language and that a more restricted version of it namely  higher-order coloured unification  hocu  is more adequate in that it helps prevent over-generation i.e. the prediction of linguistically invalid readings  gardent and kohlhase  1 . to see this  consider again the example just discussed. 
given the stipulated equation  hou yields two values for r namely  of which only the first value is linguistically valid. to remedy this  dsp postulate a primary occurrence restriction  por : the term occurrence representing the element which is parallel to the subject of the elliptical utterance  is a primary occurrence and any solution containing a primary occurrence is discarded as linguistically invalid. for instance  j is a primary occurrence in the equation s o the s o l  s invalid.  gardent and kohlhase  1  show that dsp's por can be expressed within hocu because it uses a variant of the simply typed :alculus where symbol occurrences can be annotated with so-called colours and substitutions must obey the following constraint: 
for any colour constant c and any c-coloured variable vc  a well-formed coloured substitu-


	gardent & kohlhase 	1 

a-priori labelling of occurrences as primary or not primary can now be reduced to a more plausible constraint namely  the constraint that mary is a parallel element which has exactly one parallel counterpart in the source  or antecedent  clause. 
　the analysis is as follows. first  we follow dsp and assign the above example the representation 
where r stands for the missing semantics. however  in contrast to dsp  we do not presuppose any knowledge about parallelism in the source utterance and determine the meaning of r from the equation 
which only says that the propositions expressed by jon likes mary and golf too stand in a c-parallel relation1. the rationale for the colors in this equation is that mary must be a parallel element in the target utterance. for jon and golf in the source utterance  we do not know yet which of them will be a parallel element  but it can be at most one of them  which we code by giving them unspecified but contradictory colors1. finally  r gets the color -pe  since it may not be instantiated with formulae that contain primary material  por . 
since the elided material in gapping constructions and 
vpe may only copy material from the source utterance  and may not introduce new material  we add the constraint to arp that =p and =s imitations may only be applied to equations  where the head is pe-colored. we call this the copying constraint for gapping and vpe. it ensures that whenever two elements are similar but not identical  then they must be primary  since they are parallel. 
　let us now go through the arp computation to see that our analysis obtains exactly the desired readings and to gain an insight of the mechanisms employed therein. 
   the initial equation is a flex/rigid pair  where only the strict imitation1 rule is applicable  there is no projection binding of sort w o m a n --  t . so  we obtain the binding where h and k are new variables 
of sort woman --  human. eliminating this equation yields the equation 
1
　　by contrast  an extension of dsp's analysis to gapping would posit the equations l j g  = r j  and / j  g  = r g  thereby postulating both the parallel elements  and the ambiguity of the gapping clause. 
1
　　clearly  this coding is not general enough for the general case  where there are more than one parallel elements in the target utterance  we leave a general treatment to further work. 
1 note the copying constraint is at work here. 

1 controlling a r p 
clearly  a naive implementation of the arp calculus as sketched above will be intractable  since the set of abducibles is much too large. however  most abducibles are very implausible and should not be considered at all. as in all implementations of abductive processes  the search for abducibles has to controlled  which in turn calls for a quality measure of abduced equations. a standard  but not very imaginative1  measure would be the conceptual distance of the sorts justifying the equation   i.e. the number of subsorts crossed to reach the common and discerning sorts . in our example  the rating of m =p g is 1  while that of m =p j is 1  justifying the claim that the reading mary likes golf  is more plausible than jon likes mary. since all other readings are either ruled out by the colors or are even more implausible  e.g. an a* implementation of arp will only derive these  iff given an appropriate threshold. since the aim of this paper is to establish the principles of parallelism reconstruction  we will not pursue this here. 
1 	conclusion 
we have given a sketch of how to develop a computational framework for calculating parallelism in discourse. this approach is based on the hocu variant of dsp's 
hou account of ellipsis  but unlike that approach does not presuppose knowledge about the parallel elements. instead  it computes them in the analysis. 
　parallelism can be seen as affecting the interpretation of the second of two parallel utterances in mainly two ways: it can either constrain an anaphor to resolve to its source parallel counterpart  this is the case for instance  in the gapping example discussed above ; or it can add to its truth conditional content. for instance  in 
	jon 	campaigned hard for 	clinton 	in 	1. 
young aspiring politicians often support their party's presidential candidate 
parallelism enforces a reading such that jon is understood to be a young aspiring politician and clinton is understood to be jon's party's presidential candidate. 
　in future work  we plan to investigate these two aspects in more details. as for the interaction of parallelism with binding  one important question is whether our proposal preserves dsp's insights on the interaction of parallelism with ellipsis  anaphora and quantification. on the other hand  to account for the incrementing effect of parallelism on semantic interpretation  the proposal will have to cover the discourse relations of exemplification and generalisation. note however that the proposed interleaving between hou and abductive calculus gives us a handle on that problem: mismatches between semantic structures can be handled by having the calculus 
     1  clearly  a more sophisticated measure would include concepts like the specificity of the solution. 
be extended to abstract away irrelevant structural differences  this would account for instance for the fact that in our example  a temporal modifier occurs in the source but not in the target  whereas sorted hou can be used to infer information from the most specific common sort  in this case  the sort of young aspiring politicians . 
