modularity in computer assisted reasoning systems 
alessandro agostini* 
lomit - dipartimento di matematica 
universita degli studi di siena via del capitano  1 
1 siena - italy 

1 p r o b l e m being addressed 
an important problem in the domain of automated reasoning is the development of mechanisms for the integration of disparate provers. the components of a prover may be based on different logics  they may have different domain models  they may use different representations of information and reasoning strategies  and they may have different interaction capabilities. the need for composing complex provers from existing modules  and to add new modules to existing provers is motivated by the desire of not having to build from scratch a new prover for each new problem or variation of an old problem. multilogic provers are needed in many formalization problems  such as hardware and software verification. multi-logic provers are also needed in complex applications which require embedding of reasoning modules inside other systems. some examples are: program transformation systems  including synthesis; partial evaluation and compiling; planning systems; intelligent agents; and natural language systems. 
1 thesis objectives 
our ultimate goal is to provide a framework and a methodology which will allow users  and not only developers  to construct complex reasoning systems by composing existing modules  or to add new modules to existing systems. these modules and systems might be based on different logics; have different domain models; use different vocabularies and data structures; use different reasoning strategies. the thesis proposal makes two main contributions towards our goal. first  it proposes a formal notation  fb-hypersequents  for presenting the syntax and semantics of reasoning theories of open mechanized reasoning systems  omrss  as stated in  giunchiglia et a/.  1 . second  it developes the theory underlying the control component - which consists of a set of inference strategies - of omrss . this development is motivated by an analysis of  logical  consequence relation in general  and especially its possible relations with computational issues. some of the problems that the thesis proposal addresses are general problem of 
    also mechanized reasoning group disa  universita di trento  via inama  1 - 1 trento  italy. 
modularization  composability  and interoperability that are not specific to the domain of automated reasoning. as the ideas and techniques become better developed  we expect that general principles will emerge that can be used in other research areas. 
1 proposed work plan 
we are in the middle of a long term project  giunchiglia et a/.  1  which still needs to be developed in many directions. the thesis is organized into two main work phases. in the first phase we define the formal framework for representing the syntax and semantics of reasoning theories of omrss. in particular  we  1  define the language and the central notion of fb-hypersequent  its syntax and semantics; for doing this  we expect to use some previous works on formal bidirectional natural deduction such as  agostini  1; 1 ;  1  extend fb-hypersequents to formalize the sequent systems inside reasoning theories  and illustrate  with examples  the uniformity of our framework for a diversity of logics  reasoning theories ;  1  add a semantical component to our framework and provide for a notion of model for reasoning theories. 
¡¡in the second phase we study the computational properties of reasoning theories as formalized in the first phase by fb-hypersequents. these properties provide for the amount of computational information needed by reasoning systems to guide search proof  and in some case to reduce the search space. 
