 
this paper addresses the recovery of structure and motion from two uncalibrated images of a scene under full perspective or under affine projection. epipolar geometry  projective reconstruction  and affine reconstruction are elaborated in a way such that everyone having knowledge of linear algebra can understand the discussion without difficulty. a general expression of the fundamental matrix is derived which is valid for any projection model without lens distortion  including full perspective and affine camera . a new technique for affine reconstruction from two affine images is developed  which consists in first estimating the affine epipolar geometry and then performing a triangulation for each point match with respect to an implicit common affine basis. this technique is very efficient. 
keywords: motion analysis  epipolar geometry  uncalibrated images  non-metric vision  1d reconstruction  fundamental matrix. 
1 	introduction 
since the work of koenderink and van doom  koenderink and van doom  1  on affine structure from motion and that of forsyth et al.  forsyth et al  1  on invariant description  the development of nonmetric vision has attracted quite a number of researchers  faugeras  1; hartley et a/.  1   to cite a few . we can find a range of applications: object recognition  1d reconstruction of scenes  image matching  visual navigation  motion segmentation  image synthesis  etc. 
　this paper addresses the recovery of structure and motion from two uncalibrated images of a scene under full perspective or under affine projection. there is already a large amount of work reported in the literature  faugeras  1; 1; hartley et al  1; shashua  1; zisserman  1   and it is known that 
*on leave from inria sophia-antipolis  france 
1 	vision the structure of the scene can only be recovered up to a projective transformation for two perspective images and up to an affine transformation for two affine images. we cannot obtain any metric information from a projective or affine structure: measurements of lengths and angles do not make sense. however  projective or affine structure still contains rich information  such as coplanarity  collinearity and ratios. the latter is sometimes sufficient for artificial systems  such as robots  to perform tasks such as navigation and object recognition. we believe that these results are important to the whole community of computer vision. however  they are usually stated using tools from projective geometry  which is not accessible to most researchers. one objective of this paper is to present these results in a way such that everyone having knowledge of linear algebra can understand without difficulty. 
other contributions of this paper are the following: 
  a general expression of the fundamental matrix for any projection model is presented. previously  the fundamental matrix is formulated separately for full perspective and affine projection. our formula is valid for both. 
  a new efficient technique for affine reconstruction from two affine images is developed. we decompose the problem into two subproblems: recovery of affine epipolar geometry and 1d reconstruction with respect to an implicit affine basis. 
　this paper is organized as follows. section 1 presents different camera projection models. section 1 derives an expression of fundamental matrix which is valid for any projection model  ignoring the lens distortion . section 1 describes the projective reconstruction from two uncalibrated perspective images. in section 1  we first specialize the general fundamental matrix to the case of affine cameras and then show that only affine structure can be recovered  and finally a new technique for affine reconstruction is proposed. 
1 	perspective projection and its approximations 
if the lens distortion can be ignored  the projection from a space point m =  x  y  z t to its image point m = 
 x  y t can be represented linearly by 	where  is the pseudo-inverse of matrix p':  1  
where 	and p is the 1 x 
1 projection matrix which varies with projection model and with the coordinate system in which space points m are expressed. given a vector   we use 
to denote its augmented vector by adding 1 as the lastelement  i.e.   now we can rewrite the above formula concisely as 
		 1  
where s = 1 is an arbitrary nonzero scalar. 
　the projection matrix corresponding to the full perspective is of the form: 
		 1  
which is defined up to a scalar factor. this implies that there are only 1 degrees of freedom in a full perspective projection matrix. in terms of the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of a camera  p can be decomposed as p = a   r t   where a is a 1 x 1 matrix defined by the intrinsic parameters  see e.g.   faugeras  1    and  r  t  is the rotation and translation  extrinsic parameters  relating the world coordinate system to the camera coordinate system. 
　the affine camera  introduced by mundy and zisserman  mundy and zisserman  1  as a generalization of orthographic  weak perspective and paraperspective projections  has the following form: 
		 1  
the elements p1 p1 and p1 are equal to 1. this is an approximation to the full perspective  and works quite well when object size and depth is small compared with the distance between the camera and object. 
1 	fundamental matrix for any projection model 
consider now the case of two images whose projection matrices are p and p'  respectively  the prime ' is used to indicate a quantity related to the second image . a point m in the first image is matched to a point m' in the second image. from the camera projection model  1   we have 

an image point m' defines actually an optical ray  on which every space point  projects on the second image at  this optical ray can be written in parametric form as 
 1  
 1  
and is any 1-vector that is perpendicular to all the row vectors of p' i.e.  . thus  is a null vector of p'. as a matter of fact  indicates the position of the optical center  to which all optical rays converge . we show later how to determine  for a particular value s'  equation  1  corresponds to a point on the optical ray defined by m'. equation  1  is easily justified by projecting m' onto the second image  which indeed gives m'. 
　similarly  an image point m in the first image defines also an optical ray. requiring the two rays to intersect in space implies that a point m' corresponding to a particular s' in  1  must project onto the first image at m  that is 
eliminating s and s' by multiplying from the left  equivalent to a dot product   we have 
		 1  
where f is a 1 x 1 matrix  called fundamental matrix: 
		 1  
equation  1  is the well-known epipolar equation  hartley et a/.  1; faugeras et a/.  1; luong and faugeras  1   but the form of the fundamental matrix  1  is general and  to our knowledge  is not yet reported in the literature. it does not assume any particular pro-
jection model. indeed  equation  1  only makes use of the pseudo-inverse of the projection matrix  which is valid for full perspective as well as for affine cameras . in  luong and faugeras  1   for example  the fundamental matrix is formulated only for full perspective  because it involves the inverse of the first 1 x 1 submatrix of p which is not invertible for affine camera. in  zisserman  1   a separate fundamental matrix is given for affine cameras. our formula  1  works for both. we will specialize it for affine cameras in sect. 1. 
   the fundamental matrix f recapitulates all geometric information between two images. the nine elements of f are not independent from each other. in fact  f has only 1 degrees of freedom. this can be seen as follows. first f is defined up to a scale factor because if f is multiplied by any nonzero scalar  the new f still satisfy  1 . second  the rank of f is at most 1  i.e.  det f  = 1. this is because the determinant of the antisymmetric matrix  is equal to zero. another thing to mention is 
that the two images play a symmetric role. indeed   1  can also be rewritten as 	it can be shown 
that 
one  and that the row vectors are generally independent 	1 	projective reconstruction 　the vector still needs to be determined. we first note that such a vector must exist because the difference between the row dimension and the column dimension is from each other. indeed  one way to obtain 	is 
 1  
where is an arbitrary 1-vector. to show that is perpendicular to each row of p'  we multiply by p' from the left: 
which is indeed a zero vector. the action of is to transform an arbitrary vector to a vector that is perpendicular to every row vector of p'. if p' is of rank 1  which is usually the case   then  is unique up to a scale factor. see  xu and zhang  1  for more details. 
1 	projective reconstruction 
we show in this section how to estimate the position of a point in space  given its projections in two images whose epipolar geometry is known. the problem is known as 1d reconstruction in general  and triangulation in particular. we assume that the fundamental matrix between the two images is known  e.g.  computed with the methods described in  zhang et a/.  1    and we say that they are weakly calibrated. 
1 	f u n d a m e n t a l m a t r i x for full perspective 
we now derive a usual form of fundamental matrix for full perspective from the general expression  1 . let a and a' be the 1 x 1 matrices containing the intrinsic parameters of the first and second image. without loss of generality  we choose the second camera coordinate system as the world coordinate system. then  the camera projection matrices are p = a  r t  and p; = 
a'  i 1    where  r  t  is the rotation and translation relating the two camera coordinate systems  and i is the 1 x 1 identity matrix and 1 is a zero 1-vector. it is not difficult to see that 

tal matrix  1   we have 
in the calibrated case  a 1d structure can be recovered from two images only up to a rigid transformation and an unknown scale factor  this transformation is also known as a similarity   because we can choose an arbitrary coordinate system as a world coordinate system  although one usually chooses it to coincide with one of the camera coordinate systems . similarly  in the uncalibrated case  a 1d structure can only be performed up to a pro-
 jective transformation of the 1d space  faugeras  1; hartley et a/.  1; maybank  1; faugeras  1 . a 1 x 1 nonsingular matrix h defines a linear transformation from one projective point to another  and is called the projective transformation. the matrix h  of course  is also defined up to a nonzero scale factor  and we write if is mapped to  by h. here p is a nonzero scale factor. 
　now we are given two perspective images of a scene. the intrinsic parameters of the images are unknown. 
assume that the true camera projection matrices are 
p and p'. from  1   we have the following relation 
	given 1 or more point matches 
in general position  the fundamental matrix f can be uniquely determined from two images. we are now interested in recovering p and p' from f  and once they are recovered  triangulation can be conducted to reconstruct the scene in 1d space. 
proposition 1 given two perspective images of a scene whose epipolar geometry  i.e.  the fundamental matrix  is known  the camera projection matrices can only be determined up to an unknown projective transformation. 
   the proof of this proposition is omitted due to space limitation. the consequence of this proposition is the following: if p and p' are two camera projection matrices consistent with the fundamental matrix f  then  are also consistent with the 
same f  where h is any projective transformation of the 1d space. if the true structure is m  then the structure reconstructed from image points is   up to a projective transformation. this is because gives the exact projection for the first image; the same is true for the second image. although the above result has been known for several years  we believe that it is easier to understand our discussion than what has been presented in the literature. 
　in order to reconstruct points in 1d space  we need to compute the camera projection matrices from the fundamental matrix f with respect to a projective basis  which can be arbitrary because of proposition 1. one way is to use a canonical representation  luong and vieville  1; beardsley et a/.  1 : 

1 	vision 

1 	affine reconstruction 
this section deals with two images taken by an affine camera at two different instants or by two different affine cameras. 
1 	affine fundamental matrix 
in the case of a general affine camera  the projection matrix  1  can be rewritten as 
we now derive the specific tundamental matrix for affine cameras from the general form  1 . 
　for any affine camera  we can construct where a  are related to the coefficients of the camera projection matrices. the fact that the affine fundamental matrix has the form of  1  is mentioned in  zisserman  1 . defined up to a scale factor  f i has only 1 degrees of freedom. the corresponding points in the two images must satisfy the following relation  called the affine epipolar equation: 

expanding the epipolar equation  the left-hand side is a first-order polynomial of the image coordinates  and we have 
		 1  
it means that the epipolar lines are parallel everywhere in the image  and the orientations of the parallel epipolar lines are completely determined by the affine fundamental matrix. 
1 	affine reconstruction 
given a sufficient number of point matches  at least 1  between two images  the affine fundamental matrix fa can be estimated  see  shapiro et a/.  1  . we are now interested in recovering pa and p'a from fa  and once they are recovered  the structure can be redressed in 1d space. 
　since pa and pa are defined up to a scale factor  without loss of generality  we assume then the relation between a 1d point and its 1d image is given 
note that there is no 
more scale factor in the above equations. from the affine epipolar equation  1   it is easy to obtain 
we now show the following proposition. 
proposition 1 given two images of a scene taken by an affine camera  the 1d structure of the scene can be reconstructed up to an unknown affine transformation as soon as the epipolar geometry  i.e.  the affine fundamental matrix  between the two images is known. 
　let the 1d structure corresponding to the true camera projection matrices we need to show that the new structure is still consistent with the same sets of image points  i.e.  with the affine fundamental matrix   where 



1 	vision 


figure 1: two orthographic views of the superposition of the original 1d data  in solid lines  and the transformed affine reconstruction  in dashed lines  
the affine transformation which brings the set of affinely reconstructed points to the original set of 1d points. the root of the mean of the squared distances between the corresponding points is 1 mm  thus the error is less than 1%. the superposition of the two sets of data is shown in fig. 1. it is interesting to observe that the reconstruction of the near part is larger than the real size while that of the distant part is smaller. this is because the assumption of an affine camera ignores the perspective distortion in the image. 
1 	conclusion 
we have addressed in this paper the problem of determining the structure and motion from two uncalibrated images of a scene under full perspective or under affine projection. epipolar geometry  projective reconstruction and affine reconstruction have been elaborated in a way such that everyone having knowledge of linear algebra can understand without difficulty. a general expression of the fundamental matrix has been derived which is valid for any projection model without lens distortion  including full perspective and affine camera . a new and efficient technique for affine reconstruction from two affine images has been developed  which consists in first estimating the affine epipolar geometry and then performing a triangulation with respect to an implicit affine basis for each point match. 
