
the paper introduces a number of propositional argumentation systems obtained by gradually extending the underlying language and associated monotonic logics. an assumption-based argumentation framework  bondarenko et al.  1  will constitute a special case of this construction. in addition  a stronger argumentation system in a full classical language will be shown to be equivalent to a system of causal reasoning  giunchiglia et al.  1 . the implications of this correspondence for the respective nonmonotonic theories of argumentation and causal reasoning are discussed.
1 introduction
in this study we will demonstrate  among other things  that two relatively recent approaches to nonmonotonic reasoning  namely argumentation theory  dung  1b; bondarenko et al.  1  and a theory of causal nonmonotonic reasoning  mccain and turner  1; giunchiglia et al.  1; bochman  1b; 1a  are actually 'two faces of the same coin'. the common basis of these formalisms is a notion of explanation  which takes the form of an attack relation in the argumentation theory  and a causal relation in the theory of causal reasoning. it will be shown that  at some level of generalization  these two relations will be directly interdefinable.
¡¡both the argumentation theory and theory of causal nonmonotonic reasoning have proved to be powerful frameworks for representing different kinds of nonmonotonic reasoning  including traditional nonmonotonic logics  logic programming  abduction and reasoning about actions and change. the present study should hopefully provide a basis for clarifying the representation capabilities of these formalisms  and a step toward a unified theory of nonmonotonic reasoning.
¡¡another objective of this study consists in a systematic development of a propositional approach to argumentation  in which arguments are represented as  special kinds of  propositions. this approach will naturally lead us to developing the underlying logics of argumentation  cf.  chesnevar  et al.  1; prakken and vreeswijk  1   and their associated semantics. as will be shown  the resulting argumentation systems will directly represent a number of important nonmonotonic formalisms.
¡¡the plan of the paper is as follows. we introduce first an abstract argumentation theory  and describe its four-valued semantics based on acceptance and rejection of arguments. adding a 'global' negation to this language will give us a formalism that generalizes the assumption-based argumentation framework from  bondarenko et al.  1 . then we describe an alternative extension of the argumentation theory to the full classical propositional language. a special case of the latter formalism will be shown to be equivalent to a
¡¡system of causal reasoning. finally  we will consider the correspondence between argumentation and causal reasoning on the level of their associated nonmonotonic semantics.
1 collective argumentation
as a general formal basis of argumentation theory  we will adopt the formalism of collective argumentation suggested in  bochman  1a  as a 'disjunctive' generalization of dung's argumentation theory. in this formalism  a primitive attack relation holds between sets of arguments: in the notation introduced below  a ¡úb says that a set a of arguments attacks a set of arguments b. this fact implies  of course  that these two sets arguments are incompatible. a ¡úb says  however  more than that  namely that the set of arguments a  being accepted  provides a reason  or explanation  for rejection of the set of arguments b. accordingly  the attack relation will not in general be symmetric  since acceptance of b need not give reasons for rejection of a. in addition  the attack relation is not reducible to attacks between individual arguments. for instance  we can disprove some conclusion jointly supported by a disputed set of arguments  though no particular argument in the set  taken alone  could be held responsible for this.
¡¡in what follows  a b c ... will denote finite sets of arguments  while u v w ... arbitrary such sets. we will use the same agreements for the attack relation as for usual consequence relations. thus  a a1  ¡úb b will have the same meaning as a ¡È a1  ¡úb ¡È {b}  etc.
definition 1. let a be a set of arguments. a  collective  attack relation is a relation  ¡ú on finite sets of arguments satisfying the following postulate:
monotonicity	if a ¡úb  then a a1  ¡úb b1.
¡¡though defined primarily on finite sets of arguments  the attack relation will be extended to arbitrary such sets by imposing the compactness requirement: for any u v   a   compactness  u ¡úv if and only if a ¡úb  for some finite a   u  b   v.
¡¡the original dung's argumentation theory  dung  1b  can be seen as a special case of collective argumentation that satisfies additional properties  cf.  kakas and toni  1  :
definition 1. an attack relation is normal if no set of arguments attacks    and the following condition is satisfied:
 locality  if a ¡úb b1  then either a ¡úb  or a ¡úb1.
¡¡for a normal attack  a ¡úb holds iff a ¡úa  for some a¡Êb. as was shown in  bochman  1a   the resulting argumentation theory coincides with that given in  dung  1a .
¡¡by an argument theory we will mean an arbitrary set of attacks a ¡úb between sets of arguments. any argument theory   generates a unique least attack relation that we will denote by  ¡ú . the latter can be described directly as follows:
u ¡ú  v iff a ¡úb ¡Ê    for some a   u b   v.
¡¡it can be easily verified that an attack relation is normal if and only if it is generated in this sense by an argument theory consisting only of attack rules of the form a ¡úa.
1 four-valued semantics
collective argumentation can be given a four-valued semantics that will be instructive in describing the meaning of the attack relation. this semantics stems from the following understanding of an attack a ¡úb:
if all arguments in a are accepted  then at least one of the arguments in b should be rejected.
¡¡the argumentation theory does not impose  however  the classical constraints on acceptance and rejection of arguments  so an argument can be both accepted and rejected  or neither accepted  nor rejected. such an understanding can be captured formally by assigning any argument a subset of the set {t f}  where t denotes acceptance  truth   while f denotes rejection  falsity . this is nothing other than the wellknown belnap's interpretation of four-valued logic  see  belnap  1  . as a result  collective argumentation acquires a natural four-valued semantics described below.
definition 1. an attack a ¡úb will be said to hold in a fourvalued interpretation ¦Í of arguments  if either t /¡Ê ¦Í a   for some a ¡Ê a  or f ¡Ê ¦Í b   for some b ¡Ê b.
¡¡an interpretation ¦Í will be called a model of an argument theory   if every attack from   holds in ¦Í.
¡¡since an attack relation can be seen as a special kind of an argument theory  the above definition determines also the notion of a model for an attack relation.
¡¡for a set i of four-valued interpretations  we will denote by  ¡úi the set of all attacks that hold in each interpretation from i. then the following result is actually a representation theorem showing that the four-valued semantics is adequate for collective argumentation  see  bochman  1a  .
theorem 1.  ¡ú is an attack relation iff it coincides with
 ¡úi  for some set of four-valued interpretations i.
1 assumption-based argumentation
the notion of an argument is often taken as primitive in argumentation theory  which allows for a possibility of considering arguments that are not propositional in character  e.g.  arguments as inference rules  or derivations . as has been shown in  bondarenko et al.  1   however  a powerful version of argumentation theory can be obtained by identifying arguments with propositions of a special kind called assumptions1. this representation can be refined further to a fullfledged theory of propositional argumentation in a certain well-defined propositional language.
¡¡let us extend the language of arguments with a negation connective ¡« having the following semantic interpretation:
¡«a is accepted iff a is rejected ¡«a is rejected iff a is accepted.
¡¡the connective ¡« will be called a global negation  since it switches the evaluation contexts between acceptance and rejection. an axiomatization of this connective in argumentation theory can be obtained by imposing the following rules on the attack relation  see  bochman  1a  :
	a ¡ú¡«a	¡«a ¡úa
if a ¡úa b and a ¡«a ¡úb  then a ¡úb	 an  if a a ¡úb and a ¡úb ¡«a  then a ¡úb
¡¡attack relations satisfying the above postulates will be called n-attack relations. it turns out that the latter are interdefinable with certain consequence relations.
¡¡a belnap consequence relation in a propositional language with a global negation ¡« is a scott  multiple-conclusion  consequence relation   satisfying the postulates
 reflexivity 	;
 monotonicity    then;
  then 
as well as the following double negation rules for ¡«:

¡¡for any set u of propositions  we will denote by ¡«u the set {¡«a | a ¡Ê u}. now  for a given n-attack relation  we can define the following consequence relation:
		 ca 
¡¡similarly  for any belnap consequence relation we can define the corresponding attack relation as follows:
		 ac 
¡¡as has been shown in  bochman  1a   the above definitions establish an exact equivalence between n-attack relations and belnap consequence relations. this correspondence allows us to represent an assumption-based argumentation framework from  bondarenko et al.  1  entirely in the framework of attack relations.
slightly changing the definitions from  bondarenko et al. 
1   an assumption-based argumentation framework can defined as a triple consisting of an underlying deductive system  including the current set of beliefs   a distinguished subset of propositions ab called assumptions  and a mapping from ab to the set of all propositions of the language that

determines the contrary a of any assumption a.
¡¡now  the underlying deductive system can be expressed directly in the framework of n-attack relations by identifying deductive rules a   a with attacks of the form a ¡ú¡«a. furthermore  the global negation ¡« can serve as a faithful logical formalization of the operation of taking the contrary. more precisely  given an arbitrary language l that does not contain ¡«  we can define assumptions as propositions of the form ¡«a  where a ¡Ê l. then  since ¡« satisfies double negation  a negation of an assumption will be a proposition from l. moreover  such a 'negative' representation of assumptions will agree with the applications of the argumentation theory to other nonmonotonic formalisms  described in  bondarenko et al.  1 . accordingly  n-attack relations can be seen as a proper generalization of the assumption-based framework.
1 classical propositional argumentation
taking seriously the idea of propositional argumentation  it is only natural to make a further step and extend the underlying language of arguments to a full classical propositional language. the latter step should be coordinated  however  with the inherently four-valued nature of an attack relation. and the way to do this amounts to requiring that the relevant classical connectives should behave in a usual classical way with respect to both acceptance and rejection of arguments.
¡¡as a first connective of this kind  we introduce the conjunction connective ¡Ä on arguments that is determined by the following familiar semantic conditions:
a ¡Ä b is accepted iff a is accepted and b is accepted a ¡Ä b is rejected iff a is rejected or b is rejected
¡¡as can be seen  ¡Ä behaves as an ordinary classical conjunction with respect to acceptance and rejection of arguments. on the other hand  it is a four-valued connective  since the above conditions determine a four-valued truth-table for conjunction in the belnap's interpretation of four-valued logic  see  belnap  1  . the following postulates provide a syntactic characterization of this connective for attack relations: a a ¡Ä b  ¡úb iff b a a  ¡úb a ¡úa ¡Ä b b iff a ¡úa b b  a¡Ä 
¡¡collective attack relations satisfying these postulates will be called conjunctive. the next result shows that they give a complete description of the four-valued conjunction.
corollary 1. an attack relation is conjunctive if and only if it coincides with  ¡úi  for some set of four-valued interpretations i in a language with a four-valued conjunction ¡Ä.
¡¡an immediate benefit of introducing conjunction into the language of argumentation is that any finite set of arguments a becomes reducible to a single argument va:
	a ¡úb	iff  a ¡ú b.
¡¡as a result  the collective attack relation in this language is reducible to an attack relation between individual arguments  as suggested already in  dung  1b .
having a conjunction at our disposal  we only have to add
a classical negation   in order to obtain a classical language. moreover  since sets of arguments are reducible to their conjunctions  we can represent the resulting argumentation theory using just a binary attack relation on classical formulas.
¡¡as a basic condition on argumentation in the classical propositional language  we will require only that the attack relation should respect the classical entailment  in the precise sense of being monotonic with respect to  on both sides.
definition 1. a propositional attack relation is a relation  ¡ú on the set of classical propositions satisfying the following postulates:
 left strengthening 	if  then a ¡úc;
 right strengthening    then a ¡úc;
 truth 	t ¡úf;
 falsity 	f  ¡út.
¡¡left strengthening says that logically stronger arguments should attack any argument that is attacked already by a logically weaker argument  and similarly for right strengthening. truth and falsity postulates characterize the limit cases of argumentation by stipulating that any tautological argument attacks any contradictory one  and vice versa.
¡¡there exists a simple definitional way of extending the above attack relation to a collective attack relation between arbitrary sets of propositions. namely  for any sets u v of propositions  we can define u ¡úv as follows:
u ¡úv ¡Ô  a ¡ú b  for some finite a   u and b   v
¡¡the resulting attack relation will satisfy the properties of collective argumentation  as well as the postulates  a¡Ä  for conjunction.
¡¡finally  in order to acquire full expressive capabilities of an argumentation theory  we can add the global negation ¡« to the language. actually  a rather simple characterization of the resulting collective argumentation theory can be obtained by accepting the postulates an for ¡«  plus the following rule that permits the use of classical entailment in attacks:
classicality if  then a ¡ú¡«a and ¡«a ¡úa.
¡¡it can be verified that the resulting system satisfies all the postulates for propositional argumentation. the system will be used later for a direct representation of default logic.
1 semantics
a semantic interpretation of propositional attack relations can be obtained by generalizing four-valued interpretations to pairs  u v  of deductively closed theories  where u is the set of accepted propositions  while v the set of propositions that are not rejected. such pairs will be called bimodels  while a set of bimodels will be called a binary semantics.
definition 1. an attack a ¡úb will be said to be valid in a
binary semantics b if there is no bimodel  u v  from b such that a ¡Ê u and b ¡Ê v.
¡¡we will denote by  ¡úb the set of attacks that are valid in a semantics b. this set forms a propositional attack relation. moreover  the following result shows that propositional attack relations are actually complete for the binary semantics.
theorem 1.  ¡ú is a propositional attack relation if and only if it coincides with  ¡úb  for some binary semantics b.
1 probative and causal argumentation
we will introduce now some stronger propositional attack relations that will be shown to correspond to systems of causal inference. these stronger attack relations are obtained by adding the following quite reasonable postulates:
 left or 	if a ¡úc and b  ¡úc  then a ¡Å b  ¡úc;  right or 	if a ¡úb and a ¡úc  then a ¡úb ¡Å c;  self-defeat 	if a ¡úa  then t ¡úa.
definition 1. a propositional attack relation will be called probative if it satisfies left or  basic  if it also satisfies right or  and causal  if it is basic and satisfies self-defeat.
¡¡probative argumentation allows for reasoning by cases. its semantic interpretation can be obtained by restricting bimodels to pairs  ¦Á v   where ¦Á is a world  maximal classically consistent set . the corresponding binary semantics will also be called probative. similarly  the semantics for basic argumentation is obtained by restricting bimodels to world pairs  ¦Á ¦Â ; such a binary semantics will be called basic. finally  the causal binary semantics is obtained from the basic semantics by requiring further that  ¦Á ¦Â  is a bimodel only if  ¦Â ¦Â  is also a bimodel.
corollary 1. a propositional attack relation is probative  basic  causal  iff it is determined by a probative  resp. basic  causal  binary semantics.
¡¡basic propositional argumentation can already be given a purely four-valued semantic interpretation  in which the classical negation   has the following semantic description1:
 a is accepted iff a is not accepted
 a is rejected iff a is not rejected
¡¡a syntactic characterization of this connective in collective argumentation can be obtained by imposing the rules
	a  a 	¡ú ¡úa  a
if a a ¡úb and a  a ¡úb then a ¡úb	 a   if a ¡úb a and a ¡úb  a then a ¡úb
¡¡then a basic propositional attack relation can be alternatively described as a collective attack relation satisfying the rules  a¡Ä  and  a  . moreover  the global negation ¡« can be added to this system just by adding the corresponding postulates  an . it turns out  however  that the global negation is eliminable in this setting via to the following reductions: a ¡«a ¡úb ¡Ô a ¡úb  aa ¡ú¡«a b ¡Ô a  a ¡úb a  ¡«a ¡úb ¡Ô a ¡úaa b ¡ú ¡«a b ¡Ô a a ¡úb
 r¡« 
¡¡as a result  the basic attack relation can be safely restricted to an attack relation in a classical language.
¡¡finally  the rule self-defeat of causal argumentation gives a formal representation for an often expressed desideratum that self-conflicting arguments should not participate in defeating other arguments  see  e.g.   bondarenko et al.  1  . this aim is achieved in our setting by requiring that such arguments are attacked even by tautologies  and hence by any argument whatsoever.
1 argumentation vs. causal inference
probative attack relations will now be shown to be equivalent to general production inference relations from  bochman  1b; 1a   a variant of input-output logics from  makinson and van der torre  1 .
¡¡a production inference relation is a relation   on the set of classical propositions satisfying the following rules:
 strengthening 	if  then a c;
 weakening 	if  then a c;
 and 	if a b and a c  then a b ¡Ä c;
 truth 	t t;
 falsity 	f  f.
¡¡a production rule a b can be informally interpreted as saying that a produces  or explains b. a characteristic property of production inference is that reflexivity a a does not hold for it. production rules are extended to rules with sets of propositions in premises by requiring that u a holds for a set u of propositions iff va a  for some finite a   u. c u  will denote the set of propositions produced by u:
c u  = {a | u a}
¡¡the production operator c plays much the same role as the usual derivability operator for consequence relations. a production inference relation is called basic  if it satisfies
 or 	if a c and b  c  then a ¡Å b  c. and causal  if it is basic and satisfies  in addition
 coherence 	if a  a  then a f.
¡¡it has been shown in  bochman  1b  that causal inference relations provide a complete description of the underlying logic of causal theories from  mccain and turner  1   see also  giunchiglia et al.  1  .
¡¡it turns out that the binary semantics  introduced earlier  is appropriate also for interpreting production inference:
definition 1. a rule a b is valid in a binary semantics b if  for any bimodel  u v  ¡Ê b  a ¡Ê u only if b ¡Ê v.
¡¡as has been shown in  bochman  1a   the above semantics is adequate for production inference relations. moreover  the semantics for basic production inference can be obtained by restricting bimodels to world pairs  ¦Á ¦Â   while the semantics for causal inference is obtained by requiring  in addition  that  ¦Á ¦Â  is a bimodel only if  ¦Á ¦Á  is also a bimodel.
¡¡now  the correspondence between probative argumentation and production inference can be established directly on the syntactic level using the following definitions:
a b ¡Ô  b  ¡úa; pa a ¡úb ¡Ô b   a. ap ¡¡under these correspondences  the rules of a probative attack relation correspond precisely to the postulates for production relations. moreover  the correspondence extends also to a correspondence between basic and causal argumentation  on the one hand  and basic and causal production inference  on the other. hence the following result is straightforward.
lemma 1. if  ¡ú is a probative  basic  causal  attack relation  then  pa  determines a  basic  causal  production inference relation  and vice versa  if   is a  basic  causal  production inference relation  then  ap  determines a probative  basic  causal  attack relation.
remark. a seemingly more natural correspondence between propositional argumentation and production inference can be obtained using the following definitions:
a b ¡Ô a ¡ú ab ¡úb ¡Ô a  b.
¡¡by these definitions  a explains b if it attacks  b  and vice versa  a attacks b if it explains  b. unfortunately  this correspondence  though plausible by itself  does not take into account the intended understanding of arguments as  negative  assumptions. as a result  it cannot be extended directly to the correspondence between the associated nonmonotonic semantics  described below.
1 nonmonotonic semantics
the correspondence between argumentation and causal reasoning has been established above on the level of underlying logical  monotonic  formalisms. in this section we will describe how this correspondence can be extended to the associated nonmonotonic semantics.
¡¡in  bondarenko et al.  1   the assumption-based argumentation framework has been instantiated to capture existing nonmonotonic formalisms. in other words  it has been shown how particular nonmonotonic systems can be viewed as assumption-based frameworks just by defining assumptions and their contraries. we will show  however  that the propositional argumentation theory allows us to give a direct representation of reiter's default logic  reiter  1 .
¡¡given a system of propositional argumentation in the classical language augmented with the global negation ¡«  we will interpret reiter's default rule a:b/a as an attack
a ¡« b ¡ú¡«a 
or  equivalently  as a rule a  of the associated belnap consequence relation. similarly  an axiom a of a default theory will be interpreted as an attack t ¡ú¡«a. for a default theory    we will denote by tr    the corresponding argument theory obtained by this translation.
¡¡by our general agreement  by assumptions we will mean propositions of the form ¡«a  where a is a classical proposition. for a set u of classical propositions  we will denote by u  the set of assumptions {¡«a | a /¡Ê u}. finally  a set w of assumptions will be called stable in an argument theory   if  for any assumption a  a ¡Ê w iff w ¡ú1   a. then we have
theorem 1. a set u of classical propositions is an extension of a default theory   if and only if u  is a stable set of assumptions in tr   .
¡¡the above result is similar to the corresponding representation result in  bondarenko et al.  1   theorem 1   but it is much simpler  and is formulated entirely in the framework of propositional attack relations. the simpler representation was made possible due to the fact that propositional attack relations already embody the deductive capabilities treated as an additional ingredient in assumption-based frameworks.
¡¡as our next result  we will establish a correspondence between the nonmonotonic semantics of causal inference relations and that of causal argumentation.
¡¡the nonmonotonic semantics of a causal inference relation is a set of its exact worlds  namely worlds ¦Á such that ¦Á = c ¦Á   see  bochman  1a  . such a world satisfies the rules of the causal relation  and any proposition that holds in it is explained by the causal rules.
¡¡a causal theory is an arbitrary set of production rules. by a nonmonotonic semantics of a causal theory   we will mean the exact worlds of the least causal relation containing  .
¡¡the correspondence between exact worlds and stable sets of assumptions is established in the next theorem.
theorem 1. if   is a causal theory  and  a its corresponding argument theory given by  ap   then a world ¦Á is an exact world of   iff ¦Á  is a stable set of assumptions in  a.
¡¡the above result shows  in effect  that propositional argumentation subsumes causal reasoning as a special case. moreover  it can be shown that causal attack relations constitute a strongest argumentation system suitable for this kind of nonmonotonic semantics.
¡¡as an application of the above correspondence  we will describe now an alternative argumentation-based representation of logic programming.
a general logic program ¦° is a set of rules of the form
	notd c ¡û a notb	 * 
where a b c d are sets of propositional atoms. these are program rules of a most general kind that contain disjunctions and negations as failure not in their heads. as has been shown in  bochman  1b   general logic programs are representable as causal theories obtained by translating program rules  *  as causal rules
d  b  a ¡ú  c 
and adding a formalization of the closed world assumption:  default negation   p  p  for any propositional atom p.
¡¡now  due to the correspondence between causal reasoning and argumentation  this causal theory can be transformed  using  pa   into an argument theory that consists of attacks
	a  c ¡ú b d	 al 
plus the 'argumentative' closed world assumption:
 default assumption 	p ¡ú p  for any atom p.
¡¡let tr ¦°  denote the argument theory obtained by this translation from a logic program ¦°. then we obtain
theorem 1. a set u of propositional atoms is a stable model of a logic program ¦° iff u  is a stable set of assumptions in tr ¦° .
¡¡it is interesting to note that  due to the reduction rules  r¡«  for the global negation ¡«  described earlier  the above representation  al  of program rules is equivalent to a ¡«b ¡ú¡«c d  and therefore to the inference rules
a 
of the associated belnap consequence relation. for normal logic programs  this latter representation coincides with that given in  bondarenko et al.  1 .
1 conclusions
two main objectives have been pursued in this study. the first consisted in showing that propositional argumentation suggests a viable and useful extension of an abstract argumentation theory that allows us to endow argumentation with full-fledged logical capabilities. it has been shown  in particular  that propositional argumentation subsumes assumptionbased frameworks  and provides a direct representation of default logic  causal reasoning and logic programming. it could be expected that further development of this propositional approach to argumentation may bring us additional theoretical and practical benefits.
¡¡the second aim was to demonstrate that causal reasoning can be seen as an important kind of argumentation. it has been shown in this respect that causal inference relations and their semantics exactly correspond to a special  quite strong  kind of propositional attack relations and their associated stable semantics. this correspondence established a basic link between argumentation and causal reasoning  and it can be extended in both directions. to begin with  the argumentation theory has suggested a number of weaker semantic models  such as admissible sets and complete extensions  see  bondarenko et al.  1; dung  1a    and it seems worth to inquire whether such models correspond to reasonable semantics for causal reasoning. on the other hand  a number of alternative models for causal reasoning has been suggested in  geffner  1; 1   see also  darwiche and pearl  1    and here it seems plausible to suppose that the correspondence between causal reasoning and argumentation could be helpful in analyzing and evaluating such models. these are  however  the topics for further study.
