
we use a transition system approach to reason about the evolution of an agent's beliefs as actions are executed. some actions cause an agent to perform belief revision and some actions cause an agent to perform belief update  but the interaction between revision and update can be nonelementary. we present a set of basic postulates describing the interaction of revision and update  and we introduce a new belief evolution operator that gives a plausible interpretation to alternating sequences of revisions and updates.
1 introduction
formalisms for reasoning about action effects typically focus on the representation of actions that change the state of the world. however  several formalisms have been introduced for reasoning about actions that change the beliefs of an agent without altering the state of the world  shapiro et al.  1; van ditmarsch  1; herzig et al.  1 . in order to reason about multiple actions in this context  it is necessary to consider sequences of alternating belief revisions and belief updates. however  to date there has been little explicit discussion about the formal properties of such sequences.
﹛this paper makes two contributions to the existing work on epistemic action effects. the first contribution is the development of a transition system framework suitable for reasoning about belief change. the new framework provides a simple tool for reasoning about revision and update in a single formalism  and it facilitates the treatment of conditional updates. the second contribution is the presentation of a principled approach to the interaction between revision and update. there are plausible examples in which agents appear to revise a prior belief state in response to a new observation; such examples are difficult to represent in existing formalisms.
1 background and motivation
1	belief change
we distinguish two kinds of belief change. belief revision occurs when an agent receives new information about a static world. the original approach to belief revision is the agm approach  alchourron et al.  1 . due to limitations on space  we do not review the approach here; instead  we simply assume that the reader is familiar with the agm postulates. belief update  on the other hand  is the process in which the beliefs of an agent are modified in response to a world that has changed. one standard approach to belief update is the katsuno and mendelzon approach  which follows the agm tradition by introducing a set of rationality postulates for belief update  katsuno and mendelzon  1 .
1	reasoning about action
we introduce some standard terminology for describing transition systems  gelfond and lifschitz  1 . an action signature is a pair hf ai of non-empty sets  respectively called the set of fluent symbols and the set of action symbols. informally  fluent symbols are propositional variables representing properties of the world that may change over time and action symbols are atomic symbols representing deterministic actions that may be performed. a state is an interpretation over f  and a transition system is a directed graph where each node is labeled by a state and each edge is labeled by a set of action symbols. the edges in a transition system indicate how the fluents change values in response to the execution of individual actions. we use the capital letter a  possibly with subscripts  to range over actions. the notation a‘ will be used to denote a finite sequence of actions of indeterminate length. a belief state is a set of states. we can think of a belief state as expressing a proposition. informally  a belief state is the set of states that an agent considers possible. in this paper  we use lower case greek letters to denote belief states. we are interested in belief change resulting from two distinct kinds of actions: ontic actions and epistemic actions. ontic actions are actions that change the state of the world  whereas epistemic actions change the beliefs of an agent without altering the state of the world. informally  after executing an ontic action  an agent should update the current belief state on a point-wise basis. on the other hand  if an agent executes an epistemic action  then the current belief state should be revised.
1	the basic problem
as noted above  belief update occurs when an ontic action is performed. hence  we define belief update operators that take two arguments: a belief state and an ontic action. epistemic actions are identified with observations  which are simply sets of interpretations. as a result  revision operators also take two arguments  each of which is a set of interpretations. informally  the observation 汐 provides evidence that the actual world is in 汐. let  be an update operator and let   be a revision operator. we are interested in giving a reasonable interpretation to sequences of the form
.
there are intuitively plausible examples in which applying the operators iteratively results in an unsatisfactory result. in the next section  we introduce one such example.
1	illustrative example
we extend the litmus paper problem originally presented in  moore  1 . in the original problem  there is a beaker containing either an acid or a base  and there is an agent holding a piece of litmus paper that can be dipped into the beaker to determine the contents. the litmus paper turns red if it is placed in an acid and it turns blue if it is placed in a base. we extend the problem by admitting the possibility that the paper is not litmus paper  instead it is just plain white paper.
﹛boutilier points out that the standard approach to belief change provides an unintuitive representation of this problem  boutilier  1 . one issue is that the standard approach does not allow conditional action effects; an agent simply updates the initial belief state by the new color of the litmus paper. intuitively  this seems incorrect because there are actually two independent belief changes that occur. first  the agent dips the paper in the beaker and projects each possible world to the outcome of the dipping action. second  the agent looks at the paper and observes the new color. hence  the problem involves an update followed by a revision.
﹛even if the belief change is broken into two steps  the standard approach is limited in that an agent can only revise the current belief state. suppose that an agent initially believes that the paper is litmus paper  but then it remains white after dipping it in the beaker. in this case  the agent should conclude that the paper was never litmus paper to begin with. this indicates that it is sometimes necessary for agents to revise prior belief states in the face of new knowledge.
﹛we will return to this example periodically as we introduce formal machinery that provides a more natural representation.
1 a transition system approach
1	metric transition systems
standard transition systems do not provide a useful basis for performing belief revision  because belief revision generally requires some notion of plausibility among states or formulas. in order to define a revision operator  we introduce a distance function between states. a metric over 1f is a function d that maps each pair of states to a non-negative real number  and satisfies the following conditions:
1. d w1 w1  = 1 iff w1 = w1
1. d w1 w1  = d w1 w1 
1. d w1 w1  + d w1 w1  ≡ d w1 w1 .
we will generally be concerned with metrics that return only integral distances  so from here on we will use the term metric to refer to integer-valued metrics.
definition 1 a metric transition system is a triple hs r di where
1. s   1f
1. r   s ℅ a ℅ s
1. d is a metric on s
informally  if w1 is close to w1  then an agent considers w1 to be a plausible alternative to w1.
1	belief update
in this section  we define belief update with respect to a transition system. recall that we update a belief state by an action with effects given by a transition system. this contrasts with the standard approach  in which a belief state is updated by a formula. the advantage of our approach is that it facilitates the representation of actions with conditional effects.
﹛intuitively  after executing an action a  an agent updates the belief state by projecting every state s to the state s1 that would result if they executed a in s.
definition 1 let t = hs r di be a metric transition system.
the update function is defined as follows
for some e ﹋ 汐}.
note that the distance function d does not play any role in belief update.
﹛we briefly illustrate that transition systems can be used to define a standard update operator in which a belief state is updated by a formula rather than an action. given f  let a be the set of action symbols of the form a耳  where 耳 is a
﹛conjunction of literals over f. define tf to be the transition system with s = 1f and rsa耳s1 just in case s1 |= 耳 and s1 agrees with s on every atom that does not occur in 耳. informally  the action a耳 corresponds to an update by 耳.
proposition 1 the update operator obtained from tf satisfies the katsuno and mendelzon postulates.
1	belief revision
with each metric transition system t  we associate a revision function. the revision function associated with t is the distance-based revision function defined in  delgrande  1 . we choose this approach because it requires the introduction of relatively little formal machinery and  provided that d satisfies some natural conditions  this revision operator satisfies the agm postulates.
definition 1 let t = hs r di be a metric transition system.
the revision function   : 1s ℅ 1s ↙ 1s is defined as follows 百   汐 = {w ﹋ 汐	|	 v1 ﹋ 百  v1 ﹋ 汐  v1 ﹋ 百 
d w v1  ≒ d v1 v1 }.
hence  if an agent is in belief state 百  then 百   汐 is the set of all worlds that are minimally distant from some world in 百.
1	litmus paper revisited
we revisit the litmus paper problem in the context of metric transition systems. the problem can be represented with the following action signature:
h{red blue acid litmus} {dip}i.
{litmus}
dip
 
{litmus blue}	{litmus acid}	 
dipdip
	 	 
{litmus red acid}	 
figure 1: extended litmus paper problem{acid}
dip
 
{acid}intuitively  red is true if the paper is red  blue is true if the paper is blue  acid is true if the beaker contains an acid  and litmus is true if the paper is litmus paper. the effects of dipping are given by the transition system in figure 1. we can extend this to a metric transition system by defining d to be the hamming distance between states. note also that we assume all actions are executable in all states  but self-loops are omitted from figure 1 for ease of readability.
﹛recall that we are interested in an agent that initially believes they are holding a piece of white litmus paper. hence  the initial belief state e is
e = {{litmus} {litmus acid}}.
after dipping the paper  we update the belief state:
.
at this point  the agent observes that the paper is neither blue nor red. this observation is represented by the following set: o = {  {litmus} {acid} {litmus acid}}.
the naive suggestion is to simply revise  giving e1 = {{litmus} {litmus acid}}.
however  this is not a plausible final belief state. given the transition system in figure 1  it is clear that white litmus paper can not remain white after a dipping action. hence  successively applying the update and revision operators obtained from the transition system does not yield a plausible result.
1 rationality postulates
in this section  we give a set of rationality postulates specifying some natural properties that we expect to hold when an update is followed by a revision. the postulates are not overly restrictive and they do not provide a basis for a categorical semantics; they simply provide a point for discussion and comparison. our underlying intuition is that the most recent observation should always be incorporated  provided that it is consistent with the history of actions that have been executed. hence  the postulates are only appropriate for action domains in which there are no failed actions.
﹛assume a fixed propositional signature f. let 百 and 汐 be sets of worlds  and let a‘ be a sequence of actions. we adopt the shorthand notationas an abbreviation for the sequential update of 百 by each element of a‘. the following postulates describe some basic properties of the interaction between an update operator  and a revision operator  .
  then 
  then 1. 
  then 1. 
we give some intuitive motivation for each postulate.
﹛postulate 1 is a straightforward agm-type assertion that 汐 must hold after revising by 汐  provided 汐 is possible after executing a‘. postulate 1 handles the situation where it is impossible to be in an 汐-world after executing a‘. in this case  we simply discard the observation 汐. these postulates together formalize the underlying assumption that there are no failed actions.
﹛taken together  postulates 1 and 1 assert that revising by 汐 is equivalent to taking the intersection with 汐  provided the intersection is non-empty. these postulates are similar to the agm postulates asserting that revisions correspond to expansions  provided the observation is consistent with the knowledge base.
﹛postulate 1 provides the justification for revising prior belief states in the face of new knowledge. the postulate asserts that  after revising by 汐  we must still have a belief state that is a possible consequence of executing a‘. in some cases  the only way to assure that 汐 holds after executing a‘ is to modify the initial belief state. we remark that the postulates do not indicate how the initial belief state should be modified.
1 belief evolution
1	representing histories
transition systems are only suitable for representing markovian action effects; that is  effects that are determined entirely by the current state and the action executed. however  examples like the litmus paper problem indicate that sometimes agents need to look at prior belief states as well. hence  even if ontic action effects are markovian  it does not follow that changes in belief are markovian. as such  we need to introduce some formal machinery for representing histories.
definition 1 a belief trajectory of length n is an n-tuple h百1 ... 百n 1i of belief states.
intuitively  a belief trajectory is an agent's subjective view of how the world has changed. we remark that a belief trajectory represents the agent's current beliefs about the world history  not a historical account of what an agent believed at each point in time.
﹛we will also be interested in observation trajectories and action trajectories  each of which is simply another n-tuple.
definition 1 an observation trajectory of length n is an ntuple obs = hobs1 ... obsni where each obsi ﹋ 1s.
definition 1 an action trajectory of length n is an n-tuple act = hact1 ... actni where each acti ﹋ a.
each set obsi is interpreted to be evidence that the actual world is in obsi at time i. an action trajectory is a history of the actions an agent has executed. note that  as a matter of convention  we start the indices at 1 for belief trajectories and we start the indices at 1 for observation and action trajectories. the rationale for this convention will be clear later. we also adopt the convention hinted at in the definitions  whereby the nth component of an action trajectory obs will be denoted by obsn  and the nth component of an action trajectory act will be denoted by actn
﹛we define a notion of consistency between action trajectories and observation trajectories. the intuition is that an action trajectory act is consistent with an observation trajectory obs if and only if each observation obsi is possible  given that the actions  actj j≒i have been executed.
definition 1 let act = hact1 ... actni be an action trajectory and let obs = hobs1 ... obsni be an observation trajectory. we say that act is consistent with obs if and only if there is a belief trajectory h百1 ... 百ni such that  for all i ≡ 1 
1.
1..
if act is consistent with obs  we write act||obs.
﹛a pair consisting of an action trajectory and an observation trajectory gives a complete history of all actions that have occurred. as such  it is useful to introduce some terminology.
definition 1 a world view of length n is a pair w = hact obsi  where obs is an observation trajectory and act is an action trajectory  each of length n.
if act||obs  we say that hact obsi is consistent.
1	a new belief change operator
we introduce a new operator   that takes two arguments: a belief state and a world view. roughly speaking  we would like 百   hact obsi to be the belief trajectory that results from the initial belief state 百 and the alternating action-observation sequence act1 obs1 ... actn obsn. we call   a belief evolution operator because it takes a sequence of actions  and returns the most plausible evolution of the world.
﹛the formal definition of   is presented in the following sections. the definition relies on a fixed revision operator   and a fixed update operator . as such  it might be more accurate to adopt notation of the form  but we opt for the less cumbersome   and assume that the underlying operators are clear from the context. we remark  in particular  that every finite metric transition system generates a unique belief evolution operator. however  it is worth noting that the definition of   does not rely on any specific approach to revision.
﹛the action domains of interest for belief evolution will be those in which it is reasonable to assume that action trajectories are correct and actions are successful. this is intuitively plausible in a single agent environment  because it simply amounts to assuming that an agent has complete knowledge about the actions that they have executed. hence  in the definition of    the belief trajectory returned will always be consistent with the actions that have been executed.
1	infallible observations
in this section  we assume that observations are always correct. formally  this amounts to a restriction on the class of admissible world views. in particular  we need not consider inconsistent world views.
we need to introduce a bit of notation.
definition 1 let t be a transition system; let a‘ = a1 ... an; and let 汐 be a set of states. then 汐 1 a‘  denotes the set of all w such that there is a path from w to an element of 汐 following the edges a1 ... an.
hence  汐 1 a‘  is the set of states that can precede a world in 汐  given that the sequence a‘ has been executed.
﹛for illustrative purposes  it is useful to consider world views of length 1. suppose we have an initial belief state 百  an ontic action a and an epistemic action 汐. without formally defining the belief evolution operator    we can give an intuitive interpretation of an expression of the form 百   hhai h汐ii = h百1 百1i.
the agent knows that the actual world is in 汐 at the final point in time  so we must have 百1   汐. moreover  the agent should believe that 百1 is a possible result of executing a from 百1. in other words  we must have 百1   汐 1 a . all other things being equal  the agent would like to keep as much of 百 as possible; therefore  the natural solution is the following:
1. 
1.
this procedure can be applied to world views of length greater than 1. the idea is to trace every observation back to a precondition on the initial belief state. after revising the initial belief state by all preconditions  each subsequent belief state can be determined by a standard update operation.
	we have the following formal definition for  .	in the

definition  let acti denote the subsequence of actions act1 ... acti.
definition 1 let 百 be a belief state  let act be an action trajectory of length n and let obs be an observation trajectory of length n such that act||obs. define 百   hact obsi = h百1 ... 百ni
where

1. 百1 = 百   ti obsi 1 acti 
1. for.
we remark that the intersection of observation preconditions in the definition of 百1 is non-empty  because act||obs.
﹛the following propositions are immediate  and they demonstrate that   subsumes both revision and update. in each proposition  we assume that act||obs.
proposition 1 let 百 be a belief state  let act = hai and let obs = h1fi. then
.
in the following  we assume that 竹 is a null action that never changes the state of the world.
proposition 1 let 百 be a belief state  let act = h竹i and let obs = h汐i. then 百   hact obsi = h百   汐 百   汐i.
hence  both revision and update can be represented through the   operator. as such  it is reasonable to adopt the following notation for trajectories of length 1:
.
proposition 1 if act||obs  the operators defined above  satisfy the interaction postulates  1 - 1 .
the three preceding propositions demonstrate the suitability of   as a natural operator for reasoning about the interaction between revision and update.
1	fallible observations
we address fallible observations by allowing inconsistent world views. if a world view is inconsistent  then there is no initial belief state that supports all of the observations  so some observations need to be ignored. to deal with inconsistency  we adopt the convention previously explored in  nayak  1  and  papini  1   in which more credence is given to the most recent observations. we demonstrate that   can be extended naturally to represent belief change under this convention. in order to state the extended definition  we need to be able to extract a maximally consistent sub-view from an inconsistent world view.
definition 1 let w = hact obsi be a world view of length n. define 而 w  = hact obs1i  where obs1 =
 is defined by the following recursion.
  if obsn 1 act  1=   then obsn1 = obsn 
.
  for i   n  if

then obsi1 = obsi  otherwise obsi1 = 1f.
the observations in 而 w  are determined by starting with the most recent observation  then working backwards through the observations from most recent until the initial observation. at each point  we keep an observation if it is consistent with the observations that followed it; otherwise  we discard the observation as incorrect.
the following properties are immediate.
  if w is a world view  then 而 w  is consistent.
  if w is a consistent world view  then 而 w  = w.
recall that the original definition of   applied only to consistent world views. by passing through 而  we can extend the definition to apply to arbitrary world views.
definition 1 let 百 be a belief state  and let w be a world view of length n. if w is inconsistent  then 百 w = 百 而 w .
we could equivalently have stated a single definition for   by passing all world views through 而. we have presented the definition in two cases in order to highlight the distinct treatment of fallible observations. the extended definition is still satisfactory from the perspective of the rationality postulates.
proposition 1 the operators obtained from    satisfy the interaction postulates  1 - 1 .
thus far  applying the   operator requires tracing action preconditions back to the initial state for revision  then applying action effects to get a complete history. if we are only concerned with the final belief state  then there are many cases in which we do not need to go to so much effort.
 proposition 1 let 百 be a belief state  let act be an action trajectory of length n and let 汐 be a belief state such that  is the observation trajectory with
n   1 null observations followed by 汐  then the final belief state in.
the proposition indicates that  given a single observation that is consistent with the actions that have been executed  we can simply revise the outcome of the actions and we get the correct final belief state.
1	litmus paper concluded
we conclude the litmus paper example by giving a plausible treatment based on a belief evolution operator. the world view wv = hhdipi hoii represents a dipping action followed by the observation that the paper is still white. if   is defined from the metric transition system in figure 1  the final belief state in e   wv is given by

this calculation is consistent with our original intuitions  in that the agent revises the initial belief state before updating by the dip action. this ensures that we will have a final belief state that is a possible outcome of dipping. moreover  the initial belief state is revised by the pre-image of the final observation  which means it is modified as little as possible while still guaranteeing that the final observation will be feasible. note also that the final belief state given by this calculation is intuitively plausible. it simply indicates that the contents of the beaker are still unknown  but the agent now believes the paper is not litmus paper. hence  a belief evolution operator employs a plausible procedure and returns a desirable result.
1 relationship with iterated revision
if the null action is the only action permitted  then belief evolution is closely related to iterated revision. we briefly consider the suitability of belief evolution operators for reasoning about iterated revision. in the following proposition  let 竹‘ denote a sequence of null actions of indeterminate length.
proposition 1 for any 百 and obs  there is a unique belief state 百1 such that 百   h竹 obs‘ i = h百1 ... 百1i.
this result is consistent with the view that belief evolution operators return a trajectory representing an agent's current beliefs about the evolution of the world. we remark that  in general  百1 is not obtained by successively revising by the elements of obs. moreover  we claim that this is appropriate for action domains in which recency determines the plausibility of an observation.
﹛darwiche and pearl present a set of four postulates for iterated revision  darwiche and pearl  1 . it is easy to verify that many belief revision operators do not satisfy the darwiche-pearl postulates if applied in succession. however  if we define the iterated revision 百   obs1   ...   obsn to be the unique belief state in 百   h竹 obs‘ i  then we get the following result.
proposition 1 iterated revision  as defined by any belief evolution operator    satisfies all four darwiche-pearl postulates.
hence  given any belief revision operator  we can formulate an adequate approach to iterated revision by passing to the corresponding evolution operator.
1 discussion
we make some brief remarks about related formalisms for reasoning about epistemic action effects. our formalism is similar to the multi-agent belief structures of  herzig et al.  1  in that both approaches combine revision with update based on actions with conditional effects. however  multiagent belief structures do not consider any non-elementary interaction between revision and update. on the other hand  the situation calculus approach of  shapiro et al.  1  implicitly handles the interaction of revision and update correctly. the  revision actions  employed in that formalism are provably equivalent to belief evolution operators. correctly identifying these actions as evolution operators improves the intuitive plausibility of iterated belief change in the situation calculus approach.
﹛the framework presented in this paper requires an agent to believe the most recent observation. a more general approach would attach a plausibility value to every observation  and then an agent would keep the most plausible observations. we are currently working on such a generalization. similarly  we are looking at attaching plausibilities to action histories in order to represent domains in which an agent is uncertain about the actions that have been executed.
1 conclusion
we have presented a transition system framework for reasoning about the epistemic effects of actions. we identified ontic action effects with belief update and epistemic action effects with belief revision  and we focused on the interaction between iterated update and revision operators. we illustrated by example that the interaction between update and revision can be non-elementary  so we proposed a set of rationality postulates restricting the interaction and demonstrated that the postulates all hold in our transition system framework. by contrast  existing formalisms for reasoning about epistemic action effects either ignore the interaction between revision and update or they deal with it implicitly. hence  our formalism contributes to the existing work on epistemic action effects in two ways. first  it is able to provide simple object level representations of action domains in which prior belief states need to be revised. second  it provides an explicit treatment of the the interaction between revision and update  which has not always been salient in related formalisms.
