
communication among participants  agents  robots  is central to an appearance of collective ai. in this work we deal with the development of local communication mechanisms for real microrobotic swarms. we demonstrate that despite of very limited capabilities of the microrobot  the specific construction of communication hardware and software allows very extended collective capabilities of the whole swarm. we propose mechanisms providing information content and context for collective navigation  coordination and spatial perception in a group of microrobots.
1 introduction
communication is the central issue in collective systems such as collective/swarm robotics  multi-agent systems  sensor networks and so on. communication provides and supports  among others   awareness  about relevant events  collective decision making and coordination in a group  execution of cooperative activities  etc. due to communication all robots/agents behave in a coordinated way like one  organism   they can even emerge new behavior types  kornienko et al.  1 . there are many phenomena that appear in this way; in the vast literature they are denoted as collective/swarm intelligence  bonabeau et al.  1 .
¡¡in this paper we investigate the communication mechanisms for large microrobotic swarm  i-swarm  1 . due to very small size and limited capabilities of microrobots  swarm robotics differs from other collective robotic systems in a couple of essential points  sahin  1 . the most important are inaccessibility of global coordinates  global perception and global communication. despite of the  very limited intelligence  of individual microrobots  the collective intelligence of the whole swarm does not change essentially. the swarm is still able for distributed spatial sensing  collective decision making  building spatial formation  coordinated acting and so on. this swarm intelligence primarily appears due to specific communication between robots. we are interested in the following question:  which communication mechanisms among microrobots do allow emerging collective properties of a swarm   
¡¡generally for ai and especially for  swarm intelligence  not only the transferred message is important   i find something    but also the context of the message   where is it found    doyle and dean  1 . one robot cannot provide this context  because e.g. it does not know its own position. retrieving and providing this context represents also the collective task performed during communication. however not all communication approaches can provide the context of information and can generally be implemented in a swarm. in this paper we demonstrate that the well-known packagebased routing is not useful for swarms and suggest instead an approach that  diffuses  information with its context.
¡¡achieving collective capabilities in real microrobotic systems  we are very limited by hardware. therefore not all approaches from ai domain are feasible here. the second question of this paper is  which collective capabilities a swarm are feasible by very limited communication hardware    we demonstrate that the specific composition between multi-directional communication hardware and  diffusing  software protocols allows emerging some interesting spatial and functional collective capabilities of a swarm.
¡¡the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 1 we investigate the local communication between robots. sections 1  1 and 1 are devoted for describing the hardware platform  logical protocols and communication context. finally  in section 1 we discuss some preliminary experiments and conclude our work.
1 information diffusion  swarm density and communication radius
for collective systems a communication plays the role of nervous system in human body. since microrobots in a swarm can communicate only locally with their neighbors  such a  swarm nervous system  can be produced only by a mechanism that propagates information through multiple robotrobot connections. parameters of a global circulation of information  like global propagation speed or global propagation time  depend on characteristics of local communication  communication radius rc  the number of robots within rc . in this section we derive this relation  which is necessary for further development of the robot's communication hardware.
¡¡since parameters of local communication between robots depend on their behavior  we differentiate three following behavioral cases:
1. robots move only in small areas  so called clusters. in this case robots are situated more or less closely to each other  so that swarm peer-to-peer network  sppn  is created  automatically . the main problem is a communication between such clusters.
1. robots move in large areas  typical swarm scenario . robots exchange information only when they meet each other. the inter-cluster communication belongs to this case.
1. part of robotic swarm purposely creates and supports the sppn. this is the most interesting case  that provide stable communication in swarm  see more in section 1 .
in the further calculation we consider the most hardest case of a large-area swarm. we can intuitively assume that the communication radius rc  the swarm density dsw  the robots motion velocity v and the time t are closely related in propagating the information. for deriving a relation between them  we take several analogies to molecular-kinetic theory of ideal gas  more exactly diffusion in ideal gas  by these analogies we denote also a  diffusion of information  . we introduce the following notions: the sensor radius rs  where a collision-avoiding procedure is started; lc the length of free path from the start of motion till the first communication contact; ls the length of free path from the start of motion till the first collision-avoiding contact; nc and ns are correspondingly the number of communication and collision-avoiding contacts; sc and ss are the area of the  broken  rectangles built by a motion in some time interval t with rc and rs. in figure 1 a  we sketch our consideration. firstly  we are in-

	 a 	 b 
figure 1:  a  motion path of a robot with communication and collision-avoiding contacts;  b  total propagation time ttotal as a function of communication distance rc with different values of velocity v and the number of robots n.
terested in the number of communication contacts nc happen during the motion. this value is equal to the average number of robots in the area sc  nc = scdsw  where dsw is the swarm density. we assume that the collision avoiding radius and the robot's rotation radius are small so that we can neglect the area of fractures. in this case sc = 1rc¦Ôt. dsw can be calculated as the number of robots n in swarm divided by the area available for the whole swarm ssw:
	.	 1 
in the relation  1  we assume only one robot moves whereas other are motionless. more exact relation  when all robots move  differs from  1  only by the numeric coefficient ¡Ì1  as proved by maxwell for a diffusion in ideal gas . for the
further calculation we use. now we have to estimate how the information will be propagated after the first communication contact. this propagation dynamics is similar to  epidemic infection  dynamics  estimated as the series:
 nc + 1  + nc nc + 1  + nc nc + 1 + nc nc + 1   + ...  1 
and written iteratively as
   kn = nckn 1 + kn 1 = kn 1 nc + 1   k1 = 1.  1  that is the  standard  exponential form  nc +1 n. we are interested in the case when all robots are  infected   nc+1 n ¡Ý n or n = log nc+1 n. from real experiments we know that for establishing a communication contact and transmitting messages  robots need some time pt  that can be measured experimentally. the information transfer starts when the first robot  infects  one additional robot nc = 1 ; the time till the first infection tfirst and the total time ttotal = n tfirst+npt for infecting the whole swarm can be obtained as:

in the performed simulations  pt = 1   the swarm areal is 1 ¡Á 1 pixels1  n = 1 with dsw ¡Ö 1 pix./sec.  rc = 1 pix. formula  1  gives us ttotal ¡Ö 1 sec.. in many performed simulation cycles we observed ttotal between 1 and 1 sec. formula  1  is also useful in estimating the energy needed for each robot. for example  swarm during the running time has to propagate 1 different messages; it takes about 1 hours in the mentioned example. so the power supply should provide energy at least for 1 hours.
¡¡for developing a real microrobotic swarm we can take ssw = 1 ¡Á 1 mm1  n = 1 and assume first pt = 1
 see section 1 for the real pt . in figure 1 b  we plot ttotal depending of rc with different values of n and v. we see  that for the average propagation time 1 min  the rc for n = 1 lies between 1 mm and 1 mm. thus  for the targeted robots body of 1 mm  the communication radius rc is of 1 times larger then the size of the robot.
¡¡at the end of this section we discuss such an important point as the critical swarm density dswcrit. the critical swarm density and the  coefficient of swarm efficiency   the relation between the number of robots with useful/desired and useless/undesired activities  determine the minimal number of robots nmin in some areal sws required to perform some operation successfully. for the considered example with the given ssw = 1 ¡Á 1 mm1  ttotal = 1 sec.  rc = 1 mm and v = 1mm/sec.  related to the random motion   the minimal number nmin ¡Ö 1 and the critical swarm density dswcrit = 1 1. this relation is not exact  because it does not involve the size of a robot into this calculation  however in the microrobotic case with srobot   ssw  it can serve as a good approximation.
1 requirements and restrictions imposed on communication in real swarms
the requirements concern choosing the transmission equipment  the number of directional communication channels  communication radius and the hardware reduction of communication deadlocks. the communication equipment of a microrobot should consume as less energy as possible and be of small size  the robot's size is 1x1 mm . finally  the communication equipment should include  as far as possible  other functions  like proximity or distance measurement. the communication radius rc = 1   1 mm can be implemented in the radio-frequency  rf  and infrared  ir  way.
¡¡the rf provides two-way communication channel  the communication radius rc is of several meters and modern one-chip rf modules  even 1b/1g modules  consume energy in mw area. however we have a serious objection against rf in microrobotic swarms. firstly  a simultaneous transmission of many  1  microrobots leads to massive rf-interferences. secondly  the rf-system  with the large rc  transmits local information exchange between robots globally in a swarm. this local information does not have too much sense for all robots  so that we have high communication overhead in this case.
¡¡the ir communication is recently dominant in the socalled small-distance-domain  as e.g. for communication between laptops  hand-held devices  remote control and others. in ir domain we can choose between several different technologies  like irda1  1 khz pcm-based devices and so on. additional advantage of the ir-solution consists in combining communication equipment with sensors; we can think about proximity or distance sensors on the base of ir reflection. the ir-solution is not new in robotic domain  see e.g.  kube  1    suzuki et al.  1    however there are almost no solutions that combine perception  proximity sensing and communication.
¡¡the ir-equipment has also the problem of interferences. they appear  like in rf case  when several neighbor robots transmit simultaneously. the problem of ir-interferences can be avoided by restricting an opening angle of a pair irreceiver-transmitter. for four communication channels  the opening angle of each channel is 1o. in this case we have 1and 1-robots ir-interferences even in the  closest  radius  1 mm . reducing the opening angle to 1o or to 1o allows avoiding ir-interferences in the  close  and  near  radius  1 mm   figure 1 a  . since many microcontrollers have 1-channel adc  one adc input is used by the distance sensor   we choose 1-channel directional communication  figure 1 b  .
¡¡directional communication is extremely important in a swarm also from another reason. the point is that a robot has to know not only a message itself  but also the context of this message  e.g. the direction from which the message is received  intensity of signal  communicating neighbor and so on . without directional communication hardware  we cannot implement algorithms providing a spatial context. from many software requirements the communication radius rc and the number of directional communication channels are the most important ones. from this viewpoint  the ir is more suitable for robot-robot communication than the rf. the host-robot communication can also be implemented with ir  a sensor with pcm-filter for receiving global modulated signal . such a signal can be thought as of a remote control or a global information exchange between robots and host.

	 a 	 b 
figure 1:  a  problem of ir-interferences in the  close    near  and  far  communication zones;  b  the sensors board with megabitty board that supports 1-x directional robot-robot and hostrobot communication  proximity sensing and perception of surfaces geometry.
¡¡speaking about ir communication we have to mention the problem of ambient light. it represents generally a very critical issue  because it can essentially distort or even completely break ir-communication/sensing. we performed experiments with luminescent lamps  filament lamps and daylight. even for ir-receivers with daylight filter  swarm has to be protected against a light of filament lamps. as far as possible  the direct daylight should be also avoided. use of modulated light can essentially improve communication against ambient light  however this solution is not always acceptable/feasible.
¡¡the filament lamps can be used as a global pheromone to control a swarm  bonabeau et al.  1 . when it is emitted simultaneously with luminescent light  the robot reacts more intensively on filament light. this effect can be utilized in many purposes  like finding the food source  navigation or even a quick message about some global event. this communication way does not require any additional sensors  however should be used only as an exception  because it essentially distorts a regular communication.
¡¡in the following we briefly describe the developed hardware solution for the directional ir-communication and sensing. more details for hardware can be found in  kornienko
et al.  1 . in the hardware we do not use such popular sensors as is1f or sharp's gp1dxxx with binary output  because they do not assume active control needed for communication. we encountered that small integrated transistordiode pairs like sfh1  tcnt1  tcrt 1  gp1  qrb1 are not suitable as distance  proximity and communicating sensors for rc of 1 mm. there are also several problems with spectral matching of some receiver-emitter pairs  despite they use the same wavelength. in the tested phototransistors with 1o angle  we choose teft1  1o  collector light current 1 ma  1...1 nm   tsks1-fsz as ir-emitter for proximity measurement and communication  1o  1 nm  1 mw/sr  and gaas/gaalas ir-emitter tsal1  1o  1 nm   1 mw/sr  for distance measurement. this pair is very small  emitter 1x1 mm and receiver 1x¦Õ1 mm  so that they can easily be integrated in the sensors board. in experiments the current if of ir-emitters was limited to 1 ma  that corresponds to i/o port of the microcontroller. for controlling we use the megabitty board  1¡Á1¡Á1 mm  with atmel avr mega 1 microcontroller with 1 kb rom and 1 kb ram  megabitty  1 . the sensors board and megabitty board are assembled in one chassis with accumulators and 1 dc motors as shown in figure 1. the tested communication

figure 1: the prototype of the  jasmine  microrobot.
speed is about 1 bit/sec with low error rate  so that an application of error-correction approaches is not required.
1 communication and intelligence: logical protocols
after a description of the communication hardware of the microrobot  we return to our original question about collective intelligence. the question is  which degree of collective intelligence is still feasible in the group of microrobots    and  how to implement it    in table 1 we collect some  swarm activities  that microrobots can collectively perform. these collective activities build a basis of swarm intelligence. we take the most simple example of spatial orientation. let us assume  a robot has found a  food source  being relevant for the whole swarm. it sends the message  i  robot x  found y  come to me . when this message is propagated through a swarm  each robot knows there is a resource y at the robot x. however robots cannot find it because they do not know a coordinate of this  food source . the robot x cannot provide these coordinates because it does not know its own position. therefore even for the simple collective feature of spatial orientation  a local context of messages determines a global capability of the whole group. collective systems often have many different contexts  so that we have a context hierarchy.
	context	n	swarm capability
1spatial orientationspatial1building spatial structures1collective movement1building informational structures1collective decision makinginformation1collective information processing1collective perception/recognition1building functional structures1collective task decompositionfunctional1collective planning1group-based specializationtable 1: some collective activities performed by the whole swarm.
¡¡the main point of this work is that the required context can be processed/provided by communication. however which level of communication can do it   after hardware level  there are four such levels: level of physical signal transmission  level of communication protocols and level of informational structures  that require communication. in swarm-based systems we have the additional level concerned to the robot's behavior for creating and supporting required communication.
¡¡1. on the level of physical transmission  the problem of communication is related to a choice of modulation/transmission approaches suitable for the ir-based signal transmission. on this level such properties of signals as strength  ir-interferences  directions can be extracted and incorporated into high-level protocols  it is closely related with the robot embodiment .
¡¡1. level of communication protocols concerns the propagation of information in a swarm. generally  there are only two main ways of such a propagation:
- each robot routes communication packages from other robots without any changes  package-based communication ;
- each robot processes the information from other low-level packages and sends only its own messages further.
in the package-based communication each package consists of a header with ids of sender and receiver  routing information and the package content. the package id can be coded by 1 bits  ids of sender/receiver by 1 bits  1 bit each   so the header is of 1 bits  the package content is only of 1 bits. for recording the package history each robot needs about 1 bytes ram only for routing 1 packages within a few minutes  n = 1 robots  each sends max. 1 messages each 1 sec  propagation time of 1 min. . in order to use the  spatial  context of message  e.g. the spatial location of the sender   the robots can follow the propagation way by using id-history. however since all robots are continuously moving  the propagation way does not exist a long time. in the simulation  when a particular robot tries to achieve the source of a message by following the propagation way  it fails in 1% ! after many experiments we came at the conclusion  that pure routing is not really suitable for propagating information thought a swarm  however package-based communication is used for local communication between neighbor robots . thus  the second approach represents the main way of incorporating the information context into communication.
¡¡1. levels of informational structures and specific collective behavior belong to the high level of information processing in a swarm. these levels deal with optimal representation of information  a minimization of communication flow  availability of information and supporting multiple peer-topeer connections for a large-distance information transmission. we demonstrate some ideas in section 1  but generally  these levels overstep the framework of swarm-based communication.
1 diffusion of messages context
as presented in the previous section  the context of message cannot be extracted from the message itself. this point has been discussed many time in collective ai community. in  ai world  there exist some approaches to retrieve the required context  however the microrobots are too limited to use them. our proposal is that robots work with communication context during communication.
¡¡there are many different approaches to work with messages context. one of them is to incorporate the embodied information  signal intensity  direction  neighbors  into non-routed packages. the robots during  normal  communication process this context  so that it diffuses over a swarm. in this way a specific collective activity can be coordinated/created/controlled  see section 1 .
¡¡another approach is a pheromone-based communication  well-known in natural  bonabeau et al.  1  as well as in technical/robotic systems  payton et al.  1 . pheromonebased communication can be divided into two main groups: with pheromone leaved on immovable objects  ground  floor and so on  and pheromone leaved on moving objects like robots. whereas the first type of pheromone assumes usually real  physical  pheromone  like chemical substances or electromagnetic marks  the second type of pheromone can also have some virtual nature. for instance  robots exchange the values of some variables  these variables are  located  on a robot and we can speak about  virtual pheromone .
¡¡basic idea of pheromone-based communication is quite simple. let assume that the information source  robot x  sends a message  say  i found y . this message is binary  however the robot x represents it by some integer value. this value is maximal at the origin. any other robot  when getting this value  subtracts some constant and sends it further. in this way  the far away from the source the value is propagated  the less is its intensity. based on this gradient every robot can conclude about the source y and its origin  figure 1 . in this way not only a content of information   something is found   is propagated  but also a spatial context  spatial origin of this  something  . more generally  different temporary  spatial or functional context can be provided by this  field .
¡¡independently of the implemented mechanism  the  diffusion field  can be of four different types: non-gradient  used simply for transmitting some signals   gradient  to provide spatial context of a message   oriented  some specific direction   functional  e.g. repelling or attracting . the values of this field can be calculated as a function of connectivity  the number of neighbors  see  nembrini et al.  1    time  spe-

	 a 	 b 

	 c 	 d 
figure 1: propagation of the pheromone field from the initial to the final states.  a  initial state of pheromone field;  b c  intermediate states where propagation of field is not finished;  d  final state of pheromone field  where all robots get the message and know its spatial origin.
cific input  e.g. only robots that see something transmit a pheromone   embodied information. diffusion field can consist of many different subfields  i.e. with hierarchical structure.
¡¡1. diffusion of the size context. the diffusion field is a function of the connectivity degree: ¦µn+1 = f pi ¦µin  where i goes over all local neighbors. the more large is the group of robots  the more higher is the value  so that a context is the size of the whole group.
¡¡1. diffusion of the spatial context. the source emits a constant value. all other robots subtract some constants ci from this value  see figure 1 :  
¦µn+1 = f pi ¦µin    c1 and transmit it further. disadvantage of this relation is that robots can move in clusters  so that we can have local maximums of the diffusion field. instead we can use ¦µn+1 = f max ¦µ1n ... ¦µin      c1. in this case the clusterization effect is removed  however it cannot be completely removed from a swarm .
¡¡1. diffusion of the directional context. as already mentioned  robots support directional communication. the source emits a specific signal only in one direction. all other robots transmit this signal also only in one direction  as opposite to a receiving direction  received on  north   send to  south  . in this way   communication streets  appear  that can be used for e.g. navigation.
¡¡1. diffusion of the temporal context. the diffusion field is a function of time: ¦µn+1 = f max ¦µ1n ... ¦µin      f t . this can be useful for coordinating some temporary event  activities  in a swarm.
¡¡1. diffusion of the activity context. this kind of field transmits a stimulus for a specific activity. since all robots are heterogenous  a robot can need an assistance of only specific robots  with some specific functionality . field can have a gradient and non-gradient character.
¡¡1. multiple diffusion. the context  especially spatial one  can be useful not only for information transfer  but also for many other spatial operations like navigation  localization

	 a 	 b 
figure 1:  a  initial location of 1 different field sources;  b  final distribution of 1-fields.
and so on. in the most simple form there are two or three field sources that are propagated in a swarm  figure 1 . three fields are more preferable  because in this case robots can perform triangulation  like gps.
1 preliminary experiments and discussion
we performed two series of preliminary experiments with a small group of microrobots  jasmine  and the goal of collective perception and spatial information processing  figure 1 . some parameters and conditions of experiments and imple-

	 a 	 b 
figure 1: preliminary experiments with 1 microrobots;  a  collective perception;  b  building a  communication street .
mented local protocols are collected in table 1. the main
parametervalueswarm areal¡«only with a luminescent light1m1  white plastic covering signal transmissionpcm  1 ms - logical  1 
1 ms - logical  1   1 ms - pauselogical protocolswith and without confirmationcoding/decodingatmel's 1 mhz timer  divider 1low-level packages1 bit with one parity bitsending/receivingsequential on all channels sending - 1 ms on one channel listening - 1 ms on one channeltable 1: some parameters and conditions of the experiments.
problem we encountered is a poor probability of bidirectional communication contact in the prototype's multi-channel communication system. the reasons for that are:
- appearance of communication-dead-zones  primarily corners of the chassis  and the problem of emitter-receiver optical isolation that additionally increases these zones  they are different at emitters and receivers . we estimate that in average ¡« 1%   1% of the 1  communication areal is lost; - nonlinear radiation patterns  figure 1 a  . for bidirectional communication contact  both radiation patterns have to match. comparing to one-directional communication  the probability of bidirectional contact on any arbitrary channel is 1-1  according to the communication distance ; - the microrobot can send and receive only sequentially by all channels. in order to send a message  sending and receiving channels have to be  synchronized   the number of a  sending  channel has to correspond to the number of a  listening  channel . the probability that both channels  meet  is 1*1=1.
¡¡as shown in table 1  sending on one channel continues ¡« 1ms for 1 bit package and is repeated each 1   1ms  depend on the currently executed activities . with the probability of 1  the communication contact will be established within pt =¡« 1s 1s and a transmission of message  without confirmation  with 1 robots takes npt =¡« 1   1s. the transmission of messages with the confirmation protocol takes 1   1s. these data are confirmed by experiments  pradier  1    fu  1   as shown in figure 1 b  and table 1. to improve matching of nonlinear radiation patterns  the robots can slowly rotate during  looking/listening phase . in table 1 we demonstrate the results of these experiments for 1 robots  from  fu  1  . generally  we are
receiversenderpropagation time-1  per cyclenot always stable1  per cycle-stable  1 s.1  per cycle1  per cyclestable  1 s.table 1: rotation of robots during  looking/listening phase .
developing the second version of the sensors board  where at least a part of problems will be solved in hardware way.
¡¡the first series of experiments concerns collective perception. for that  all robots surround an object and scan the corresponding object's surfaces  figure 1 . the scan data provide information about surface's geometry and allow classifying the type of surface  flat  concave  convex; size of surface and so on . the classification data are exchanged be-

	 a 	 b 
figure 1:  a  scanning of the finite-size surface;  b  the irdiagram for finite-size surface and the used features of ir-diagrams relevant for identifying the surfaces.
tween robots and matched with the distributed model of the object. however for a particular robot is important not only to recognize an object  but also to know its own position in relation to this object. this positional context cannot be obtained from the sensor data of individual robot  figure 1 b  . the idea here is that during local communication  all robots know their neighbors  and this  embodied  information can be used for estimating a position. when sequences of connected particular observations are matched with models  e.g. the model a-b-c-a-c-d and the connected particular observation a-b   these connected observations can be located in the model. in this way the robots can collectively estimate their own spatial context  see more in  pradier  1  . as

	 a 	 b 
figure 1:  a  estimation of spatial context during collective perception;  b  dependence between global information propagation time and the distances between robots  1 robots .
demonstrated by experiments  even for uncomplete observations  this approach allows deriving the positions  as shown in figure 1 a .
¡¡the second series of experiments concerns the spatial information processing  like distance/area measurement over a swarm  collective calculation of the swarm's center of gravity and so on. to perform these operations  the robots have to create the sppn so that a part of them is continuously contained within the communication radius of each other. in this way they build a collective information system  that we call a  communication street .
¡¡to maintain the desired distances in sppn  the moving robots can periodically scan the neighborhood. however this consumes energy/time and essentially distorts the currently executed activities. the idea is to use the local communication context provided by the ir-signal strength  which nonlinearly decreases with the distance. during pcm encoding  the robots measure the amplitude of received from different directions pcm-signals and control the motion so that to maintain sppn. in this way they not only support an optimal distance for global information propagation  figure 1 b    but also can collectively perform different spatial computation  distances  areas  centers of gravity and so on . the details of the experiments can be found in  fu  1 .
¡¡the performed experiments are too preliminary to be generalized  however the processing of context information during communication works  videos can be downloaded from the project home page  contact authors . during experiments we encountered several undesired effects  one of them consists in clusterization. this phenomenon appears when robots fall to groups so that any communication between groups is broken down. when the detached group is small  these robots usually lose  orientation  and are  lost  for swarm.
¡¡generally  we have shown that despite the limited hardware capabilities of microrobots  the specific construction of hardware and software parts make feasible many collective properties. we also demonstrated that some features of collective ai can essentially be  improved  when using context-based communication. context-awareness is closely related with physical processes  e.g. ir-signals transmission  and hardware/software components  i.e. with robotic embodiment. however the concept  or at least a systematic approach  that connects the embodiment  context-aware communication and collective intelligence still remains open and represents future works.
¡¡we are grateful to our students mauricio fernandez pradier¡ä and zheng fu for performing several experiments.
