
we report a study of word meaning that tests whether dynamical aspects of movies predict word use. the movies were based on a novel representation of verb semantics called maps for verbs. we asked preschool-school-age children to describe the movies  and demonstrated that their distributions of words could be predicted by the dynamical aspects of the movies. these results lend support to the empiricist position that word meanings are learned associatively.
1	introduction
previous work has shown that robots can learn the meanings of words by associating aspects of the perceptual array with utterances  e.g.   steels  1; oates  1; siskind  1; vogt  1; cohen and oates  1  . in this paper we test the conjecture that the dynamics of the perceptual array  specifically  the manner in which objects move and interact  explains the production of particular verbs. the work is part of a larger project to model human language development on robot platforms  and is based on the maps for verbs framework described in section 1. a persistent question in the project is whether the perceptual array contains enough information to provide semantics for words  or  in a slightly different formulation  what fraction of the variability of word use is explained by information in the perceptual array  a concrete version of this question is posed here: what fraction of the variability of word use is explained by the dynamical aspects of interactions between two objects 
　we developed 1 movies of interactions between objects. each movie was generated by a program written in breve  klein  1   an animation tool with good physics. a vector of parameters of each program characterizes the dynamics of the corresponding movie. we showed the movies to preschool children and asked them to describe the action in the movies. after removing non-content words  we characterized each movie by a distribution of words. we ranked all pairs of movies in two ways: by the similarities of their word distributions and by the similarities of their vectors of program parameters. then we compared the rankings. the results are highly significant: there is strong dependence between the parameters of the programs that generated the movies and the distributions of words that children use to describe the movies.
1	related work
interest in the perception of the dynamics of whole-body interactions is not new. heider and simmel  report a study in which adults were shown a film of animated shapes interacting with each other in and around a box. after watching the film  participants were asked to describe what happened in the film. heider and simmel found a strong tendency to attribute a rich set of intentions to the moving objects and a story-line describing the interactions  even though the only information in the stimuli was the shape and size of the objects and their motion dynamics.
　more recently  several psychologists and computer scientists have explored dynamic maps as representations of activities  often for machine recognition and modeling of human gesture and bodily movement  e.g.   thelen and smith  1; rosenstein  1; intille and bobick  1; bobick and davis  1 .
　blythe  todd & miller  and todd & barrett  present a preliminary study of adult and child perception of intention based on the dynamics of motion between two simple interacting bodies. their work also uses the tools of dynamic map representation to characterize interactions. their results suggest that such dynamics are implicated in people's categorization of interactions  although their focus was on intention  rather than more primitive verb classes.
　for a comprehensive review of the psychological literature on dynamics and word meanings see  cannon and cohen 
1 .
1	maps for verbs
in the maps for verbs representation of verb meanings  the denotations of verbs dealing with interactions between two bodies  such as push  hit  chase  and so on  are represented as pathways through a metric space  or map  the axes of which are perceived distance  velocity  and energy transfer  cohen  1 . verbs with similar meanings have similar pathways. a scene  such as one object chasing another  is thought to be perceived as a pathway through the map. to learn verb meanings  one simply associates verbs that describe scenes with the corresponding pathways.
　although maps are compact and objective representations of some verb meanings  we do not know whether they have psychological reality - whether humans use maps to assign meanings to verbs. even if they do  the original maps for verbs representation might have the wrong axes  or the axes might be correct but verbs might not be correlated with the particular features of pathways  as we thought. the experiment in this paper does not test whether humans have maps in their heads. instead it asks   if one creates movies which are different according to the maps for verbs framework  will human subjects use different distributions of words to describe them  
　in the maps for verbs framework  the dynamics of interaction are split into before  during  contact   and after phases. figure 1 depicts these phases with illustrative trajectories in eac. the axes of the maps are the same in the before and after phases: they are relative velocity and distance between the two bodies. relative velocity is the difference between the velocity of one body  a  and another  b: v elocity a    v elocity b . many verbs  e.g.  transitive verbs  predicate one body as the  actor  and the other as the  target   or  subject  or  recipient   of the action. for example  in a push interaction  the actor does the pushing  and the target is the body being pushed. by convention  the actor is designated as a and the target is b. thus  when relative velocity is positive  the actor's velocity is greater than that of the target; and when relative velocity is negative  the target's velocity is greater than that of the actor. distance  in turn  is simple euclidean distance between the bodies.
　the vertical dimension of the map in the during phase is perceived energy transfer  from the actor to the target . if energy transfer is positive  then the actor is imparting to the target more energy than the target originally had; if energy transfer is negative  then the situation is reverse and the target is imparting more energy to the actor. since energy transfer is not directly perceivable  we approximate it by calculating the acceleration of the actor in the direction of the target while the actor and target are in contact.
　the labeled trajectories in figure 1 characterize the component phases of seven interaction types  as described by the verbs push  shove  hit  harass  bounce  counter-shove and chase.
　for example  hb b bi describes a shove. the actor approaches the target at a greater velocity than the target  closing the distance between the two bodies. as it nears the target  the actor slows  decreasing its velocity to match that of the target. trajectory b of the before phase in figure 1 illustrates these dynamics  showing the decrease in relative velocity  along with decrease in distance. at contact  the relative velocity is near or equal to zero. during the contact phase  the actor rapidly imparts more energy to the target in a short amount of time  as illustrated by b of the during/contact phase. and after breaking-off contact with the target  the agent rapidly decreases its velocity while the target moves at a greater velocity due to the energy imparted it.
　in figure 1 b   below  we provide a plot of the dynamics of a simulated shove action. the map in the figure plots the dynamics for a portion of the time between contact phases. the trajectory begins with very low relative velocity  as would be expected just after completing the contact phase of a shove  after phase b in figure 1   and ends with a high relative velocity that is ramping down  before phase b in figure 1  just before a new shove occurs.
　with this three-phase representation scheme  we define six more interaction types corresponding to common english verbs:
  push hb a ai - begins like shove  but at contact relative velocity is near or equal to zero and the actor smoothly imparts more energy to the target; after breaking contact  the agent gradually decreases its velocity.
  hit hc/d c ci - may begin with the actor already at high velocity relative to the target or increasing in relative velocity  and thus is characterized by c or d in the before phase.
  harass hc/d c di - is similar to a hit  except the afterphase involves the actor quickly recovering its speed and moving back toward the target  not allowing the distance between the two to get very large  the d in the after phase . harass highlights that interactions may be cyclic: the after phase of one epoch blends into the before phase of the next.
  bounce hc/d d ei - along with counter-shove  bounce involves the target making a more reactive response to the actor's actions. bounce begins like a hit or harass  but at contact  the target transfers a large amount of energy back to the actor.
  counter-shove hb/c/d e ei - is a version of a shove where the target imparts energy to the actor.
  chase ha    i - involves the actor moving toward the target  closing the distance between the two  but never quite making contact  so the during and after phases are not relevant. this is depicted as the circular trajectory a in the before phase.

figure 1:  a  example of maps-for-verbs simulation running the shove-wander action  as rendered in breve 1.  note: dashed lines represent motions of colored patches for demonstration purposes; only the moving color-patches themselves were displayed in the stimuli movies. ;  b  dynamic map plot of shove-wander action before contact  corresponding to the picture in  a   x-axis = distance between agents  y-axis = relative velocity .

	starting	1
	distance	tick	time	distance
figure 1: maps-for-verbs model of the three phases of interaction.1	experiment
1	stimuli
we used breve 1  an environment for developing realistic multi-body simulations in a three dimensional world with physics  klein  1   to implement a model of the seven interaction classes described in the previous section. the models were rendered as two generic objects  a blue ball for the actor and a red ball for the target  moving on a white background - see figure 1 a . the models allowed us to generate multiple instances of each interaction type.
　we generated a set of movies based on each of the breve interaction models. for several of the interaction classes we also varied the behavior of the target object  as follows: the target object   a  did not move except when contacted   stationary     b  moved independently in a random walk   wander    or  c  moved according to billiard ball ballistic physics  based on the force of the collision   coast  . we generated a total of 1 unique movies. for the bounce and countershove interaction types  we only implemented  stationary  and  wander  target behavior  as  coast  would obliterate the effect of the target transferring energy back to the actor. also  there was only one version of  chase   as the target must always be moving away from the actor. chase was also unique because it was the only instance in which the two balls never contacted each other.
　the 1 movies were recorded and presented on a g1 imac with 1 inch screen. the children's responses were recorded and later transcribed.
participants
sixteen children participated in this study  ranging in age from 1 months old  average age = 1 months . participants were recruited and tested at a local daycare in amherst 
ma.
procedure
for each child  a total of 1 movies was presented  each movie instance appearing once - with the exception of chase  which the child watched twice. an experimenter told each child that she would be watching movies on the computer screen with two balls  one blue and one red  and that the task was to tell a story about what the balls were doing.
1	analysis
the children used remarkably small vocabularies and very terse sentences to describe the movies; the following transcript is typical:
e: okay  last one. can you tell me a good story about this one 
s: even gooder than all of the other ones 
e: make it the best story!
s: it's going umm gooder and it's playing but the red is letting the blue push him. and the red is letting the blue one push e: how come he's letting the blue push 
s: because he wanted to. e: why does he want to 
s: because he likes to play like that.
all the content words for each trial were extracted and
 canonicalized   converting verbs in different tenses or forms  e.g.  ending in -ed  -ing  etc.  to a single form. also  negation phrases  such as  it's not zooming  or  red didn't move   were also transformed into a single token  e.g.  not-zooming and not-moving. the total number of unique  canonicalized content words uttered by all the subjects in response to all the movies was 1  of which the following 1 words were uttered more than three times  words are listed with their frequencies : pushing  1; moving  1; bonking  1; away  1; trying  1; playing  1; fast  1; running  1; around  1; up  1; getting  1; chasing  1; friends  1; bumping  1; slow  1; hitting  1; down  1; circle  1; catching  1; standing  1; tag  1; zooming  1; stopping  1; coming  1; flying  1; knocking  1; following  1; bouncing  1; about  1; together  1.
note that some of these words are not verbs; for instance 
 friends  and  away. 
　each movie is characterized by a vector of relative frequencies of these 1 words. for example  here is the vector for the movie shove-stationary:
pushing  1; moving  1; bonking  1; away 
1; trying  1; playing  1; fast  1; running  1; around  1; up  1; getting  1; chasing  1; friends  1; bumping  1; slow  1; hitting 
1; down  1; circle  1; catching  1; standing 
:before-subject-action	'agent-coast
:before-actor-action	'approach-slow-down
:before-actor-original-speed	1
:before-actor-desired-speed	.1
:before-actor-distance-for-slow-down	1
:before-actor-distance-for-stop	1
:during-actor-action	'agent-approach-speed-up
:during-actor-speed-up-start-time	'self
:during-actor-speed-up-end-time	.1
:during-actor-original-speed	'self
:during-actor-desired-speed	1
:during-actor-self-wait	.1
:during-1-actor-action	'agent-halt
:during-1-actor-self-wait	.1
:after-subject-action	'agent-coast
:after-actor-action	'agent-run-away-speed-up
:after-actor-speed-up-start-time	'self
:after-actor-speed-up-end-time	1
:after-actor-original-speed	'self
:after-actor-desired-speed	1
:after-1-subject-action	'agent-halt
:after-1-actor-self-wait	1
table 1: a vector of parameters for the movie shove-static
1; tag  1; zooming  1; stopping  1; coming  1; flying  1; knocking  1; following  1; bouncing  1; about  1; together  1.
that is  of the content words used to describe the movie
shove-stationary  1% of them were pushing  1% were moving  and so on. let vwords movie  denote the vector of relative frequencies of words used to describe a movie.
　the movies also can be characterized by the parameters of the breve programs that generated them. these parameters include the current speed and desired speed of the objects  the subroutines that implement patterns of movement  the distance between objects at which one slows down  the latency before starting the next movement  and so on. table 1 shows the vector for the movie shove-static. let vparams movie  denote the vector of parameters for the program that generates the movie.
　the next step of the analysis is to test whether there is an association between the vectors of parameters for movies  vparams movie   and the vectors of words used to describe the movies  vwords movie . a simple method is to calculate the similarities between pairs of movies i and j  rank the pairs by similarity  and see whether the ranking based on word vectors is predicted by the ranking based on parameter vectors. let
simwords i j  =f vwords i  vwords j   1 simparams i j  =g vparams i  vparams j   1 where f and g are methods for comparing word-frequency vectors and parameter vectors  respectively. the question is whether  averaged over pairs of movies i and j  simwords i j  is predicted by simparams i j . we let f be generalized euclidean distance between the probabilities p wi  and p wj  of hearing word w uttered in response to movies i and j  respectively:

　the function g  for comparing parameter vectors  cannot be simple euclidean distance because parameter vectors include non-numeric values. we wrote a function that increases the similarity score when symbolic  and numeric values  are identical  decreases the score by a constant when symbolic values don't match  and decreases the score proportional to the mismatch between numeric values. we added some conditions for missing values. we are aware that this function might conceivably be  tuned  to make the parameter vectors better predict the word vectors  so we wrote it once and did not revise it. the results presented below are for the first and only evaluation of this function on these data. as a final step  we ranked pairs of movies according to simwords i j  and simparams i j .
1	results
each pair of movies i j gets two similarity scores  simwords i j  and simparams i j   so we can look at the simple correlation of these scores and the regression of simparams i j  on simwords i j . figure 1 shows these score plotted against each other and the linear regression line that fits them best. clearly  the similarity of two movies according to their parameters is a good predictor of the similarity of distributions of words used to describe the movies. the correlation between them is 1  which means the similarity of two movies according to their parameters accounts for 1% of the variance in the similarity of the word vectors for the movies. this result is highly significant  p   .1 .

figure 1: regression plot of similarity scores for movie pairs according to movie parameters and movie word descriptions.
　another way to analyze the data is to compare the rankings of pairs of movies according to the two similarity scores. to illustrate  suppose we have four movies  a b c d  and so six pairs of movies  ranked by function f from most to least similar:   a b  a c  b d  a d  b c  c d  . now suppose function g produces a different ranking:   b d  a c  a d  c d  b c  a b  . according to f  the most similar movies  with rank 1  are  a b  whereas the rank of these movies is 1 according to g. we can characterize the difference of two rankings by summing the differences in rank over items; for instance  the item  a b  contributes 1 = 1 to the sum.
for the data in figure 1  the summed rank difference is
δ = 1  but how can we tell whether this is a statistically significant number  we perform a randomization test as follows: there are 1 pairs of movies  so construct two vectors  v1 and v1  each containing the numbers 1...1. now shuffle v1 thoroughly and calculate δ  = pi= 1  abs v1 i   v1 i . repeat 1 times. the resulting distribution of δ  is the empirical sampling distribution of the summed rank difference under the null hypothesis that the ranks of items in the vectors are unrelated. if the actual summed rank difference  δ  has low probability according to this sampling distribution  we reject the null hypothesis with residual uncertainty  the p value  equal to the quantile of δ in the sampling distribution  see  cohen  1  for details .
　as it happens  the ranking of movie pairs according to the movie parameters is not independent of the ranking according to word frequencies. the summed rank difference δ = 1 is just the 1 quantile of the sampling distribution  so we can reject the null hypothesis and conclude with confidence that the rankings are related.
1	discussion
these results are supported by another study  using the same movies  with adult subjects.  the final paper will present both sets of results.  they show conclusively that the dynamics of interactions between two bodies  as represented by the parameters of the programs that generate movies  predict the distributions of words that children use to describe the movies. this result is surprisingly strong when one considers how few words children actually use. although our study involved 1 children  only 1 content words were uttered more than three times in the entire study. nevertheless  by concentrating on the distributions of these words for each movie we were able to show a strong dependence on the dynamics of the movies.
　returning to the question that motivates this work  is there sufficient information in the perceptual array  particularly dynamical information  to supply semantics for some words  particularly some verbs  by demonstrating a dependency between dynamical information and word choice  especially in young children  we strengthen the empiricist case that word meanings can be learned as associations between the words and percepts. our evidence is only suggestive  however  because we demonstrated a dependence of word use not on the child's percepts but  rather  on the parameters of the movies shown to the child. only by assuming that these parameters affect how the movie is perceived can we argue for associative learning of word meanings. the assumption is very reasonable; after all  the parameters were tuned to make the movies look different and distinctive.
　still  we think it likely that associative learning of word meanings  needs help   probably from prior domain knowledge. although researchers such as todd and barrett  todd and barrett  1  argue that motion is a cue to intention  they do not argue that it is the only cue  and one is hard-pressed to see how the intentional aspect of  say   chasing   can be learned from nothing but the relative motions of two bodies. we think dennett  dennett  1  is probably right when he says we adopt an intentional stance even to non-intentional scenarios  and the intentional language of our subjects  directed to a couple of colored blobs moving on the screen  lends force to his argument. it seems likely to us that perceived movement is one cue to word meaning  but the intentional aspects of words are generated by the subjects themselves. we are currently designing studies to tease apart these contributors to word meanings.
　finally  we relate an anecdote about our word-learning robot: it learned that  forward  is associated with the wheels rotating in one direction and  backward  with the opposite direction of rotation  but it never learned that forward and backward are antonyms. we realized then that word meanings can be arbitrarily  deep  and that associating percepts and words produces a shallow kind of meaning. but it's a start.
