
the agm postulates for belief revision  augmented by the dp postulates for iterated belief revision  provide generally accepted criteria for the design of operators by which intelligent agents adapt their beliefs incrementally to new information. these postulates alone  however  are too permissive: they support operators by which all newly acquired information is canceled as soon as an agent learns a fact that contradicts some of its current beliefs. in this paper  we present a formal analysis of the deficiency of the dp postulates  and we show how to solve the problem by an additional postulate of independence. we give a representation theorem for this postulate and prove that it is compatible with
agm and dp.
1 introduction
belief revision is the process of changing the beliefs of an agent to accommodate new  more precise  or more reliable evidence that is possibly inconsistent with the existing beliefs. in situations where the new evidence is consistent with the existing beliefs  the two can just be merged; we call this mild revision. more interesting and complicated are situations where the evidence conflicts with the prior beliefs  in which case the agent needs to remove some of its currently held beliefs in order to accommodate the new evidence. this kind of revision is referred to as severe revision.
¡¡in the literature  the classical approach of belief revision is the agm framework  alchourron¡ä et al.  1; gardenfors¡§ and makinson  1; gardenfors ¡§ 1 . given an underlying logic language l  the beliefs of an agent are represented by a set of sentences in l  known as belief set  which is closed under logical consequence. new evidence is also a sentence in l  and a belief revision operator maps the current belief set and the new evidence to a revised belief set. to provide general design criteria for belief revision operators  alchourron ¡ä gardenfors ¡§ and makinson  agm  have developed a set of postulates  alchourron¡ä et al.  1 . the guiding principle is that of economy of information or minimal change of belief sets  which means not to give up currently held beliefs and not to generate new beliefs unless necessary.
¡¡for the incremental adaptation of beliefs  these postulates proved to be too weak  darwiche and pearl  1; 1 . this has led to the development of additional postulates for iterated belief revision by darwiche and pearl  dp   among others.
¡¡still  however  the two sets of postulates are too permissive in that they support belief revision operators which assume arbitrary dependencies among the pieces of information which an agent acquires along its way. a universal dependency among all new evidences has a drastic effect when the agent makes an observation which contradicts its currently held beliefs: the agent has to cancel everything it has learned up to this point  nayak et al.  1; 1 . in this paper  we first give a formal analysis of this problem of implicit dependence  and then we present  as a solution  an independence postulate for iterated belief revision. we give a representation theorem for our postulate and prove its consistency by defining a concrete belief revision operator. we also contrast the postulate of independence to the so-called recalcitrance postulate of  nayak et al.  1; 1  and argue that the latter is too strict in that it rejects reasonable belief revision operators.
¡¡the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in the next section  we recall the classical agm approach in a propositional setting as formulated by  katsuno and mendelzon  1   followed by the approach of  darwiche and pearl  1  for iterated belief revision. in section 1  we formally analyze the problem of the dp postulates to be overly permissive. in section 1  we present an additional postulate to overcome this deficiency. we give a representation theorem for the postulate along with a concrete revision operator. we conclude in section 1 with a detailed comparison to related work.
1 preliminaries
it has been observed by many researchers that belief sets alone are not sufficient to determine a unique strategy for belief revision  gardenfors¡§ and makinson  1; spohn  1 . any concrete belief revision operator requires additional information concerning the firmness of different beliefs to determine the revision strategy. in particular  this  extra-logical  information should uniquely determine a set of conditional beliefs: an agent is said to hold a conditional belief   with ¦Á ¦Â sentences in l  precisely when it will believe ¦Â after a revision with ¦Á  gardenfors ¡§ 1; boutilier  1 . the triviality theorem of  gardenfors¡§ and makinson  1  shows that using the agm postulates it is improper to include conditional beliefs into the belief sets. as a consequence  we need to distinguish a belief set  referred to as propositional beliefs  from a belief state  also called epistemic state . the latter contains  in addition to its belief set  the conditional beliefs which determine the revision strategy.
1  modified  km postulates
katsuno and mendelzon  km  rephrased the agm postulates for the propositional setting  katsuno and mendelzon  1 . the beliefs of an agent are represented by a sentence ¦× in a finitary propositional language l.1 any new evidence is a sentence ¦Ì in l  and the result of revising ¦× with ¦Ì is also a
sentence  denoted as ¦×   ¦Ì  belonging to l.
¡¡to avoid an inconsistency with their postulates for iterated revision   darwiche and pearl  1; 1  suggested to weaken the original km postulates by regarding belief revision operators as functions on belief states  rather than on belief sets . this resulted in the postulate  r*1 - r*1  shown below.
¡¡for the sake of the simplicity  we will abuse notation by using interchangeably a belief state ¦· and its belief set bel ¦· . for example  ¦· and ¦·   ¦Ì in postulate  r*1  refer  respectively  to the current belief state and to the posterior belief state; and ¦·   ¦Ì |= ¦Ì is just shorthand for bel ¦·   ¦Ì  |= ¦Ì. the following are the  modified  km postulates  which in turn are a reformulation of the agm postulates:
 r*1  ¦·   ¦Ì |= ¦Ì.
 r*1  if ¦· ¡Ä ¦Ì is satisfiable  then ¦·   ¦Ì ¡Ô ¦· ¡Ä ¦Ì.
 r*1  if ¦Ì is satisfiable  then ¦·   ¦Ì is also satisfiable.
 r*1  if ¦·1 = ¦·1 and ¦Ì1 ¡Ô ¦Ì1  then ¦·1   ¦Ì1 ¡Ô ¦·1   ¦Ì1.  r*1   ¦·   ¦Ì  ¡Ä ¦Õ |= ¦·    ¦Ì ¡Ä ¦Õ .  is satisfiable  then ¦·    ¦Ì ¡Ä ¦Õ  |=  ¦·  
¡¡darwiche and pearl have given a representation theorem for postulates  r*1 - r*1  wrt. a revision mechanism based on total pre-orders over possible worlds:
definition 1 let w be the set of all worlds  interpretations  of a propositional language l. a function that maps each belief state ¦· to a total pre-order ¡Ü¦· on w is called a faithful assignment iff
  if w1 w1 |= ¦·  then w1 =¦· w1.
  if w1 |= ¦· and w1 |1= ¦·  then w1  ¦· w1.
  if ¦· = ¦µ  then ¡Ü¦·=¡Ü¦µ.
where w1 =¦· w1 is defined as w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 and w1 ¡Ü¦· w1; and w1  ¦· w1 means w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 and w1¡Ü¦· w1.
the intuitive meaning of w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 is that w1 is at least as plausible as w1 in ¦·.
theorem 1  darwiche and pearl  1  a revision operator   satisfies postulates  r*1 - r*1  iff there exists a faithful assignment that maps a belief state ¦· to a total pre-order ¡Ü¦· such that
mods ¦·   ¦Ì  = min mods ¦Ì  ¡Ü¦· 
here  mods ¦Ì  denotes the set of all models of ¦Ì  and min mods ¦Ì  ¡Ü¦·  is the set of minimal elements of mods ¦Ì  wrt. the pre-order ¡Ü¦·.
1 dp postulates
in order to allow for successive revisions  in each revision step it must be fully specified how the conditional beliefs are to be modified. following the principle of economy of information  minimal change should also be applied to the conditional beliefs. unfortunately  although the km postulates put much emphasis on the preservation of propositional beliefs  they do not constrain the modification of conditional beliefs. darwiche and pearl have shown that the km postulates alone are too weak to adequately characterize iterated belief revision  because they support unreasonable revision behaviors  darwiche and pearl  1 . to overcome this deficiency  they proposed these four additional postulates  darwiche and pearl  1 :
 c1  if ¦Â |= ¦Ì  then  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â ¡Ô ¦·   ¦Â.
 c1  if ¦Â |=  ¦Ì  then  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â ¡Ô ¦·   ¦Â.
 c1  if ¦·   ¦Â |= ¦Ì  then  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â |= ¦Ì.
 c1  if ¦·   ¦Â 1|=  ¦Ì  then  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â |1=  ¦Ì.
motivation and interpretation of these postulates can be found in  darwiche and pearl  1; 1 .
¡¡to provide formal justifications  darwiche and pearl have presented an extension of the above representation theorem for postulates  c1 - c1 :
theorem 1  darwiche and pearl  1  suppose that a revision operator satisfies postulates  r*1 - r*1 . the operator satisfies postulates  c1 - c1  iff the operator and its corresponding faithful assignment satisfy:
 cr1  if w1 w1 |= ¦Ì  then w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 iff w1 ¡Ü¦· ¦Ì w1.  cr1  if w1 w1|= ¦Ì  then w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 iff w1 ¡Ü¦· ¦Ì w1.
 cr1  if w1 |= ¦Ì and w1 |1= ¦Ì  then w1  ¦· w1 implies w1  ¦· ¦Ì w1.
 cr1  if w1 |= ¦Ì and w1|= ¦Ì  then w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 implies w1 ¡Ü¦· ¦Ì w1.
¡¡furthermore   darwiche and pearl  1  showed that their additional postulates are consistent with the  modified  km postulates. they did so by defining a concrete revision operator which satisfies both  r*1 - r*1  and  c1 - c1 .
1	why not absolute minimization 
a different approach to studying iterated belief revision is by defining concrete revision operators. for instance   boutilier  1  proposed a specific revision operator  known as natural revision  which satisfies the modified km postulates and the following one:
 cb  if ¦·   ¦Ì |=  ¦Â  then  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â ¡Ô ¦·   ¦Â.
as shown by  darwiche and pearl  1; boutilier  1   postulate  cb  imposes absolute minimization on the change of conditional beliefs:
theorem 1 suppose that a revision operator satisfies postulates  r*1 - r1 . the operator satisfies postulate  cb  iff the operator and its corresponding faithful assignment satisfy
 cbr  if w1 |=   ¦·   ¦Ì  and w1 |=   ¦·   ¦Ì  then w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 iff w1 ¡Ü¦· ¦Ì w1
condition  cbr  says that the agent should keep as much of the ordering information in ¦· as possible while satisfying the km postulates. at first glance  therefore  it seems that condition  cbr  complies with the principle of economy of information. however  postulate  cb  is too radical since any severe revision necessarily cancels all previous evidences  darwiche and pearl  1; zhang  1 . this suggests that absolute minimization of the change of conditional beliefs is overly strict and not desirable in general. it is easy to see that the dp postulates are a weakening of postulate  cb   in the sense postulate  cb  implies all of the dp postulates but not vice versa.
1 the problem of implicit dependence
although most counter-examples in  darwiche and pearl  1  against the km postulates are solved by adding the dp postulates  several open problems remain. for instance  the dp postulates are consistent with  cb   hence they do not block counter-examples against natural revision  like the following  darwiche and pearl  1 :
example 1 we encounter a strange new animal and it appears to be a bird  so we believe the animal is a bird. as it comes closer to our hiding place  we see clearly that the animal is red  so we believe that it is a red bird. to remove further doubts about the animal birdhood  we call in a bird expert who takes it for examination and concludes that it is not really a bird but some sort of mammal. the question now is whether we should still believe that the animal is red.
¡¡as argued in  darwiche and pearl  1   we have every reason to keep our belief that the animal is red  since birdhood and color are not correlated. however  natural revision enforces us to give up the belief of the animal's color: according to postulate  cb   since bird red |=    bird  it follows that  bird red   bird ¡Ô bird  bird.
¡¡in being compatible with  cb   the dp postulates are not strong enough to guarantee that the belief of the animal's color is retained. this can be intuitively explained as follows: after observing the animal's color  we are actually acquiring a new conditional belief  namely  that the animal is red even if it were not a bird i.e. . however  the dp postulates do not enforce the acquisition of conditional beliefs. in the sequel  we first give a formal analysis of this weakness of the dp postulates  and then we present an additional postulate by which this problem is overcome.
¡¡it is well known  see  e.g.   gardenfors¡§ and makinson  1   that if a belief state ¦· suffices to uniquely determine a revision strategy that satisfies the agm  or the km  postulates  then the belief state determines a unique  total pre-order ¡Ü¦·  known as epistemic entrenchment  over l which satisfies certain conditions. given an epistemic entrenchment  the corresponding belief revision operator is defined by the following condition: for any ¦Â 
 c*  ¦·   ¦Ì |= ¦Â if either |=  ¦Ì or  ¦Ì  ¦·  ¦Ì ¡Å ¦Â
¡¡other forms of total pre-orderings on l have been proposed  e.g.   rott  1; williams  1 . all of these orderings require extra-logical information  that is  they cannot be determined by pure logical relations among the sentences. although we focus on epistemic entrenchment  the analysis that follows does not depend on this specific ordering; it can be easily adapted to the approaches just mentioned.
¡¡to begin with  we define the notion of dependence between sentences wrt. a belief state as follows  farinas  del cerro and herzig  1 :
definition 1 a sentence ¦Â depends on another sentence ¦Ì in belief state ¦· precisely when ¦· |= ¦Â and ¦·  ¦Ì |1= ¦Â. two sentences ¦Ì ¦Â are called dependent in ¦· if either ¦Ì depends on ¦Â or ¦Â depends on ¦Ì in ¦·.
consider  now  a  non-tautological  new evidence ¦Ì. whenever ¦· |= ¦Â  condition  c*  implies that if ¦Ì ¡Ý¦· ¦Ì ¡Å ¦Â  then ¦Â is  implicitly  dependent on ¦Ì in ¦·. this kind of dependency could be problematic. in particular  it is possible that two initially independent sentences become  undesirably  dependent after a revision step. in example 1  say  red becomes dependent on bird after revising by red if natural revision is used.
¡¡epistemic entrenchment reveals that the problem of natural revision is that it assigns the lowest degree of belief to a new evidence without asserting conditional beliefs for independence. thus the new evidence depends on all other beliefs which survive the revision process. this explains why severe revision always cancels all previous evidences.
1 a postulate of independence
the analysis in the previous section shows that in order to overcome the problem of implicit dependence  the revision operator must explicitly assert some conditional beliefs. it is easy to see that the dp postulates only require the preservation of conditional beliefs when a belief state ¦· is revised with ¦Ì: postulates  c1  and  c1  neither require to add nor to remove certain conditional beliefs  namely  those conditioned on ¦Â  in case ¦Â |= ¦Ì or ¦Â |=  ¦Ì; postulate  c1  requires to retain the conditional belief finally  postulate  c1  requires not to obtain the new conditional belief. since none of the dp postulates requires to make independence assumptions  a new postulates is necessary to avoid undesired dependencies.
¡¡the revision process may introduce undesirable dependencies in both directions. that is  it could be that the new evidence becomes dependent on existing beliefs  or the other way around. prior to stating the new postulate  we show that the dp postulates impose some constraints on the retention of the independence information in one direction. in the presence of the km postulates  postulate  c1  implies the following:
 c1  if ¦·    ¦Ì |= ¦Â  then  ¦·   ¦Ì   ¦Ì |= ¦Â
this essentially means that if ¦Â is not dependent on the new evidence ¦Ì in ¦·  then it also does not depend on ¦Ì in ¦·   ¦Ì.
¡¡in order to ensure the explicit assertion of independence information in the other direction  we propose the following postulate of independence to complement the dp postulates:  ind  if ¦· ¦Â 1|=  ¦Ì then  ¦· ¦Ì  ¦Â |= ¦Ì
basically  postulate  ind  says that if the belief in ¦Â    ¦Ì is not strongly held in ¦·  then ¦Ì does not depend on  ¦Â in ¦·   ¦Ì.
¡¡postulate  ind  is sufficient to overcome the problem of implicit dependence  as can be shown by reconsidering example 1. according to  ind    bird red   bird |= red  given that bird  bird 1|=  red. this shows that the new postulate blocks unreasonable behaviors which are admitted by the dp postulates. in section 1  we will also argue that postulate  ind  is not overly strict.
¡¡in order to formally justify our new postulate  we will first provide a representation theorem along the line of theorem 1. thereafter  we will give a concrete belief revision operator which satisfies  ind .
1 a representation theorem
for the proof of the representation theorem  we need the following observation  which is a consequence of theorem 1.
observation 1 suppose that a revision operator satisfies postulates  r*1 - r*1 . if 1|=  ¦Â  then ¦· ¦Â |= ¦Ì precisely when there exists a world w such that w |= ¦Ì ¡Ä ¦Â and w  ¦· w1 for any w1 |=  ¦Ì¡Ä¦Â  where ¡Ü¦· is the corresponding faithful assignment.
theorem 1 suppose that a revision operator satisfies postulates  r*1 - r*1 . the operator satisfies postulate  ind  iff the operator and its corresponding faithful assignment satisfy:
 indr  if w1 |= ¦Ì and w1 |=  ¦Ì  then w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 implies w1  ¦· ¦Ì w1.
proof:    : assume ¦· ¦Â 1|=  ¦Ì. from observation 1  it follows that for any world w |= ¦Â ¡Ä  ¦Ì  there exists another world w1 |= ¦Â ¡Ä ¦Ì such that w1 ¡Ü¦· w. hence  since ¡Ü¦· is total  there must be a world w1 such that w1 |= ¦Ì ¡Ä ¦Â and w1 ¡Ü¦· w1 for any w1 |=  ¦Ì ¡Ä ¦Â. condition  indr  then implies that w1  ¦· ¦Ì w1 for any w1 |=  ¦Ì ¡Ä ¦Â. due to observation 1  we have  ¦· ¦Ì  ¦Â |= ¦Ì.
¡¡   : assume w1 |= ¦Ì  w1 |=  ¦Ì  and w1 ¡Ü¦· w1. let ¦Â be such that mods ¦Â  = {w1 w1}. from theorem 1  it follows that w1 ¡Ê mods ¦· ¦Â . hence ¦· ¦Â 1|=  ¦Ì. postulate  ind  implies  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â |= ¦Ì. due to postulates  r*1  and  r*1   mods  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â  = {w1}. from theorem 1  it follows that w1  ¦· ¦Ì w1.	1
¡¡an immediate consequence of theorem 1 and 1 is that postulate  ind  implies both  c1  and  c1 . theorem 1 also shows that postulate  ind  is not overly constrained: condition  indr  only requires to decrease the plausibility of the worlds violating the new evidence ¦Ì and not to decrease the plausibility of the worlds confirming ¦Ì.
1 properties of the independence postulate
we suggest to use the km postulates along with postulates  c1    c1   and  ind  to govern iterated belief revision. to show that these postulates together are consistent  we present a concrete revision operator which satisfies all of them. the operator is based on spohn's proposal of revising ordinal conditional functions  spohn  1   which can be viewed as a qualitative version of jeffrey's rule of probabilistic conditioning  goldszmidt  1 .
¡¡an ordinal conditional function is a function k from a given set of worlds into the class of ordinals. intuitively  the ordinals represent degrees of plausibility. the lower its ordinal  the more plausible is a world. an ordinal conditional function encodes both a belief set and the conditional beliefs. the belief set bel k  is the set of sentences which hold in all worlds of rank 1  the smallest ordinal :
mods bel k   = {w|k w  = 1}
from now on  we use an ordinal conditional function and its belief set interchangeably; e.g.  ¦Ì ¡Ê k means ¦Ì ¡Ê bel k   extended to a rankingv of sentences as follows:
and k ¡Ä ¦Ì denotes	bel k  ¡Ä ¦Ì. a ranking of worlds can be
if |= ¦Ì
 ¦Ì  =	 1  minw|= ¦Ì k w 	otherwise
put in words  the rank of a formula is the lowest rank of a world in which the formula does not hold. hence  the higher the rank of a sentence  the firmer the belief in it. in fact  it is not hard to see that an ordinal conditional function k determines an epistemic entrenchment as follows:
¦Á ¡Ük ¦Â iff k ¦Á  ¡Ü k ¦Â 
¡¡our belief revision operator allows to assign different plausibility degrees to new evidences; standard km/dp revision is easily obtained as a special case by using a fixed value in all iterations  darwiche and pearl  1 . an ordinal conditional function k is revised according to new evidence ¦Ì with plausibility degree m   1 as follows:
		 1 
¡¡assuming the same degree of plausibility for any new evidence  satisfiability of the km postulates along with postulates  c1    c1   and  ind  by the revision defined in  1  is an almost direct consequence of theorem 1  1  and 1. but we can even prove a stronger result with varying plausibility values m.
theorem 1 for any m   1  the belief revision operator defined by  1  satisfies all km postulates  r*1 - r*1   where
bel ¦·  and ¦·   ¦Ì are  respectively  identified with	bel k 
and k¦Ì m 	.	v
lemma 1 let k be an arbitrary ordinal conditional function and ¦Ì a new evidence with plausibility degree m  then for any non-tautological sentence ¦Â 
 
	k ¦Â  + m	if |= ¦Ì   ¦Â
k¦Ì m   ¦Â  =t   k  ¦Ì  else if t = k ¦Â  min t   k  ¦Ì  k ¦Â  + m  otherwise
where t = k ¦Ì   ¦Â .
theorem 1 for arbitrary m1 m1   1  the belief revision operator defined by  1  satisfies the following conditions:1
 ec1  if ¦Á |= ¦Ì  then  k¦Ì m  1 ¦Á m 1 ¡Ô k¦Á m 	1.  ec1  if ¦Á |=  ¦Ì  then  k¦Ì m  1 ¦Á m 1 ¡Ô k¦Á m 	1.
 eind    then
proof: if |=  ¦Á  condition  ec1  holds trivially. assume that ¦Á |= ¦Ì and 1|=  ¦Á. by  1  
		 1 
likewise 
 k¦Ì m  1  ¦Á m1 w  = 1 iff w |= ¦Á
and k¦Ì m  1 w  = k¦Ì m  1  ¦Á   1 
since ¦Á |= ¦Ì  for any w |= ¦Á we have k  ¦Ì  by  1 . since ¦Ì    ¦Á ¡Ô  ¦Á and 1|=  ¦Á  it follows from lemma 1 that k¦Ì m  1  ¦Á  = k  ¦Á    k  ¦Ì . hence 
 1  is equivalent to
 k¦Ì m  1  ¦Á m1 w  = 1 iff w |= ¦Á and k w  = k  ¦Á 
this and  1  implies . condition  ec1  can be proved analogously.
¡¡we prove condition  eind  by contradiction. to begin with  from the assumption that it follows that 1|= ¦Â and 1|= ¦Ì   ¦Â. furthermore  there exists w such that
. with the
help of  1   this implies k ¦Â  = k ¦Ì   ¦Â .
¡¡now assume that . it follows that there exists w1 such that   and k¦Ì m  1 w1  = k¦Ì m  1 ¦Â . since k w  = k ¦Â  and w1 |=  ¦Â  we have k w1  ¡Ý k w . hence by  1   k¦Ì m  1 w1  = k w1  + m1   k ¦Â . but from lemma 1 it follows that
  since 1|= ¦Â and |1= ¦Ì   ¦Â. this contradicts k¦Ì m  1 w1  = k¦Ì m  1 ¦Â .	1
¡¡theorem 1 and 1 show that postulate  ind  is consistent with the km and dp postulates. on the other hand   ind  does not follow from these postulates  which can be seen by the fact that  ind  is incompatible with  cb   the postulate that characterizes natural revision.
¡¡it is worth mentioning that revisions based on ordinal conditional functions are particularly suitable for implementations of belief revision. for instance   jin and thielscher  1  presented a method  and its implementation  for revision of belief bases which is equivalent to the belief revision defined by  1 .
1 related work and conclusions
the first dp approach  darwiche and pearl  1  seemed excessively strong because one of the postulates   c1   is inconsistent with the classical agm framework  as pointed out by  freund and lehmann  1 . apart from the solution by  darwiche and pearl  1   namely  to use a modified version of km  which we followed in this paper   several other proposals were made to overcome the inconsistency. for instance  lehmann proposed a different way of weakening the agm postulates accompanied by quite different additional postulates for iterated revision  in which a belief state consists of a sequence of revision sentences  lehmann  1 . nayak et al. suggested to retain the original agm framework and to consider a belief revision operator as a unary function  associated with a belief state . the idea is to view belief revision as dynamic  in the sense that the operator evolves after each step  nayak et al.  1; 1 . on the other hand  one point has been generally accepted  namely  that iterated belief revision should not be considered as a purely set-theoretical change of belief sets but as an evolution of belief states  which encapsulate beliefs with some kind of information of the firmness of beliefs  zhang  1 .
¡¡the problem of the dp postulates to be overly permissive was already studied by nayak et al.   1; 1 . they suggested to strengthen the dp postulates by the following socalled postulate of conjunction:
 conj  if ¦Ì 1|=  ¦Â  then  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â ¡Ô ¦·    ¦Â ¡Ä ¦Ì .
it is easy to see that  conj  implies another postulate  which they called postulate of recalcitrance:
 rec  if 1|= ¦Â    ¦Ì  then  ¦·   ¦Ì    ¦Â |= ¦Ì.
¡¡in the following  we argue that postulate  conj   while strengthening the dp postulates  is overly strict. to this end  we show that even postulate  rec  is too strong. the latter says that  as long as ¦Â    ¦Ì is not a tautology  it should be canceled after a successive revision by ¦Ì followed by ¦Â  no matter how strong the initial belief in ¦Â    ¦Ì. a simple example shows that this behavior is not reasonable:
example 1 all her childhood  alice was taught by her parents that a person who has told a lie is not a good person. so alice believed  initially  that if bob has told a lie then he is not a good person. after her first date with bob  she began to believe that he is a good guy. then a reliable friend of alice warns her that bob is in fact a liar  and alice chooses to believe her. now  should alice still believe that bob is a good guy 
¡¡according to postulate  rec   alice should not challenge bob's morality and still believe he is good  and hence to disbelieve what her parents taught her. but it is at least as reasonable to give up the belief that bob is good. this shows that postulate  rec  is too strict a criterion for belief revision operators.
¡¡with regard to the postulate we have proposed in this paper  it is easy to see that  ind  is a weakening of postulate  rec . this raises the question whether postulate  ind  weakens too much. let us consider an example  taken from  nayak et al.  1   which  at first glance  seems to show that this is indeed the case.
example 1 our agent believes that tweety is a singing bird. however  since there is no strong correlation between singing and birdhood  the agent is prepared to retain the belief that tweety sings even after accepting the information that tweety is not a bird  and conversely  if the agent were to be informed that tweety does not sing  she would still retain the belief that tweety is a bird. imagine that the agent first receives the information that tweety is in fact not a bird  and later learns that tweety does not sing.
nayak et al. claimed that it is only reasonable to assume that the agent should  in the end  believe that tweety is a nonsinging non-bird. indeed  with ¦· ¡Ô singing ¡Ä bird it follows from postulate  rec  that  ¦·    bird     singing |=  bird  since 1|=  singing   bird. postulate  ind   on the other hand  does not apply in this case. but the behavior which is claimed to be the only reasonable one is not generally justified. suppose  for example  the agent initially believes firmly that  singing   bird. it is then possible  after revising by  bird  that the belief in  singing   bird is stronger than the belief in  bird. in this case  after further revising by  singing  the agent believes that tweety is a bird after all.
¡¡in  zhang  1   it has also been argued that postulate  rec  is too radical because only those revision operators are admissible which assign the highest belief degree to the new evidence. this can be considered a further justification of our postulate  ind . moreover  it is easy to verify that postulate  ind  is satisfied by all revision operators with memory  konieczny and perez ¡ä 1 .
¡¡we have formally justified our new postulate by a representation theorem and a concrete revision operator which satisfies both  ind  and km/dp. other concrete revision operators have been proposed  e.g.  in  williams  1   which also use ordinal conditional functions. the main difference is that these operators do not satisfy the independence postulate.
