
recent years have seen a revived interst in semantic parsing by applying statistical and machinelearning methods to semantically annotated corpora such as the framenet and the proposition bank. so far much of the research has been focused on english due to the lack of semantically annotated resources in other languages. in this paper  we report first results on semantic role labeling using a pre-release version of the chinese proposition bank. since the chinese proposition bank is superimposed on top of the chinese treebank  i.e.  the semantic role labels are assigned to constituents in a treebank parse tree  we start by reporting results on experiments using the handcrafted parses in the treebank. this will give us a measure of the extent to which the semantic role labels can be bootstrapped from the syntactic annotation in the treebank. we will then report experiments using a fully automatic chinese parser that integrates word segmentation  pos-tagging and parsing. this will gauge how successful semantic role labeling can be done for chinese in realistic situations. we show that our results using hand-crafted parses are slightly higher than the results reported for the state-of-the-art semantic role labeling systems for english using the penn english proposition bank data  even though the chinese proposition bank is smaller in size. when an automatic parser is used  however  the accuracy of our system is much lower than the english state-of-the-art. this reveals an interesting crosslinguistic difference between the two languages  which we attempt to explain. we also describe a method to induce verb classes from the proposition bank  framefiles  that can be used to improve semantic role labeling.
1 introduction
recent efforts on semantic annotation have made it possible to train domain-independent semantic systems  gildea and jurafsky  1; gildea and palmer  1; hacioglu et al.  1; sun and jurafsky  1; pradhan et al.  1; xue and palmer  1 . most of the semantic annotation projects focus on the predicate-argument structure  which represents a predicate and a number of arguments that are expected of this predicate. generally each expected argument is assigned a label that marks the role this argument plays in relation to its predicate. it is in the level of generalization these role labels represent that the various annotation efforts differ. the most general are a limited set of roles such as agent and theme that are globally meaningful  chen et al.  1 . the role labels used in framenet  baker et al.  1  are less general in that they are meaningful only with respect to a specific situation  more formally known as a semantic frame. for example  the label byr is only meaningful in the  commercial transaction  frame. one reflection of this reduced generality is that it is realized with a small class of predicates that indicate transaction  e.g. purchase  rent. the least general are the labels used in the propbank annotation. the propbanks  palmer et al.  1; xue and palmer  1  use predicate-specific labels arg1  arg1  ... argn for arguments and argm combined with a
secondary tag to mark adjunct-like elements. the secondary tags indicate types of adjuncts and represent generalizations across all verbs.
　the predicate-specific approach of the propbank annotation builds a solid foundation for making high-level generalizations in a bottom-up manner  if broader generalizations are needed. there is generally a straightforward mapping from the numbered role labels to more general roles such as agent and theme. it is much harder to derive these semantic concepts from syntactic representation because an argument may not always be realized  and when it is  it may not always be realized in the same syntactic position as a result of syntactic alternations  levin  1   etc.. in addition  different senses of a verb take different sets of arguments that demonstrate different syntactic patterns. thus  predicate-argument structure recognition at this level represents a crucial leap towards proper representation of semantic structure from the syntactic structure.
　so far  most of the work on automatic semantic role labeling has been devoted to english due to the lack of resources in other languages. in this paper we present first results on the chinese proposition bank  xue and palmer  1 . while sun and jurafsky  did preliminary work on chinese semantic role labeling using 1 selected verbs  our experiments will be on the all the verbs in the chinese proposition bank. we discuss the linguistic annotation of the chinese proposition bank in section 1. we describe our experiments using hand-crafted parses in section 1. in particular  we describe a method of automatically inducing verb classes and use this information as features in semantic role labeling. in section 1  we describe our experiments using a fully automatic character-based parser. section 1 discusses our experimental results and the facilitating and exacerbating factors in chinese semantic role labeling in comparison with english. section 1 concludes this paper.
1 the chinese proposition bank
in this section we briefly examine the annotation scheme of the penn chinese propbank  xue and palmer  1 . the chinese propbank is based on the chinese treebank  xue et al.  to apear   which is a 1k-word corpus annotated with syntactic structures. the semantic annotation in the propbank is added to the appropriate constituents in a syntactic tree. this is illustrated in table 1. the newly added semantic role labels are in bold. the predicate  l pass  in table 1 has two numbered arguments  arg1 {ii  u.s. congress  and arg1s 1{ interstate banking law . it also has a temporal semantic adjunct  argm-tmp   c recently . in addition to the arguments and adjuncts  the predicate  l pass  is also annotated with a frameset identifier  f1  which uniquely identifies the frameset of this verb instance.
ip
arg1
	pass	 1{
interstate
banking law
the u.s. congress recently passed the interstate banking law.
table 1: a treebank tree annotated with semantic role labels and frameset id
　the frameset represents a major sense defined by the set of arguments a predicate takes. for example   1  and  1  represents two different framesets of the predicate  l pass  because its arguments in those two cases are different. the two arguments for frameset f1 can be described as  a legislative body  and  the law  regulations  etc. that are passed   while the two arguments for frameset f1 are  an entity in motion  and  a location the entity passes through . note that the two instances of  l pass  within  1  or  1  do not belong to different framesets since they share the same set of arguments  even though the arguments may be realized in different places  if realized at all. in  1b   the  legislative body  argument is dropped and the  law  argument is realized in the subject position instead of the object position  1a .
 1  a.  arg1 {i i     c  f1  l     arg1
	the u.s. congress	recently	pass	asp
1s  1{     interstate banking law	.
 the u.s. congress passed the interstate banking law recently. 
b.  arg1s  1{    c  f1  l      interstate banking law recently pass asp .
 the interstate banking law passed recently. 
 1  a.  arg1     1 f1  l   arg1       train	now	pass	tunnel	.
 the train is passing through the tunnel. 
b.  arg1     1 f1  l    train 1 pass	.
 the train is passing through. 
　the task of semantic role labeling is to use the role labels as categories and classify each argument as belonging to one of these categories.
1 semantic role tagging with hand-crafted parses
in this section we describe a system that does semantic role labeling using gold standard parses in the chinese treebank as input. to be used in real-world natural language applications  a semantic role tagger has to use automatically produced constituent boundaries either from a parser or some other means  but experiments with gold standard input will help us evaluate how much of a challenge it is to map a syntactic representation to a semantic representation  which may very well vary from language to language.
1 classifier
for our purposes here  we use a maximum entropy classifier with a tunable gaussian prior in the mallet toolkit1. the maximum entropy classifier does multi-category classification and thus can be straightforwardly applied to the problem here. the classifier can be tuned to minimize overfitting by adjusting the gaussian prior.
1 architecture
the propbank annotation is predicate-centered in that sense that only constituents that are semantic arguments and adjuncts  in a loose sense  to a predicate are annotated. since the treebank sentences are very long and generally contain several verbs  the majority of the constituents are not related to the predicate in question. one obvious strategy is to assign a null label to the unannotated constituents  but it is a known fact that when negative samples  null constituents in this case  overwhelm positive samples  constituents that are actually annotated   the classifier will be heavily biased towards null constituents. most systems find a way to filter out some of the negative samples to make the classification task more balanced. for example   hacioglu et al.  1  uses a two-stage architecture where a binary classifier is first used to label all the constituents as either null or non-null  and then a multi-category classifier is run on the non-null constituents to assign the semantic role labels. xue and palmer uses a three-stage architecturein which some negativesamples are first filtered out with heuristics that exploit the syntactic structures represented in a parse tree. a binary classifier is then applied to further separate the positive samples from the negative samples and finally a multiply-category classified is applied to assign the semantic role labels to the positive samples. in our experiments we adopt the same three-stage strategy described in  xue and palmer  1 . first the heuristic algorithm is adapted to take advantage of the syntactic structures in the penn chinese treebank  which uses a different set of syntactic categories. the algorithm starts from the predicate that anchors the annotation  and first collects all the syntactic complements of this predicate  which are represented as sisters to the predicate. it then iteratively moves one level up to the parent of the current node till it reaches the appropriate top-level node. this top-level node can be an ip  cp  or np depending on what their parent nodes are. for example  if the parent node of a cp is an np  then this cp is very likely a relative clause and the head of this np is a possible argument to the predicate  via a trace. in this case the algorithm will collect all sisters of this cp. at each level  the system has a procedure to determine whether that level is a coordination structure or a modification structure. the system only considers a constituent to be a potential candidate if it is an adjunct to the current node. punctuation marks at all levels are skipped. it is worth pointing out that the functional tags and traces are not used to determine the candidates to allow for fair comparison with results from using automatic parses  where they are not available. after this initial procedure  a binary classifier is applied to distinguish the positive samples from the negative samples. a lower threshold is used for positive samples then negative samples to maximize the recall so that we can pass along as many as positive samples as possible to the final stage  which is the multi-category classification.
1 data
in all our experiments we use a pre-release version of the
chinese proposition bank. this version of the chinese proposition bank  xue and palmer  1  consists of standoff annotation on the first 1 articles  chtb 1.fid to chtb 1.fid  of the penn chinese treebank1. this chunk of the data has 1k words and 1 sentences. the total number of verb types in this chunk of the data is 1.1. following the convention of the english semantic role labeling experiments  we divide the training and test data by the number of articles  not by the verb instances. this pretty much guarantees that there will be unseen verbs in the test data. for all our experiments on semantic role labeling  1 files  chtb 1.fid to chtb 1.fid  are used as training data and the other 1 files  chtb 1.fid to chtb 1.fid  are held out as test data. however  our parser is trained on all the data in most current version of the penn chinese treebank except for the test data that has been set aside. that is  in addition to the training data for the semantic role labeling experiments  it also uses the rest of the treebank which has not been propbanked.
1 features
one characteristic of feature-based semantic role modeling is that the feature space is generally large. this is in contrast with the low-level nlp tasks such as pos tagging  which generallyhave a small feature space. a wide range of features have been shown to be useful in previous work on semantic role labeling  gildea and jurafsky  1;pradhanet al.  1; xue and palmer  1 and we suspect that manymore will be tested before they will settle down with a core set of features. in their preliminary work on chinese semantic role labeling  sun and jurafsky  has successfully adapted a number of the features to chinese. in our experiments more features that have been described in recent work on english semantic role labeling are adapted to chinese. we briefly discuss these features and explain at an intuitive level why these are useful features for semantic role labeling where necessary. our focus  however  will be on how verb classes can be induced from  frame files  from the penn proposition bank and be used as features  which we will discuss in greater detail in the next subsection. the features that we use are listed below:
  position: the position is defined in relation to the predicate verb and the values are before and after.
  path: the path between the constituent in focus and the predicate.
  head word and its part of speech: the head word and its part-of-speech is often a good indicator of the semantic role label of a constituent.
  predicate: the verb itself.
  subcat frame: the rule that expands the parent of the verb.
  phrase type: the syntactic category of the constituent in focus.
  first and last word of the constituent in focus
  phrase type of the sibling to the left
  syntactic frame: the syntactic frame consists of the nps that surround the predicate verb. this feature is defined

and 1 articles.
1
　　these include the so-called stative verbs  which roughly correspond to adjectives in english.
by the position of the constituent in focus in relation to this syntactic frame  xue and palmer  1 .
  combination features: predicate-head word combination  predicate-phrase type combination.
　the reason why the position feature is useful is obvious since constituents receiving a particular semantic role label may occur in some typical positions. for example  the majority of the adjuncts  argms occur before the verb in chinese. the path feature  defined as the route from the constituent in focus to the predicate  represents a more  fine-grained  position. while the values for the simple position feature are just  before  or  after   the values for the path feature can represent syntactic notions like  subject  or  object . for example  a subject may be representedas  np●ip◎vp◎vv and an object may be represented as  vv●vp◎np . intuitively the path feature is more informative than simple position features but they are also sparse because they are more specific.
　the head word and its part-of-speech are clearly informative for semantic role labeling. for example  a noun phrase headed by  jintian/today  is very likely to be a temporal element. so is a prepositional phrase with the head word  zai/at . however  for propositional phrases  the preposition is not always the most informative element. sometimes the head word of the np complement is more predictive of the semantic category. for example  in the prepositional phrase  zai/at beijing/beijing   the np head  beijing/beijing  is more telling of the fact that it indicates a location. so for prepositional phrases we use both the preposition and the head noun as features in our system. as has been discussed in sun and jurafsky  the head word feature also tends to be sparse  especially given the smaller size of the penn chinese treebank. the chance of seeing a word in the test data that also occurs in the training data is small. the pos tag serves as one form of backoff: constituents headed by words that have the same part-of-speech are likely to receive the same semantic role labels as well.
　the first-word-in-the-constituent and the phrase label of the left sibling features are from  pradhan et al.  1  and the interested reader is referred to their work for an explanation of why these are useful features. we also implemented features that are described in xue and palmer . these include the syntactic template features  predicate head word combination features and predicate phrase type combination features. for details of these features the reader is referred to  xue and palmer  1 .
1 using verb classes to improve semantic role labeling
with the current experiment setup  as is also the case in most of the work on semantic role labeling  training data and testing data are not divided by verb instances but by the number of articles. as a result  it is expected that the verb instances are not evenly divided. it is even possible that some verbs can only be found in the training data and other verbs can only be found in the test data. by our count  there are 1 verb types in the training data and 1 verb types in the test data. 1 verb types that occur in the test data are absent from the training data and conversely  1 verb types are in the training data only. since the semantic role labels are defined with regard to the individual verbs  this can be a real problem since the model learned in the training process does not optimally fit with the test data if different verbs are involved. fortunately  many verbs have similar argument structures and therefore are annotated with similar semantic role labels in the chinese proposition bank. for examples  verbs like  jiada/enlarge    jiaju/make more drastic    jiakuai/accelerate    jiaqiang/strengthen    jiashen/deepen    jiasu/accelerate    jiazhong/give more weight   jiagao/make higher  all take two arguments  a theme that undergoes a change of state and an external force or agent that brings about the change of state. these verbs are uniformly annotated and they all have two numbered arguments arg1 and arg1 with arg1 denoting the cause and arg1 denoting the theme. it would make sense to group these verbs together into a class and use this information as features in the semantic role labeling task. having a membership in a particular class says something about the predicate-argument structure of a verb and when a verb is absent in the training data  which is the familiar sparse data problem  the class information may tell the system how to label the semantic roles of the verbs belonging to a particular class.
　although to our knowledge no such classification exists for chinese verbs based on the predicate-argumentstructures  a rough classification can be automatically derived from the frames files  which are created to guide the propbank annotation. we classified the verbs along three dimensions  the number of arguments  the number of framesets and selected syntactic alternations.
number of arguments: verbs in the chinese proposition bank can have one to five arguments  with the majority of them having one  two or three arguments. verbs with zero argument are auxiliary verbs 1 like  bi/will    deyi/be able to    gai/should    gan/dare    ke/may    ken/be willing to    neng/can    nenggou/can    xu/must    yingdang/should  and some other light verbs. verbs that have five arguments are change of state verbs like  yanchang/lengthen    suoduan/shorten   jiangdi/lower    tigao/increase    kuoda/enlarge    suoxiao/make smaller . these verbs generally take as arguments a theme that undergoes the change of state  the original state  the new state  the range of the change and the cause or agent that brings about the change.
number of framesets: a frameset roughly corresponds to a major sense. this information is used because it is common that the different framesets of a verb can have different number of arguments. for example  verbs like  pingheng/balance  can be used either as a non-stative verb  in which case it means  balance   or a stative verb  in which case it means  balanced . when it is used an a non-stative verb  it takes two arguments  the thing or situation that is balanced and the balancer the entity that maintains the balance. when it is used as a static verb  obviously it only takes a single argument.
syntactic alternations: we also represent certain type of syntactic alternations. one salient type of syntactic alternation is the well-known  subject of intransitive / object of the transitive  alternation described in detail in levin  levin  1 . chinese verbs that demonstrate this alternation pattern include  chuban/publish . for example   zhe/this ben/cl shu/book  plays the same semantic role even if it is the subject in  zhe/this ben/cl shu/book chuban/publish le/as  and the object in  zhe/this jia/cl chubanshe/publishing house chuban/publish le/asp zhe/this ben/cl shu/book .
　thus each verb will belong to a class with a symbol representing each of the three dimensions. for example  a given verb may belong to the class  c1a   which means that this verb has two framesets  with the first frameset having one argument and the second having two arguments. the  a  in the second frameset represents a type of syntactic alternation. 1 classes are derived in this manner.
　such a classification scheme will undoubtedly prove to be linguistically unsophisticated. verbs that have the same number of arguments may have different types of arguments  and the current classifications system do not pick up these distinctions. however  our experiments show that such a simple classification  when used as features  significantly improves the semantic role labeling task.
1 using automatic parses
previous work  sun and jurafsky  1  on chinese semantic role labeling uses a parser that assume correct  hand-crafted  segmentation. as word segmentation is a very challenging problem that has attracted a large body of research by itself  it is still unclear how well semantic role tagging in chinese can be performed in realistic situations. in our experiments  we use a fully automaticparser that integratessegmentation  pos tagging and parsing. our parser is similar to  luo  1 . the parser is trained on ctb1  using the training data described in the previous section. tested on the held-out test data  the labeled precision and recall are 1% and 1% respectively for all sentences. the results are comparable with those reported in luo  luo  1   but they cannot be directly compared with most of the results reported in the literature  where correct segmentation is assumed. in addition  in order to account for the differences in segmentation  each character has to be treated as a leaf of the parse tree. this is in contrast with word-based parsers where words are terminals. since semantic role tagging is performed on the output of the parser  only constituents in the parse tree are candidates. if there is no constituent in the parse tree that shares the same text span with an argument in the manual annotation  the system cannot possibly get a correct annotation. in other words  the best the system can do is to correctly label all arguments that have a constituent with the same text span in the parse tree.
1 results and discussion
the results of the semantic role labeling are presented in table 1. the verb class information  when used as features  improves the semantic role labeling accuracy by about 1 percent when the gold standard parses are used. when the parser is used  however  the improvement is insignificant. the 1 percent that our system achieved using hand-crafted parses is fairly highconsideringthe fact that the state-of-the-artsemantic role labeling systems trained on the english proposition bank  palmer et al.  1  is around 1 percent  pradhan et al.  1; xue and palmer  1  and the english proposition bank is a much larger corpus  with 1 million words. there are several facilitating factors for chinese semantic role labeling when hand-craft parses are provided as input. first of all  chinese verbs appear to be less polysemous  at least the ones that occur in the penn chinese treebank. of the 1 verbs in this version of the chinese proposition bank  only 1 verbs have 1 or more framesets. in contrast  1 verbs out of the 1 verbs in the penn english proposition bank has 1 or more framesets. when a verb is less polysemous  the arguments of the verb tend to be realized in a more uniform manner in syntax. as a result  the argument labels are easier to predict from their structure in a correct parse tree. chinese seems to compensate this fact by using a larger number of verbs. this becomes obvious when we consider the fact that 1 verbs are from just 1k words and the 1 verbs in the english proposition bank is from one million words! a related fact is that adjectives in chinese are traditionally counted as verbs and they generally have only one argument with a much simpler syntactic realization.
experimentsclassp  % r % f % known constituents  gold non/an/a1known constituents  gold yesn/an/a1unknown constituents  gold no111unknown constituents  gold yes111unknown constituents  parser no111unknown constituents  parser yes111table 1: results
　we also believe that a more subtle explanation for the higher semantic role labeling accuracy given the annotation of the chinese treebank is the fact that the chinese treebank has richer structure. by using less flat structures and more hierarchical structures  the chinese treebank resolves some of the attachment ambiguities that are useful for semantic role labeling. for example  the complement and adjunct in a vp in the chinese treebank are attached in different syntactic configurations with regard to the verb. since complements are generally numbered arguments and adjuncts are generally argms  the semantic role labeler can take advantage of this fact it tries to determine when a constituent is a numbered argument or an adjunct.
　this apparent advantage in chinese semantic role labeling is diminished when an automatic parser is used. first of all  the hierarchical structures in the hand-craft parses that aid semantic role labeling are hard to recover with an automatic parser. resolving the many attachmentambiguities caused by the hierarchical structures in language is the one of the most difficult problems in parsing literature. parsing chinese in a realistic scenario is especially difficult given that word segmentation must be performed as a prerequisite. chinese word segmentation is a non-trivial problem that has been the topic of a lot of research in the chinese language processing community. it is still a very much unsolved problem  with the current state-of-the-artaccuracy being around 1 percent  sproat and emerson  1 . this is in contrast with the much less difficult problem of english tokenization. the segmentation errors are very difficult to recover in later parsing stages. another property of chinese that exacerbates parsing is the lack of formal clues. for example  determining whether a word is a verb or noun in chinese can be difficult because chinese does not have a rich inflection system to aid pos tagging.
1 conclusions and future work
we presented first experimental results on chinese semantic role labeling using a pre-release version of the chinese proposition bank. we show that verb classes  induced from the predicate-argumentinformationin the  frame files   helps semantic role labeling. we also show that given gold standard parses  chinese semantic role labeling can be performed with considerable accuracy. in fact  even though the chinese proposition bank is a smaller corpus the english proposition bank  we achieved results that are slightly higher than the state-of-the-art english semantic role labeling systems. on the other hand  even though our experiments using a fully automatic parser yields promising results  the accuracy is much lower than the english state-of-the-art. we suggest that the lower accuracy when an automatic parser is used is due to the fact that determining the argument boundaries in chinese using a parser is a very challenging task because word segmentation is a prerequisite and word segmentation errors are hard to recover in the parsing stage. the lack of formal clues such as inflection morphologyalso makes pos tagginga verydifficult task. since parsing assumes accurate word segmentation and pos tagging  word segmentation and pos tagging errors naturally translate into parsing errors. once these bumps are overcome  however  semantic analysis actually gets easier  compared with english  due to the lower degree of polysemy.
　naturally there is a lot to be done in chinese semantic role labeling  with the first order of business being to improvechinese parsing. we also need to conduct more experimentswith the features to figure out which features are most useful for chinese.
acknowledgements
we would like to thank zixin jiang  meiyu chang and gang chen for their annotation efforts. this work is funded by the nsf itr via grant 1-1-xxxx-1.
