
yaman et. al.  yaman et al.  1  introduce  go theories  to reason about moving objects. in this paper  we show that this logic often does not allow us to infer that an object is not present at a given place or region  even though common sense would dictate that this is a reasonable inference to make. we define a class of models of go-theories called coherent models. we use this concept to define a motion closed world assumption  mcwa  and develop a notion of mcwa-entailment. we show that checking if a go-theory has a coherent model is np-complete. an in atom checks if a given object is present in a given region sometime in a given time interval. we provide sound and complete algorithms to check if a ground in literal  positive or negative in atom  can be inferred from a gotheory using the mcwa. in our experiments our algorithms answer such queries in less than 1 second when there are up to 1 go-atoms per object.
1 introduction
reasoning about moving objects is becoming increasingly important. air traffic controllers in both the us and europe are facing a dramatically increasing workload as the number of flights increases. cell phone companies are increasingly interested in knowing where cell phones on their network are located - this is useful for hand-off policies between cell phone towers. vehicle security systems such as lojack and onstar are increasingly being used to determine where vehicles are and where they are not.
¡¡ yaman et al.  1  proposed the concept of a  go theory  which can be used to make statements of the form  object o is expected to leave location p1 at some time point in the interval and reach location p1 at some time point in the interval  traveling at a velocity between v1 and v1. go theories can be used  for example  to make statements such as  plane p1 is expected to take off from paris at some time between 1 and 1 and land at boston at some time between 1 and 1 traveling at a speed between 1 to 1.  go theories are sets of such statements. figure 1 shows the spatial layout of one such go-theory  the go theory is written in text at the top .  yaman et al.  1  provides a model theory for go theories 

figure 1: planes example
together with algorithms to check entailment of certain kinds of atoms:  in  atoms that check if a given moving object is within a given region at a given time  and  near  atoms which are used to check if two objects are within a given distance of each other at some time.
¡¡though the semantics given by  yaman et al.  1  is adequate for positive atoms  it is inadequate for negative atoms. for example  suppose we consider the go-theory containing just the two statements above about plane p1. in this case  we would like to infer that plane p1 is not in detroit at time 1  even though it may be theoretically possible for the plane to make it to detroit. the goal of this paper is to ensure that intelligent negative inferences of this kind can be made from go-theories.
¡¡the contributions and organization of this paper are as follows: in section 1  we recapitulate the syntax of go-theories from  yaman et al.  1 . in section 1  we introduce the concept of a coherent model of a go-theory  and describe the concept of coherent entailment. we also introduce the motion closed world assumption  mcwa for short  and show how the mcwa can be used to reason about negative information. also in section 1  we show that the problem of checking if a go-theory has a coherent model is np-complete. in section 1  we provide algorithms to evaluate  in  literals w.r.t. the mcwa semantics. we are developing algorithms to process other kinds of queries such as the near literals described in  yaman et al.  1  - however  space reasons prevent us from presenting them. section 1 describes a prototype implementation to answer positive and negative  in  queries - the implementation shows that our system is highly scalable. we compare our work with related work in section 1.
1 go-theories: syntax and semantics
we first provide a quick overview of the main definitions of  yaman et al.  1 . we assume the existence of several sets of constant symbols: r is the set of all real numbers  o is the set of names of objects  p = r ¡Á r is the set of all points in two-dimensional cartesian space. we assume the existence of three disjoint sets of variable symbols  vr  vo  and vp  ranging over r  o and p  respectively. a real term t is any member of r ¡Èvr. object terms and point terms are defined similarly. ground terms are defined in the usual way. we now define atoms as follows.
  if o1 o1 are object terms  and d t1 t1 are positive real terms  then near o1 o1 d t1 t1  is an atom. when these terms are ground  this atom says that o1 o1 are within distance d of each other during the time interval  t1 t1 .
  if o is an object term  p1 p1 are point terms  and t1 t1 are positive real terms  then in o p1 p1 t1 t1  is an atom. when these terms are ground  this atom says that object o is in the rectangle whose lower left  resp. upper right  corner is p1  resp. p1  at some point in the time interval  t1 t1 .
  if o is an object term  p1 p1 are point terms  and  are positive real terms  then go is an atom called a go atom. when all these terms are ground  this atom says that object o leaves point p1 at some time in and arrives at point p1 during   traveling in a straight line with a minimum speed v  and maximum speed v+.
ground atoms are defined in the usual way. a go theory is a
finite set of ground go-atoms.
notation. if then
obj g  = o v  g  = v  v+ g  = v+ loc1 g  = p1   loc1 g  = p1  .if a is an atom  then a and  a are called literals. due to space constraints  we only consider literals in this paper -  yaman et al.  1  provide a richer syntax including conjunction and disjunction.
¡¡an interpretation is a continuous function i : o ¡Á r+ ¡ú p. intuitively  i o t  is o's location at time t. we first define satisfaction of a  go  atom w.r.t. a given time interval.
definition 1 let g = go be an atom and i be an interpretation. i satisfies g over a time interval t =  t1 t1  iff:
 and i o t1  = p1  and i o t1  = p1
   t ¡Ê  t1 t1   i o t  is on the line segment  p1 p1 
   t t1 ¡Ê  t1 t1   t   t1 implies dist i o t  p1    dist i o t1  p1  where dist is the function that computes the euclidean distance between two points.
  for all but finitely many times in  t1 t1   v = d |i o t | /dt is defined and v  g  ¡Ü v ¡Ü v+ g .
the above definition intuitively says that i |= g over a time interval t =  t1 t1  iff o starts moving at t1  stops moving at t1 and during this interval  the object moves away from p1 towards p1 without either stopping or turning back or wandering away from the straight line connecting p1 and p1. we are now ready to define the concept of satisfaction of arbitrary literals.
definition 1 i satisfies a ground literal  denoted i |= a  in these cases:
1.  iff there exists an interval  t1 t1  such that i satisfies a over  t1 t1 .
1. i |= near o1 o1 d t1 t1  iff dist i o1 t  i o1 t   ¡Ü d for all t1 ¡Ü t ¡Ü t1
1. i |= in o p1 p1 t1 t1  iff there are numbers t ¡Ê
 t1 t1   x ¡Ê  p1x p1x  and y ¡Ê  p1y p1y  such that i o t  =  x y .
1. i |=  a iff i does not satisfy a.
i satisfies  or is a model of  a set of ground atoms mt iff i satisfies every a ¡Ê mt. mt is consistent iff there is an interpretation i such that i |= mt. l is a logical consequence of mt  denoted mt |= l  iff every model of mt is also a model of l.
example 1 the planes go-theory of figure 1 is consistent as the interpretations i1 i1 below both satisfy it.
  i1 : p1 leaves paris at time 1  flies to boston at a constant speed of 1 and arrives in boston at 1. p1 waits in boston until 1  then it departs for paris with a
constant speed of 1 arriving in paris at 1. the other plane  p1 leaves london at time 1 and flies to delhi at a constant speed of 1  arriving in delhi at 1.
  i1 : p1 leaves paris at time 1  flies to boston at constant speed of 1 and reaches boston at 1. it waits in boston until 1  when it takes off for detroit where it arrives at time 1. it immediately departs and reaches boston at time 1. at time 1  p1 leaves boston and flies to paris at a constant speed of 1  arriving in paris at time 1. the other plane  p1 leaves london at time 1 and flies to delhi at a constant speed of 1  arriving in delhi at 1.
it is important to note that even though i1 satisfies the planes go theory  it is an interpretation that allows plane p1 to wander around in ways that were not explicitly stated in the planes go theory. in particular  it lets the plane wander to detroit which was never mentioned in the go-theory. we would like to exclude such  wandering  interpretations as they prevent us from making the intuitive  nonmonotonic  inference that plane p1 was never in detroit.
¡¡throughout the rest of the paper we are going to use the notation g o  to denote the set of all atoms about an object o in a go theory g.
definition 1 let g be a go theory  o be an object and g o  = {g1 g1 ... gn}. then for every gi gj ¡Ê g o  we define a partial order  such that. a total order v on g o  is compatible with g o  iff v is a
topological sort of .
definition 1 suppose g is a go theory  o is an object and v is a total order compatible with g o . then l g o  v  is set of linear constraints such that
  for every ¡Ê
g o   l g o  v  contains:
-  
- v  ¡Á eg  sg  ¡Ü dist p1 p1  ¡Ü v+¡Á eg  sg  
  for every g g1 ¡Ê g o  such that g v g1  l g o  v  contains: eg ¡Ü sg1.
intuitively sg eg are variables that represent the times o starts and stops moving.
definition 1 a go theory g is non-collinear iff for each object o there are no g g1 ¡Ê g o  such that
  the intersection of line segments  loc1 g  loc1 g   and  loc1 g1  loc1 g1   is a line segment  p q  
  the direction of the movement in g and g1 is same  i.e.   k ¡Ê r+ such that ~v = k ¡Á ~u where ~v = loc1 g    loc1 g  and ~u = loc1 g1    loc1 g1 
 and  i.e. temporally overlapping.
the following theorem establishes necessary and sufficient conditions for non-collinear go theories to be consistent.
theorem 1 a non-collinear go theory g is consistent iff for every object o there is a total order vo compatible with g o  such that l g o  vo  has a solution.
1 coherence
in this section  we define the concept of a coherent interpretation. we start by defining precedence of time intervals.
definition 1  precedence  let s = {t1 ...tn} be a set of time intervals  where ti =  ti1 ti1  for each i. ti immediately precedes tj in s if ti1 ¡Ü tj1 and for every tk ¡Ê s  either tk1 ¡Ü ti1 or tk1 ¡Ý tj1.
intuitively  i is a coherent interpretation of a go theory g if for each object o  there is a time interval t such that for every time point t ¡Ê t  i o t  either satisfies a go-atom in g or keeps the object at the destination of the last satisfied go-atom in g .
definition 1  coherent model and theory  let i be a model of the go theory g. let g o  = {g1 g1 ... gn} be the set of all go-atoms in g about object o. i is coherent w.r.t. o and g iff
 i  there are time intervals t1	=	 t1 t1   t1	=
 t1 t1   ...  tn =  tn1 tn1  such that for each i  i satisfies gi over ti and
 ii  for every pair of time intervals ti  tj such that ti immediately precedes tj in {t1 t1 ... tn} the following holds:
 t ¡Ê  ti1 tj1  i o t  = loc1 gi   i.e. destination of gi.
i is a coherent model of g iff i is coherent w.r.t. o and g for all objects o.
g is a coherent go-theory iff g has a coherent model.
example 1 let g be the go theory in figure 1. let i1 and i1 be the two interpretations in example 1. i1 is coherent with respect to g and p1 because it satisfies g1 over  1   g1 over  1  and in between  1  plane p1 is in boston. i1 is not coherent with respect to g and p1 because although it satisfies g1 over  1   g1 over  1  during  1   p1 does not stay in boston which is the destination of g1.
¡¡the following lemma and definition are useful in checking whether a non-collinear go-theory has a coherent model or not.
definition 1 suppose g is a non-collinear go theory  o is an object and v is a total order compatible with g o . let g1 v g1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ v gn be the atoms of g o . v is spatially continuous w.r.t. g o  iff for every i  1 ¡Ü i   n  loc1 gi  = loc1 gi+1  
i.e.  gi's destination is gi+1's origin;
lemma 1 suppose g is a non-collinear go theory. g is coherent if for every object o there is a total order vo compatible with g o  such that l g o  vo  has a solution and vo is spatially continuous w.r.t. g o .
¡¡the following theorem shows that checking coherence of a go-theory is np-complete.
theorem 1  i  checking coherence of a non-collinear go theory is np-complete.  ii  checking coherence of a go theory is np-complete.
the proof is omitted due to lack of space. we now define the concept of coherent entailment.
definition 1  mcwa entailment  let l be a ground literal and g be a go theory. g entails l via mcwa  denoted
g|=mcwal  iff every coherent model of g also satisfies l.
the mcwa is inspired by minker's generalized closed world assumption  minker  1  where a class of models is used to check if a given literal is true. we do the same here. the following example shows that the mcwa can handle examples such as the planes example.
example 1 let g be the go theory in figure 1. let i1 and i1 be the interpretations in example 1. suppose a = in p1  1   1  1 . g|=mcwaa since in all coherent models of g  during  1  plane p1 is in boston which is inside the rectangle of the atom a.
¡¡suppose b = in p1  1   1  1 . then g|=mcwa b since in all coherent models of g  during  1  plane p1 stays in boston which is not in the rectangle of the atom b.
¡¡also note that g 1|= a and g 1|=  b because according to the semantics in  yaman et al.  1  plane p1 can be anywhere during  1 .
theorem 1 let l be a ground in   literal and g be a go theory. checking if g|=mcwal is co-np complete.
¡¡since incoherent theories entail everything the following section describes algorithms for coherent go theories.

figure 1: spatial layout of two go atoms  related to object o  going from p1 to p1 and p1 to p1 and a rectangle r. in a coherent model  o stays in r between the points p1 and p1.
1 mcwa-entailment algorithms
this section provides algorithms to check for mcwaentailment of both positive and negative ground literals. due to space limitations we assume all theories are non-collinear go theories. extending our algorithm to remove this assumption is straightforward using the methods defined in  yaman et al.  1  that combine collinear go atoms into  movements - our implementation applies to all go theories. we first introduce some notations. if g is a go atom  then ls g  is the line segment between the source and destination of g. let g be a go-theory  o be an object and v be a total ordering compatible with g o . let p be a point on ls g  where g ¡Ê g. then t  g o  v g p  and t+ g o  v g p  are the earliest and latest possible times for o to be at p  subject to g o  v and g. 1
1 coherent in  
in this section  we show how to check whether a ground atom of the form a = in o q1 q1 t1 t1  is mcwa-entailed by a go-theory g. let rec a  denote the set of points p such that q1x ¡Ü px ¡Ü q1x and q1y ¡Ü py ¡Ü q1y.
¡¡we first consider a non-collinear go theory g={g1 g1} about an object o  and an atom a = in o q1 q1 t1 t1 . assume figure 1 depicts rec a  and the two line segments  p1 p1   p1 p1  representing movements defined by g1 and g1. in any coherent model of g  g1 will be satisfied before g1. hence the object enters rec a  at p1 and leaves rec a  at p1. if o always arrives at p1 before t1 and always leaves p1 after t1 subject to the constraints in g  then we can say that g|=mcwaa.
¡¡for an arbitrary go theory  any object might enter and leave rec a  multiple times. we need to identify these entrance and exit points as well as the atoms that contain them.
definition 1 let l be a sequence of line segments `1 =
 p1   `1 =  p1  ...  `n =  pn1pn1  such that for

1  
¡¡¡¡t  g o  v g p  is the solution to linear programming problem: minimize xp g subject to l g o  v  ¡È l p g   where
l p g  contains the following linear constraints:

where xp g is the variable that represents the time the object will arrive p while satisfying g. sg and eg are the variables associated with g in l g o  v . t+ g o  v g p  can be computed in the same way  using maximization instead of minimization.
1 ¡Ü i   n  pi1 = p i+1. let r be a rectangular region. an entry-exit of l for r is  i j  iff
  `i ¡É r 1=   and i   1 =  pi1 ¡Ê1	r
  `j ¡É r 1=   and j   n =  pj1¡Ê r
   k ¡Ê  i j  pk1 ¡Ê r
the following lemma gives necessary conditions for g|=mcwaa when the atoms in g are satisfied in a specific order and the object enters and exits rec a  multiple times.
lemma 1 let g be a coherent go theory  o be an object and v be a total order compatible with g o  such that l g o  v  has a solution and v is spatially continuous w.r.t g o . let g1 v g1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ v gn be the atoms of g o . let a = in o q1 q1 t1 t1  be an atom. if g|=mcwaa then there is an entry-exit  i j  of ls g1 ...ls gn  for rec a  such
that
¡¡t+ g o  v gi pi  ¡Ü t1 and t1 ¡Ü t  g o  v gj qj . where  pk qk  = ls gk  ¡É rec a  
the following algorithm uses this lemma to check for mcwa-entailment w.r.t. a specific total ordering.
algorithm checkcoherentin g v a 
suppose a = in o q1 q1 t1 t1 ; let g1 v g1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ v gn be atoms of g o 
if v is not spatially continuous w.r.t g o  then return true if l g o  v  has no solution then return true
for each entry-exit  i j  of ls g1 ...ls gn  for rec a 
let  pi qi  = ls gi  ¡É rec a  let  pj qj  = ls gj  ¡É rec a 
if t+ g o  v gi pi  ¡Ü t1 and t1 ¡Ü t  g o  v gj qj 
then return true
end for return falsetheorem 1 suppose g is a coherent go-theory and a = in o q1 q1 t1 t1  is a ground atom. then: a is entailed by g via mcwa iff for every total order v compatible with g o   the algorithm checkcoherentin g v a  returns  true .
1 coherent  in  
we now address the problem of checking whether a literal of the form  in o q1 q1 t1 t1  is mcwa-entailed by a gotheory g.
¡¡consider a coherent go theory g={g1 g1} about an object o  and an in-atom a = in o q1 q1 t1 t1 . as before figure 1 depicts rec a  and two line segments  p1 p1   p1 p1  representing the movements defined by g1 and g1. note that in any coherent model of g  g1 is satisfied before g1. hence the object enters rec a  at point p1 and leaves rec a  at point p1. g|=mcwa a iff
  t1 is greater than or equal to the start time of g1 in any coherent model of g.
  t1 is smaller than or equal to the end time of g1 in any coherent model of g.
  let t1 be the earliest arrival time to p1 and t1 be the latest arrival time to p1 in any coherent model of g then t1   t1 or t1   t1.
¡¡the following lemma gives necessary conditions for g|=mcwa a to hold w.r.t. a specific total ordering v even if the object enters and exits rec a  multiple times.
lemma 1 let g be a coherent go theory  o be an object and v be a total order compatible with g o  such that l g o  v  has a solution and v is spatially continuous w.r.t. g o .
let g1 v g1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ v gn be the atoms of g o . let a = in o q1 q1 t1 t1  be a ground atom. if g|=mcwa a then the following hold
  t+ g o  v g1 loc1 g1   ¡Ü t1
  t  g o  v gn loc1 gn   ¡Ý t1
    entry-exit  i j  of ls g1 ...ls gn  for rec a   t  g o  v gi pi    t1 or t+ g o  v gj qj    t1 where  pk qk  = ls gk  ¡É rec a .
the following algorithm checks if g|=mcwa in   w.r.t. a specific total ordering.
algorithm checkcoherentnotin g v  a 
suppose a = in o p1 p1 t1 t1 ;
let g1 v g1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ v gn the atoms of g o .
if v is not spatially continuous w.r.t g o  then return true if l g o  v  has no solution then return true if t1   t+ g o  v g1 loc1 g1   return false if t1   t  g o  v gn loc1 gn   return false
for each entry-exit  i j  of ls g1 ...ls gn  for rec a  let  pi qi  = ls gi  ¡É rec a  let  pj qj  = ls gj  ¡É rec a 
if t  g o  v gi pi  ¡Ü t1 and t1 ¡Ü t+ g o  v gj qj  then return false
end for return truetheorem 1 suppose g is a coherent go-theory and l =  in o q1 q1 t1 t1  is a ground literal. then l is entailed by g via mcwa iff for every total order v compatible with g o   the algorithm checkcoherentnotin g v a  returns  true .
1 implementation
determining mcwa-entailment is co-np complete because the number of orderings spatially continuous w.r.t. g o  can be exponential. however  in the real world  we expect a gotheory to allow only a small number of orderings compatible with g o . in other words  the respective order of movements an object is going to perform is mostly known. for example we might not know exactly when the plane p1 will land but we usually know where it is going to fly next. thus  in practice there is a bound on the number of compatible total orderings per object.
¡¡for our experiments we generated random go theories with at most 1 spatially continuous orderings. this is not a hardcoded limit of our implementation. generating random gotheories such that more than one spatially continuous ordering exists is a little bit tricky. here is one method to generate a go theory g = {g1 g1 g1 g1 g1} with two spatially continuous orderings.
  randomly pick points p1  p1  p1 and p1
  set loc1 g1  = p1 and loc1 g1  = p1 
  set loc1 g1  = p1  loc1 g1  = p1 and loc1 g1  = p1  loc1 g1  = p1 
  set loc1 g1  = p1  loc1 g1  = p1 and loc1 g1  = p1  loc1 g1  = p1 
  set temporal and speed intervals of every gi so that g1 is always first and the rest can be done in any order.
we have generalized the reasoning above to create random go theories with an arbitrary bound on the number of spatially continuous orderings.
¡¡we have implemented the two algorithms checkcoherentin and checkcoherentnotin in matlab and conducted experiments on a mobile athlon xp 1 processor running under windows xp and having 1mb of memory. figure 1 shows the computation time of four types of queries for coherent go theories with at most 1 spatially continuous orderings and have the following properties: all points are selected randomly from the rectangle   1   1   and the speeds allowed for any object less than 1. the four query templates we used are:
q1: in o  1   1  1   h 1   h 
q1: in o  1   1  h   1 h   1 
q1:  q1 q1:  q1
¡¡where h is the latest end time for any atom related to o in the given theory. the data points in figure 1 are an average of 1 runs.
¡¡our implementation performs very well  executing most queries in less than 1 seconds even when there are as many as 1 go-atoms per object. in the query q1 where checkcoherentin returns true in almost every compatible orderings the algorithm runs in linear time with respect to number of atoms per object and takes up to 1 seconds when there are 1 go-atoms per object. consequently q1  the complement of q1  takes almost no time because checkcoherentnotin returns false for any compatible ordering.
1 related work
the closed world assumption  cwa  proposed by  reiter  1  holds that anything that cannot be entailed by a theory is false. minker  minker  1  extended the cwa to a generalized cwa  gcwa  that accounts for disjunction. gcwa states that a formula is false if it is false in all minimal models of the theory. the go-theories proposed by  yaman et al.  1  are disjunctive because the start and end times and object velocities are all known to be within a given range. the notion of a coherent model of a go-theory selects certain models  much like minker selected minimal models in gcwa  and uses these to make closed world inferences.
¡¡ intille  1; intille et al.    have used the cwa to track moving objects in football games using computer vision algorithms. they use cwa to adaptively select and weight image features used for correspondence. no motion reasoning of the type we perform in this paper is done.
¡¡numerous spatio-temporal logics exist  gabelaia et al.  1; merz et al.  1; wolter and zakharyaschev  1;

figure 1: time to answer queries q1 q1 q1 and q1 when total number of spatially continuous orderings is at most 1.
cohn et al.  1  have proposed spatio-temporal logics. these logics extend temporal logics to handle space. by and large  these frameworks use discrete rather than the continuous representations we use. moreover  these works focus on qualitative aspects of spatio-temporal reasoning  rather than deal quantitatively with the dynamics of motion. our methods are rooted in a mix of geometry and logic  rather than in logic alone. cohn  anthony g. cohn  1  provides an excellent survey of spatio-temporal logics but the survey sheds little light on reasoning above motion. a notable exception is the work of muller  muller  1a; 1b  who describes a formal qualitative theory for reasoning about motion. the expressive power of the theory allows for the definition of complex motion classes. the work however is purely symbolic not quantitive.
1 conclusions
yaman et. al.  yaman et al.  1  introduce a logic based on  go theories  for reasoning about moving objects. in this paper  we show that this logic often does not allow us to infer that an object is not present at a given place or region  even though common sense would dictate that this is a reasonable inference to make. we define a class of models of go-theories called coherent models. we use this concept to define a motion closed world assumption  mcwa  and develop a notion of mcwa-entailment. we show that checking if a go-theory has a coherent model is np-complete. an in atom checks if a given object is present in a given region during a given time interval. we provide sound and complete algorithms to check if an in literal  positive or negative in atom  can be inferred from a go-theory using the mcwa. in our experiments our algorithms executed queries in less than 1 second even when there are as many as 1 go-atoms per object.
acknowledgements
this	work	was	supported	in	part	by	aro	grant
daad1 	arl	grants	daad1	and daal1  the arl ctas on telecommunications and advanced decision architectures  nsf grants iis1 and iis1 and 1 and uc berkeley contract number sa1  subcontract from darpa's real program . the opinions expressed in this paper are those of authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the funders.
