
we describe a system in which simple  identical  autonomous robots assemble two-dimensional structures using prefabricated modules as building blocks. modules are capable of some information processing  enabling them to share longrange structural information and communicate it to robots. this communication allows arbitrary solid structures to be rapidly built using a few fixed  local robot behaviors. modules are identical in shape but may be functionally distinct  with constraints governing the location of different classes. we present algorithms for assembly of solid structures of any shape  both when the layout of module classes is fully specified in advance  and when functional constraints are satisfied duringthe buildingprocess  allowing for adaptive structures. this approach demonstrates a decentralized  autonomous  flexible  simple  and adaptive approach to construction.
1	introduction
in this paper we discuss the design of a system for automated construction  in which elements are separated into mobile and structural components  robots and modular blocks  respectively . our approach is to use robots that are simple in capabilities and behavior  and that communicate indirectly through information stored in the environment; that information is embodied by the blocks  which themselves can communicate with one another when attached. here we focus on construction when the blocks are identical in shape but heterogenous in function  and a given set of functional constraints governs how they can be put together. we first show how specific structures can be built  and then discuss the assembly of structures which have no prespecified plan but satisfy a given set of constraints.
모our approach relies on very simple procedures and therefore should be practical for the complexities and difficulties of real robots in physical environments. the limited requirements for implementation are that robots be able to follow a perimeter  communicate with immediately adjacent blocks  and push together blocks with self-aligning connectors. problems  from unexpected environmental influences to breakdown of some robots  need not prevent completion of a structure; temporary failures at any step can be corrected.
모the ability to automate construction would be useful particularly in settings where human presence is dangerous or problematic; for instance  robots could be initially sent to underwater or extraterrestrial environments  to create habitats to await later human travelers. swarm approaches  involving larger numbers of simpler robots rather than one or a few with greater sophistication  have advantages for such a goal  in particular with respect to decentralization and robustness. such systems can typically absorb the loss of many components without a significant impact on task completion; similarly  they tolerate components acting in no specified order  a useful quality since it is difficult to preplan robot behavior in detail in uncertain environments.
모if blocks can be arbitrarily custom-designed for particular structures  then any structure can be built using only local rules for assembly; a trivial  inefficient way to do it is to designate specific blocks for specific locations in a blueprint  and engineer the blocks so that each one can be attached solely to the neighboring blocks in that layout.1 however  we take the opposite approach  assuming that the block types are defined by the application  and our task is to work within those limits.
모an example of such an application is the building of underwater structures  for marine research  oil drilling  etc.   where the buildingblocks are high-levelprefabricatedpods that each fill one of several distinct and predefined roles-living quarters  power generation  emergency escape centers  laboratory space  etc. there may be desired constraints on which classes are attached relative to which other classes-for instance  using the previous example  we might want all living pods to be located in a contiguous block  or no two airlock pods to be adjacent to one another.
모in 뫫1 we review related work  and in 뫫1 describe the problem we address and our assumptions about the system. 뫫1 gives algorithms the system can use to assemble structures. 뫫1 covers geometric constraints on block placement. 뫫1 and 뫫1 describe structures which are fully prespecified or adaptive  respectively  and elaborate on the satisfaction and specification of functional constraints. 뫫1 discusses issues associated with the use of multiple robots.
1	related work
several previous papers address topics related to construction  though not with the goal of producing user-specified building designs. for example   wawerla et al.  1; jones and mataric뫣  1  study aspects of the use of communication among robots  to increase their effectiveness on tasks involving rearrangement of functionally heterogenous blocks.  bowyer  1  discusses issues of mechanical design for robots meant to build arches  towers  and walls  using extruded foam.  melhuish et al.  1  deals with minimization of capabilities for behavior-based robots arranging pucks into walls  using environmental cues.
모 werfel  1  describes a framework for arranging blocks into arbitrary lines and curves  specified geometrically;  mason  1  describes one in which structures can be specified through the use of static  global 'pheromone' signals. both make assumptions about the precision with which their mobile agents operate  the former having to do with odometry  the latter with ability to evaluate the strength of distant signals  that may cause the shapes they generate to suffer from lack of robustness to noise.
모our approach is particularly motivated by research in two areas: insect and insect-inspired construction  the뫣raulaz and bonabeau  1   and self-reconfigurable modular robotics  rus and chirikjian  1 . social insects which build do so with the principle of stigmergy  communicating indirectly by storing information in the environment. while this approach can be used to produce structures with given qualitative characteristics  it does not easily allow the consistent production of specific structures  potentially arbitrary and complicated ones ; nor has a general principle been described for taking a particular desired structure and extracting a set of lowlevel behaviors that building agents can follow to produce it. work in modular robotics has produced hardware systems with many capabilities we will take advantage of here  including connections that self-adjust so that inexact alignment is corrected  and communication links between physically attached modules. such communication is reliable  unambiguous  rapid  and scalable  compared to the communication by external signaling that robots typically use. modular robot algorithms typically require that all modules remain connected at all times  and that individual modules be capable of mobility  neither of which are appropriate for automated construction applications. very recently  modular robotics researchers have begun to describe hardware systems for automated assembly of structures  terada and murata  1; everist et al.  1 . these systems are based on inert  identical modules  and have not yet explored issues of specifying distributed robot behavior and creating complex userspecified structures.
모elsewhere we describe a similar system to that presented here  werfel et al.  1   concerning identical blocks only. there we show that giving blocks limited communication abilities is an effective way to enable the system to construct arbitrary solid structures  while allowing robots to remain simple and with fixed  local behaviors. the block communication provides the nonlocal knowledge about the structure necessary to assemble arbitrarily complicated shapes.

figure 1: a sketch of the kind of system described here. as the structure is assembled  it forms a lattice with an implicit coordinate system  of which the beacon can be taken to be the origin.
this approach provides other benefits  including increased efficiency of construction  alleviation of interference between robots  and better exploitation of the parallelism of the swarm  without requiring additional capabilities from the robots. as computation becomes less expensive  it has been proposed to make it more pervasive  hill et al.  1 . particularly if the building blocks in question are high-level units  as in the underwater application suggested above  it should be feasible to incorporate these computation capabilities into the blocks without making the system prohibitively more expensive.
1	general problem and assumptions
we consider the problem where mobile robots and caches of building blocks are deployed at random into an obstacle-free workspace  along with a beaconindicatingthe location for the start of construction. the goal is for robots to collect blocks from the caches and arrange them into a structure  satisfying some set of criteria  starting at the beacon  fig. 1 . the beacon and caches send out distinct long-range signals which robots can use to navigate to them. each cache contains a single block type.
모we will work with square blocks  to be assembled in the horizontal plane. an important constraint is that a block can be added to the growing structure if and only if the potential attachment site has at least two adjacent sides open; otherwise there is insufficient room to maneuver to add the new block  fig. 1 . though a system has been demonstrated in which cubical blocks can be slid into spaces like that at  d  in that figure  terada and murata  1   the task of mechanical design will be simplified and the precision with which robots must operate reduced if we maintain this constraint. in particular  if we prevent gaps like that at  d   then situations where a robot needs to maneuver a block down a longer 'tunnel'  like that around  c   will also be prevented. a block attached to the structure can immediately obtain from its neighbors its

figure 1: examples of valid and invalid prospective docking sites for a sample structure  shaded squares represent grid sites already occupied by blocks . a new block can be attached at a or b; c and d are too spatially constrained to allow a block to be maneuvered into position.
position in a common coordinate system  along with information about the present and desired final structure. blocks along the perimeter of the structure and robots traversing the perimeter can also communicate  with lower bandwidth; this communication is very short-range  avoiding problems associated with signaling over distances  interference when many robots are active  and ambiguity in which agents are signaling.
모robots can move in any direction in at least the two dimensions of the plane  alone or while holding a block. they can detect the presence of other robots  for collision avoidance  either by active short-range signaling or by passive perception. once in the immediate vicinity of the growing structure  they can follow its perimeter  and communicate with adjacent blocks.
1	algorithms for blocks and robots
blocks attached to each other to form the structure have access to informationabout the entire structure  via communication with other blocks. our approach will be for blocks to be the agents responsible for ensuring that the structure remains consistent with all the constraints. robots can then simply circle the perimeter of the structure  and rely on it to tell them when a site is acceptable for attachment of their payload.
모we can divide the constraints on block placement into two classes: those independent of block type  and those based solely on block type. geometric constraints  the former  ensure that the structure is free of unwanted internal gaps and has a perimeter of the desired shape. functional constraints  the latter  encompass whatever restrictions based on block types may be dictated by the particular application. both classes are discussed further below  뫫1 .
모algorithm 1 summarizes high-level procedures for robots and blocks to follow to build structures using this approach.
1	robustness
physical robots in real-world environments are subject to a wide variety of internal and environmental perturbations. a hardware implementation would need to be robust to such factors. our approach is intended to minimize the effect or likelihood of problems that robots and blocks might encounter. it relies on simple basic capabilities that can be made robust and self-correcting: directed movement  block algorithm 1 high-level pseudocode procedure for assembly of a close-packed structure by a single robot.

a: robots while structure not complete do
choose a block type t get t from cache go to structure perimeter while still holding block do
ask adjacent structure blocks if t can be attached here if all structure blocks answer yes then
attach block here
else if taking too long to find a place for block then
return block to cache
else move one site counterclockwise along perimeter
b: blocks loop
if neighboring robot asks to attach a block of type t at site s then
if  block at s consistent with geometric constraints  and  t at s consistent with functional constraints  then
answer yes update map with t block at s
모pass message about  t s  to neighboring blocks else
answer no
if neighboring block sends message about t at s then
if message represents new information then
update map with t block at s pass message about  t s  to neighboring blocks

pickup  perimeter following  block joining  limited communication with immediate neighbors.
모noise affecting robot movement  e.g.  due to motor unreliability or currents in an underwater setting  can be compensated for. for instance  if robots lose track of the perimeter during their tour  they need only revert to a previous step of their algorithm  find the perimeter again and proceed from there. the lack of robot internal state means no important information is lost in such an event. self-aligning connectors drawn from modular robotics effect the fine details of block attachment. communication between robots and blocks can be physically limited  e.g.  through appropriate geometric design of an optical interface  to ensure that robots only communicate with immediately neighboring blocks and that crosstalk with more distant blocks is prevented. interblock communication is via a physical interface.
모more serious robot failures can also be absorbed. in keeping with the swarm approach  the algorithm does not depend on particular robots completing particular assigned tasks  nor on blocks being attached in a particular order. thus breakdowns of individualrobots almost anywhere in the workspace need not impede the system's ability to complete the structure. the exception is at the edge of the growing structure  where a broken robot could serve as an obstacle to others following the perimeter  and prevent growth of the structure in that area. such perimeter breakdowns would need to be detected and towed away by other robots.
모blocks  less complicated mechanically  may be less subject to failure. malfunctions that do occur could be detected by neighboring blocks  which could alert robots to the need for replacement. similarly  in the event that a block is mistakenly attached to the structure so as to violate a constraint  the active nature of the blocks makes it easier to detect and report that error. 뫫1 outlines a scheme for disassembly and reconstruction of the necessary part of the structure.
1	geometric constraints
positions can be specified by reference to the common coordinate system which blocks share via their communication.
1	rectangular structures
the simplest possible perimeter is a rectangle; the geometric constraint enforcing that shape is simply a restriction against robots attaching blocks at sites with coordinates outside the desired rectangle.
모the other geometric constraint to be followed is the generally applicable one that the structure should be solid  without internal holes. to avoid unwanted gaps  it is necessary to avoid situations where two blocks end up in the same row  unless they are adjacent. a block can check  based on its communication with the other blocks in its row  werfel et al.  1   whether a potential attachment site satisfies this criterion  and forbid robots from attaching further blocks at that site if it does not. this rule is sufficient to generate solid structures.
1	complex shapes
with only a small modification  the system extends to solid structures with perimeters which are not necessarily rectangular  nor even convex  but can be of any arbitrary shape.1as usual  the desired shape is specified with respect to the shared coordinate system and downloaded by each new block attached to the structure. to achieve the extension to arbitrary shapes without letting unwanted gaps creep in  it is sufficient to relax the geometric rule against attaching two non-adjacent blocks in the same row  to allow two such blocks so long as they are separated by space intended never to be occupied by blocks. the desired shape can be represented compactly  e.g.  as a collection of rectangles whose superposition gives the desired structure  st y and nagpal  1 . fig. 1 gives an example of an h-shaped structure being built  with geometric constraints only.
1	functional constraints: patterned structures
an important aspect of such a construction system  hitherto unaddressed  is the ability to create predefined patterns of block types. this can be achieved with functional constraints that act as a blueprint  specifying exactly what block type

figure 1: snapshots of five robots  brown  building a structure of a single block type  white   using only geometric constraints. sites that the structure plan specifies should eventually be occupied by blocks are shown in dark gray. robots not appearing in a particular frame are off fetching blocks.

figure 1: snapshots of ten robots  white  building a structure of four block types  yellow  red  blue  green .
should be attached at every location in the desired structure. this specification can be more compact than a full enumeration  just as an image specification can be more compact than a bitmap. structure blocks forbid robots to attach the blocks they carry unless the latter are the single type allowed at the site in question. figs. 1 and 1 shows rectangular and nonrectangular structures built using such functional constraints.
1	functional constraints: adaptive structures
in many cases the design of structures does not require specific patterns  but rather requires functional relationships between the locations of blocks of various types. for instance  with the underwater habitat example we gave above  it may be that the exact locations of escape pods are unimportant  but safety considerations require that no pod be further than three steps away from one. any structure that satisfies that constraint will be considered acceptable. the more relevant way to specify the constraint in this case is by reference not to absolute coordinates  but to relationships between the block types. our approach extends naturally to building structures in this flexible way. figs. 1 and 1 show structures built using relative constraints of this sort.
모it is always a valid approach to come up with a blueprint ahead of time that satisfies all such constraints  give that to the system  and have it produce that particular structure. but satisfying constraints on the fly during the building process instead can let the structure be adaptive  and respond to changing circumstances or conditions unknown in advance.
모satisfying constraints on the fly can have additional benefits  such as increased speed of construction. as an example  consider the class of 1 뫄 1-block structures of fig. 1. if we assume that robots take no time to bring blocks from caches to the structure perimeter and movingone blocklength and attaching a block each take one time step  then the time required to build a structure will reflect primarily the

figure 1: example of a patterned structure with a complex shape.

figure 1: examples of square structures built with two block types and the constraint that no two yellow blocks be adjacent.
time robots spend following the perimeter looking for a place to put their block. averaging over 1 independent runs with 1 robots  on-the-flyconstructioncompletesin 11time steps  while building exactly the same 1 structures as prespecified patterns takes 11 steps  or 1% slower on average. robots come to the structure already carrying some type of block; the speedup for on-the-fly construction occurs because sites can accept any type of block consistent with the constraints  rather than having to wait for a particular block type to appear  and robots can accordingly find places to attach their blocks more readily.
1	satisfiability
a task involving fitting a given set of blocks into a given shape subject to given constraints may have no solution; and if one exists  it may be hard to find. in general  the problem of finding a solution to such a scenario  or showing that none exists  is np-complete  van emde boas  1 . however  many cases of interest will have the property that a solution can be found quickly by a straightforward trial  and no exhaustive search is necessary. the system here provides a natural and effective way of assembling structures for constraint sets that are easy to satisfy in this sense. constraint sets difficult to satisfy would best be handled by finding a solution prior to construction  and building that solution as a blueprint.
1	types of functional constraints
in general  there are several classes of functional constraints we can consider:
  absolute  without reference to neighboring blocks: e.g.  type a may be attached; b is forbidden.
  proximity  where the types of neighboringblocks are important but their locations are not: e.g.  every a must have at least one b somewhere within a neighborhood of radius 1; no c can be adjacent to a d.

figure 1: example of a structure assembled according to the following list of constraints:
region 1  border of upper-left area: only blue blocks allowed. region 1  interior of upper-left area: blue and white blocks both allowed; no white block may be in the eightneighborhood of another white block.
region 1  elsewhere: blocks must be either red or white depending on their y-coordinate.
  relational  involving both types and locations of neighboring blocks: e.g.  every a must have a b bordering its west edge and a c bordering its north edge. rotation and reflection may each be allowed or forbidden in such a constraint.
모proximity and relational constraints imply an associated distance d within which blocks are relevant to satisfaction of the constraint. one approach is for blocks to maintain a local map of their area of the structure  whose size is at least of radius d. blocks refer to this map to determine whether robots should be allowed to attach blocks at a neighboring site; when a new block is attached  a message to that effect is sent to blocks within d  for them to update their maps accordingly. the larger the value of d  the more memory is required of blocks  but the farther-reaching constraints may be.
모another type of functional constraint can result from finite numbers of each block type. for instance  there might be only two blocks of type a  which must be attached adjacent to one another. the first a attached to the structure could be added anywhere  but the second would have to be next to the first. in order to give an a-carrying robot the proper instruction  blocks would need to establish whether another a had already been attached anywhere  a global property of the structure. having blocks maintain a global map of the structure would be the most straightforward way to ensure being able to handle all possible constraints  though not the most memory-efficient.
1	multiple levels
constraints may also be specified on multiple levels of organization. we can define different regions of the structure  in each of which some different set of constraints as listed above is to be imposed. figs. 1 and 1 give examples where such regions are designated according to specific coordinates. the former designates regions compactly by reference to geometric shapes and lines  e.g.  a region of red blocks is defined as those cells within a given distance from an arc with given center  radius  and endpoints  etc. . the latter combines patterned and adaptive constraints into a single structure.
모regions can be designated in this rigid way  or more fluidly: it may be permissible for a region to occur anywhere

figure 1: three examples of structures that can all equally well be built based on the constraints given in the text.
in the structure  with variable size  aspect ratio  orientation  multiplicity  etc. just as blocks can have proximity and relational constraints restricting their placement  so can regions occur in the structure in locations restricted based on the locations of other regions. dimensions  etc. of regions may also be specified with reference to each other  e.g.  region 1 must be larger than region 1 .
모moreover  regions can be nested in this framework. an application might  for instance  call for a complex  which is composed of wings. one wing might be residential  made up of apartments; another might be made up of lab spaces. an apartment can be broken down into bedroom  bathroom  kitchen  etc.; and so on until the lowest level  which is decomposed into blocks as before. each region may have its own constraints governing the placement of its sub-regions.
모figure 1 gives an explicit  abstract example. an 1뫄1 structure is constrained to have four 1뫄1 regions  one of type a  one b  two c. in a region of type a  only red blocks are allowed; in b  only blue blocks are allowed. in c  there must be four 1뫄1 subregions  one of type d  one e  two f. in a region of type d  only yellow blocks are allowed; in e  only green blocks are allowed. finally  a region of type f must contain an arrangement of {purple  cyan  magenta  white} blocks  in that order clockwise; rotation is permitted  reflection is not. a great variety of structures can be built consistent with this set of constraints  all equally valid; the figure shows three.
1	short- and long-term constraint satisfaction
there are two ways to satisfy the condition that no functional constraint be violated by attaching a block of type t at a site s. one is to consider only blocks that are part of the structure at that time. the condition is simply: if attaching t at s would result in a structure that violates any constraint  then forbid the attachment. the examples of figs. 1 were assembled in this way.
모in many cases  however  it will be desirable to look further ahead in time while ensuring constraints are met. for some constraint sets  situations may occur where attaching a block gives an acceptable structure  but one to which no further blocks can legally be attached. looking ahead can prevent becoming trapped in such dead ends. a structure like that of fig. 1 gives one example: guaranteeing exactly 1 'stars' would require looking ahead during assembly of region 1  to ensure sufficient remaining room for the white blocks not yet attached. it may also be desirable to allow constraints to be violated temporarily  so long as some future way of satisfying them remains possible. consider  e.g.  a structure of two block types  each of which is constrained always to have at least one neighbor of its own type. without the possibility of violating the constraint temporarily  the structure would necessarily turn out to consist entirely of one block type: no block of the other type could ever be attached  since it would have no neighbor of its own type until a second such block were attached to it.
모this looking ahead may be limited to a fixed number of steps f into the future. like functional constraints associated with larger d  larger f will be more powerful but more difficult for the blocks. putting no limit on f  so that blocks always look ahead to the completion of some finished structure  will be slow but will prevent the structure from getting trapped in dead ends of partial completion.
1	multiple robots
algorithm 1 gives a procedure which will work for a single robot. however  when more than one robot is working on construction at once  additional precautions need to be taken. finite speed of message propagation between blocks means that two robots can request to attach at mutually exclusive sites at about the same time  and both can be given permission by blocks working with outdated information.
모the violation of geometric constraints  two non-adjacent blocks being attached in the same row  can be prevented  e.g.  by sending messages to lock out a previously empty row when a robot requests to attach a block in it  and not giving the robot permission until all blocks in the adjacent row have indicated they have not and will not let other robots attach.
모for functional constraints with finite d  the corresponding approach is to lock out all blocks within radius d before giving a robot permission to attach. when d is large  and  in particular  since for some constraints d may extend over the entire structure   so doing can become unwieldy: considerable message-passing over the entire structure will take place for every block attached  and robots may be turned away from attaching more often than necessary.
모however  message-passing within the structure will be much faster than physical movement of robots. geometric constraints only require consulting with other blocks when the first block in a row is being attached  and typically  only a few blocks will need to be consulted ; thereafter  allowing or forbidding other blocks to be attached in the same row can be reliably done without communication within the structure  werfel et al.  1 . and d is small for many functional constraints of interest.
모all this means that  even without this strategy of locking out before attaching  errors should be infrequent. an alternative approach  then  is to correct errors when they arise rather than being scrupulousabout preventingthem in the first place. blocks can allow or forbid robots to attach based solely on their own knowledge; if that causes a conflict which is only detected later  the blocks can direct robots to correct the error by removing the offendingblocks  as described in 뫫1 below. 1 additional construction procedures
we briefly consider how two related procedures  disassembly and error correction  could be achieved with such a system.

figure 1: a structure in the process of disassembly. numbered blocks can be removed. the block marked x meets criterion 1 in the text but not 1; if removed  it would split the structure into two parts. the beacon may be at the location of any of the unmarked blocks.
1	disassembly
many applications will involve structures intended to be temporary; the modular nature of this system is especially suited to such cases  allowing a structure to be dismantled following use and its parts reused for another structure. disassembly can be accomplished by having robots follow the structure perimeter  removing any blocks they find that satisfy the following criteria:
1. it has at most two neighbors  bordering adjacent sides; i.e.  if that site were unoccupied  it could physically accomodate a block  as in fig. 1.
1. if it does have two neighbors along adjacent sides  then the other site which those two neighbors border is occupied by a block  see fig. 1 .
1. it is not attached at the beacon location  unless no other blocks remain; the block at the beacon must be the last one removed.
모again  blocks can determine whether they satisfy these criteria  and indicate that to robots. the second and third criteria ensure that throughoutdisassembly  the structure remains one contiguous piece  which a robot homing in on the beacon signal will be able to find. violating either of those rules can result in part or all of the remaining structure becoming isolated  and thereby lost to robots no longer able to reach it by the simple procedure of following the beacon signal to the structure and following the perimeter thereafter. if the structure is physically tethered to some anchor point via the first block attached  as would likely be the case  e.g.  in spacebased applications   then violating those criteria would mean that blocks could drift off and be lost in a more literal sense. care must also be taken with multiple robots that two blocks not be chosen for removal at the same time  such that each block considered alone satisfies the three criteria  but would violate criterion 1 if the other block were removed. blocks 1 and 1 in fig. 1 illustrate such a pair.
1	error correction
suppose that a block mistakenly ends up attached at a location where it should not be  or needs to be replaced due to malfunction or some other reason. it may be some time before this error arises or is detected; we will thus consider the problem of replacing any arbitrary block in the structure. we outline the high-level approach and omit elaboration of an algorithm to be carried out by individual blocks.

figure 1: error correction in a compound structure. the beacon is marked with the letter b; the block to be replaced is marked *. see text for discussion.
모because of our assumption that a block can only be removed from the structure if it is already free on two sides  it is necessary to removeall blocks in an entire 'quadrant'of the structure in order to free up the target block. fig. 1 demonstrates the demarcation of quadrants.  a  shows a completed compound structure; the beacon is marked with the letter b  and the block to be replaced is marked *. extending horizontal and vertical arms from the target block  as in  b   defines the four  overlapping  quadrants  crosshatched in  c - f . a quadrant is constructed essentially by flood-filling the area including and to one side of a pair of arms.
모note that in a compound structure  a quadrant may contain blocks whose absolute coordinates go beyond those of the associated arms  as in  d   where a quadrant nominally above the right-hand arm includes blocks that extend below it . also  any blocks that would otherwise be left isolated from the rest of the structure if a quadrant were removed must be included in that quadrant. this issue arises if an arm lies along an edge of the structure for all or part of its length. in this example  the right-hand arm lies along such an edge  at the top side of the second and third blocks from the target block; any blocks above and further along that arm must therefore be included in the quadrant nominally below it  as shown in  e .
모for efficiency  the quadrant containing the fewest blocks should be chosen for removal. as with disassembly  the block attached at the beacon must remain intact  and so any quadrants containing that beacon are omitted from consideration in this choice. here the quadrant in  f  contains the fewest blocks  but cannot be removed because it includes the beacon  as does the quadrant in  c  . the quadrant chosen for removal will be that in  e .
모blocks in the quadrant chosen forbid robots from attaching any further blocks to them  and ask to be removed. upon receiving such a request  some robots may switch their role temporarily from 'assembly' to 'disassembly'. once the target block has been removed  that section of the structure can be restored by construction as usual. construction may also progress as usual in other parts of the structure throughoutthe correction process.
1	conclusions
we have demonstrated that this approach  of building structures with communicating blocks and multiple simple robots  can achieve a variety of construction objectives. structures can be built with perimeters of any shape  and with prespecified patterns of block types or adaptive satisfaction of constraints. other approaches using swarms of simple robots have demonstrated the ability to create structures which satisfy locally specified constraints  the뫣raulaz and bonabeau  1;melhuish et al.  1 . however this system with communicating blocks is unique in its ability to handle fully specified and locally adaptive constraints alike.
모we are currently working on implementing a version of this system using the amour robot of the rus robotics lab at mit  vasilescu et al.  1 .
acknowledgments
we thank daniela rus  jason redi  and jake beal for useful discussions. this work was supported by nsf grant eia1.
