
logical filtering is the process of updating a belief state  set of possible world states  after a sequence of executed actions and perceived observations. in general  it is intractable in dynamic domains that include many objects and relationships. still  potential applications for such domains  e.g.  semantic web  autonomous agents  and partial-knowledge games  encourage research beyond immediate intractability results.
in this paper we present polynomial-time algorithms for filtering belief states that are encoded as first-order logic  fol  formulae. we sidestep previous discouraging results  and show that our algorithms are exact in many cases of interest. these algorithms accept belief states in full fol  which allows natural representation with explicit references to unidentified objects  and partially known relationships. our algorithms keep the encoding compact for important classes of actions  such as strips actions. these results apply to most expressive modeling languages  such as partial databases and belief revision in fol.
1 introduction
many everyday scenarios are dynamic and partially observable: a robot in one room cannot see the state of another room  a camera overlooking a bookshelf cannot detect the title of a book that is obscured  and one cannot readily observe the amount of money an agent has. many applications in such domains compute information about the current world state  belief state  i.e.  set of possible states or a distribution over such a set  after actions and observations. this computation is called filtering  also  state estimation  belief update  and database progression . they use this information to make decisions  answer questions  and explore.
¡¡filtering is intractable in general for discrete domains  eiter and gottlob  1   and much research is dedicated to its approximation in stochastic domains  e.g.   boyen and koller  1  . still  these approximations introduce unbounded errors many times  take unbounded computation time in others  and are not usable in most deterministic domains. recent progress on logical methods for filtering of propositional belief states  sets of states   amir and russell  1  with actions and observations has shown that exact filtering is tractable when belief states are represented as propositional formulae  and certain natural assumptions are met. still  many domains have propositional encodings that are too large or are not possible  e.g.  large numbers of objects  unknown number of objects  and observations with partial knowledge about identity of objects .
¡¡in this paper we present tractable algorithms and theoretical results for updating belief states that are represented in first-order logic  fol . these representations permit belief states of infinite sizes  uncertainty about the number of objects and their identity  and observations that do not distinguish between some objects. it also enables more compact representations than those of propositional logic.
¡¡we show that when actions map states 1  then we can update fol belief-state formulae efficiently  linear time in the representation size   after prior compilation. we also show that the representation remains of bounded polynomial size for two classes of actions  including those for which actions have simple case preconditions and actions with strips-like preconditions  non-conditional  and observed success/failure . for those we also present filtering algorithms that do not require precompilation for efficient update. this is in surprising contrast to the common belief that fol cannot be used efficiently for representing and updating partial knowledge  winslett  1; lin and reiter  1 .
¡¡on the way to these contributions we form the foundations and provide a theory for fol belief update. we relate deterministic situation calculus  reiter  1  with a first-order transition model  blass and gurevich  1 . there  every belief state is a set of fol models over the fol language of a state. we show that filtering such belief states can be captured exactly by deduction in fol  if the result of the filtering is definable in fol  this is the best we can hope for  lin and reiter  1  . also  we show that deduction can be carried out one time step at a time.
¡¡most work related to ours is limited to the propositional case  e.g.   amir and russell  1; boyen and koller  1  . important exceptions are  cravo et al.  1; dixon and wobcke  1   first-order agm belief revision    winslett  1   belief update and revision in simple subclasses of fol   and  lin and reiter  1   progression in situation calculus . the important difference that we draw with these works is that ours provides efficient inference procedures  while others focus on the use of general-purpose theorem provers  and intractability results.
1 semantics of first-order filtering
in this section  we study logical filtering with first-order structures. a first-order language has as nonlogical symbols  the variables  the function symbols and the predicate symbols. a 1-ary function symbol is called constant. note that among the binary predicate symbols must be the equality symbol =. we define the terms and formulas by the generalized inductive definition. variables and functions are terms. predicates are atomic formulas.
¡¡a first-order language is a language in which the symbols and formulas are as described above. we now turn to a description of the semantics of first-order languages. a structure s for a first-order language consists of:
1. |s|  the nonempty universe or domain of the structure s. the elements of |s| are called the individuals of s.
1. for each n-ary predicate symbol p  ps   |s|n. these tuples of the universe are those tuples on which p is true.
1. for each n-ary function symbol f  fs : |s|n ¡ú |s|.  in particular  for each constant e  es is an individual of s 
¡¡when a sentence ¦× is true in a structure s  we denote it by |=s ¦×. for example  suppose that in structure s  |s| = {b r}  for predicate in  ins = {hb ri}  for constant cs-r  cs-rs = {r}  and for constant cs-b  cs-bs = {b}. this world has a cs room  cs-r   a cs book  cs-b   and a predicate in which indicates whether a book is in a room. by this definition  sentence in cs-b  cs-r  is true in s.
¡¡we define logical filtering using situation calculus. the one that we use is compatible with the basic action theory of  reiter  1 . the basic action theory has the form d = ¦² ¡È dss ¡È dap ¡È duna ¡È ds1 where:
  ¦² are the foundational axioms for situations.
  dss is a set of successor state axioms.
  dap is a set of action precondition axioms.
  duna is a set of unique name axioms for actions. a  ¡úx   1= a¡ä  ¡úy     a  ¡úx   = a  ¡úy      ¡úx =  ¡úy where a and a¡ä are action symbols.
  ds1  the initial database  is a finite set of first-order sentences that are uniform in s1
definition 1  uniform formula . a formula is uniform in s if s is the only term of sort situation mentioned by that formula.
¡¡we define precondition axioms and successor state axioms as a part of basic action theory as follows.
definition 1  action precondition axioms . an action precondition axiom is a sentence of the form:1
¡¡poss a x1:n  s    preconda x1:n s  where a is an n-ary action symbol  and preconda x1:n s  is a formula that is uniform in s and whose free variables are among x1 ... xn s.
¡¡generally  the values of relations and functions in a dynamic world will vary from one situation to the next. relations whose truth values vary from situation to situation are called relational fluents. they are denoted by predicate symbols taking a situation term as their last argument. same argument is true about functions.
definition 1  successor state axioms . successor state axioms is defined for either a relational fluent or a functional fluent. a successor state axiom for an n-ary relational fluent p is a sentence of the form:
poss a x1:n  s     y1 ...  ym
¡¡¡¡¡¡ p y1:m do a x1:n  s     succp a x1:n y1:m s   where a is an action symbol  and succp a x1:n y1:m s  is a formula that is uniform in s and whose free variables are among x1 ... xn y1 ... ym s. we define a successor state axiom for a functional fluent in a similar way.
¡¡all changes to the world are the result of named actions. an action may be parameterized. for example  move b r1 r1  stands for the action of moving object b from room r1 to room r1. the intended interpretation is that situations are finite sequences of actions  and do a s  denotes the sequence formed by adding action a to the sequences s. in other words  do a s  is the successor situation resulting from performing the action a. we use situation calculus as foundations and semantics. later  section 1 onwards  we do not mention it because we always focus on belief states. however  it is used in the proofs of theorems and our results are applicable to it.
¡¡example consider a book keeper robot who lives in a world consisting of rooms. when the robot is in a room  it can make observations about the books in that room. it can move a book between rooms  it can return a book to the library from an arbitrary room or it can put a borrowed book in a room. so possible actions are move b r1 r1   return b r  or borrow b r . the actions which are executable in a world state can change the value of different predicates or functions. predicates are room r   book b  or in b r . there are no functional fluents except constants.
¡¡we define a precondition axiom and a successor state axiom for action move and skip the others.
  precondition axiom:
poss move b r1 r1  s    book b s ¡Äroom r1 s ¡Ä room r1 s  ¡Ä in b r1 s 
  successor state axioms:
poss move b r1 r1  s   
 b¡ä r¡ä  in b¡ä r¡ä do move b r1 r1  s    
   b¡ä = b  ¡Ä  r¡ä = r1     false
¡Ä  b¡ä = b  ¡Ä  r¡ä = r1     true
¡Ä    b¡ä = b  ¡Ä  r¡ä = r1  
	¡Ä   b¡ä = b  ¡Ä  r¡ä = r1      in b¡ä r¡ä s   	
the definition of progression and filtering semantics are as follows.
definition 1  transition relation of structures . for an action theory d and a structure s  we define a transition relation rd s a s¡ä  as follows.
rd = {hs a u1:n  s¡äi | |=s preconda u1:n  |s¡ä| = |s|  ps¡ä = {hs1:mi ¡Ê |s|m| |=s succp a u1:n s1:m }  fs¡ä = {hs1:m sri ¡Ê |s|m+1|
|=s succf a u1:n s1:m sr }}
¡¡we use  x/v  as a notion of substitution in which x is a vector of variables and v is a vector of variables and constants.  x/v  is a shorthand for  x1/v1 ...  in which  x1/v1  means replacing all instances of symbol x1 by symbol v1.
definition 1  logical filtering semantics . let ¦Ò be a set of first-order structures. we refer to it as belief state. the filtering of a sequence of actions  ground or not  and observations ha1 o1 ... at oti is defined as follows    refers to the empty sequence .
1. filter    ¦Ò  = ¦Ò;
1. filter a  ¦Ò  = {s¡ä | s ¡Ê ¦Ò  hs a s 	¡äi ¡Ê rd  a  = a x/v }
1.;
1.	 	i	i	t	t      =
filter hai+1 oi+1 ... at oti 
 filter oi  filter ai  ¦Ò   .
we call step 1 progression with a and step 1 filtering with o.
1 filtering of fol formulae
in the above definition  filtering is applied to a set of firstorder structures. in this section we use fol to represent belief states and we update this representation without explicit reference to the structures in a belief state.
1 fol theories and belief states
a belief state formula is a first-order theory  possibly infinite  that represents belief state. a structure is in belief state if and only if it satisfies the belief state formula. the use of a theory instead of a formula is required because the set of first-order consequences of a first-order formula is infinite and may not be representable by a fol formula.
¡¡for simplicity  we use the same logical connectives that we have for fol formulas. the meaning of those connectives on first-order theories is as follows: if   ¦× are theories of infinite size  then
    ¡Ä ¦× will mean   ¡È ¦×.
    ¡Å ¦× will mean {¦Á ¡Å ¦Â| ¦Á ¡Ê   ¦Â ¡Ê ¦×}  similar to de-morgan law .
  whenever applying negation     we will assume that   is a finite theory  thus  a logical formula 
  same for    can replace   with a new constant symbol 
¡¡thus  in the rest of the paper  whenever we say  belief state formula   we refer to a fol theory  unless sanctioned otherwise as above. from now on  we assume that our first-order language has no function symbols except constants.
1 basic algorithm
in this section  we show how we can progress an initial database represented by a logical formula after applying a single action or observation. the result of progression is a
new database that progression algorithm can use afterwards.
¡¡we define a predicate corresponding to each relational fluent whose truth value does not depend on the situation. the snapshot of system at time t only shows the truth values of predicates. the truth values of predicates would change while moving from one situation to the next. we represent predicates with the same symbol as relational fluents but with different arity.
¡¡suppose that p = {g1 ... gr} is the set of all constants and predicates. we define a new set of symbols
such that gi¡ä y1:n  = gi y1:n  p/p¡ä  where
 p/p   is a shorthand for . we view p as the set of predicates in situation s  and p¡ä as the set of predicates in situation do a s .
¡¡we filter a belief-state formula as follows.  we reuse filter ¡¤  ¡¤  for filtering a belief-state formula.  let ¦× be a belief state formula  a u1:n  be a grounded action  cn ¦·  be the set of logical consequences of ¦·  i.e. formulae ¦Õ such that ¦· |= ¦Õ   and cnl ¦·  be the set of logical consequences of ¦· in the language l. we write cnl ¦·   when l is a set of symbols  to mean cnl l  ¦· .
1. filter a u1:n   ¦×  =  cnp¡ä ¦× ¡Ä preconda u1:n ¡Ä
  y1:m p¡äi y1:m    succpi a u1:n y1:m ¡Ä
i
  y1:m z fi¡ä y1:m  = z   succfi a u1:n y1:m z    p¡ä/p 
i
1. filter o  ¦×  = ¦× ¡Ä o	 1 
when we filter with action a we assert implicitly that its precondition held in the last world state. if the action is not executable on the belief state  the new belief state would be false which indicates an empty set. we prove in the following theorem that this definition of filtering approximates the semantics of definition 1.
theorem 1. let ¦× be a belief state formula and a be an
action  then
filter a  {s | |=s ¦×}    {s¡ä | |=s¡ä filter a  ¦× }
	proof	see section a.1	
¡¡ lin and reiter  1  showed that progression is not always first-order definable. however  they proved that progression always exists as a set of second order sentences for finite initial databases. therefore  the two sides in theorem 1 are not equivalent since formula  1  is in fol. in other words  fol is not strong enough to model the progression of the initial database. however  the following corollary shows that the two sides of theorem 1 would be equal if the progression of a database is fol definable.
corollary 1. let ¦× be a first-order belief state formula. if fol can represent the progression of ¦× after performing action a  then
filter a  {s | |=s ¦×}  = {s¡ä | |=s¡ä filter a  ¦× }
¡¡from this point  we assume that progression is first-order definable. our basic algorithm computes filter ha1 o1 ... at oti  ¦×  by iteratively applying filtering of a belief-state formula with an action and an observation. it sets ¦×1 = ¦× and ¦×i = filter oi  filter ai  ¦×i 1   recursively for i   1 using the equations defined above. this algorithm is correct  as shown by corollary 1. it can be implemented using a first-order consequence finder.
1 sequences of actions and observations
this section shows that iterative applications of progression steps lose no information. thus  we can throw away the previous database and start working with the new one after performing each action.
¡¡we break our action theory d into two parts  the initial database ds1 and the rest dg. therefore  d = dg ¡È ds1. now we define the language of an action theory as follows.
definition 1. the language of d  l d   is a set of firstorder formulae whose predicate and function symbols occur in d.
¡¡for instance  if ds1 = put a b  ¡Ä  x box x   then put a a  and  x y put x y  are in l ds1  but box a b  is not.
¡¡in progression we assume that a ground action a is performed  and we are looking for a set of sentences dsa that can serve as a new initial database  sa denotes the situation term do a s  . unfortunately  lin and reiter  1  showed that dsa is not always first-order definable.
¡¡we define fsa as the set of first-order sentences uniform in sa entailed by d. if we use fsa instead of ds   for every first-order sentence ¦× about the future of sa  iff d |= ¦×. the following theorem states this result.
¡¡note that the intersection of all consequences of the action theory with l dg ¡È {sa}  is uniform in sa.
theorem 1. let d1 be an action theory  and define  as follows.
d1=cn d1 ¡È {s1 = do a1 s1 }  ¡É l dg ¡È {s1} d1=cn d1 ¡È {s1 = do a1 s1 }  ¡É l dg ¡È {s1} =cn d1 ¡È {s1 = do a1 s1  s1 = do a1 s1 } ¡Él dg ¡È {s1} 
 a1 and a1 are two actions in d1  not necessarily different. s1  s1 and s1 do not occur in dg.  then  .
	proof	see section a.1	
¡¡for instance in our book keeper example  if ds1 is {book b s1  room r s1  in b r s1 } and the first action is return b r   ds1 would be
{book b s1  room r s1   in b r s1 }.
1 factored inference
several distribution properties hold for logical filtering. we can decompose the filtering of a formula   along logical connectives ¡Ä ¡Å      .
theorem 1. let a be an action  and let   ¦× be first-order formulae. then 
1. filter a    ¡Å ¦×  ¡Ô filter a     ¡Å filter a  ¦× 
1. |= filter a    ¡Ä ¦×    filter a     ¡Ä filter a  ¦× 
1. |= filter a         filter a    ¡Äfilter a  true 
1. filter a   x   x   ¡Ô  x filter a    l   l/x 
 l is a fresh constant symbol. 	1  1 hold only when
filter a     is finite.
¡¡we can say something stronger for actions that act as permutations on the structures in which they are executable.
definition 1  permuting actions . action a is permuting  1  if for every structure s¡ä there is at most one s such that rd s a s¡ä .
¡¡domains that only include permuting actions are called permutation domains.
theorem 1  distribution for permutation domains . let a be a permuting action  and let   ¦× be formulae. then 
1. filter	¦×	filter	filter	¦×
1.
1.
1.
¡¡we can decompose every first-order formula into a set of single literals by using distribution properties proved above. for instance   x    x  ¡Ä ¦× x   is equivalent to  x   x  ¡Ä  x ¦× x  so rule 1 can break it into two parts. also  x    x  is equivalent to   x   x  so rule 1 and rule 1 can be used  and  x    x ¡Å¦× x   is equivalent to   x     x ¡Ä ¦× x   so rule 1  rule 1  and rule 1 can be used.
¡¡in permutation domains  we decompose the formula down to a set of grounded first-order single literals  and for filtering a single literal we use formula  1 .
¡¡our factored filtering  ff  algorithm for permutation domains is presented in figure 1. it relies on theorems 1  1  and 1. the number of different grounded single literals would be finite  if the number of objects is finite. therefore  we can calculate filtering of all single literals as a preprocessing step and retrieve it later in finite domains.
¡¡note that the arguments of these literals are either the constants associated to existential quantifiers or the constants which are mentioned in the initial belief state  the set of axioms or the observations.
procedure ff hai oii1 i¡Üt ¦× 
 i  ai an action  oi an observation  ¦× a belief-state formula.
1. if t = 1  return ¦×. 1. return ot¡Ä ff-step at 
precondat¡Ä ff hai oii1 i¡Ü t 1  ¦×  .procedure ff-step a ¦×  a an action. ¦× a belief-state formula.
1. if ¦× is a single literal  then return single-literal-filtering a  ¦× .
1. else  use distribution properties  call ff-step recursively onsub-formulas of ¦×.figure 1: filtering of a fol formula when all the actions are permuting actions.
theorem 1. the algorithm ff is correct  and if the filtering of all single literals are given  the algorithm ff would run in time o |preconda ¡Ä ¦×|   where ¦× is a belief state formula.
¡¡our factored filtering algorithm uses consequence finding tools. since it is part of preprocessing  it does not affect the runtime of the system. in open systems the time is different since new objects may be added during the operation of the system. in these systems filtering of new single literals should be computed while system is running.
1 filtering algorithms for different domains
our naive filtering algorithm uses consequence finding tools which do not scale to large domains. the following theorem suggests a different reasoning procedure.
theorem 1. let a be an action  ¦× be a belief state formula  and ¦µ  1:n  be a first-order logical formula whose atomic subformulas are among  1 ...  n. then 
filter a  ¦×  ¡Ô {¦µ p1:n | fol formula ¦µ  ¦× ¡Ä preconda |= ¦µ succp1 a ... succpn a }  1 
¡¡in this formula  all possible ¦µs should be considered. in general  generating all ¦µs is impossible because there are infinitely many such ¦µs. in the following sections  we provide simpler closed-form solutions for two special cases of dynamic domains. these give rise to practical polynomial  algorithms.
1 unit-case successor state axioms
by definition of successor state axioms  for every pair of actions and predicates exactly one successor state axiom is provided. the successor state axiom for action a and predicate pi can be rewritten as:
poss a x1:n  s     y1 ...  ym  pi y1:m do a s    
  case1i   ¦Õ1i  ¡Ä ... ¡Ä  caselii   ¦Õlii  ¡Ä  case1i ¡Ä ... ¡Ä  caselii    ¦Õili+1 
where caseji is of the form  yj1 = xj1  ¡Ä ... ¡Ä  yjk = xjk   variable xj1 is an argument of action a and variable yj1 is an argument of predicate p  and each variable assignment satisfies at most one of the cases. a successor state axiom is called unit-case successor state axiom if it can be rewritten in a form where every ¦Õji  1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü li + 1  is a unit clause.
¡¡we break a unit-case successor state axiom into multiple instantiated axioms. instantiated successor state axioms for predicate pi are:
  poss a x1:n  s     pi y1:m do a s     ¦Õji  yij/xji  for all 1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü li
  poss a x1:n  s     y1:m   case1i ¡Ä...¡Ä caselii   
 pi y1:m do a s     ¦Õli+1 
 yij/xji  is the substitution corresponding to caseji  yij and xji are sequences of variables . this process is called breaking into cases. note that all instantiated successor state axioms are in the form poss a     condi    pi   ¦Õi   where in some of them condi is true  i is an enumeration of all instantiated successor state axioms of action a .
¡¡figure 1 shows the unit-case filtering  ucfilter  algorithm. this algorithm is applicable on permutation domains whose successor state axioms are unit-case. the algorithm ucfilter is actually a way to compute every ¦µ subsucc1a ... subsuccka  in formula  1 . in permutation domains  the head of entailment in formula  1  is a single literal  action precondition can be considered as a conjunct to
procedure ucfilter hai oii1 i¡Üt ¦× 
 i  ai an action  oi an observation  ¦× a belief-state formula.
1. if t = 1  return ¦×.
1. ¦×t 1 = ucfilter hai oii1 i¡Ü t 1  ¦× .
1. return ot¡Ä filter-true at  ¡Ä ucstep at precondat¡Ä¦×t 1 .procedure filter-true a  a an action.
1. poss a     condi    pi   ¦Õi   an instantiated successor state axiom  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü k .
1. s =  
1. for all 1 ¡Ü i j ¡Ü k 
 a  if ¦Õi = true  add casei   pi to s
 b  elseif ¦Õi = false  add casei    pi to s
 c  elseif unifiable ¦Õi ¦Õj   add
  condi ¡Ä condj     pi   pj  mgu ¦Õi ¦Õj  to s
 d  elseif unifiable ¦Õi  ¦Õj   add
  condi ¡Ä condj     pi    pj  mgu ¦Õi ¦Õj  to s
 e  elseif ¦Õi =  x q x  ¦Õj = q t   add
    condi ¡Ä condj      pi ¡Å pj  to s  f  elseif ¦Õi =  x q x  ¦Õj = q t   add  condi ¡Ä condj     pi ¡Å  pj  to s
1. return v ¡Ês  .procedure ucstep a ¦× 
a an action. ¦× a belief-state formula.
1. if ¦× is a single literal  then
 a  poss a     condi    pi   ¦Õi   an instantiated successor state axiom  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü k .
 b  s =  
 c  for all 1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü k 
i. if unifiable ¦Õi ¦×   add
¡¡ casei   pi mgu ¦Õi ¦×  to s ii. elseif unifiable ¦Õi  ¦×   add
¡¡¡¡¡¡ casei    pi mgu ¦Õi ¦×  to s  d  return v ¡Ês  .
1. else  use distribution properties  call ucstep recursively onsub-formulae of ¦×.figure 1: unit-case filtering.
the belief state formula  and the distribution properties can be used . consequently  ¦µ subsucc1a ... subsuccka  is either equivalent to that literal or a tautology. a tautology is at most of size two when unit-case successor state axioms are used. therefore  we can compute all desired ¦µs in a finite number of steps.
theorem 1. let k be the number of successor state axioms after breaking into cases  and ¦× be the belief state formula. if each predicate has arity at most r  then algorithm ucfilter returns the filtering of ¦× with action a in time o r¡¤k1 +r ¡¤
. the length of new belief state formula is
a .
corollary 1. given a sequence of t actions and observations  algorithm ucfilter returns the filtering of ¦×1 in time o t1 ¡¤ rt ¡¤ kt+1 + t ¡¤rt ¡¤kt ¡¤ |¦×1| . the length of belief state formula after t step is ¦×t = o t ¡¤ rt ¡¤ kt+1 + rt ¡¤ kt ¡¤ |¦×1| .  if the length of all observations and preconditions of actions are negligible compared to the length of belief state formula 
1 strips domains
in strips domains every action has no conditional effects. it means that the value of each predicate either changes to true  changes to false  or remains the same. strips actions are not necessarily permuting. consequently strips successor state axioms can not be treated by algorithm ucfilter even though they are unit-case. successor state axioms in strips domains are of the form:
poss a x1:n  s     y1 ...  ym  pi y1:m do a s    
 case1i   ¦Õ1i  ¡Ä ... ¡Ä  caselii   ¦Õlii 
¡Ä  case1i ¡Ä ... ¡Ä  caselii    pi y1:m s  
where ¦Õji  j ¡Ü li  is either true or false.
¡¡a strips action affects some of the instantiated predicates and keeps the value of the others. we refer to the set of affected instantiated predicates as eff a .
eff a  = {p  ¡úv  | action a affects every instance of p  ¡úv  }
where v is a sequence of variables and constant symbols.
¡¡the first-order strips filtering  fosf  algorithm is presented in figure 1. the belief state formula which is an input to this algorithm should be in the form     ¦Õ  eafol   eafol is a first-order formula in which there is no existential quantifier inside a universal one . a clause in the clausal form of ¦Õ would be splitted into multiple instantiated clauses if one of its literals has some instances in eff a  and some out of eff a . this step is called splitting into pure literal clauses. we split every clause p x  ¡Å   in which some instantiations of p x  are affected and some are not  into:

where p v1  ... p vr  are in eff a . note that we treat   x 1= v1 ¡Ä ... ¡Ä x =1 vr    p x   as a single literal.
¡¡the new clausal form of ¦Õ is divided into two parts  clauses with no literal in eff a  and clauses that have at least one literal in eff a . the first part directly goes to the new belief state formula. the algorithm adds all the consequences of the second part in which no affected literals exist  to the new belief state formula. all literals in eff a  are also added to new belief state formula as their values can be determined unconditionally after applying the action.
theorem 1. given action a  observation o  and belief state formula ¦× in eafol  algorithm fosf returns the filtering of ¦× with a and o in time o r ¡¤ |e| ¡¤
eff a |1|e|¡¤r  + |¦×|  where e is the set of all clauses with any literal in eff a  after splitting into pure literal clauses and each clause has length at most r.
theorem 1. if ¦× is in 1-fo-cnf1 then the time complexity of fosf after filtering one action is o |eff a | ¡¤ |e|1 + |¦×| . the formula length is o |eff a | + |e|1 + |¦×| .
extended example
consider our previous book-keeping robot. suppose that we have two rooms  a cs room and an ece room  and two books 
procedure fosf hai oii1 i¡Üt ¦× 
 i  ai an action  oi an observation and ¦× a belief state formula. oi and ¦× in eafol
1. if t = 1  return ¦×.
1. return move-quana ot¡Ä fo-strips-step at 
move-quan precondat¡Ä fosf hai oii1 i¡Ü t 1  ¦×    

a
moves all the quantifiers to the front with fresh variable namesprocedure fo-strips-step a ¦×  a an action  ¦× =      vi ci a belief-state formula.	a
1. if ¦× =  x ¦Õ x   return  x fo-strips-step a ¦Õ l   l/x 
1. elseif ¦× =  x ¦Õ x   return  x fo-strips-step a ¦Õ x   1. else 
 a  ¦×¡ä ¡û split every clause in ¦× into pure literal clauses
 b  e ¡û all clauses in ¦×¡ä with any literal in eff a 
 c  s ¡û all clauses in ¦×¡ä with no literal in eff a 
 d  if e 1=   for all l ¡Ê eff a 
e ¡û resolve-out l  e 
 e  ¦Õ = vci¡Êe¡Ès ci
 f  eff+ a  ¡û literals affected to true
 g  eff  a  ¡û literals affected to false
 h  return ¦Õ ¡Ä vp v ¡Êeff+ a  p v  ¡Ä vp v ¡Êeff  a   p v .

a
l is a fresh constant that does not appear in the languagefigure 1: first-order strips filtering.
a cs book and an ece book  and our belief state formula is in cs-b  cs-r  ¡Ä in ece-b  ece-r . ece department needs the cs book for a while  so the book keeper moves it to ece room. the action is a = move cs-b  cs-r  ece-r .  this example has unit-case successor state axioms. 
¡¡first  we add precondition to belief state formula. the new belief state is in cs-b  cs-r  ¡Ä in ece-b  ece-r  ¡Ä book cs-b ¡Äroom cs-r ¡Äroom ece-r . we calculate the filtering of all the single literals of the belief state formula separately and compute the result by using distribution properties. what follows is the formula for one of these literals based on the algorithm presented before.
filter move cs-b  cs-r  ece-r   in ece-b  ece-r   ¡Ô in cs-b  ece-r  ¡Ä  in cs-b  cs-r  ¡Ä in ece-b  ece-r 
now suppose that instead of applying an action we filter the belief state based on an observation. the robot enters the cs room and observes that there is only one book in the room. the perfect filtering algorithm guarantees that in such cases the book is the same book that the robot has put in the room before.
¡¡assume that the belief state formula is in cs-b  cs-r  ¡Ä in ece-b  ece-r . the observation is  xin x  cs-r    x = thebook. filter o  ¦×  |= thebook = cs-b  so we can replace every instance of thebook in the new belief state formula by cs-b.
1 conclusions
in this paper we presented semantics and methodology for filtering in domains that include many objects whose identity is not certain. we generalized this problem to filtering with fol formulae. we showed that this problem is solvable in polynomial time when actions map states 1  or the actions are strips. we showed that 1 actions allow us to filter firstorder belief state formulae in linear time  in the size of representation   if we can perform a precompilation step. when actions are strips or unit-case  we can filter these belief state formulae efficiently without precompilation. in some cases  we showed that the belief state formulae is guaranteed to remain compactly represented. those cases permit filtering of actions and observations indefinitely in polynomial time  in the number of predicates and objects . as a result  we can use our algorithm for many interesting applications  such as semantic web  autonomous agents  robot motion control  and partial knowledge games.
1 acknowledgements
we wish to thank megan nance for useful discussions on related topics. we also wish to acknowledge support from daf air force research laboratory award fa1-1  darpa real program .
