
this paper describes a dynamic simulation of a space habitat. the simulation is configurable and controllable via external programs. several groups have been using the simulation to study the impact of artificial intelligence tools on space habitat design and control. we outline some of the ai challenges and invite the ai community to use our simulation to further nasa's exploration goals.
1 introduction
nasa has embarked on a new exploration strategy that will return people to the moon and eventually to mars  national aeronautics and space administration  1 . two key aspects of this strategy are sustainability and autonomy. the former means that these will not be single-shot missions  but a continued  evolving presence by humans outside of lowearth orbit. the latter means that the missions will be more self-reliant and less dependent on a standing army of earthbased controllers. achieving both of these aspects requires significant advances in intelligent software systems. in this paper we present an integrated simulation of a space habitat that allows for testing of artificial intelligence approaches.
1 space habitats
the function of a space habitat is to provide a livable environment to the crew. a typical space habitat will have subsystems that provide oxygen and remove carbon dioxide; that provide potable water; that provide food; that remove solid waste; and that provide power. in addition  a biomass subsystem may supply crops that can be turned into food and also help with other life support functions. figure 1 shows such a habitat configuration. many of the subsystems impact each other creating complex interactions and dependencies. since the cost of placing materials on a lunar or planetary surface is so high  minimizing the consumables required to provide life support functions is important. recycling or regenerating resources  often achieved by using biological-based subsystems  adds additional complexity but reduces overall habitat mass. in the next section we present a dynamic simulation of such an integrated  closed habitat system.

figure 1: the various modules that comprise a habitat life support system
1 biosim
biosim is a discrete-event simulation of a space habitat  kortenkamp and bell  1 . each of the life support components of a habitat are modeled as processes that consume certain resources and produce other resources. for example  the water recovery system model consumes dirty water and power and produces potable water. crew members are also modeled - they consume and produce resources just as other life support components. all of the components  including crew members and crops  if any  exist in one or several environments that consists of a volume of mixed gases. figure 1 shows the different models that compose our simulation and the resources that pass between the models. biosim is implemented in java.
1 configuring biosim
biosim can be configured to simulate a wide variety of different habitats. this includes the number  genders and ages of crew members  the size of the habitat environments  atmospheric pressure  capacities of tanks  initial levels of consumables  processing capacity of life support modules and many other variables. initial setup is configured via an xml file that is read in when biosim is started.
1 controlling biosim
biosim has sensors and actuators that connect to various controllable elements and allow for real-time control. sensors read simulation values  such as oxygen levels in the environment. actuators set flow-rates of resources between components. higher level actuators control more abstract variables such as the crew schedule  extravehicular activities  evas   crop harvesting  crop planting and equipment maintenance. crop management is a particular focus in biosim and up to nine different crops can be planted and harvested. each has their own model for oxygen production  carbon dioxide consumption  water consumption and food production. sensors and actuators are accessible via corba method calls so that control programs can be created in most programming languages and connected as clients to the biosim server. we have defined biosim control methods that let you advance biosim in one hour increments or advance biosim until the mission has ended. malfunctions can be injected into any of the components of biosim at any time.
1 habitat design
one use of artificial intelligence tools is in the design of an optimal habitat for a specific exploration mission. as an example  let's take a 1 day lunar mission with a crew of four and one eight hour eva per day. the goal is to find an optimal habitat configuration that meets those mission objectives  i.e.  provides sufficient life support to the crew. a habitat configuration includes sizing each of the life support components  e.g.  water processing  air processing  crops  power  etc.   sizing tank capacities  deciding on initial levels of consumables  sizing the air volume of the crew habitat  etc. an optimal configurationis defined as one that meets the mission goals with minimum mass. we have defined mass values for all of the variables in a habitat configuration. essentially  this is a search through a large space of possible habitat designs to find an optimal solution. many artificial intelligence search techniques would be applicable  including genetic algorithms and reinforcement learning. several groups are already using biosim to experiment in this area  kortenkamp et al.  1; wu and garibay  1 .
1 habitat control
a second use of artificial intelligence tools is the control of the habitat. that is  given a predefined habitat configuration develop a control policy that optimizes resource utilization and reduces buffer sizes. the control policy adjusts resource flow rates  crew schedules  crop planting and harvesting schedules and eva schedules to meet mission objectives with minimum resource utilization. habitat control will involve dealing with real-time control issues such as water production  air production  etc. as well as planning and scheduling around time and resource constraints. several groups are looking at different approaches to this problem  bonasso et al.  1; muscettola et al.  1; klein et al.  1 . habitat control also involves diagnosing faults in the habitat and devising a recovery strategy. gautam biswas at vanderbilt has been using biosim to test modelbased approachesto fault diagnosis  biswas et al.  1 . another research area is distributed control  for example  determining whethermarket-basedapproachesare valid for habitat controland findingwhat advantagesthey provide. distributed control architecture will need to look at integration of control across the various subsystems of the habitat and integration of different artificial intelligence techniques.
1 conclusion
with a renewed mission to head back to the moon and then to mars  nasa needs the artificial intelligence community's help in achieving its exploration mission objectives in a cost effectiveand safe manner. biosim providesa portable testbed for researchers to test their ideas and demonstraterelevanceto nasa. biosim also provides a baseline in which a standardized set of configurations  malfunctions and metrics can be established and used to compare control approaches. biosim can be obtained from http://www.traclabs.com/biosim.
