
this paper describes an obstacle recognition system based on svm and vision. the basic components of the detected objects are first located in the image and then combined with a svm-based classifier. a distributed learning approach is proposed in order to better deal with objects variability  illumination conditions  partial occlusions and rotations. a large database containing thousands of object examples extracted from real road images has been created for learning purposes. we present and discuss the results achieved up to date.
1	introduction
this paper describes an svm-based object recognition system that can recognise both vehicles and pedestrians using vision. in our approach  the basic components of the objects are first located in the image and then combined with a svm-based classifier. our object detection technique is characterised by example-based learning algorithms. the salient features of a class are learnt by the system based on a set of examples. example-based techniques have been previously used in natural  cluttered environments for pedestrian detection  shashua  1 . in general  these techniques are easy to use with objects composed of distinct identifiable parts arranged in a well-defined configuration. this is the case of road vehicles  where a distributed learning approach based on components  mohan  1  is more efficient for object recognition in real cluttered environments than holistic approaches  papageorgiou  1 . distributed learning techniques can deal with partial occlusions and are less sensitive to object rotations. the use of svms is a viable option as long as we intend to discriminate between two classes: car and non-car.
1	system description
the system is divided in two modular subsystems. the first subsystem is responsible for vehicle detection and tracking. the second subsystem provides pedestrians detection using the information obtained by the vehicle detection module. in this paper  we focus on the vehicle recognition system alone  working with 1 monochrome images. the objects searching space is reduced by using the limits established by the estimated lane markings. this helps reduce the rate of false positive detections. in case that no lane markings are detected  a basic area of interest is used instead covering the front part ahead of the host-vehicle. in a first stage  an attention mechanism has been devised with the intention of filtering out inappropriate candidate windows based on the lack of distinctive features  such as horizontal edges and symmetrical structures  which are essential characteristics of road vehicles. this has the positive effect of decreasing both the total computation time and the rate of false positive detections. each road lane is sequentially scanned  from the bottom to the horizon line of the image  looking for collections of horizontal edges that might represent a potential obstacle. we use a distributed learning approach in which each individual part of the vehicle is independently learnt by a specialized classifier in a first learning stage. the local parts are then integrated by another classifier in a second learning stage. we have considered a total of 1 different sub-regions for each candidate region  covering the most characteristic parts of the vehicle. two small sub-regions have been located in the area of the region where the wheels are supposed to be. a third subregion is located in the central part of the region  covering the area where car plates and rear windshield are usually placed. the locations of the three sub-regions have been chosen in an attempt to detect coherent and structural car features. a set of features must be extracted from each sub-region and fed to the classifier. before doing that  the entire candidate region of interest is pre-processed using a canny operator in order to enhance the differential information contained in it  edges . the canny image provides a good representation of the discriminating features of the car class. on the one hand  edges  both horizontal and vertical  are clearly visible and distinguishable. on the other hand  the vertical symmetry of a car remains unchanged. in addition  edges are not affected by colours or intensity. this property makes the use of edges robust enough to different car models of the same type. the pre-processed sub-region is directly applied to the input of the classifier. the dimensions of the entire region of interest are normalized before being fed to the classifier. a size of 1 pixels has been chosen  as it is adequate for detecting vehicles at long distances  up to 1 meters .
¡¡the global training strategy is carried out in two stages. in a first stage  separate svm-based classifiers are trained using individual training sets that represent a subset of a sub-region.
this stage provides classification of individual parts of the candidate sub-regions. in a second step  the outputs of all classifiers are merged in a single svm classifier in order to provide the final classification result.
1	results
the system was implemented on a apple pc at 1 ghz running the debian gnu/linux operating system. the complete algorithm runs at 1 frames/s. we created a preliminary database containing 1 samples of road vehicles. the samples were extracted from recorded images acquired in real experiments onboard a road vehicle in real traffic conditions in madrid. two different training sets were built for the same sub-region in different conditions in order to decrease the complexity of the training process. this yields a total of 1 training sets  1 . all training sets were created at day time conditions using the tsetbuilder  nuevo  1  tool  specifically developed in this wok for this purpose. by using the tsetbuilder tool different candidate regions are manually selected in the image on a frame-by-frame basis. this allows to select candidate regions containing vehicles of different size  from different manufacturers  and so on. the number of nonvehicle samples in the training sets was chosen to be similar to the number of vehicle samples. we obtained a detection rate of 1% in a test set containing 1 images  and a false detection rate of 1%. no image from the training set was used in the test set. as an example  figure 1 shows a sequence of images in which a vehicle is detected and tracked along the lane of the host vehicle. a blue box is overprinted over the detected vehicle indicating the estimated distance measured from the host vehicle. other vehicles appearing along the adjoining lane are marked with a horizontal red line.

figure 1: vehicle detection and tracking in a sequence.
1	conclusions and future work
we have developed a visual multi-frame two-stage object classification system based on support vector machines  svm   boser  1 . the learning process has been simplified by decomposing the candidate regions into 1 local subregions that are easily learned by individual svm classifiers. several training sets have been built for each sub-region in order to cope with different weather and illumination conditions. the results achieved up to date using a set of 1 samples are encouraging. nevertheless they still need to be improved before being safely used as an assistance driving system onboard road vehicles in real conditions. for this purpose  the content of the training sets will be largely increased by including new and more complex samples that will boost the classifier performance. in addition  the attention mechanism will be refined in order to provide more candidates around the original candidate region. this will reduce the number of candidate regions that only contain a part of the vehicle  i.e.  those cases in which the entire vehicle is not completely visible in the candidate region due to a misdetection of the attention mechanism.
acknowledgment
this work has been funded by research projects cicyt dpi1-1 and fom1  ministerio de fomento  spain .
