 
 
in conditional visuomotor learning  several arbitrary associations between visual cues and motor responses have to be learned by trial and error at the same time. monkeys  as humans  do not achieve this task by randomly trying each possible association. rather  they use a strategy that organizes sequentially the acquisition of individual stimulus-response associations. accordingly  neuronal recordings in the monkey striatum  the main basal ganglia structure  reveals two forms of plasticity during learning  a transient one that could constitute the neuronal correlate of the strategy  and a long-lasting one that could reflect the slow neuronal implementation of individual associations.  existing models of basal ganglia function based on reinforcement learning cannot account for this dual process. hence  we developed a mathematical model of conditional visuomotor learning  inspired from viability theory  which implements both the formation of individual associations and the use of strategies to organize learning.   
 
introduction 
 
studies of arbitrary visuomotor learning in laboratory situations generally use several stimuli taken from the same category  colors  pictures  positions etc.  and an equivalent number of motor responses  hand postures  lever displacements  etc. . subjects are required to learn by trial and error  conditional rules such as 'if green go right  if red go left  if blue  go up'  etc. this requires on-line monitoring of the associations already tried and of their outcome  correct or incorrect . with large sets of items and actions to associate  this monitoring represents a high memory load  which can be decreased by using specific learning strategies.  
 
conditional associative learning: behavioral and neuronal data 
 
the striatum  the larger structure composing the basal ganglia  constitutes a key neural substrate for arbitrary visuo-motor learning  see e.g. hadj-bouziane et al.  1 for review .  hence  in a recent study  we recorded single cell activity in the striatum of two rhesus monkeys during learning of a conditional visuomotor task that required to associate complex visual cues with joystick movements  hadj-bouziane & boussaoud  1 . the animals searched  by trial and error  for the correct joystick movement associated with each of four visual cues. the four associations comprising a set were presented concurrently  that is  each appeared once  in randomized order  within each block of four consecutive trials. 
 
behavior. although the four associations were presented concurrently within each block of 1 trials  monkeys learned them sequentially  focusing on one association at a time in order to decrease the memory load. the use of strategies to organize learning was also observed in humans in a separate study  hadj-bouziane et al.  1 .  
 
neuronal activity: neuronal activity in the striatum showed two main types of modulations during learning. one was transient  consisting in a time-limited increase in activity during early learning stages. the other was long-lasting  consisting in a gradual increment of activity over the entire course of the learning session. the former could underlie the development and use of learning strategies  whereas the latter could be responsible for long term storage of the individual associations. 
 
pdf cr¨¦¨¦ avec la version d'essai pdffactory www.gs1i.fr/fineprint/pdffactory.htm 
mathematical model: the striatum and viability theory 
 
several not mutually exclusive computational models of basal ganglia have been proposed in the literature  e.g. houk et al.  1; barto  1 . many of these models use the reinforcement learning  rl  algorithm. for learning associations by rl algorithms one would need to build a cost function adapted to this particular learning task and then to find a way to maximize this function.  however  as described above  learning arbitrary visuomotor associations is not based on random selection of a behavioral response  but rather implies strategies. mathematically the learning of associations leads to the so called target problem of control theory and there are different tools  cf. viability theory and capture basin algorithms  time optimal control  adaptive control  that allow to find policies theoretically and construct solutions numerically. the learning of policies leading to a target can be derived from viability theory  aubin 1 . instead of a repetitive improvement of the cumulative reward to make it as close as possible to a maximum  as it is done in rl algorithms   the viability kernel algorithms are based on the systematic exploration of boundaries of sets. indeed when we investigate the boundary of a set  instead of the set itself  we reduce the dimension of the problem  cardaliaguet et al.  1 . we propose that the use of strategies such as the sequential strategy evoked above correspond to investigation of boundaries. from the mathematical view point the viability and capture basin algorithms are based on elimination: taking out points from which it is impossible to get to a target and in the same time constructing the winning strategies for capture basin  e.g. frankowska & quincampoix  1 . this elimination is based on a local analysis of constraints. instead of applying exploration type arguments and trying different controls from the same initial condition  the viability kernel algorithms consider only critical points  that is the boundary of the set of constraints and check which points of the boundary are not viable.  
 
summary and conclusions 
 
learning arbitrary visuo-motor associations implies to learn the correct stimulus-movement associations and then to store them in long term memory. one has to learn by trial and error to select the appropriate movement according to the stimulus presented. during early stages of learning  processes such as discrimination  recognition and memorization of the stimuli are required  but also monitoring of events and behavioral outcome.  learning time can be reduced by the use of particular strategies such as focusing on a single cue at a time or repeating a motor response until correct.  
we propose a computational model based on 1  these behavioral data showing the use learning strategies  1  the possible correlates found in the dynamics of neuronal changes in the striatum  and 1  viability theory. this model complements existing ones  by taking into account the strategies  viewed as a way to determine the boundaries of the learning space. in our model the learning strategies artificially reduce the dimension of learning space  number of actions or number of images   a process that simplifies the task. at the neuronal level  we suggest that the strategy choice may be carried out by the transient activities  whereas the boundary encodings may be accomplished using the rules proposed in bar-gad et al.  1   and local analysis done using the reinforcement signal. we thus propose an additional role of the basal ganglia  that of reducing the dimension of learning space. 
 
acknowledgements  
 
this work was supported by the french ministry of research  aci cognition et traitement de l'information   and by the cnrs  pi tcan   and a bettencourt-schuller foundation fellowship for fhb. 
 
