 
can we assign attitudes to a computer based on its beeps  if so  which kinds of beeps are perceived as specific attitudes  such as  disagreement    hesitation  or  agreement   to examine this issue  i carried out an experiment to observe how participants perceive or assign an attitude to a computer according to beeps of different durations and f1 contour's slopes. the results revealed that 1  beeps with increasing intonation regardless of duration were perceived by participants as  disagreement   1  flat sounds with longer duration were interpreted as  hesitation   and 1  decreasing intonations with shorter duration were as  agreement.  
1 introduction 
the purpose of this study is to clarify an effective method for making users perceive artificial agents as having attitudes and empathize with them. actually  many researchers have developed humanoid robots  for example  breazeal and velasquez  1  that can exist in the same physical space with users and life-like  or character  agents  for example  morishima et al.  1  that appear on computer screens. these anthropomorphic agents are believed to facilitate communication between these agents and humans. some researchers  however  have reported that humans perceive the attitudes of others from the information  e.g.  humming without any language information   even if this information is simpler than that derived from gestures or facial expressions  for example  suzuki et al.  1 .  
¡¡therefore  one may reasonably assume that the simple information presented by an agent without a human-like shape or face would also cause people to perceive different attitudes and to assign specific attitudes to such agents. moreover  this perception might induce the users' sympathy toward the agent and eventually trigger smooth communication between them.  
¡¡as a preliminary study aimed at achieving such a relationship between users and agents  i have focused on a normal laptop computer as the agent without a human-like shape or face  and on beeps  sound stimuli  as simple information presented to humans. specifically  i conducted an experiment 

   figure 1.  eleven different f1 contours  duration; 1 ms :   u1  indicates that f1 transition range was 1 hz with upward slope  increasing intonation . in which various beeps were presented to participants from a laptop computer. the purpose of the experiment was to observe and analyze how participants assign specific attitudes to the computer based on the presented beeps.   
1 experiment 
i prepared 1 different types of beeps with four different durations and 1 different f1 contours. specifically  the four durations were 1  1  1  and 1 ms. the 1 f1 contours were set so that the transition range of f1 values that were linearly downward or upward  figure 1 . participants were 1 japanese  1 men and 1 women; 1 - 1 years old .   an experimenter asked participants to assume that these presented beeps were answering speeches in a telephone conversation  actually this was not true . as an experimental trial  one randomly selected beep among the 1 beeps was presented to participants. they were then asked to answer a question like  did you feel that  ***  was this computer's attitude based on this beep  ;  ***  was the randomly selected attitude among the following three that were complementary to each other. in addition  these three attitudes might correspond to valence evaluations; 1  disagreement  e.g.  surprising  doubting  negative valence   1  hesitation  
e.g.  being lost for words  neutral valence   1  agreement  
e.g.  acceptance  positive valence . specifically  each participant experienced 1 trials  1 beeps x 1 attitudes . 

figure 1.  relationship between f1 contours and rate of  disagreement  interpretation for each duration  left    rate of  hesitation   center  and  agreement   right .   1 results 
case 1: disagreement figure 1  left  shows which beeps were interpreted as the computer's attitude of  disagreement.  in this figure  the horizontal axis lists the types of f1 contours and the labels on this axis  such as  u1  or  d1   are the same ones used in figure 1. the vertical axis shows the interpretation rates  ir  that give the proportion of participants answering  yes  in the corresponding trials. there are four lines indicating the duration of sound stimuli.  
¡¡in the results  no significant differences were found among different durations  f 1 =.1  n.s.  and different f1 transition ranges in falling tones  f 1 = 1  n.s. . on the other hand  rising tones showed a significant higher ir than falling tones  f 1 =1  p .1   and wider f1 transition ranges in a rising tone showed higher ir  f 1 = 1  p .1 . to sum up  when the beeps with upward slopes  increasing intonation  regardless of their duration were presented from the computer  this computer's attitude was interpreted as  disagreement.  
 
case 1: hesitation figure 1  center  shows which beeps were interpreted as  hesitation.  longer duration showed the higher ir  f 1 =1  p .1   and falling tones showed the higher rate than the rising tones  f 1 =1  p .1 . moreover  narrower f1 transition range in both rising and falling tones showed the higher ir than wider ones  f 1 =1  p .1  f 1 = 1  p .1 . in sum  when the slower slopes  flat sounds  with longer duration were presented  the computer's attitude was interpreted as 
 hesitation.  
 
case 1: agreement figure 1  right  shows which beeps were  agreement.  shorter duration showed the higher ir  f 1 =1  p .1  and falling tones showed the significantly higher rate than rising tones  f 1 = 1  p .1 . and wider f1 transition range in falling tone showed rather higher rates than narrower ones  f 1 = 1  p .1   and in rising tones  narrower transition range showed higher rates than wider ones  f 1 = 1  p .1 . to sum up  when the downward slopes with shorter duration were presented  the computer's attitude was interpreted as  agreement.  
1 discussion and conclusions  
the results have established that different kinds of simple information  beeps  can be interpreted as presenting the different attitudes of an information sender  a laptop computer.  therefore  sufficient possibilities exist to justify applying the results to an actual application. the same argument was presented by lin and picard  in their  subtle expressivity  study. at first glance  these results seem to show that users can perceive only three agent attitudes; however  implementing the findings of this study into a laptop computer would create effective interactions with users. for example  when a computer responds to a certain action of users by presenting  beeps with increasing intonation   users would intuitively assign a particular attitude  in this case  disagreement   to the computer from this beep sound:  umm... this computer seems to have some doubts about my last command...  and also implementing these results into a simple mobile robot would realize a star wars r1 type robot  which can not speak clearly but can express its attitudes by its electric sounds or behaviors. thus  the results of this study can contribute to achieving an agent that enables users to assign or interpret intuitively and effectively particular agent attitudes. 
