
complex problem solving typically involves the generation of a procedure consisting of an ordered sequence of steps. analogical reasoning is one strategy for solving complex problems  and visual reasoning is another. visual analogies pertain to analogies based only on visual knowledge. in this paper  we describe the use of galatea  a computational model of visual analogies in problem solving  to model the problem solving of a human subject  l1 . l1 was a given the task of solving a complex problem using analogy in a domain that contained both visual and non-visual knowledge  and was encouraged to use visual analogy. we describe how galateamodels l1'suse of visual analogy in problem solving.
1 introduction
complex problem solving typically involves the generation of a procedure consisting of a strongly-ordered sequence of steps. these procedures have two important properties: 1  the procedure contains two or more steps  and 1  some steps cannot be executed before some other steps have already been executed. analogical reasoning is one strategy humans often use to solve complex problems. analogical problem solving takes a solution from a source analog and applies some version of that solution to a target problem. visual reasoning is another strategy humans sometimes use to address complex problems.
　we have used galatea to model data on problem solving by several human subjects. this data was collected in a pyschological experiment run by dr. david craig. in this experiment  the human participants were given the task of solving a complex problem using analogy in a domain that contained both visual and non-visual knowledge  and were encouraged to use visual analogy in their problem solving. in this paper  we describe how galatea models one participant's  l1's  use of visual analogy in problem solving. in the interest of space  we refer you to  davies and goel  1  for information about the galatea modelling language.
1 the galatea model of l1
galatea is intended to be a partial cognitive model of visual analogical transfer in human beings. to support galatea with respect to its psychological plausibility we modelled some of the visual aspects of four experimental participants' drawings  one of which we will describe in detail in this paper.
　dr. david craig ran 1 participants in an analogical transfer experiment  craig et al.  1 . participants were shown a problem-solving solution about a laboratory  presented with text and a diagram. they were asked to solve an analogous problem with a weed-trimmer  presented with text only. of these  1 participants  in three conditions  correctly described the analogous solution. all participants were asked to draw a diagram to illustrate their suggested solutions.
　the source given was a laboratory clean room problem. a single door lets in dirty air  so a vestibule is added  with two doors where one door stayed shut while the other was open. the target problem is a weed trimmer arm attached to a truck that must be able to pass through street signs. the analogous solution is to design an arm with two latching doors  so that while one is open to let the sign pass  the other stays closed to support the arm and trimmer. participants produced diagrams describing their solutions to the problems. we modelled four of these experimental participants in galatea  one of which  l1  we will describe in detail.
　we represented the source analog as a series of s-images connected with transformations. see the top of figure 1 for an abstract diagram of our galatea model of the source analog.
　the first transformation is replicate. the second transformation is add-connections which places the door sets in the correct position in relation to the top and bottom walls. the third and fourth transformations are add-component  which add the top and bottom containment walls. the fifth transformation  another add-connections  places these containment walls in the correct positions in relation to the door sets and the top and bottom walls.
1 evaluation

figure 1: the source data for l1. the drawing above and handwritten text are what participant l1 produced on the experiment sheet.

figure 1: the implementation of l1. the top series of s-images represents the source analog  the lab problem  and the bottom series the target. there are six s-images for the five transformations.we can now examine what made l1 differ from the stimulus drawing: long vestibule  rotation  line to double line  sliding doors  added objects  numeric dimensions added  and mechanisms added. of these seven differences  our model successfully re-creates four of them  all through manipulation of the input knowledge and by adding transformations. that is  the source galatea code did not need to be changed.
　unaccounted for are the two bent lines emerging from the vestibule on the left side  the numeric dimensions and words describing the mechanism. also  l1 shows one of the doors retracting  and the model does not. the model also fails to capture the double line used to connect the door sections  because the single line is transferred without adaptation from the source. this could be fixed  perhaps  by representing the argument to the add-component as a function referring to whatever element is used to represent another wall  rather than as a line.
1 conclusion
our initial view was that visual knowledge facilitates transfer even when non-visual knowledge might be available. in conclusion  the evaluation supported this and resulted in one unexpected discovery  for a total of two claims: claim one: visual knowledge facilitates transfer even when non-visual knowledge might be available. l1's data is an example of a cross-domain analogical problem solving that could have been represented both non-visually and visually. our implemented model of l1 uses only visual knowledge. the level of abstraction of the visual symbols in covlan allows the cross-domain transfer of problem-solving steps to occur  supporting our hypothesis. further it shows that galatea can account for human participant data.
　claim two: the successful transfer of strongly-ordered procedures in which new objects are created requires the reasoner to generate intermediate knowledge states and mappings between the intermediate knowledge states of the source and target analogs. in the course of creating this model  we discovered something about analogical transfer in general: a characteristic of strongly-ordered procedures is that components of the problem are created by the operations  and these components are acted on by later operations.
　our model shows how this might work for human cognition: the doorway is replicated  then moved  then sealed with containing walls. for the transfer of multi-step  stronglyordered procedures it was necessary for galatea to generate intermediate knowledge states and mappings.
