 
this paper introduces a multidimensional semantic framework for adaptive systems. different planes allow us to represent ontologies of user  her actions  context  device  domain  while the intersection between planes allow us to represent the semantic rules for inferring new user features or adaptation strategies. the adoption of ontology-based framework aims at creating a server for user modeling and adaptation strategy. 
1 introduction 
the semantic web aims at representing information in the www such that machines can use it for automation  integration and reuse of knowledge across applications. the advantage of such an approach can be particularly useful in the field of adaptive hypermedia systems. these systems typically reflect some features of the user in the user model and apply this model to adapt various aspects of the system  content  interface  navigation  etc  to the user  brusilovsky  1 . current adaptive systems may also take into account other features  besides the user model  such as the context of interaction  the device  etc. usually the corpus of the documents and services the system can adapt is already known at the design time and can be defined as a closed corpus of adaptation  dolog et. al  1 . the application of semantic web technologies to those systems and the use of shared ontologies and metadata to describe resources can contribute to extend the closed corpus to an open corpus of adaptation. thus  external documents and resources  which are semantically annotated  can be considered during the adaptation to the users. furthermore  representing the user model with a semantic formalism and shared ontologies can be the base for building a user model server: a server that enables the reuse of user models across applications  kay et al.  1 . different adaptive systems can query the same user model server  be primed with the user model that has already built up and share the common knowledge.  
　this paper describes an ontology-based framework for adaptive hypermedia systems which is aimed at providing a 
　methodological approach for the semantic definition of two kinds of relevant knowledge for adaptation:  i  knowledge regarding what features of the system have to be adapted and which dimensions  of the user  context  etc.  have to be taken into account to perform adaptation;  ii  knowledge regarding adaptation strategies and rules for inferring new knowledge. following the 'equation' ontology= i  taxonomy +  ii  axioms proposed by the ruleml initiative  boley et al  1   we represent  i  the declarative descriptions of user models  domain knowledge  etc.  with taxonomies expressed in the standard semantic markup language for the semantic web  owl1  and  ii  the adaptation rules with ruleml1  a candidate rule markup language. 
1. goals of the project 
while many works exploit ontologies to describe application domains and some recent ones adopt them to represent user models  devices features  context of interaction  etc.  e.g.  ubisworld  http://www.u1m.org/   the semantic representation of reasoning strategies is still little addressed in mature projects. nevertheless  besides the discussed advantages of using standard markup languages for the ontological representation of knowledge  a semantic representation of rules could extend this goal. indeed  it could allow applications  and designers  to share reasoning strategies  to detect incompatibilities  to validate or eventually refuse them.  furthermore  the conjunction of taxonomies with a semantic representation of rules brings benefits to both of them. for example  in adaptive systems  it allows to provide explanations about the inference of new user features   the system behaviour and the forms of adaptation by exploiting the ontological description of terms which are involved in the rules. moreover  since the semantic representation of rules provides a proof of the reasoning of the system  it is also relevant for the so called proof layer of the semantic web  which  involves the actual deductive process as well as the representation of proofs in web languages and proof validation  antoniou et al.  1 . 
 
1. framework description 
the framework aims at supporting the visual design  the semantic representation and the implementation of rules in adaptive hypermedia systems based on symbolic reasoning. these rules include user modeling rules  which can be considered derivation rules  that add new knowledge about user  starting from her current environment  usage data and context of interaction  and adaptation rules  which can be considered reaction rules   that define adaptation strategies  content  presentation  modality . 
 the choice of using a semantic formalism  in order to define the framework arises from the evidence that user modeling dimensions are common to different applications and  if semantically descripted  they can be shared among them  e.g. the feature user familiarity with the system is used by almost all adaptive systems . defining these dimensions once for all represents an interesting opportunity in terms of reducing costs of design and optimization of results. similar considerations can be made for modality and contexts of interaction. while for the domain and service features  the reason to exploit an ontological representation especially deals with the diffusion of this kind of ontologies on the web  and the possibility to link such ontologies and integrating with web services  mizoguchi et al  1 .  for the definition of this semantic framework we developed a multidimensional matrix  torre  1  in which each plane contains the ontological representation of a specific kind of knowledge  user model  user actions  device  domain  context and adaptation ontology . 
being a framework  the ontologies on the planes are application independent  modular and layered in a first level ontology  containing the definition of general concepts  and successive levels with specialized concepts. in this way  the framework can be used by different applications  selecting a sub-part of the most generic ontology  in the considered planes  and instantiating only the concepts they are interested in. 
　the basic idea of the matrix is that derivation rules and reaction rules derive from the intersection of planes and that the matrix representation helps the visual design of such rules. for example  for the definition of derivation rules  on the x1-plane we put the ontology which describes the user actions on adaptive system  selection  bookmark  print  etc. ; on the x1-plane the ontology which describes the possible domain features  business  tourist  e-learning etc ; and on the x1-plane  the ontology of the user model dimensions  demographic features  preferences  interests  etc . from the intersection of dimensions on these planes we can define user modeling rules  derivation rules   in the form of: 
if   x1plane user actions=a  and  x1plane domain feature=b  
and x1plane explicit user features=c d   then  inferred user feature=i  
in which the left hand side specifies the dimensions that contribute to define the value of the inferred feature and the right hand side represents the assignment of this value. 
the same methodology can be applied to infer other di-
mensions  such as  user's goals and plans  or to define the adaptation rules  clearly changing the planes to take into account. for instance  to identify adaptation rules  on the z1plane we put the ontology that describes the device that can be used by the user  pda  pc  mobile phone  on-board system etc. ; on the z1-plane we put the ontology of the adaptation  adaptation of content  interface  etc. ; on the z1plane  the ontology of context conditions  e.g. driving  walking  night  etc.  and on the z1-plane  the ontology of the user model dimensions  integrated/updated with the user's dimensions inferred by the previous user modeling rules. 
　the ontologies on the planes are written in owl  while rules  at the intersection of planes  are written in ruleml. both of them can be translated into popular rule engines such as clips and jess. 
 
conclusion and future work 
in future we plan to use the proposed methodology with different adaptive applications  e.g.   amendola et al.  1   we developed in the past in order to use these applications as test bench to evaluate the correctness of our approach.  
