 
we have developed a set of microplanning choice rules which are intended to enable natural language generation  nlg  systems to generate appropriate texts for readers with below-average literacy  focusing in particular on choices related to how discourse structure is expressed  cue phrases  ordering  sentence structure . evaluation experiments suggest that our rules do enhance the readability of texts for low-skilled readers  although there is still room for improvement. 
1 introduction 
natural language generation  nlg  systems are computer programs that generate written texts in english or other human languages  reiter and dale  1 . most existing nlg systems assume that generated texts will be read by proficient readers with good literacy levels. however  many people in the uk and elsewhere are not proficient readers. the goal of our research is to generate texts which low-skill readers will find  relatively  easy to read. 
　generating appropriate texts for poor readers is a multifaceted problem  which involves choices at all nlg levels  content  microplanning  realisation . the focus of our research is on microplanning choices  in particular on choices related to the expression of discourse structure. 
　this work was done in the context of the girl and skillsum1 projects. these projects worked in the application area of generating feedback reports on assessments of adult basic skills  e.g. literacy . that is  users took a test assessing their basic skills  and girl/skillsum generated for them reports that summarized their performance on the test. 
　while many previous researchers have looked at tailoring generated texts according to the user's domain expertise  e.g.  paris  1    less has been done on tailoring texts according to the reader's literacy. perhaps the best known previous work in this area is pset  devlin et al.  1   which examined choices in texts intended for aphasic readers. unfortunately most of pset's rules were not experimentally validated. scott and de souza  suggested some psycholinguistically-motivated rules for expressing discourse relations  but did not evaluate them at all. 
1 microplanning choices investigated 
the document  content  planners of our systems produce as output a tree  where core messages are related by discourse relations such as explanation or concession. discourse relations are essentially rst relations  and messages are represented using a deep-syntactic representation. an example of an extract from a typical content plan  with messages shown as text glosses instead of deep syntactic structures  is shown in figure 1. 

figure 1 - extract from a typical content plan 
our work focuses on how discourse relations such as concession in figure 1 are expressed  in particular: 
  cue phrases: which cue phrases  if any  should be used to express a discourse relation   
  ordering: which order should the constituents related by a discourse relation be expressed in    
  punctuation  sentence structure : should constituents be expressed in separate sentences  paragraphs  . if not  should punctuation be used to separate them  
　we developed a set of rules for these choices which we hypothesised were appropriate for low-skill readers; this is our enhanced readability  er  model. we also developed a control model for making these choices  based on the most common choices in the rst-dtc  carlson et al.  1 . 
　we created a microplanner that generated texts according to the rules in the er and control models. we used a constraint-based approach that in general terms is similar to power ; further details are given in williams . 

figure 1: examples of output from research system skillsum. left-hand control text automatically generated using corpus rules  and not intended for low-skilled readers    right-hand text generated with er model. 1 evaluation 
girl evaluation experiment: 1 subjects  of varied literacy levels  took the girl assessment and were shown girl's feedback reports. subjects were initially shown texts generated with either the er or control version  randomised   and asked to read the report aloud; we measured reading time and reading errors  reading aloud was preferred over silent reading because pilot tests showed that many poor readers would skim texts when asked to silently read . subjects were then shown both versions  er and control  of the report  and asked to state a preference. 
the results showed that poor readers on average seemed to read er texts faster  make fewer reading errors on er texts  and also preferred er texts; however none of these results were statistically significant. there was little difference between the two versions for good readers 
skillsum evaluation experiment: 1 subjects were selected by skills experts to be people with moderate but not severe literacy problems  we also removed outliers; hence this group was more homogenous that of the first experiment. after completing the assessment and reading their own report  each subject was asked to read a report generated for someone else  in order to de-personalise the experiment ; half read er and half read control versions. in fact the reports read were those shown in figure 1. as in the girl experiment  we measured reading aloud rate and reading errors  but not preference . 
 this time our results showed a significant effect on reading rate  subjects read the er version 1% faster than the control version  p=1 . there was also a weakly significant  p=1  improvement in reading errors.  
1 conclusion 
we have only scratched the surface of the topic of generating appropriate texts for low-skilled readers; much more can and should be done. in particular we would like to include lexical choice in our models  and also develop different models for people with different skill profiles. nevertheless  we think our results to date are encouraging  and suggest that good choice rules can make a difference. 
