
driven by planning problems with both disjunctive constraints and contingency we define the disjunctive temporal problem with uncertainty  dtpu   an extension of the dtp that includes contingent events. generalizing existing work on simple temporal problems with uncertainty  we divide the time-points into controllable and uncontrollable classes  and propose varying notions of controllability to replace the notion of consistency.
1 introduction
for modelling and solving real-world planning and scheduling problems  quantitative temporal constraint networks in the form of the simple temporal problem  stp   dechter et al.  1  are widely known. the stp has been independently extended in two orthogonal directions.
　first  since the stp formalism is unable to express concepts such as  event a occurs before or after event b   the disjunctive temporal problem  dtp   stergiou and koubarakis  1  admits more than one disjunct in a constraint. thus dtp constraints are disjuncts of the form: y1 x1 （  ai1 b1 ‥，，，‥yn xn （  an bn . note a variable may appear in more than one disjunct. a simple way to solve a dtp is to consider the component stps obtained by selecting one disjunct from each constraint. the computational complexity of solving each component stp  deciding consistency and deriving the minimal network  is polynomial  while the worst-case complexity of solving a dtp is np-hard  stergiou and koubarakis  1 ; but in practice  efficient solving techniques have been developed  e.g.  tsamardinos and pollack  1    and tractability results are known for some classes of dtps  satish kumar  1 .
　second  since the stp formalism assumes all time-points are under the complete control of the execution agent  the simple temporal problem with uncertainty  stpu   vidal and fargier  1; morris et al.  1  divides the time-points into two classes  executable and contingent. contingent timepoints are controlled by exogenous factors  often referred to as 'nature'  and consistency of an stp is replaced by varying notions of controllability.
　driven by planning problems that feature both disjunctive constraints and contingent events  in this poster we propose the disjunctive temporal problem with uncertainty  dtpu . consider  for instance  planning the schedule of an elderly patient  peintner and pollack  1 . on the one hand  her schedule includes events  such as exercising and a relative's visit  that are not totally orderedby the problemrequirements; on the other hand  while the patient has some idea when the relative will arrive  the precise time is not under her control.
1 extending the dtp with uncertainty
following the stpu formalism  vidal and fargier  1   in a dtpu we divide the time-point variables into two classes: the controllable decision variables vd and the uncontrollable parameters vu. in an stpu  this induces a partition of the temporal relation constraints c into two types. a constraint y   x （  a b   where y （ vu  is a contingent link. intuitively  contingent links model tasks with uncertain durations. if a constraint is not contingent  it is an executable link; thus all other constraints  i.e. where y （ vd  are executable links. in a dtpu  each constraint is a disjunction of links:
definition 1 a dtpu is a tuple hvd vu rd ru ci  where vd  vu are as above  rd is the set of all executable links  and ru is the set of all contingent links  and c is a finite set of disjunctive temporal constraints.
　thus in a dtpu  three types of constraints arise according to the contingent status of the included disjuncts. first  only rd disjuncts; analogously with stpus  the constraint is said to be executable. second  only ru disjuncts; analogously with stpus  the constraint is said to be contingent. third  both rd and ru disjuncts. here  a situation which has no analogue in an stpu  the constraint can be satisfied by the satisfaction of either some executablelink  a possibility under the agent's control   or of some contingent link  which is not ; we say that it is semi-executable.
　a constraint is satisfied if at least one of its disjuncts is satisfied. a solution to a dtpu is a complete assignment to all variables v = vd“vu that satisfies all the constraints in c. a solution s can be partitioned into sd “ su  where sd and su are the set of temporal values assigned to elements of vd and vu respectively. sd is called a decision  and su is a realisation  or possible world  or scenario . we say a component stpu of a dtpu is the problem obtained by selecting one disjunct from each constraint.
example 1 consider further the example of an elderly patient's schedule  peintner and pollack  1 . the timepoints in a dtp model of the schedule include es and ee  and vs and ve  which describe the start and end of exercising and a visit respectively. one of the constraints is:
　　　　vs   ee （  1 inf  ‥ es   ve （  1 inf   1  stating that  exercise must finish at least 1 minutes before the visitor arrives or start anytime after the visitor leaves. 
　while the visitor has a scheduled arrival time of 1 p.m.  his precise arrival is not under the control of the patient; thus vs is a parameter. this means that the first disjunct of  1  is a contingent link. the second disjunct is an executable link  and so constraint  1  is semi-executable.
1 controllability
for space reasons  we present informal definitions extending the notions of controllability to dtpus. the important new possibility is of a semi-executable dtpu constraint.
strong controllability. a dtpu is strongly controllable  sc  if there exists a decision that  combined with any realisation  satisfies the constraints. in other words  there is a way to assign values to the decision variables such that  given any values for the parameters  at least one disjunct on each constraint is satisfied. note this means that a dtpu is sc if some componentstpu is sc. the converseis false  however  since in a sc decision  sd“su may satisfy different disjuncts in different realisations.
dynamic controllability. a dtpu is dynamicallycontrollable  dc  if there exists an incremental  online decision that  given knowledge of the values of all parameters that have occurred until now  can be dynamically extended to a decision in the future  whatever the values of the parameters that have not yet occurred. note this means that a dtpu is dc if some component stpu is dc  provided the decision for the component stpu can be consistently extended to a decision to all decision variables in the complete dtpu.  a component stpu may involve a strict subset of vd.  again  the converse is false in general.
weak controllability. a dtpu is weakly controllable  wc  if for any realisation there exists a decision that  combined with that realisation  satisfies the constraints. that is  every realisation can be consistently extended to a decision. once more  a dtpu is wc if some component stpu is wc  but the converse is false.
trivial controllability. the situation where every constraint is semi-executable brings the possibility that the agent couldsatisfy the dtpu withoutregardto the contingentlinks  by satisfying at least one executable link in each constraint. we say a component stpu of a dtpu is a component stp if it contains only executable links. a dtpu is trivially controllable  tc  if one or more of its component stpus is a consistent component stp. consistency of a component stp is required to prove that: every tc dtpu is sc.
　since sc =  dc =  wc  inherited from the stpu case   by testing whether a dtpu is trivially controllable  we have a sufficient but not necessary condition for all other types of controllability. testing for this condition requires  in the worst case  checking the consistency of every component stp. while there may be exponentially-many such stps to check  the consistency of each can be determined relatively quickly  compared to other inference tasks for dtpus.
　the other constraints of example 1  not shown here  are all single-disjunct executable constraints. thus  since a component stp arising with the second disjunct of  1  is consistent  the whole problem is trivially controllable. while so for this particularly simple example of a dtpu  more interesting dtpus are not tc in general.
1 future work
as a step towards modelling real-world planning problems with disjunctive temporal constraints and contingent events  we have proposed the disjunctive temporal problem with uncertainty. while the dtpu extends previous work on the stpu  much future work is needed. on the theory side  our main task is to formally state and prove properties of dtpus; on the practical side  our task is to develop algorithms to check the various controllability notions  and prove their complexity. beyond this  we are interested to combine the dtpu framework with user preferences  peintner and pollack  1   in a similar manner to  rossi et al.  1 .
acknowledgments. we thank m. pollack and t. uribe for useful discussions  and the reviewers for their comments. this material is based upon work supported by the defense advanced research projects agency  through the department of the interior  nbc  acquisition services division  under contract no. nbchd1.
references
 dechter et al.  1  r. dechter  i. meiri  and j. pearl. temporal constraint networks. artificial intelligence  1-1 :1  1.
 morris et al.  1  p. morris  n. muscettola  and t. vidal. dynamic control of plans with temporal uncertainty. in proc. of ijcai'1  pages 1  seattle  wa  1.
 peintner and pollack  1  b. peintner and m. e. pollack. lowcost addition of p