 
in this paper  we consider a mobile mailbox communication scheme to reduce inter-agent communication costs. we employ a mailbox mobility strategy based on the ability of the mailbox to predict variations in inbound message rates and to migrate  if necessary  to a potentially better position in the network. 
1 introduction 
　effective and efficient communication between mobile agents requires a different approach than the one employed in traditional distributed system communication  as difficulties may be encountered when tracking the location of the target agent  together with message delivery reliability issues. in  feng et al.  1   cao et al.  1a   a nonautonomous mailbox based message delivery protocol is proposed. as the mailbox can travel independently of its owner  there is the possibility to reduce the costs of message delivery to an agent but the mailbox does not decide about its own migration. 
　in this paper  we consider performance of autonomous mailbox agent whose migration strategy is influenced by reducing the costs of message delivery from senders to a receiver or target agent  which is the owner of the mailbox  cavrak et al.  1 . cost reduction mainly relies on lower mailbox mobility rates and in choosing optimal relay network positions  cutting the inbound message delivery costs. 
1 cost model 
　the communication network is designed as a fully connected  undirected  weighted graph. we employ the assumption that the costs associated with messages transferred from senders to the receiver using the mailbox depend on the following: 
　cost of message transfer from sender to mailbox in the time interval  ti - te  ti : 
ctrns  ti   = ‘m cipb  λp  ti           1  
                             p=1 where cipb is associated with the cost of transfer of one message between host hip  agent ap location  and host hp  mailbox location   while λp ti  is the amount of messages sent by agent ap in the time period considered. 
 
1faculty of electrical engineering and computing unska 1  hr-1 zagreb  croatia 
{igor.cavrak mario.zagar} fer.hr 
 
　cost of mailbox registration and deregistration procedure in the synchronised push model when mailbox moves from host hb to host hb*: 
　　　　m creg	i b	i b*	     1  
where q is a ratio between the delivery cost of one control and one data message  q 1 . whenever mailbox changes location it requests and waits for synchronisation release confirmation  1 messages  and sends resynchronisation request on arrival  1 message . 
　cost of mailbox migration depends on the number of messages  collected in time interval  t1 t1   present in the mailbox's internal buffer at the moment of migration from host hb to host hb*: 
	cmig = cbb*  ‘‘m	t1 λp  t          1  
p= =1 t t1
　cost of mailbox position update at corresponding home object:   
chmreg = q cb*h          1  
where cb*h is the cost incurred by sending one message from the future mailbox's host hb* to host hh where the home object is placed. 
　cost of message transfer from mailbox to the receiver associated with the cost of pulling the collected messages within time interval  t1 t1  by the receiver agent:  
c pull         1  
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　p= =1 t t1 where cbr  is the cost of transfer of one message between host hb where the mailbox is located  and the host hr where the receiver is located. 
1 mailbox migration strategy and model 
　the mailbox holds the data that include network topology and communication costs  the number of message sources and their network locations  and the set of hosts where the receiver agent will be located. reducing the cost of communication by planning optimal mailbox positions during the course of system execution is the main task. 
　at simulated time ti  a mailbox does the following:  a  predicts message rate vector λ ti+te  for all senders using extrapolated straight line fit method   b  based on those predictions  calculates ctrns ti+te  for all possible mailbox positions within the network and finds future position that will incur the minimal cost.  c  based on cost calculations  migrates to the next proposed host or remains on the current one. 
1 simulation and results 
　a simulated mobile agent system consists of n hosts and m agents that are distributed randomly in the fully connected network. message rate functions of sender agents are randomly picked from the set of functions such as periodic step function  constant function and periodic triangular function superimposed with positive or negative random errors. efficiency of the mailbox is defined as a ratio between total costs occurred in the system with mobile mailbox and total costs in the system without the mailbox.  

 
figure 1: efficiency for different message rate amplitudes  heterogeneous network  
 
　figure 1 shows the dependency between the efficiency of the mailbox and the message rate amplitude of sender agents in a heterogeneous network. increasing the network heterogeneity  the usability of the mailbox is still justified even with increased host residence time  hrt  of the receiver agent  if the message rate amplitude is low. the heterogeneous network will decrease the influence of a two-stage communication effect as the ratio between paths used for message delivery from senders to the receiver agent in the system with the mailbox when compared with the system without the mailbox will be lower than the system with the homogeneous network.  
　figure 1 shows the dependency between the efficiency of the mailbox and the number of hosts in the network. the number of hosts has a significant influence on the efficiency of the mailbox. in a network with fewer hosts  the mailbox is not provided with enough opportunities to mitigate the effect induced by a two-stage communication process and that is the reason the ratio is above 1. increasing the number of hosts  the mailbox is offered more alternatives to deliver messages with lower costs. the higher number of sender agents will increase the dispersion of message sources in the network which will decrease the likelihood for the mailbox to be  too far  from agents. it will result in a more even message transfer cost over various positions of the mailbox. the efficiency of the mailbox will be less variable as the number of sender agents increases and the graph will be smoother. the number of agents does not significantly influence the efficiency of the mailbox as both the mailbox and the receiver agent need to synchronise with them whenever the migration occurs  and those costs do not affect the efficiency ratio. 

figure 1: efficiency for different numbers of hosts 
in the network 
1 conclusion  
in this paper  we investigated performance of a novel approach for message-delivery cost-reduction in mobile agent systems. the approach uses an autonomous mobile mailbox acting as an intermediary message relay station. intelligent behaviour of the mailbox relies on its ability to predict incoming message rates on-the-fly and decide about potential migration accordingly. its migration strategy is motivated by a desire to reduce the costs of message delivery to the agent to which it belongs. possible cost savings are achieved through lower mailbox mobility rates as well as deciding about optimal mailbox position within the network.  
