
when deciding what to do agents must choose among alternative actions and different agents may make different choices according to what they wish to achieve in the light of their preferences and values. it cannot be assumed  however  that agents have a conscious understanding of their value preferences independent of the reasoning situations in which they engage. in this paper we consider an extension to a generic framework for reasoning about arguments justifying actions in terms of values in which the preferences amongst values emerge from the reasoning process.
1 introduction
we are concerned with practical reasoning - reasoning about what to do in a given situation. such reasoning is quite different from reasoning about beliefs  and has a number of characteristic features which any account must respect.
모first  arguments justifying actions must be considered in the context of other related arguments: arguments can only be accepted if due consideration to arguments attacking and defending them is given. in a set of arguments relating to an issue - which we call a debate - the acceptability of an argument relies on it forming part of a coherent subset of such arguments able to defend itself against all attacking arguments. we call such a coherent subset a position. the construction of a position and related problems of acceptability have been explored in ai through the use of argumentation frameworks  e.g.  dung  1; bench-capon  1 . such reasoning can be naturally explored through the use of a dialogue in which an argument is attacked and defended  cayrol et al.  1; dunne and bench-capon  1 .
모second  debates about which action is best to perform must permit rational disagreement. whereas the truth of facts may be demonstrated and compel rational acceptance  with regard to actions there is an element of choice: we cannot choose what is the case  but we can choose what we attempt to bring about  and different people may rationally make different choices. such differences in values and interests mean that arguments will have different audiences  and what is acceptable to one audience may be unacceptable to another. disagreements are represented in  dung  1  by the presence of multiple acceptable positions. in  bench-capon  1   the disagreements are explained within an extended argumentation framework which explicitly relates arguments to values and explicitly represents audiences in terms of their preferences over values.
모while a framework such as that of  bench-capon  1  can be used to explain disagreements between different audiences in terms of their different ranking of values  it does not explain how these value rankings are formed. a third feature of practical reasoning  as indicated in  searle  1   is that we cannot presuppose that people bring to a debate a knowledge of their value preferences. it means that the value preferences should emerge from the construction of a position instead of being taken as an input.
모finally  practical reasoners may not be equally open to all arguments: they may have certain arguments that they wish to include in their position  some desired arguments   certain arguments that they wish to exclude  rejected arguments   and they may be indifferent to the status of the remainder  the optional arguments . for example  a politician forming a political programme may recognise that raising taxation is electorally inexpedient and so must reject any arguments with the conclusion that taxes should be raised from the manifesto  while desiring that arguments justifying actions bringing about core objectives are present: other arguments are optional  and acceptable if they enable this. such a distinction between arguments has been taken into account in the construction of positions for dung's framework by  cayrol et al.  1   but not for that of  bench-capon  1 . it is an account of these two last phenomena in the  benchcapon  1  framework which is the objective of our work.
1 definition of a position
to accommodate the last feature of practical reasoning identified above  we define an extension of the  bench-capon  1  framework  called a dor-partitioned value-based argument framework  dor-vaf   as a tuple hx a v 붾i  where: x = d 뫋 o 뫋 r for three disjoint sets d  the desired arguments   o  the optional arguments  and r  the re-
jected arguments ; a   x 뫄x is an attack relation between arguments; v = {v1 v1 ... vk} is a set of k values  and 붾 : x 뫸 v is a mapping that associates a value 붾 x  뫍 v with each argument x 뫍 x.
모as in  bench-capon  1   preferences between values are considered through the notion of an audience  which is a transitive  irreflexive relation     v 뫄 v. a pair hvi vji is referred to as 'vi is preferred to vj' w.r.t.  . given an audience    an argument x defeats an argument y if x attacks y and h붾 y  붾 x i 뫍/  ; an argument x is a defender of an argument y if and only if there is a finite sequence a1 ... a1n such that y = a1  x = a1n  and  i 1 뫞 i 뫞  1n   1   ai+1 defeats ai w.r.t.  .
모a position in a dor-vaf is defined as a set of arguments p = d 뫋 y with y   o  such that there exists at least one audience   with respect to which:  i  no argument in p defeats w.r.t.   another argument in p;  ii  any defeated argument in p w.r.t.   has a defender w.r.t.   in p;  iii  each optional argument of y is a defender w.r.t.   of a desired argument of d. an audience for which p is a position is said to be a corresponding audience of p.
모this new notion of a position accomodates the third feature of practical reasoning: the preferences between values are not given as an input on the basis of which the position is constructed  but are a result of constructing the position.
1 development of a position
in order to build a position in a dor-vaf  one may start by considering the set of desired arguments. this set must be first tested to demonstrate that there is at least one audience w.r.t. which no desired argument defeats another desired argument. it may be that this condition can only be satisfied by imposing some value preferences. if we can satisfy this test we must next ensure that any defeated argument in the set has a defender in the set w.r.t. at least one audience. to this end  some optional arguments may be added to the set as defenders of defeated arguments and/or some additional constraints on the ordering of values may be imposed. if the process succeeds  then the set developed is a position and the set of constraints determined by the construction can be extended into a corresponding audience of this position  by taking its transitive closure. otherwise  the user has to reconsider the partition of the set of arguments.
모this construction can be presented in the form of a dialogue between two players. one  the opponent  outlines why the set under development is not yet a position  by identifying arguments which defeat members of the set. the other  the proponent  tries to make the set under development a position by extending it with some optional arguments and/or some constraints between values. if the proponent terminates the dialogue  then the set of arguments played is a position  and the set of constraints advanced can be extended into a corresponding audience. otherwise  the set of desired arguments cannot be extended into a position.
모this presentation in a dialogue form has the main advantage of making clear why some constraints between values must be imposed  and why some optional arguments must belong to the position. moreover  it captures well the first feature of practical reasoning. in  doutre et al.  1   an original formal dialogue framework  extending previous dialogue frameworks for argumentation  is introduced and instantiated in order to capture the construction above. the instantiation takes into account some heuristics aiming at keeping the extensions of the set under development to a minimum. the idea is that the proponent will wish to meet an attack in a way which retains as much room for subsequent manoeuvre as possible. there are four ways of meeting an attack from an argument x. in ascending order of commitment they are: include an optional argument requiring no new value preference; add a new value preference; include an optional argument requiring an additional value preference  but does not conflict with any existing position argument; and add an optional argument which does conflict with some existing position argument so requiring additional value preferences to be imposed to resolve the conflict. the first three responses are computationally cheap: the complexity in constructing positions arises when the need to use the fourth response arises.
1 conclusion
we believe that this approach will have significant practical application in the analysis and modelling of argumentation about which action should be chosen  for instance in areas such as case law and political debate  both of which are receiving increasing attention as the notion of e-democracy becomes widespread. interesting possibilities also arise if we consider extending a debate in which a position has already been constructed. some additions should radically change the best position  giving insight into phenomena such as paradigm shift in science  and landmark cases which require extensive theory revision in the development of case law.
