 
to settle the disputation  adr  alternative disputation resolution  has been becoming popular instead of the trial. however  to educate the mediation skill  much training is needed. in this paper  we introduce the overview of the online mediator education system. this system navigates the users by providing materials for decision making by referring to old cases. users can communicate with each other by using avatars   and they can see the status of disputation in the form of several diagrams.  
 
1. introduction 
  
these days  there are various types of troubles related to transactions on the internet. especially the number of troubles in online shopping and online auctions are on the increase. since going through trials to argue is high cost and time-consuming  therefore it is difficult to provide effective remedy for these types of troubles. prompt and low-cost mediations and arbitrations called the alternative disputation resolution  adr  are in the spotlight. 
　non-legal professions can carry out mediations  however  as the demand increasing  we are lacking mediators. trainee mediators not only need education on the procedures and skills for actual mediations but also need to practice with example cases   katsh  1; rule  1 . however  when mediators practice  they need constant attendance by instructors. they have to be at the same location at same time which is a great burden. 
　given this factor  we have been researching to aim for developing an online mediator education system. this system does not only provide online argument environment  but also assists and educates the mediators by using case example base. it also suggests a new education model using the analyzed data accumulated by the system. 
 
 
 
 
 
1. online mediation education assistance system 
 
online mediations are carried out by connecting to the server through the internet by the users using the argument interface. mediator  host  and the two parties are present for the system. educational assistance is done by the instructor suggesting the next possible remark and judging the mediator's skill by analyzing the accumulated mediation records statistically. 
 
the main features of this system are the following three;  1  to provide online mediation education environment 
　exchanging remarks online  setting index to the remark contents and show them in diagrams and  accumulate them in case example base 
 1  to navigate mediations using case example base 
　during mediation practice  similar past mediation cases can be searched and the next remarks  candidate are indicated to the student acting as a mediator.  1  to analyze mediation skill using case example base 
 by analyzing mediation records in case example base  assess the mediation student's skill. 
 
 
 
figure 1: argument interface 
 
　situated mediations are carried out with argument interface as shown in figure 1. users input  remark texts    link data  and  avatar expressions . 
　the case data dealt in this study is natural-language texts representing conversations in mediations. to be able to search for similar situations from the conversations and to analyze statistically  we propose to index the remarks as follows; 
　firstly  when instructors set questions  they should know what the point at issue is  for instance  in mediations for auction troubles  the following point at issues are to be included  ashley  1; aleven  1 ; 
 
f1: whether or not the product auctioned was a defect  f1: does it have any flaw       f1: is it broken  f1: was there enough description for the product  
    f1: did the product description picture show the defect part  
    f1: did the description explain the defect-status well  
 
　for each question set  we prepare around twenty points at issue for it beforehand. in addition  for each of them  we register which points at issue is on the topic when which term  or groups of term  appear. this extraction of wordlist is done by tf/idf method by using mediation records in the case example base. 
　this allows one remark to have two data be indexed;  1  the point at issue in the remark and  1  the relation  with the previous remark.   
 
　during mediation  we tend to be stuck what remarks to make next. in those cases  it would be helpful if we can refer to other people's remarks in similar situations picked up from the case example base  and by knowing how the mediation proceeded can help them refer to making next remark. 

figure 1: similar situation search 
 
　however  searching similar situations are not easy. similar remarks can always be slightly different from one another  as the expressions are different  and what we understand from them differs regarding the previous remarks. 
　to make searching for similar situations easier  we propose a searching method of using index of remarks. this method  as shown in figure 1  goes back to two of the previous remarks from the present subject remark and within these three remarks  the point at issue and the relation  link data  are compared and similar situations are assessed. 
 
1. utilizing the case base  
 
by analyzing old cases statistically  we can draw various information which is useful for legal education strategy. for example  by observing the number of issue points which the mediator introduced in the case   we can estimate how positively the mediator controls the mediation. this information is used to measure the mediation skill.  
　another example is that we can classify the mediation data in the case base by comparing the flow of issue points. the classified data is used to arrange the mediation records and to evaluate the results of mediation training. 
 
1. conclusion 
 
we introduced the outline of the online system of adr mediation education assistance. the characteristics of this system are that it uses case example base to compare the mediation navigation and to assist mediator education.  
　the final object of this study is to develop a mediation agent that carries out mediations instead of human. mediation agent acts as a host following the argument models. with using the case example base  they can refer to the remarks form similar situations to use in hosting. therefore  we need to collect more simulated mediation cases and statistically analyze them and with the results of them  we need to improve the accuracy of the similar situation search. 
 
