
knowledge of which lexical items convey the same meaning in a given context is important for many natural language processing tasks. this paper concerns the substitutability of discourse connectives in particular. this paper proposes a datadriven method based on a minimum description length  mdl  criterion for automatically learning substitutability of connectives. the method is shown to outperform two baseline classifiers.
1 introduction
discourse connectives are words or phrases which explicitly signal coherence relations in texts  e.g. however  even though and whereas. studies of connectives have provided insights into natural language discourse  however formal semantic analysis of connectives is a difficult task  and most connectives have not been the subject of much study. the empirical study of the substitutability of discourse connectives can inform and complement theoretical analyses  knott  1 . the substitutability of discourse connectives is also important for natural language processing applications such as natural language generation and text simplification  moser and moore  1; siddharthan  1 .
¡¡this paper investigates acquiring substitutability relationships between connectives automatically. previous attempts to do so have been hindered by the relatively low prior likelihood of two connectives being substitutable  hutchinson  1 . we introduce an mdl-based approach that addresses this.
1 substitutability of discourse connectives
example  1  contains the connective seeing as. however  because can also be used to achieve the same discourse aims  i.e. it is substitutable  knott  1 .
 1  seeing as/because we've got nothing but circumstantial evidence  it's going to be difficult to get a conviction.
however  because it is not always substitutable for seeing as  and the converse does not hold either. in general  there are five possibilities for a connective x's relationship to another connective y :
  x is a synonym of y if x can always be substituted for y   and vice versa.
  x and y are exclusive if neither can ever be substituted for the other.
  x is a hyponym of y if y can always be substituted for x  but not vice versa.
  x is a hypernym of y if x can always be substituted for y   but not vice versa.
  x and y are contingently substitutable if each can sometimes  but not always  be substituted for the other.
¡¡we would like to automatically predict which of these relationships holds  for any given pair of connectives.
1 an mdl-based model of substitutability
we will refer to a consistent set of relationships between connectives as a taxonomy. our model of taxonomies exploits the following two observations. firstly  it is unlikely that every connective should be exclusive with every other one. secondly  there are logical constraints on substitutability. for example  if a is a hyponym of b and b is exclusive with c  then a must also be exclusive with c.
¡¡our modelling of substitutability is within the minimum description length  mdl  framework. in our case  we wish to evaluate models representing substitutability relationships between connectives. for a taxonomy t and data data  the total description length is given by:
	l t data  = l t  + l data|t 	 1 
we will exploit the fact that description lengths l can be related to probabilities p via the equation l =  log1 p.
calculating the prior: we will use the notation hrel x y i ¡Ê t to indicate that in the taxonomy t connectives x and y are in relationship rel. we calculate p t  using the following multinomial model:
	p t  = m y p rel 	 1 
hrel x y i¡Êt
where  i  p rel  is the prior probability of two connectives being in the relationship rel  which will be estimated empirically  and  ii  m is a multinomial coeffient which ensures that the most likely taxonomy contains numbers of each pairwise substitutability relationship in proportion to their prior probabilities.
¡¡the multinomial model  1  is defined over all sets of pairwise substitutability relationships  but we are only interested in calculating the probabilities of consistent sets. however this does not affect the relative likelihoods of taxonomies with the same number of connectives  so for the purposes of the experiments below this effect can be ignored.
estimating the posterior probability: previous work has found a correlation between substitutability and distributional similarity  hutchinson  1 . therefore  the data that our model of taxonomies aims to explain are the kullback-leibler  kl  divergences  d p||q   between pairs of connectives.
that is  we assume that the data to be explained is:
data ¡Ô {d x||y   : hrel x y i ¡Ê t}
to estimate the probability of the data  we assume that the likelihood of observing a given distributional divergence d x||y   between x and y is dependent only on the substitutability of x and y .
	p data|t  ¡Ö y p d x||y  |hrel x y i 	 1 
hrel x y i¡Êt
to estimate each of the multiplicands in  1   we use gaussian models of the distributional divergences corresponding to each substitutability relationship  i.e.
 p d x||y  |hrel x y i  ¡Ø n d x||y  ;¦Ìrel ¦Òrel   1  where ¦Ìrel and ¦Òrel and the mean and standard deviation of kl divergences of all pairs of connectives in relationship rel.
1 experiment
task: our task is to predict the substitutability relationships in a manually constructed taxonomy t of connectives. we iteratively remove a single connective from t and attempt to re-insert it in its original position. to do this  we insert it in the position that minimises the description length.
methodology: an existing taxonomy containing 1 discourse connectives was used as a gold standard  hutchinson  1 . fixed width beam search  width=1  is used to search for the taxonomy with minimum description length. co-occurrences with other discourse connectives were used as the distributional representations.
parameter tuning: due to unrealistic independence assumptions in equation  1   our model underestimates the value of p data|t . as a result  it overestimates l data|t . to counterbalance this effect  we weight l data|t  by a parameter ¦Ë ¡Ê  1 . using half the pairs of connectives as a validation set  the setting ¦Ë = 1 was found to give good results.
evaluation metrics: two evaluation metrics were used: overall accuracy in predicting substitutability relationships  and the amount of information  measured in bits  of the correctly classified instances  kononenko and bratko  1 .
baselines: two baseline classifiers were constructed for comparison with the mdl-based model. the first assigned all pairs to the most frequent relationship  namely exclusive. the second baseline classifier assumed that the new connective would be a synonym of one other connective x already in the taxonomy. all other relationships involving the new connective were thus identical to x's. when evaluated on all of connectives  these classifiers had accuracies of 1% and 1%  and correctly learnt 1 and 1 bits of information  respectively.
results: on the 1% of pairs of connectives not in the validation set  the mdl-based classifier had an accuracy of 1%  which is significantly greater than both baselines. the improvement is even greater on the information theoretic metric: correct classifications had 1 bits of information  from which we can extrapolate a performance of about 1 bits on the set of all pairs of connectives.
1 discussion and conclusions
we have introduced a statistical model of the lexicon based on the minimum description length principle. a multinomial prior assigns the greatest probability when the frequencies of pairwise relationships are in proportion to the prior likelihoods of those relationships. the model is applied to extending a taxonomy representing substitutability relationships between discourse connectives  and gives better performance than two classifiers that do not take into account global properties of the lexicon. the model aims to explain the distributional similarity of pairs of connectives  as measured by the kullback-leibler divergence function. in future  we will explore the use other distributional similarity functions  as these provide other perspectives of the data that may prove useful for learning substitutability. the utility of including other types of co-occurrence data in our distributional representations also remains to be explored.
