
a martingale framework is proposed to enable support vector machine  svm  to adapt to timevarying data streams. the adaptive svm is a onepass incremental algorithm that  i  does not require a sliding window on the data stream   ii  does not require monitoring the performance of the classifier as data points are streaming  and  iii  works well for high dimensional  multi-class data streams. our experiments show that the novel adaptive svm is effective at handling time-varying data streams simulated using both a synthetic dataset and a multiclass real dataset.
1 introduction
in this paper we propose an efficient adaptive support vector machine  svm  for time-varying data streams based on the martingale approach  vovk et al.  1  and using adiabatic incremental learning  cauwenberghs and poggio  1 . when a new data point is observed  hypothesis testing decides whether any change has occurred. once a change is detected  historical information about previous data is removed from the memory.
1 change detection using martingale
 vovk et al.  1  introduced the idea of testing exchangeability online using martingale. the sequence of random variables z1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ zn is exchangeable if the joint distribution p z1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ zn  is invariant under any permutation of the indices of the random variables. when a new labeled example  zn  is observed  testing exchangeability of the sequence of examples z1 z1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ zn consists of two main steps  vovk et al.  1 :
1. extract the randomized p-value for zn:
	pn = #{i : ¦Ái   ¦Án} + ¦Èn#{i : ¦Ái = ¦Án}	 1 

n
where ¦Ái is the strangeness measure  for svm  one can use either the lagrange multipliers or the distances from the hyperplane  for zi  i = 1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ n and ¦Èn is a random number between 1 and 1.
1. construct the randomized martingale:
		 1 
where pi are p-values  a constant 1 ¡Ê  1   and the initial martingale.
  are computed using step 1
and 1.
¡¡the exchangeability of a data sequence is a slightly weaker assumption compared to the randomness  i.i.d.  assumption. hypothesis testing using the randomized martingale is suitable to check for the randomness of a data sequence which  in turn  can detect changes.
¡¡one tests the null hypothesis h1 :  no change in the data stream  against the alternative hypothesis h1 :  change in the data stream . the martingale test continues as long as
		 1 
one rejects the null hypothesis when.
¡¡the martingale test is justified using the doob's maximal inequality  steele  1  which states that for a martingale
{mk} and any ¦Ë   1 
	¦Ì	 
	¦Ëp	maxmk ¡Ý ¦Ë	¡Ü e mn 
k¡Ün
hence  if e mn  = e m1  = 1  then 1 		 1 
this inequality means that it is unlikely for mn to have a high value. based on this inequality  ¦Ë is appropriately set to reject the null hypothesis.
1 experiments
experiments are first conducted on a binary-class twodimensional rotating hyperplane data stream  hulten et al.  1 . to show the performance of the adaptive svm on high dimensional multi-class data stream  experiments are carried out using a modified three-digit data stream based on the usps handwritten digit dataset  lecun et al.  1 . for the svms  c = 1 and the gaussian kernel are used.

figure 1: the difference between baseline accuracy and the accuracy of the adaptive svm. negative values imply better performance than the baseline accuracy.

figure 1: the martingale values of the data stream. detected change points  denoted   : 1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1. miss detections: 1  1. the median of the time between true change points and their corresponding detected change points is 1 time units.
a. 1-d rotating hyperplane synthetic datasetfor the two-dimensional rotating hyperplane data stream  the sequence consists of 1 data points with changes in the data distribution occurring at points  1 ¡Á i  + 1  for i = 1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ 1. for each segment of a steady data distribution  1 points from the same data distribution are used to assess the performance of the svm classifier.
¡¡the adaptive svms using ¦Ë = 1  for the martingale test  1   displays very good performance as shown in figure 1. the difference in accuracy from baseline accuracy  performance of the classifier that adapts to the given true change points  is near zero most of the time. short bursts of accuracy discrepancy occur between true change points and their corresponding detected change points. longer accuracy discrepancies happen when a significant change is detected late  e.g. change point 1  as shown in figure 1. in figure 1  we observe that the martingale value is small and stable when no change in the data distribution is detected. the martingale value increases abruptly when change is suspected.
b. three-digit data stream
the usps handwritten digits dataset  which consists of 1 classes of dimension 1 and includes 1 data points  is modified to form a data stream as follows. there are four different data segments. each segment draws from a fixed
segmentdigit 1digit 1digit 1totalchange point1/1  1 1  1 1  1 111  1 1  1 1  1 111  1 1  1 1  1 111  1 1  1 1  1 1-table 1: three-digit data stream: tr/ts  d : for the true digit class d  tr and ts are the number of data points used for segment construction and for testing respectively.

	1	1	1	 1	1
	difference from baseline accuracy  % 	data stream
figure 1: left graph: the proportion of data points with the difference from the baseline accuracy less than or equal to some percentage value. the maximum  minimum and mean percentage of data points at each accuracy difference are shown. right graph: the mean difference between the baseline accuracy and the accuracy of the adaptive svm.
set of three different digits in a random fashion. the threedigit set changes from one segment to the next. the composition of the data stream and ground truth for the change points are summarized in table 1. ten simulations were performed on the simulated data stream using the one-against-the-rest multi-class svm and the martingale test with ¦Ë = 1.
¡¡for the three-class data stream there are three martingale values that have to be computed at each point in order to detect change. when one of the martingale values is greater than ¦Ë  the svm will detect and adapt to the change. one can see from figure 1 that the adaptive svm performs extremely well. about 1% of the data points have a difference from baseline accuracy less than or equal to 1%. there are no miss detections for all the ten simulations.
