 
fast and accurate tracking of moving objects in video streams is a critical process in computer vision. this problem can be formulated as exploration problems and thus can be expressed as a search into a state space based representation approach. however  these search problems are hard to solve because they involve search through a high dimensional space. in this paper  we describe an a* heuristic search for computing efficient search through a space of transformations corresponding to the 1d motion of the object  where most promising search alternatives are computed by means of integrating target dynamics into the search process  and ideas from information theory are used to guide the search. the paper includes evaluations with video streams that illustrate the efficiency and suitability for real-time vision tasks on general purpose hardware. moreover  the computational cost to carry out the tracking task is smaller than real time requirements  1 ms . 
1 problem formulation 
let t ={t1   tr}  1 be a set of points that represent a template  let i ={i1   is}  1be another set of points that denote an input image  let a bounded set of translational transformations g .  be a set of transformations g: 1 뫸 1 consisting of translations  which are parameterized by a vector 
  x  y t 뫍   min    max  뫄    min   max    1 and let a bounded error notion of quality of match q g;t i  붼  be a measurement for computing the degree of match between a 
template t and a current input image i. the quality of match assigned to a transformation g is represented by the allowed error bound붼  when template points are brought to point's image using a transformation g:  
 
 	q   g =뫉maxi뫍i	g   t  i 붼 	 1  
t뫍t
 
모given a template t  an input image i and an error bound붼  template position matching problem can be viewed 
as a search process in the space of transformations in order  to find the transformation  gmax  that maximizes the 
quality of match q g : 
 
	 	gmax t i 붼 = argmaxq g;t i 붼  	 1  
g뫍g
1 a* search algorithm  
problem solving through the use of heuristic search strategies is expressed through a state space based representation approach  pearl  1 . according to the heuristic search framework  template position matching problem is formulated as: the search process oriented to find the transformation parameters gmax 뫍 g .  that maximizes the quality of function match q g  between the transformed template g t  and the current image i. next  each one of the elements of the problem is described: 
  state: each state n is associated with a subsetgk   g .   which is represented by the transformation corresponding to the centre that is referred to as gc. 
  initial state: is represented by a bounded set of translational transformations g .   which allowing matching the current template into the current scene.  
  final state: is the transformation that best matches the current template points into the current scene  according to the quality of function q g . the quality of function match assigned to a transformation g is expressed in terms of the partial directed hausdorff distance between the transformed template t and the current image i:  
 	q g = hk g t   i  붼 	 1  
that is  the final state corresponds to the state with the translation gmax which verifies that the distance between 1% of translated template points and current image points are less than 1. 
  operators: for each current state n  the operators a and b are computed: 
a. each partial set of transformations from the current state is partitioned into four regions by vertical and horizontal bisections  that is  four new states . 
b. the quality of function match  equation 1  is computed for each one of the four new states.  
모splitting operation generates an expanded quaternary tree where with each node a 1i x 1j region is associated. the splitting operation is finished when the quadrisection process computes a translational motion according to the quality of function match q g . the best node to expand is computed through the use of an a* approach  pearl  1 . the corresponding cost value assigned to each state n is defined as:  
 
 	f    n = c   n + h*   n 	 1  
 
모h* n  is formulated in terms of expanding the best state of the search space based on measuring the similarity among the distribution functions that characterize the current state n and the objective state  denoted respectively by p and q. the distribution function p is represented by a histogram distances {hgc}i=1 r   which contains the number of template points t at distance dj with respect to the points of the input image i  when the transformation gc of the current state n is applied on the current template t. the distribution function q is modelled by approximating {h gc }i=1 r by an exponential distribution function f    n = ke an . 
모the similarity between the distributions p and q is evaluated through the relative entropy or kullback-leibler distance measurement from information theory  cover and thomas  1 : 
log
	 	  	d p || q  = 뫉ir=1 pi	qpii 	 1  
모an estimated cost function c n  is employed to lead the search process towards promising solutions. with this aim  a depth term is added to the f n  function  expression 1 . this term is based on the number of operators of type a applied from the initial search node to the current node n.  
모an alpha-beta predictive filtering  shalom and rong  1  is incorporated into the search algorithm with the purpose of predicting target position and reducing the initial size of the search space of transformations  focused on the assumption that there is a relationship between the size of the search area and the resulting uncertainty of the alphabeta predictive filtering. figure 1 illustrates the integration of the stages that compose the alpha-beta filtering with the computation of the dimension m x n of g .  and their respective equations. 
 	predict state	mxn dimension search area	get observation

figure 1. computing adjustable-size based search area. 
 
모the algorithm for template position matching in our approach based on an a* search is as follows.  
 
input 
g . : initial set of transformations. 붼: distance error bound allowed when template points are brought to point's image using a transformation g. 
 v k  : uncertainty measurement computed by alpha-beta filtering approach. 뷎: estimate which determines from what value should be selected 1max or 1min bound value for computing mxn dimension of g . .  1max and 1min: upper and lower nearest values to the innovation factor v k . 붾: number of operators of type a applied from the initial search state to 
the current state n. 
output 
mxn dimension of initial state set g .  
 
gmax =  gxmax gymax  algorithm 
step 1  compute adjustable mxn dimension of initial state set g . : 
1
  m n =    1minmax      ifif 뷎 뷎++1minmin 뫞 vv    kk   
step 	1  	find 	gmax 	such 	the 	quality 	of 	function 	match q g = hk g t  i  붼 is verified: 
 	while  q g  붼  do 
1  split current state n into four new states { }n i=1 
1  compute q gc  뫹 hk  gc    t  i  for each new ni 
1  expand the best state ni according the evaluation function f  n = c n + h*   n : 
1.1  h* n 뫹 d pq  
1.1  c n 뫹 c n 1 +붾 
 	end while 
step 1  output gmax =  gxmax gymax   
1 comparative analysis and runtime 
diverse experiments have been carried out with 1 different sequences  achieving the same behaviour for all of them on a p-iv 1 ghz. comparing the results achieved from the proposed a* heuristic search that uses an adjustable-size search area approach with the blind search strategy that does not use information to guide the search process and does not estimate the dimension appropriated for initial search state such as the conventional search strategy described by  rucklidge  1   demonstrates that the proposed a* heuristic search framework is computationally lighter and as consequence  faster than the blind search strategy  in an average rate of three times better. average time measured in seconds for processing each frame for the 1 different sequences is 1  confirming the adaptation of the search strategy proposed to real-time restrictions under unrestricted environments for arbitrary shapes.  
 
