
belief revision and belief update are two of the most basic types of belief change operations. we need to select either revision or update when we accept new information into the current belief  however  such decision making has not been considered. in this paper  we propose a unified framework of revision and update based on state transition models that enable us to do such decision making. this framework provides a hybrid operation of revision and update  called acceptance.
1 introduction
belief revision  alchour¡äron et al.  1  and belief update  katsuno and mendelzon  1  are two of the most basic types of belief change operations. when we accept new information into the current belief  we need to estimate whether the new information represents more reliable information about a static world  or it reports some  unspecified  change occurred in a dynamic world. this estimation causes decision making to select either revision to fix some errors in the current belief  or update to reflect some change into the belief.
¡¡in this paper  we introduce a state transition model as a unified framework of belief revision and belief update. the state transition model illustrates prior knowledge for estimation about the background of the new information  and also provides a selection mechanism for the decision making. using the state transition model  we also propose a hybrid operation  called acceptance  of revision and update.
1 knowledge base revision and update
katsuno and mendelzon  katsuno and mendelzon  1  have rephrased the agm postulates for revision  alchour¡äron et al.  1   and have provided a possible worlds characterization of revision. for a given propositional sentence kb that represents the current knowledge base  and a propositional sentence ¦Á that represents new information about a static world  kb ¦Á denotes a revision of kb by ¦Á. revision operators are characterized by postulates  r1  -  r1 .
 r1  kb   ¦Á |= ¦Á.
 r1  if kb ¡Ä ¦Á is satisfiable  then kb   ¦Á ¡Ô kb ¡Ä ¦Á.
 r1  if ¦Á is satisfiable  then kb   ¦Á is also satisfiable.
 r1  if |= ¦Á   ¦Â  then kb   ¦Á ¡Ô kb   ¦Â.
 r1   kb   ¦Á  ¡Ä ¦Â |= kb    ¦Á ¡Ä ¦Â .
 r1  if  kb   ¦Á  ¡Ä ¦Â is satisfiable  then kb    ¦Á ¡Ä ¦Â  |=  kb   ¦Á  ¡Ä ¦Â.
¡¡katsuno and mendelzon  katsuno and mendelzon  1  have proposed a general characterization of belief update. for a given knowledge base kb and a sentence ¦Á that represents new information by some  unspecified  change in a dynamic world  kb   ¦Á denotes an update of kb by ¦Á. update operators are characterized by postulates  u1  -  u1 .
 u1  kb   ¦Á |= ¦Á.
 u1  if kb |= ¦Á  then kb   ¦Á ¡Ô kb.
 u1  if both kb and ¦Á are satisfiable  then kb   ¦Á is also satisfiable.
 u1  if |= ¦Á   ¦Â  then kb   ¦Á ¡Ô kb   ¦Â.
 u1   kb   ¦Á  ¡Ä ¦Â |= kb    ¦Á ¡Ä ¦Â .
 u1  if kb ¦Á |= ¦Â and kb ¦Â |= ¦Á  then kb ¦Á ¡Ô kb ¦Â.
 u1  if kb is complete  then  kb  ¦Á ¡Ä kb  ¦Â  |= kb    ¦Á ¡Å ¦Â .
 u1   kb1 ¡Å kb1    ¦Á ¡Ô  kb1   ¦Á  ¡Å  kb1   ¦Á .
1 state transition models
we introduce a state transition model as prior knowledge for estimation about the background of the new information. state transition models are closely related to event models for abductive characterization of belief update  boutilier  1 .
definition 1 a state transition model is a triple  w t     where w is a non-empty set of possible worlds  t   w ¡Á w is a non-empty set of state transitions  and   is a total preorder on t.
¡¡ x y  ¡Ê t is a state transition from the starting point x to the terminal y. the intuitive meaning of  x y  ¡Ê t is  we know that some  unspecified  change at x may cause the situation y . the total preorder   illustrates relative plausibility of state transitions. if we have  x y     u v   we interpret that  x y  is at least as plausible as is  u v . using the state transition model  we can represent the following two criteria about relative plausibility of possible worlds:
  comparing  x y  and  u v  such that x =  u: the relative plausibility of x and u as the actual world.
  comparing  x y  and  x v  with the same starting point x: the relative plausibility of y and v as the result of some change at x.
definition 1 for any r   t  we define sp r    w and ter r    w as follows  respectively:
	sp r 	=	{x ¡Ê w |   x y  ¡Ê r} 	 1 
	ter r 	=	{y ¡Ê w |   x y  ¡Ê r}.	 1 
if r =  
	for any	by:
	 x y   = { x y  ¡Ê t | x ¡Ê x y ¡Ê y }.	 1 
if either x =   or y =    we define  x y   =  . for any singleton {w}   w  we abbreviate  {w} x  and  x {w}  as  w x  and  x w   respectively.
definition 1 let stm be a state transition model. stm is called centered iff the following two conditions hold:
1. for each world w ¡Ê w   w w  ¡Ê t.
1. for any non-empty subset x   w and any w ¡Ê x  the loop  w w  is the minimum element in  w x   that is  if  w x  ¡Ê  w x  and x =  w  then  w w     w x .
¡¡using the given state transition model  the current knowledge base kb is semantically characterized by starting points of the most plausible state transitions in t.
definition 1 let stm be a state transition model. a knowledge base kb induced by stm is a propositional sentence such that
	¡Îkb¡Î = sp¦Ìmint .	 1 
 
1 acceptance: a hybrid operation of revision and update
using the given state transition model that illustrates prior knowledge for estimation  we provide a selection mechanism to decide we use either revision or update when we accept new information. explainability of the new information we define below is the key concept of such decision making.
definition 1 let stm be a state transition model  and kb is a knowledge base induced by stm. a sentence ¦Á is explainable by stm iff  w ¡Î¦Á¡Î  =    for all w ¡Ê ¡Îkb¡Î.
¡¡we have the following simple selection strategy by explainability of the new information: let cstm =  w t    be a centered state transition model  and kb be the current knowledge base induced by cstm. for any observation ¦Á 
1. if ¦Á is explainable by cstm  we regard ¦Á as the new information by some change  and update kb by ¦Á.
1. otherwise  we regard ¦Á as more reliable information about a static world  and revise kb by ¦Á.
¡¡according to the selection strategy  we introduce a hybrid operation of revision and update  called acceptance  based on the given centered state transition model cstm. we use kb ¡é ¦Á to denote the result of acceptance of ¦Á into kb. the symbol ¡é is called an acceptance operator. we intend to have either kb ¡é ¦Á ¡Ô kb   ¦Á or kb ¡é ¦Á ¡Ô kb   ¦Á based on explainability of ¦Á by cstm.
theorem 1 let cstm be a centered state transition model  kb be a knowledge base induced by cstm  and ¡é be an acceptance operator defined by the following equation:
¡Îkb ¡é ¦Á¡Î
	ter	min w  ¦Á  
	w¡Ê¡Î kb¡Î1 if¦Ì  is explainable by¡Î ¡Î  1 cstm 	 1 
	 	 w  	otherwise.
then  for any sentence	 
1. if ¦Á is explainable by cstm  then ¡é satisfies postulates  u1  -  u1   the following weakened  u1 :
 u1w  if ¦Á ¡Ä ¦Â is explainable  then  kb   ¦Á  ¡Ä ¦Â |= kb    ¦Á ¡Ä ¦Â  
postulates  u1    u1   and a postulate  u1  proposed by boutilier  boutilier  1 :
 u1  if kb is complete   kb ¦Á   |=  ¦Â and kb ¦Á |= ¦Ã  then kb    ¦Á ¡Ä ¦Â  |= ¦Ã.
1. if ¦Á is not explainable by cstm  then ¡é satisfies postulates  r1  -  r1 .
the acceptance operator ¡é is well-defined as a revision operator   when ¦Á is not explainable by cstm. on the other hand  ¡é does not satisfy  u1  when ¦Á is explainable. however  in equation  1   ¦Á is independently evaluated in each possible world w ¡Ê ¡Îkb¡Î  therefore the idea of semantic characterization of km update  katsuno and mendelzon  1  is illustrated in this framework.
acknowledgement
we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions.
