
we introduce data structures called responsibility set and kernel. we present an algorithm fcrk  which is a modification of fc that maintains these structures and uses them for pruning of the search space. according to our experimental evaluation  fc-rk outperforms fc-cbj on constraint networks encoding graph k-coloring instances and on non-dense random binary constraint networks.
1 introduction
the present paper introduces a modification of the forward checking algorithm  fc   haralick and elliott  1  that associates every removed value with two data structures: the responsibility set and the kernel. having introduced the structures  we describe how they help to prune the search space. we define a notion of filtering value. next  we prove the central theorem of the paper which claims that the existence of a filtering value in some state that occurs during work of fc means that the current partial solution of the state is a nogood. we modify fc so that every time after lookahead or backtrack  it checks whether there is a filtering value in the current state. if there is  it backtracks again. we call the resulting modification fc-rk.
모the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section 1 provides the necessary definitions and notations. section 1 formulates the main theorem and introduces fc-rk. section 1 briefly discusses the results of preliminary evaluation.
1 preliminaries and notations
aconsistingbinary constraint network  cn  z = hv d cof domainsi is adtripleand of a set of variables v   a set
a set of constraints1	nc.	let v i= {v1 ... vdomainn}of. valuesthen
cofdvi vvariable=j  {dv vi ... di  dc j=vis the set of all compatible pairs of values{}c  wherevi vj|i d1= vj is1 the뫞 i j 뫞 n}  where
	dv 뫄	v
of vi and vj. we refer to the parts of z as v  z   d z   and c z . to emphasize that a value val belongs to the domain of a variable v  we refer to this value as valv. an assignment of a cn z is a pair hvi vali such that vi 뫍 v  z   val 뫍 dvi. a consistent set of assignments is a partial solution of z. a partial solution that assigns all the variables of z is a solution
v1
v1
v1
v1
v1
figure 1: a constraint network.
of z. a cn that has no solution is insoluble. let p be a partial solution of z. we denote the set of variables assigned by p by v  p . a nogood of a cn z is a partial solution of z that cannot be extended to a full solution.
모throughout the paper we use the cn shown in figure 1. the ellipses represent the domains of variables and incompatible pairs of values are connected by arcs. for example  value 1 of v1 is incompatible with value 1 of v1.
1 responsibility sets  kernels  and fc-rk
in this section we develop a modification of fc called fcrk. first we define two structures maintained by these algorithms.
definition 1 let p be a nogood of a cn z. a responsibility set r of p is a subset of v  z    v  p  such that there is no consistent extension of p that assigns all the variables of r. definition 1 let p be a nogood of a cn z  let r be a responsibility set of p and let hu valsubseti 뫍ofpr. thewhichkernelcontainsof valallu with respect to p and r is the the variables whose domains have values incompatible with valu but compatible with the rest of assignments of p.
	consider the cn shown on figure 1.	the nogood
{hv1ihv1i} has a responsibility set {v1 v1 v1}  while the kernel of hav1modification 1i is {v1}of. fc that maintains re-
now we present
sponsibility sets and kernels associated with removed values. the proposed method is a slight modification of the technique described in  schiex and verfaillie  1 .
모recall that fc detects that the current partial solution p is a nogood if the current domain of some future variable is emptied or if the current domain of the variable being assigned is wiped out  prosser  1 . in both of these cases  fc discards the last assignmentremoves val from thehu valcurrenti of the current partial solution anddomain of u. we say that p is the nogood associated with valu. the modified version of fc associates valu with two sets denoted by rs valu  and ker valu . these are the responsibility set and the kernel of the nogood associated with valu. the additional operations performed by the modified version of fc are the following.
  theof therscn.and ker sets are initialized to   for all the values
  if a valueassigningis deleted during the lookahead stage per-val to u then v is inserted into

  considerand let v abevaluethe variablevalu thatwhoseis deletedemptyduringdomainbacktrackcaused
stheisbacktrack.the union thenof thersrs val-setsu ofis setall tovaluess 뫋 {ofv}v .wherealso ker valu  is updated to the intersection of the current value of ker valu  with rs valu .  note that the preliminary value of ker valu  is computed at the lookahead stage in order to avoid recomputation of values that are incompatible with valu. 
  once a discarded value is restored to the current domain the rs and ker sets of the value are re-initialized to  .
모let us illustrate the method by simulating a few iterations of the modified fc that processes the cn of figure 1. it starts by assigning hv1thei hcurrentv1i anddomainthenofhvv1i.andthefclastback-assignment empties
notetracks.thatthethersassignment-set of 1 isv1set 1 tocan{v1remove} so isvaluesker 1fromv1 . many other variables of theh cn ibut the kernel is restricted tosigns{vv1 with} during1 and backtracks again becausethe backtrack. in the nextv1step is emptied.fc as-
then the domain of v1 is emptied therefore fc backtracks yet
rsanother 1considerv1  time= {avand1state v1producesof vfc1thataandnogoodker 1{vh1v 1= 1 i. hlookaheadv1i} withor
	}	occurs just after
backtrack. denote the current partial solution by p and its last assignment by hu vali. for the given state  define a filtering value.
definition 1 a valueremoved by backtrack is a filtering value if the following conditions hold.
  compatibility condition.of are compatiblethe assignmentswith	of variables.
  inclusion   condition.all values offorthe currentevery unassigneddomain of ww are뫍 compatible with.
now we are ready to formulate the central theorem.
theorem 1 assume that in the given state there is a filtering value. then p is a nogood with a responsibility set
  where s  is the union of rs-sets of
all values that belong to the domains of unassigned variables of.
모let us illustrate the theorem on the cn in figure 1. consider a state of a csp solver in which the value 1 is removed and associated with the rs-set {thev1 vsimulation 1 v1}weandassignthe kerv1set {v1 v1}. continuing with 1 and v1 with 1. for the obtained partial solution  1 is a filtering value  all values of the current domains of v1 and
v1 are compatible with 1  the inclusion condition .
모theorem 1 suggests a pruning procedure that discards the current partial solution if it finds a filtering value. the procedure is applied every time after lookahead or backtrack. algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode of the procedure.
algorithm 1 pruning procedure of fc-rk
1: for every removed value do
1:	if val1v is a filtering value then
1:	let hu valsolutioni be the last assignment of the current partial
1: backtrack with setting rs valu  to s  s is defined in theorem 1 
1:	end if
1: end for

모we call the modification of fc that computes rs and ker sets and applies algorithm 1 every time after lookahead and backtrack  fc-rk  rk abbreviates responsibility sets and kernels .
1 preliminary evaluation
the experimental evaluation shows that  fc-rk outperforms fc-cbj on the majority of instances of graph k-coloring problem and on binary random csps with low density. for dense random csps  fc-rk performs more consistency checks than fc-cbj but visits less nodes on the search tree. we believe that performance of fc-rk could be improved by an algorithm for checking the existence of filtering values  that takes less consistency checks than our current implementation.
