 
a redesign support framework for complex technical processes is described in this paper. this framework employs a multi-model hierarchical representation of the process to be redesigned together with a case-based reasoning engine that helps us to decide the elements of the process that should be modified. this framework has been tested in the chemical engineering domain. 
1 	introduction 
in this paper a redesign support framework is proposed. this framework integrates model-based reasoning and casebased reasoning techniques. the original process is modelled hierarchically exploiting means-end and part-whole concepts of mfm  larsson  1  and multi-modelling  chittaro et al.  1  approaches. a cbr system is used to obtain alternative process sections  which can be adapted into the original process. therefore  this framework allows us to model the process; to identify process components suitable for redesign; to obtain alternative components and; finally to adapt these components into the original process. this procedure can be seen as a reverse engineering activity where abstract models at different levels are generated from a detailed description of the existing process to reduce the complexity of the process. the framework has been applied on the chemical engineering domain  by means of three prototypes: head  aha!  and retro. 
1 	the redesign framework  
the proposed framework  see figure 1  consists of four main stages  which can be summarised as follows: 1. 
1. 	design-description acquisition. this stage consists of: 
  data acquisition. knowledge about the structure and behaviour of all components of the process is automatically extracted from a numerical simulator. therefore  human intervention is avoided and the simulator ensures that data is consistent. 
  functional identification. this is the modelling stage. 
the data extracted from the simulator is used to auto- 

figure 1. the redesign framework. 
 
matically generate the hierarchical models. based on the data extracted from the simulator  the functional and teleological models can be inferred. 
   a unit that encapsulates these four types of knowledge is generated for each physical equipment. furthermore  an ontology of functions and equipments  not necessarily with formal specification  have to be specified. this ontology is used to define a priority order of functions. given the priority of functions of units and on their goals  it is possible to identify incrementally the functional sections of the process. the grouping of functions generates metaunits and identifies a functional section. units/metaunits with lower priority functions are  absorbed  by units/meta-units with higher priority functions. this forms a tree of functions of the process. the connections between such functions denote the causal relations between the process variables and the goals. 
candidate identification. the aim of this stage is to identify the units or meta-units that have to be modified to fulfil the new redesign objectives. therefore  the design description of the process and the new set of specifications that the process must satisfy are required. the process variable to focus on  according to the new requirements of the process  must be set. then a diagnosis algorithm is used to identify the units/meta-units that affect such process variables.  
¡¡the diagnosis algorithm  larsson  1  applies causal reasoning to identify the units/meta-units where the process variables do not achieve the needed values. no simulation is required; the algorithm uses the ontological assumptions and the values of such variables. as result  a small list of the most possible  faulty  units/meta-units is obtained. based on any identified unit/meta-unit  their corresponding  cause  and  consequence  units are identified.  cause  unit/meta-unit is the unit/meta-unit that provides the actual operational conditions to the involved process variables in the function of the unit/meta-unit of interest.  consequence  unit/meta-unit is the unit/meta-unit affected by the operational conditions given by the unit/meta-unit of interest. the  causes  and  consequences  units/metaunits are important in the adaptation and evaluation stage.  
1. generation of alternatives. from the identified unit/meta-unit in the previous stage  similar units/metaunits can be suggested. new units/meta-units are generated from others similar processes. this can be achieved by a cbr system. the retrieving stage of the cbr system corresponds to this stage  and the rest of stages refer to the two last stages of the redesign framework  the adaptation and evaluation stages .  
we apply a hierarchical case-based reasoning ap-
proach. then each unit and meta-unit is considered a ground case and an abstract case respectively. a ground case is a case located at the lowest level in the hierarchy and represents a specific unit. an abstract case is a case represented at a higher level of abstraction and corresponds to a meta-unit. thus the unit or meta-unit identified in the previous stage is the target case. similar units/meta-units  source cases  are retrieved from a case library according to its similarity respect to the target case. numerical  symbolic and hierarchical similarity measures are used. as result  a set of the most similar units/meta-units is obtained. the human designer may test them in the adaptation and evaluation stage. 
1. adaptation and evaluation. the reuse  revision  and retention stages of the cbr cycle correspond to the adaptation and evaluation stages in the redesign framework. retention is not considered an explicit stage in the framework but is carried out. 
¡¡the most similar units/meta-units proposed in the previous stage must be adapted and evaluated in the process of interest until obtain an appropriate alternative process design. both stages are not systematised in the redesign framework.. since the aim of the redesign framework is to deal with complex technical process  the adaptation and revision of the most similar cases require complex simulations. the human designer must carry out them manually by means of the simulator used in the data acquisition  
    to facilitate the adaptation  an adaptation cost is computed to suggest the  adaptability  of the chosen unit/meta-unit. this adaptation cost is based on the differences between the chosen unit  source case  and the cause and consequence units/meta-units identified with the diagnosis algorithm. thus  the cost is a normalised value denoting the difference on the values of the process variables involved in the performance of the unit and the values of the process variables involved in the performance of the neighbour units/meta-units. the adaptation cost will have a value between 1 and 1. values close to 1 means that the adaptation is difficult.  
note that this framework does not redesign processes ei-
ther automatically or autonomously. the aim is to support human designers to understand a process and facilitate the redesign activities. also any assumption on some specific domain has been considered  but the domain must allow a well-defined structure on functions. 
1 	evaluation and conclusions 
this framework has been implemented and applied to the 
chemical engineering process domain over 1 chemical processes  consequently the number of ground and abstract cases is higher . interesting results have been. the functional ontology developed includes concepts from the wellknown chemical process design methodologies developed by douglas  douglas  1  and turton  turton et al.  1 . the numerical simulators employed were hysys and aspen.  
¡¡the central point of this framework is the hierarchical multi-model representations used in all redesign activities. the framework implements a hybrid approach of problem solution: means-end and part-whole model-based methodologies. this framework integrates model-based reasoning  and case-based reasoning. the framework aims to support human designers to understand the process and to guide them in the redesign process by suggesting components or sections to be modified or substituted.  
