ion network architecture
we present a cognitive architecture for perceptual processing which draws on aspects of the multiple drafts theory. our temporal abstraction network  tan  architecture consists of a set of processes  each with its own state  represented by a time-limited buffer  along with a procedure for drawing inferences based on the current contents of the buffer. these processes are connected together via a bus architecture  allowing the conclusions drawn by one process to form the inputs to other processes  including themselves   see figure 1.
　each process has an input buffer with specified capacity and duration. duration is the maximum length of time elements can remain in the buffer before they are forgotten. capacity is the number of items that may be present in the buffer at any given time. the duration and capacity of a buffer are independent of each other  e.g.  a buffer may have large capacity but short duration or small capacity but longer duration. new inputs are added to the buffer in first in first out fashion-items arriving at a full buffer cause the oldest items in the buffer to be overwritten.
each inference process also contains a set of production rules that are used to spot patterns in input data  and draw conclusions based on these patterns. conclusions are written to an output bus that transmits them to the input buffers of other processes. in this way  data can be abstracted as it progresses through the network of connected processes  with different abstractions persisting for different lengths of time. we envisage that processes further up a chain  further from the initial percepts  would have buffers spanning a larger duration of time than the lower level processes  allowing the system as a whole to remember more abstract conclusions  while most of the details are forgotten.
　the bus connection architecture allows a single conclusion from a low-level process to be delivered to multiple higherlevel processes  allowing for multiple drafts to be formed based on the same data  potentially producing different conclusions or interpretations.
1 the cutaneous  rabbit  model
we have used the architectureoutlined aboveto model a number of perceptual phenomena. in this section we briefly describe one such model: the cutaneous  rabbit . geldard and sherrick's cutaneous  rabbit  experiments 1; 1  illustrate a perceptual phenomenon called sensory saltation. in the experiments a series of short 'taps'  of about 1ms duration  were delivered to different locations on the arm of a subject - for instance  five taps at the wrist  followed by five between wrist and elbow  and then five more at the elbow. subjects reported that the taps had been more or less evenly spaced along their arm - as if a little rabbit was hopping up the arm. variation in the interval between taps  inter-stimulus interval  isi  causes differences in the perceived effect. if the isi exceeds approximately 1ms the taps are perceived at their correct locations. with an isi of 1ms or less  some taps 'disappear'  with say 1 taps being perceived as just 1.
　our model aggregates information about individual taps into information about a sequence of taps  see figure 1   allowing the agent to reason about and predict the behaviour of an object over time. at the lowest level  the model processes sensory information to determine the presence of a single tap. this process has a buffer duration of about 1ms and a capacity of just a single element  in this case  the 'element' is actually a collection of low-level data . if more than one tap occurs within this time-frame  then the newer tap simply overwrites any previous tap. this is consistent with the ex-

figure 1: network for cutaneous  rabbit  experiment.
perimental results which indicate that taps occurring within about 1ms of each other are merged with the location of the newer tap dominating.
　the intermediate level processing has a buffer of duration of 1ms and a capacity of 1 elements. when a tap arrives at an empty buffer  which can happen at most once every 1ms  a new aggregate conclusion is generated  taking the position of the tap as the start and end position of the 'run'  and initialising the count of taps in this run. this conclusion is passed to the output bus  where it is transmitted to other processes  but also  via a feedback loop  back to the input bus of the intermediate level process. if a subsequent tap arrives before this aggregate fact expires from the buffer  i.e.  within 1ms  then a new conclusion is formed which adjusts the end point of the run to the new tap position and increases the tap count by 1. the buffer duration ensures that any gap of 1ms or more causes the previous 'run' to be forgotten  and thus any subsequent tap will be perceived as the start of a new run  which is consistent with the experimental data.
　at the highest level of processing  top left in the figure   a process with a two element buffer detects the end of a tap run by comparing the start position of sequential tap-run inputs. it is the output from this process that is eventually used to generate a report of the experience. it is important to note that although the intermediate-level buffer has a duration of 1ms it is not necessary to delay conclusions for 1ms. instead  the process produces a conclusion whenever a new tap is felt  at most  once every 1ms   and these conclusions can be acted upon immediately.
1 discussion
there are a number of parallel models of cognition  e.g. copycat  epic  which have some similarities to the multiple drafts theory. however these models generally involve some serial component where  everything comes together . for instance  in copycat  mitchell  1  multiple parallel processes operate in a stochastic manner on a single workspace  creating a single solution to a problem; in epic  kieras and meyer  1  there is a single central executive which acts to coordinate the parallel processes.
　in contrast  our temporal abstraction network architecture has no global coordinating or integrating facility. however  abandoning a single central executive process does not mean that information cannot be brought together locally for integration. the tan architecture is capable of local  serial  integration while maintaining multiple simultaneous drafts: information flow can diverge as easily as converge. this approach is in contrast to that of dennett and kinsbourne who suggest that the only alternative to the cartesian theatre is a strictly parallel architecture  where local integration is replaced by a more chaotic pandemonium approach  e.g.   kinsbourne  1  .
　in future work we plan to concentrate on extending the architecture to account for action selection  as well as expanding on the details of how reports are generated. one interesting area for future research will be to look at libet's controversial experimentalresults  libet  1 on voluntaryaction.
