
a formal structural representation of speech is presented in this paper. the representation is developed within the evolving transformation system  ets  formalism and encapsulates speech processes at the articulatory level. we show how the class structure of several consonantal phonemes of english can be expressed via articulatory gestures. elements of these classes can be detected in a corresponding structural representation of continuous speech. our experimental results on the mocha articulatory corpus support the hypothesis that the proposed articulatory representation captures sufficient information for the accurate structural identification of phonemic classes.
1 introduction
despite the evident success of numerical approaches to modelling of speech  they are often criticised for having little relation to actual human speech production/recognition  jelinek  1  p. 1 . the alternative  structural  means of pattern representation have  however  received little attention. in our view  one of the main reasons for this situation is the apparent lack of suitable structural frameworks possessing the necessary formal power to accommodate the representation of classes of complex linguistic phenomena  e.g. phonemes and syllables . it is hypothesised that the appearance of such a systematic analytical framework and the development of appropriate representations within it may help to bridge the gap between speech recognition and linguistic research.
　on the linguistic side  the motivation for this work comes from the theory of articulatory phonology  browman and goldstein  1   in which vocal tract action during speech production is decomposed into discrete  recombinable atomic units known as gestures. compared to traditional approaches-such as distinctive phonological features  jakobson and halle  1 -the gestural approach is more physiologically concrete and offers a compact means of representing the truly asynchronous nature of speech  allowing for better interpretations of complex phonological phenomena  such as co-articulation .
　the evolving transformation system  ets   outlined in  goldfarb et al.  1   is a radically new formal frame-
organsemanticsgrouporgansgulupper lipbilabial closureul  ll1lllower liptongue dorsum heighttd1uiupper incisortongue tip heighttt1tdtongue dorsumlabiodental contactui  ll1tttongue tipvelic aperturevl1vlvelumvelar contacttd  vl1hphard palatealveolar contacttt  ar1aralveolar ridgepalatal contacttt  hp1vfvocal foldsvoicingvf1table 1: articulatory organs  left  involved in the production of various groups of primitive gestures  right .
work for the structural representation of  natural  processes. ets suggests that the representation of each such process should include its  formative history   which is a series of  operations   primitives  acting on the constituent elements  sites  of the process. such formative histories  structs  should contain some regular  chunks   transforms . a class representation in ets is a finite set of closely related transforms  out of which the corresponding class elements- processes-can be constructed. in our ets representation of gestural speech structure  the natural process we model is the physiological process of articulation.
1 articulatory structure according to ets
the units of representation corresponding to articulatory organs and primitive articulatory gestures are ets sites and primitives  respectively. informally  an ets primitive is a unit of temporal structure of a process  describing the structural transformation of its set of  initial  sites into its set of  terminal  sites  where an ets site is the smallest/unstructured representational unit within a process. in the articulatory representation  a primitive is identified with a change in the interaction of one or more of the associated articulatory organs  which are expressed as sites.
　the left-hand side of table 1 lists all of the ets sites used in the representation  along with the corresponding interpretation. the right-hand side of table 1 shows the groups of primitive gestures used in this study. for each group  the relevant sites  articulators  and the number of distinct constituent gestures  primitives  g are shown. informally  a group consists of semantically and syntactically related primitive gestures involving similar articulators. pictorially  it is convenient to figure 1: several of the ets primitives used in this representation  grouped by articulatory category.
represent primitives as convex shapes  with initial sites depicted as points on the upper half  and terminal sites depicted as points on the lower half. some of the 1 primitives used in the articulatory representation are given in figure 1. three groups are shown: two articulatory gestures of the vocal folds resulting in voiced or unvoiced sounds  the two gestures participating in velar closure  and three of the six gestures modelling the aperture of the lips  bilabial closure .
　an ets struct is a temporally-ordered sequence of connected primitives capturing the  history  of the corresponding process. within our articulatory representation  a struct is identified with a sequence of primitive gestures  which are hypothesised to encapsulate the gestural structure of any given utterance  note that any utterance can itself be interpreted as a highly non-trivial gesture . figure 1 depicts the gestural structure of the word  get  in our representation. the articulation of /g/  for instance  has a simple interpretation: a velar constriction is formed and then released. the formation of the constriction is achieved when the tongue dorsum td first rises to its maximum position  td-raisemax  at 1sec completing the constriction before the phoneme boundary by touching the velum vl  vc-touch  at 1sec . the constriction release is accomplished by lowering the tongue dorsum td  td-lowermid  at 1sec  then parting the tongue dorsum td from the velum vl  vc-part  at 1sec . note: vibration of the vocal folds vf  vfv-start  occurs at the onset of /g/ at 1sec.
　an ets transform is an encapsulation of a regular temporal pattern of primitives. an ets supertransform is a set of closely-related transforms specifying the description of a class  where structural variations account for noise in the class. note that the learning of class structure is described in  goldfarb et al.  1  and is outside of the scope of this paper. in the articulatory representation  a supertransform is identified with the family of articulatory gestures that collectively describe the class structure of a single  general phoneme. we defined 1 consonantal classes  see  for example  the identified phoneme /g/ in figure 1 .
　we developed a structural matching algorithm for detecting the presence of an ets transform in a given struct. it performs a rooted depth-first search in o n1 logn  time  where n is the number of primitives in the transform to be matched.

figure 1: partial ets struct describing the gestural structure of the word  get   constructed using primitive gestures detected on-the-fly in sample data. the transform corresponding to phoneme /g/ is identified with a dotted line.
1 experiments and discussion
our goal was to assess the performance of the 1 ets supertransforms via the structural matching algorithm against structures derived following  gutkin and king  1  from real data  1 mocha utterances  1 ets primitives .
　out of 1 phonemes  1 were classified correctly and 1 failed to match against any of the 1 available classes. the overall accuracy is 1%. analysis shows that /n/ was often misclassified as /d/ and /m/ as /b/  both due to a failure of the pre-processor to detect the corresponding physiological changes. we expect performance to improve with a more accurate pre-processor and refined class descriptions.
