 
in the field of spatial reasoning  point-to-point relations have been thoroughly examined  but only little attention has been payed to the modeling of path relations. we propose a computational model that extends the existing referential semantics for point-to-point relations to path relations. on the linguistic side  we present some research on german path prepositions as well as results on their english counterparts. this analysis of path prepositions is used to extract a semantic model for path relations. on the geometric side  we examine the characteristics of trajectories and propose a computational method to find an appropriate path relation for a given situation. finally  we show how our findings on the linguistic and the geometric sides can be brought together to form a consistent model. 
1 	introduction 
space plays a central role in human cognition  and has therefore been a research focus in different disciplines like  computational  linguistics  lakoff  1   cognitive sciences  kosslyn  1   psychology  landau and jackendoff  1   and artificial intelligence  maab et a/.  1 . sophisticated conceptual  egenhofer  1  and computational models  gapp  1  have been developed that made it possible to compute the appropriateness of spatial relations in specific situations  thereby providing a better understanding of what is meant by certain spatial expressions. these results paved the way for intelligent systems that are able to analyze and generate natural language descriptions of space  wahlster et al  1 . 
　within the field of spatial relations  so-called topological  e.g. near or at  and projective relations  like 
1 	cognitive modeling 
r i g h t - o f or above  have been most thoroughly examined. both groups are point-to-point relations as they establish a spatial relation between two objects of arbitrary shape.  between is an exception from this rule as it requires at least three objects to be computed correc ;tly habel  1 .  
   a different kind of spatial relations are the so-called path relations  e.g. along  around  or past . much less attention has been payed to their conceptualization  kriiger and maafi  1  and computation than in the case of point-to-point relations. this may be due to the greater complexity: the problem of computing the most appropriate path relation can only be solved if there is a path which consists at least of a simple line with a starting point and an ending point. as we will show in section 1  topological  projective  and path relations share nevertheless several  geometric  concepts. 
　in section 1  we present the basic ideas and concepts we will use throughout the paper. based on an analysis of the linguistic side of the problem  section 1   we propose a semantic model which is described in section 1. in the following section  we turn to the geometric side  and establish a basic framework for geometric path relations. these two sides are integrated to form a consistent model which then is applied to various examples  section 1 . finally  we summarize our findings and give an outlook on future directions. 
1 	k e y concepts and related w o r k 
following  herskovits  1  we distinguish between the basic meaning of a spatial relation and its instantiation in a concrete situation: an object to be localized  lo  is set  in relation to a reference object  ro . furthermore  a frame of reference has to be established in order to distinguish different spatial relations. determining the origin and the orientation of the reference frame depends on a multitude of factors such as the point of view of the observer/addressee  or the intrinsic orientation of the ro  maafi  1 . the computation of topological 


table 1: several german prepositions used for path description 

and projective relations relies on a frame of reference. it is used to extract  the two essential parameters that are needed to evaluate the applicability of point-to-point relations: the distance of the lo from the ro  topological relations   and the angle disparity from a prototypical direction  projective relations . 

figure 1: two trajectories 
　 gapp  1  proposed a model for spatial relations that is based on a three level referential semantics. on the lowest level  only purely visual information is avail able. this information is abstracted on the semantic level to a geometrical representation which the referential semantic itself relies on. idealized meanings of spatial relations are compared to the actual situation taking into account contextual factors that are modeled on the conceptual layer. a degree of applicability  da  is computed that rates how well a relation corresponds to the prototypical meaning  on a scale from 'zero'  not applicable  to 'one'  fully applicable . for a detailed description of the factors and algorithms used to determine the da of point-to-point relations  refer to  gapp  1 . 
　path relations differ from their topogical and projective counterparts in two ways. on one side  the lo is 
expected to be path-like: either its shape has to be pathlike  or it can be abstracted to a path- like shape. in some cases  this also holds for the ro.  in the computation of the applicability of point-to-point relations  the shape of the lo is of lesser importance.  on the other side  the computation of path relations cannot be reduced to a simple two point problem. figure 1 illustrates this fact: trajectory  a  is certainly a better match for a relation alongi  describing a path that follows the form of the ro  than is trajectory  b . but there is no single point on either trajectory that can be used to determine the applicability of this relation.  while one may argue about the meaning of u along   alongi might actually capture a meaning facet.  
1 	analysis of german path prepositions 
from a computational perspective  one of the main problems in understanding natural language is its inherent ambiguity. this is also true for path prepositions: the german path preposition1 u zu   roughly  to    towards    for example  is used to describe trajectories that lead towards the reference object. the description  der vveg zu dem park   uthe way to the park   can mean different things. it is not obvious where the tra-
 
　　we use the term ' path  preposition' although  from a strictly linguistic perspective  not all of them are prepositions per se. 
	kray and blocher 	1 

jectory starts  nor where it ends: does it end outside the park  just at the border  or inside  the verbalization process is affected by ambiguity  too: to describe a path that starts within the park and leads outside of it  one could  for example  use  aus   approx.  out of   or  von   approx.  from'1 . 
　table 1 lists some of the most commonly used german path prepositions. we tried to express the basic meanings of the main uses in natural language and - at a finer level of detail - in a more formal syntax. it should be 
stated that the table does not contain a complete description of all possible meanings of path prepositions but only meaning facets. the formal syntax is based on a subset of egenhofers semantics for topological relations  egenhofer  1 .   i   stands for containment of the lo within the ho  inside    m for contact of the boundaries of lo and ro  meet   and ''d  for the disjoints ss of them  disjoint . so  a formula like 

is to be read as 
 the corresponding relation describes a path that starts either within the border  or on the border  or outside of the ro. on its way  the contact relation becomes true at least once  and it ends outside of the ro.  
　we use bold style for the main usage  plain style for possible uses  and italics for unlikely  but still possible  uses of a relation. an asterix  *  above the arrow indi-
cates that no special relation has to be fulfilled during transition. although the table was created with german prepositions in mind  preliminary research on the corresponding english prepositions indicates that a basic set of concepts exists across different languages. exploratory studies in french and japanese support- tins hypothesis  and justify the search for a language independent conceptual model. 
1 	basic semantic concepts 
a first look at the meaning column in tab. 1 reveals that the majority of the prepositions describes an approach towards an object. only a few words are available to express an increase of distance  e.g.  von    aus  .  this is not surprising since one usually follows a path with the target in mind.  furthermore  there is a concept of angular movement  such as in ''um  and  entlang  . so  the two essential parameters  distance and angle  needed for the evaluation of point-to-point relations play an important role in the conceptualization of path relations  too. 
   a second observation is that the meaning component of some path prepositions  e.g.  in   contains a simple point-to-point relation. this relation is applied to either one of the endpoints of the trajectory  in the case of 
 in : to the ending point   or to the entire trajectory  e.g.  past  . if we take out that element  we are left with a simple path relation that is only related to the path but not to a single point. 
1 	cognitive modeling 
　based on these observations  we can establish a semantics for path relations which relies on simple path relations. we propose the following five simple path relations as building blocks for more complex ones. they can be combined with each other  and/or with point-topoint relations to form higher order path relations. 
  decrease-distance: the ending point of the trajec-tory is closer to the ro than the starting point. 
  increase-distance: the starting point of the tra-jectory is closer to the ro than the ending point. 
  maintain-distance: the distance of every point on the trajectory from the ro is the same. 
  change-angle: the starting and the ending point form an angle with the ro. 
  maintain-angle: the starting and the ending point show no angular disparity in relation to the ro. 
　since the direction of the angular disparity cannot be expressed easily using path prepositions  at least as far as german  french  and english are concerned   it makes sense to have just one relation expressing undirected change. this is not true in the case of distance  where we consequently differentiate approach and an increase of distance. 
1 	geometric path relations 
as far as the geometric side of the computation of path relations is concerned  we first want to define clearly the object  to be accomplished: 
given an lo in path-like shape  or abstraction  represented by a trajectory  find the path relation which describes best the relation of the lo to an arbitrary reference object  and compute a corresponding degree of applicability . 
     a trajectory is defined by n points  p1...pi.. pn . the endpoints p1 and pn denoting beginning and end of the trajectory are defined either by an explicit direction or by the order of the computational analysis itself. this description of the trajectory is provided by the conceptual layer mentioned in section 1. its construction  e.g. by choosing a specific idealization or by indicating the starting point  is beyond the scope of this paper. we rely on the following assumptions: 
1. the lo is represented as a trajectory. this corresponds to the fact that a path preposition can hardly be applied to an object which is not path-like shaped at all  e.g.  the ball along the wall  . 
1. we want to describe the trajectory as a whole. though it might be preferable to subdivide the trajectory into parts  which analyzed one by one could possibly be associated more evidently with several path relations   the entire trajectory has to be analyzed in order to detect possible subdivisions. therefore  it is appropriate to generate first an overall description using a single relation. 


figure 1: trajectories:  a  changes  b  qualities  c  curvatures 

1. we want to describe the course of a trajectory. in this case  point-to-point relations are not sufficient and path relations are needed. 
1. we want to extend the computational model of static relations to path relations. accordingly  the das have to be comparable. this will be ensured by using the same essential parameters distance and angle -  identically calculated frame 
of reference  reference points  the nearest points between lo and ro   and intermediate results of the computation of point-to-point relations. 
1. we focus on path relations that correspond to path prepositions. as the geometric model is linked to linguistic concepts via the reference semantics  path prepositions have to be kept in mind while exploring geometric path relations. 
1 two-point-trajectories 
the most basic trajectory consists of exactly two distinct points and is called two-point-trajectory. on one hand  more complex trajectories - n-point-trajectories can easily be constructed by concatenating n-1 twopoint-trajectories. on the other  even the most complex trajectory can be split into a unique series of twopoint-trajectories. this implies that the first  step to analyze path relations is to study the relations between two-point-trajectories and the reference object. 
   any trajectory can be localized exactly using the concepts of distance and angle. this corresponds to assumption four and to the observations made in section 1. in order to describe the course of a two-point-trajectory as a whole  see asumption three  using distance and angle  the changes of these essential parameters between p1 and p1 have to be analyzed: distance and/or angle can either be increased  maintained or decreased as depicted in fig. 1a. this distinction - similar to the one made in the previous section - enables us to define basic path 
relations  see tab. 1; ew: clockwise  ccw: counter-cw . 

table 1: basic path relations  see fig. 1a  
　　figure 1b shows that we can even sort trajectories according to the degree of being an optimal representant of a path r e l a t i o n : i s closer to the ideal meaning of approach than is furthermore  we can compare different relations: the quality of the relation depart represented by  lies inbetween the qualities of and 
. to describe the differences between other factors than course  e.g. the distance to the ro  have to be taken into account. nevertheless  these trajectories are all optimal representants of the relation approach since we assumed that path relations depend on their course only. consequently  the degree of applicability can be expressed as the difference in the distances  ad  of p1 and p1 with respect to the ho  divided by the length of the trajectory. as the computation of each of these distances corresponds to the one used for point-topoint relations  the resulting das are comparable. table 1 illustrates the computation of the das for the basic path relations defined above. 
1 	n-point-trajectories 
actually  in most cases trajectories representing abstractions of real world objects consist of more than two points. in order to extend the use of basic path relations 
	kray and blocher 	1 


to n-point-trajectories it suffices to build the weighted average over all parts of the trajectory. 
   however  as shown in fig. 1c  there are differences in the course of n-point-trajectories we are still not able to describe using the basic path relations defined above: a distinction of the curvature of n-point-trajectorics has to be made. three types can be distinguished: 
  tjp first approaches the ro and then departs: this curvature corresponds to the path relation past. 
  tjt first departs from the ro and then approaches it again: this curvature corresponds to t r i p . 1 
  tjf keeps the distance over the whole course  no curvature exists: this equals f o l l o w . 
   there are two possible ways to cope with curvatures: either by finding a suitable segmentation  which contradicts assumption two   or by analyzing the essential parameter distance more thoroughly. a curvature can only exist if a trajectory has at least three points: in this case  the difference of  is either positive   t r i p   or negative  past . the degree of the curvature is measured as follows: 

   a n-point-trajectory s curvature can easily be expressed by the weighted curvatures of the inner points. 
1 	results 
table 1 integrates the semantic aspects of german path prepositions developed in section 1 and path relations constructed according to section 1. they may be combined with each other  or with point-to-point relations.  path relations refer to the entire trajectory while pointto-point relations refer to the trajectory point s  mentioned explicitely in brackets.  
   however  there is no 1-correspondence between a given preposition and a specific realization. since a single preposition can be used to describe different  situations  and a single situation can be described using different prepositions  there is a n:m-relation between language and geometry. to overcome the vagueness of language  contextual factors can be taken into account. additionally  vagueness  precision  can be modeled explicitly as proposed in  kray  1.. 
1
　　there seems to be no corresponding path preposition neither in german nor in english. 
1 	cognitive modeling 

figure 1: exemplary trajectories 
   'j able 1 shows exemplary results for the trajectories in fig. 1 and 1. as expected  the das for 1 a  and 1 b  are significantly different. the examples in fig. 1 also yield reason able results. 

table 1: exemplary results 
1 	conclusion 
the connection between visual and verbal space is an important issue in the. development of natural language systems that are concerned with spatial information. in this paper  we presented an analysis of german path prepositions  and used the results to deduce a basic semantics for path relations. extending the model for spatial relations  we showed how those findings can be integrated with geometric path relations. 
   currently  our results are being integrated in a localization agent  wahlster ct a/.  1  and in a mobile tourist  deep map  1  guide. in addition  their potential for anytime behavior  inferruptability with increasing quality over time   dean and boddy  1  is being investigated. in the future  we plan to develop segmentation algorithms that are based on the methods proposed in this paper. a subdivision of a complex trajectory may improve the quality of path descriptions due to the finer granularity. furthermore  we intend to evaluate the meaning facets of path prepositions empirically. 

   a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s : the research presented in this paper was funded by the collaborative research center 1 at the university of saarbriicken  the german research center for artificial intelligence gmbh  dfki   and the european media laboratory gmbh  eml  at heidelberg  germany. 
