 
a decentralized multiagent system comprises agents who act autonomously based on local knowledge. achieving coordination in such a system is nontrivial  hut is essential in most applications  where disjointed or incoherent behavior would be undesirable. coordination in decentralized systems is a richer phenomenon than previously believed. in particular  five major attributes are crucial: the extent of the local knowledge and choices of the member agents  the extent of their shared knowledge  the level of their inertia  and the level of precision of the required coordination. interestingly  precision and inertia turn out to control the coordination process. they define different regions within each of which the other attributes relate nicely with coordination  but among which their relationships are altered or even reversed. based on our study  we propose simple design rules to obtain coordinated be-
havior in decentralized multiagent systems. 
1 	introduction 
coordination is key to the design of multiagent systems. often  the multiagent systems must be decentralized whose member agents act autonomously based on local information. such systems are essential in a number of applications where the agents may not wish to or be able to communicate or have a common plan. 
   coordination has been studied before. in the context of distributed problem-solving and generalized partial planning  many good results have been obtained  decker and lesser  1; durfee  1 . however  the key features of decentralized systems and their relationship to coordination have not yet been fully explored. their study is the theme of this paper. 
   let's begin with a brief historical overview. the early work on coordination considered knowledge as a key factor. although decentralized systems of the kind we study 
   *supported by the ncsu college of engineering  the national science foundation under grant iis-1  career award   and ibm corporation. 
1 	distributed ai 
were not always considered  the community's folklore is that more knowledge leads to better coordination. it is also recognized that the locally best actions would not always lead to the best payoff for an individual agent much less for the system as a whole. 
　schaerf et ai consider multiagent reinforcement learning in the context of load balancing in distributed systems . in their framework  the agents share a number of resources  which they autonomously select to use. when all agents are noncooperative  e.g.  by always selecting their most preferred resources  they all stand to lose. however  when individuals sometimes select  the less desirable resources  the entire population benefits. in this system  communication may not be useful in improving the performance of the population and may in fact be detrimental. 
　in a simpler framework  sen el ai also study coordination among agents sharing resources . coordination corresponds to achieving equilibrium. sen et ai argue that  contrary to conventional wisdom  giving the interacting agents additional knowledge causes the coordination to slow down. bar ay uses the same framework  but applies genetic algorithms to show how coordination can be speeded up . 
   rustogi fr singh study coordination in a similar framework . they show that in addition to knowledge  the choices available and the extent of the knowledge shared by the agents are also important. rustogi & singh show that coordination slows down when the available choices increase. when shared knowledge increases  then too coordination slows down. there is no direct contradiction with sen et al  because their results correspond to the case where the agents' knowledge also increases. 
　the present paper advances the above program of research by bringing in additional features of decentralized systems in order to better characterize the outcome of coordination. our experiments indicate that perfect coordination is often inordinately more time-consuming than slightly imperfect coordination. usually  if the agents exhibit higher patience or inertia in terms of not jumping to another resource  they can coordinate faster. 

o r g a n i z a t i o n section 1 describes our experimental setup. section 1 describes the main experimental results we obtained. section 1 discusses some relevant conceptual issues  mentions some related literature  and concludes with a description of some open problems. 
1 	experimental setup 
our setup  figure 1  consists of an array of equivalent resources. each agent uses exactly one resource  but a resource can support several agents. the agents prefer resources that support fewer other agents. the agents know the occupancy of a certain number  kn  of other resources besides their own. they can elect  to move to any of a certain number  ch  of resources. the agents move only to resources that appear better. they gradually disperse from the more crowded resources toward the less crowded ones. 
   equilibrium is achieved when the agents are uniformly distributed over all resources  and none move. equilibrium corresponds to perfect  coordination  because it means the agents have achieved a locally and globally optimal sharing of resources. note that the present setting requires the same or complementary decisions. in general  complementary decisions are more interesting  because they cannot be hardwired in some trivial mechanism. 

figure 1: knowledge  i n   choice {ch   and knowledge sharing of agents at resources i and j 
1 	decision protocol 
each agent  stochastically decides whether to move and where. all agents use the same decision function and only move to better resources. the expressions used by an agent to compute the probability of moving from current resource i to another resource j in its choice window are given as follows. the fi; are treated as weights. 

the number of agents at resources and   respectively. in our experiments  we set  = 1   = 1  and unless otherwise specified. 
the weights are normalized to yield probabilities. 
thus  the probability of an agent  moving from resource i to resource j is given by 

intuitively  when the choices are limited  as when small problems are considered   the agent typically has only a few good alternatives. each good alternative gets a small positive weight; each undesirable alternative gets a weight of 1. thus  the value of pii comes out fairly high. as the distribution of the agents levels out  their pii values increase until each of them becomes 1 meaning that none of the agents can move. 
1 	key concepts 
this simple framework provides enough structure to capture a variety of interesting concepts. 
choice. the number of actions an agent may choose from. a rational agent may find it has fewer realistic choices when it comes to know more facts  but that aspect  is not directly measured here. if resource is not in the choice window  then  is not used  and - 1. 
k n o w l e d g e . the number of resources whose occupancy is known to the agent. thus  the knowledge of an agent increases as the agent is given information about an increasing number of resources. 
the variables  and  give the occupancy of resources 
/  and j. they are accurate for resources within the agent's knowledge window. for other resources  they are estimated based on the total number of agents and the occupancy of the known part  of the world. 

where n is the total number of agents  i  is the number of agents in the knowledge window  and u is the number of resources that are not known about. thus  n and u are a form of global knowledge in the system. since eliminating them would complicate the present experiment considerably  that aspect is deferred to future work. 
i n e r t i a . this is the tendency of an agent to stay in its resource even if better alternatives are known. greater inertia means that the probability is higher. in our setup  inertia is controlled by as remarked above  if all  values increase to 1  coordination is achieved. thus inertia can facilitate coordination. a system whose agents have low inertia may exhibit chaotic behavior  and never achieve coordination. on the other extreme  very high inertia would lead to an inactive system  with a similar result. 
sharing. shared knowledge corresponds to overlapping knowledge windows. rustogi & singh estimate the total amount of sharing in the system as roughly proportional to the cube of the size of the1 knowledge window. 
	rustogi and singh 	1 

under a homogeneous strategy  as here   shared knowledge would tend to lead to similar decisions  which could influence coordination. 
precision. imprecision is the distance from a perfectly coordinated state  i.e.  the minimum number of agent relocations required to coordinate. given an acceptable level of imprecision  we control the simulations to halt when that level is reached. introducing precision into the experimental framework had important consequences. first  because coordination is achieved much faster when imprecision is allowed  we could simulate much larger configurations than otherwise possible. second  allowing some imprecision made the trends more robust by reducing the likelihood of pathological situations in which the system may get stuck. third  imprecision helps us study the above pathological situations  which are interesting in their own right. this is the basis for some technical results presented later. 
1 	results 
the following figures indicate our results. the tuple in each caption indicates  respectively  the number of resources  the number of agents  the initial deviation  distance of the agent distribution from a coordinated state   and the imprecision tolerated. 
- - 	＊' ＊＊＊ 
knowledge choice 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 table 	1: 	number 	of 	steps 	to 	coordination 

   we compute the tables only for the upper triangular submatrix  because the lower triangular submatrix is readily determined from it. the lower triangular submatrix corresponds to the knowledge window being a superset of the choice window. in our decision protocol  this extra knowledge is useless and harmless  because it does not affect the agent's decisions. thus  the values are essentially constant along each column below the principal diagonal.  in simulations  the randomization can cause minor variations.  
1 	sharing of knowledge 
　figure 1 is based on the last column of table 1. figure 1 shows that the time to achieve coordination lias the same order as the sharing metric. to reduce clutter  we only show the graphs for a cubic polynomial that was fit to the data  and data corresponding to the last 
1 	distributed al 

column  constant  maximal choice  of table 1. this figure indicates that sharing may have a significant role to play in the final understanding of coordination in decentralized systems where the agents are homogeneous and coordination calls for complementary decisions  as here. 
1 	precision 
reducing the required precision enhances the scalability of coordination. in other words  as the quality of the coordination increases  the cost in terms of time becomes extremely high. we studied this observation further by delineating the effect of the deviation from coordination at the start of each simulation run. in our setup  the deviation ranges from 1  almost coordinated  to 1  maximally uncoordinated . 

figure 1: effect of initial deviation  
　figure 1 demonstrates that it- takes far fewer steps to progress from maximal uncoordination to almost perfect coordination than to go from almost perfect coordination to perfect coordination. the last little bit of precision consumes almost  all of the effort. 
　the previous result suggests that the time to coordinate increases exponentially as the allowed imprecision is reduced to zero. figure 1 supports this claim. the exponential variation occurs as inertia drops significantly  resulting in increasing instability. the exponential variation described above  however  does not manifest itself when the agents have little choice  because in such scenarios  the agents cannot move around much anyway. instead  as figures 1 and 1 demonstrate  for small choice 


figure 1: effect of imprecision  
windows  the time for coordination increases only polynomially with reducing allowed imprecision. in these figures  to help visualize the trends better  each curve is normalized to 1 with respect to its maximum value. it should he obvious  however  that for low values of imprecision  including 1   the actual time to coordinate increases with choice. for higher values  the time to coordinate is practically independent of the choices available to the agents or the knowledge possessed by them. 
1 inertia 
recall that inertia refers to the tendency of an agent to stay in its present resource even if it knows of better resources. from the probability calculations of section 1  it should be clear that  in general  as the number of choices increase   increases  and consequently the inertia 
 i.e.  pii  decreases. this reason  especially when coupled with an imprecision of 1  can prevent coordination for moderately large dimensions. 

figure 1: effect of inertia 


figure 1: effect of choice relative to imprecision   each curve is normalized to 1  

figure 1: 	effect 	of choice 	relative 	to 	imprecision 
  each curve is normalized to 1  
   in our setup  inertia is characterized by the parameter a. the preceding results were based on  = 1; now we vary a above and below this value. figure 1 shows that increasing the inertia facilitates coordination. this is because when the agents are less likely to move  a low occupancy resource will not suddenly by occupied by several agents. conversely  decreasing the inertia to a low value can make coordination extremely slow. the agents appear to jump about too much and system takes longer and longer to converge. for such cases  the detrimental effect of shared knowledge still applies; thus adding knowledge slows coordination. 
   interestingly  for high inertia  an increase in knowledge or choice further improves the coordination. this relationship is a reversal from when the inertia is low. it appears that the trend changes  because higher inertia limits agent movement to such an extent that the benefits of additional local knowledge in decision-making overshadow the usual ill effects of increased sharing of knowledge. 
　the improvement of coordination due to increasing inertia is observed only if the inertia is not too high. increasing the inertia to a very high value results in slow coordination. this is because very high inertia causes the agents to freeze in whatever resources they occupy. 
1 	other variants considered 
our interest is in understanding the phenomenon of coordination in general  not analyzing the specific setup used in our experiments. thus we emphasize the trends 
observed in the simulations  and the qualitative relationships among the trends  such as whether the number of steps is increasing or decreasing and if so at what polyno-
	rustogi and singh 	1 

mial order. our experiments included complex scenarios  but which also yield the same trends as the simple scenarios on which the above results are directly based. 
  our results hold for several decision functions  but we present only the simple decision function used by sen et al. 
  like rustogi & singh  we observed that keeping the knowledge and choice windows of an agent symmetrically distributed around its current resource yield the same trends as when the windows are skewed with respect to each other; therefore  we focus on the simpler situation. 
  to enable convergence  we set an integral ratio of agents to resources. this is not strictly necessary when imprecise coordination is allowed  but changing the ratio has no effect on the trends  so we report only the integral situations here. 
  except when precision itself is a variable  we can make do with lower precision  because it yields faster convergence without affecting the qualitative nature of the trends. 
  we studied the role of inertia and its interplay with knowledge and choice  by altering the control parameters  in our protocol. the results 
highlighted an interesting interplay among the various bases of coordination. varying  alone  however  provides representative results. 
1 	mapping the terrain 
our experimental study of decentralized multiagent systems brought out a number of important factors that affect coordination. some of these factors inertia and precision-have not been empirically studied in such systems. others-knowledge and choice have been studied but  as our analysis showed  the trends relating to these are richer than believed. trends due to inertia and precision can dominate and sometimes reverse the simpler trends. 
　the following simple rules summarize our qualitative results. 
r1. low inertia & low imprecision  knowledge sharing governs  local knowledge & limited 
choice performs better 
r1a. moderately high inertia  extent of knowledge or choice is less important 
r1b. high imprecision  extent of knowledge or choice is less important 
r1. 	very high inertia  system inactivity 
　the above rules demarcate the most important regions of our terrain. figure 1 illustrates the corresponding regions. rule rl supported by figure 1  is mapped to region i in figure 1. to achieve effective coordination in this region  agents must limit their knowledge as well as choice. the results of sen et al. and rustogi & singh lie within this region. figures 1 and 1 support the 
1 	distributed al 
rules r1b and r1a  respectively. the results of baray lie within this region-this is the reason he obtains much faster coordination than sen et al. these rules  mapped to region ii of figure 1  imply that knowledge and choice are less relevant for coordination. rule r1 is intuitively obvious and is represented by region iii in figure 1. 

figure 1: mapping the terrain of decentralized systems 
　the study of coordination is interesting from a practical engineering standpoint. the above rules yield heuristics to aid in the engineering of a multiagent system. our first conclusion is that for maximal scalability  we should allow some imperfection in coordination. even a slight imperfection improves performance considerably. a moderately high value of inertia is desirable. selecting the right value is nontrivial  especially because it will change in a dynamic system. an open problem is to devise online learning techniques to adapt to the right inertia during execution. 
interestingly  for most of the situations in our setup  
local information performs better than global information. even when local information gives suboptirnal results  for many applications  it can provide a reasonable tradeoff with the cost incurred in acquiring the global information. 
1 	discussion 
in addition to the works mentioned above  some interesting relevant approaches are known in the literature. for instance  kuwabara et al. present a market-based approach in which agents controlling different resources set their prices based on previous usage  and buyer agents choose which resources to use . the buyer agent can use more than one resource concurrently  and seeks to minimize the total price. as in our approach  the buyer's decision-making is probabilistic. although kuwabara et al.'s model is similar to ours  they do not study the reasons for achieving effective coordination. 
　rachlin et al. show how agents  using the a-team architecture  can achieve coordination without explicit communication . an a-team is an asynchronous team of agents that shares a population of solutions that evolve over time into an optimal set of solutions. 

through sharing of the solution population  cooperative behavior between agents may emerge leading to better solutions than any one agent could produce. often  however  a human agent may be necessary to help achieve coordination by imparting domain-specific knowledge. 
   results by hogg l huberman indicate the potential benefits of introducing heterogeneity of different forms . these agree with the intuition that in homogeneous settings  the sharing of knowledge may have an undesirable effect on coordination. this is especially so when the agents must make complementary decisions so as to coordinate  i.e.  move to different resources. this problem is closely related to the emergence of conventions for resource sharing  lewis  1 . 
　there are some limitations of the present experimental setup. it. focuses on cases where the resource conflicts are direct and immediately perceived  the resources are ho mogeneous  the agents all use the same decision-making protocol  and the agents do not communicate directly. further  there are well-known limitations of reinforcement learning in terms of time taken to learn even simple concepts. the present experiments leave open the possibility that more sophisticated agents in more flex* ible environments  where their learning is supervised in certain ways might discover better ways of coordination  which may turn out to have different characteristics in terms of the influence of knowledge and choice. 
   although we introduced some interesting considerations  a lot remains to be done. choice and inertia bear an interesting relationship to the not ion of commitments. jt appears that the two are complementary in that the greater the agent's choice the lower its commitment to a particular decision. previous experimental work appears especially relevant. kinny & georgeff empirically investigate how the agents' commitment to their current plan contributes to their effective behavior  l1l . the agents in their work are characterized as bold  normal  or cautious based on the extent of their commitment  akin to inertia here   ranging from high to low  in thaiorder. the cautious agents continually reconsider their plan at every step  in the face of a dynamic environment  and therefore exhibit the least commitment . for the most part   bold agents  despite their higher degree of blind commitment  perform better than normal and cautious agents except when the rate of change is very high. kinny & georgeff  however  do not study the effectiveness of behavior when the degree of commitment is very high. 
   we identified several of the key attributes affecting coordination in a way that  agrees with but subsumes previous results. we also give some heuristics to develop decentralized multiagent systems. to cover additional applications  we need to consider communication among agents and to determine the circumstances under which it helps or disrupts coordination. we need to consider systems whose membership involves agents being removed and added back. 
