 
diagrammatic reasoning comprises phenomena that range from the so-called  free-rides   e.g. almost immediate understanding of visually perceived relationships  to conventions about tokens. such reasoning must involve cognitive processes that are highly perceptual in content. in the domain of mathematical proofs where diagrams have had a long history  we have an opportunity to investigate in detail and in a controlled setting the various perceptual devices and cognitive processes that facilitate diagrammatically based arguments. this paper continues recent work by examining two kinds of diarammatic proofs  called categories 1 and 1 by jamnik  et. al. 1   the first being one in which generalization of a diagram instance is implied  and the second being one in which an infinite completion is represented by an ellipsis. we provide explanations of why these proofs work  a semantics for ellipses  and conjectures about the underlying cognitive processes that seem to resonate with such proofs. 
1 	introduction 
the use of diagrams as reasoning aids has a long history  but the serious investigation of what is involved in such reasoning is recent. valuable insights into mixedmode or heterogeneous reasoning in which both text and diagrams play essential roles in the instruction of mathematical logic were obtained from the hyperproof system of barwise and etchemendy  barwise and etchemendy 1 . shin  shin 1  undertook a detailed investigation of how far diagrams and diagrammatic constructions can be used in set theory as an alternative to traditional textual expositions. sowa  sowa 1  and the conceptual graph community advocate a diagrammatic approach to knowledge representation and computation. there are also the long-established er diagrams in databases. for more diverse ai applications  the collection of papers  glasgow  et. al. 1  is representative of the effort to understand what constitutes diagrammatic reasoning and 
1 	cognitive modeling the strengths and weaknesses of this mode. of particular interest is the idea of  free rides   see  shimojima 1  and  gurr 1  for details   e.g. the processing and understanding of diagrams that yield facts  relationships  etc. with apparently little effort on the part of humans. not much of this is well-understood because of the complexity of the tasks and the difficulty of designing experiments to test theories. however  in the specialised domain of mathematical proofs there is the intriguing possibility that the tasks are simpler to understand and experiments may be subject to control protocols. this paper should be read from this perspective. we axe fortunate that nelsen  nelsen 1  has compiled a comprehensive collection of such proofs. indeed  jamnik  et. al.  jamnik  et. al. 1  took a number of nelsen's examples as challenges that required explanation. 
　we believe that explanation of the efficacy of a diagrammatic proof of a mathematical theorem has at least two obligations. the first obligation is to give an account - using standard mathematics  meta-mathematics  logic or computation theory - of why that mode of reasoning is sound. the second obligation is to adduce - or  in the absence of an accepted theory  to conjecture - credible cognitive processes for the  free rides  involved. 
　the main aim of this paper is to fulfill these obligations for the chosen examples  and in so doing  pave the way for discovering the principles behind the mechanical generation and/or verification of diagrammatic proofs. such principles presume an understanding of the aforementioned cognitive processes. 
1 	types of diagrammatic proofs 
jamnik  et. al.   jamnik  et. al. 1  have categorized diagrammatic proofs of mathematical theorems according to certain characteristics. they identified three categories. in category 1 which they examined in recent papers  see also  jamnik  et. al. 1    the proofs are schematic. while not requiring induction for the particular proof  one is required to generalize on the size of the diagram. their central result was to show how a constructive w-rule could be invoked to do this. the paradigmatic example is the sum of odd numbers which nelsen  op. cit. p.1  attributes to nichomachus of 
gerasa. as we shall be concerned only with categories 

1 and 1 in this paper  we reproduce their descriptions from jamnik  et. al.  jamnik  et. al. 1 . 
category 1 proofs that are not schematic: there is no need for induction to prove the general case. simple geometric manipulations of a diagram prove the individual case. at the end  generalisation is required to show that this proof will hold for all  parameters . example theorem: pythagoras theorem. 
category 1 proofs that are inherently inductive: for each individual concrete case of the diagram they need an inductive step to prove the theorem. every particular instance of a theorem  when represented as a diagram  requires the use of abstractions to represent infinity. thus  the constructive w;-rule is not applicable here. example: geometric sum. 
　in this paper we initiate an examination of both these categories. 
1 	category 1 proofs 
category 1 proofs somehow require generalization from a specific collection of diagrams. the diagrammatic proof of pythagoras theorem  attributed by nelsen  op. cit. p.1  to the unknown author of the chou pei suan ching  is reproduced as the two diagrams a a b  and 
b a b  in figure 1. the dimensions a and b are the lengths of the two sides of the four right-angled congruent triangles with hypotenuse c  a dependent length. in a a  b   the smaller square embedded in the larger one has side c  so its area is c1. it is also the residual region after the four surrounding triangles axe excluded. in b a b  we have a transformed version  via diagrammatic operations t  of a a  b  in which the triangles have been moved to the positions shown. the residual region outside the triangles  which must have the same area as the one before  are now the two small squares with areas a1 and b1. this proves the theorem for the specific case of these linear dimensions a  b and c. 

figure 1: diagrammatic proofs of pythagoras: original and its perturbed version 
　　we propose two solutions to the problem of generalization using this example as a paradigm. the first relies on a notion of continuity  while the second is the analog of a powerful meta-theorem in logic. both of these have  recursors in the recent discussion by hayes and laforte hayes and laforte 1 . 
 the continuity argument has two parts. the first is illustrated in figure 1 via two additional diagrams a a+ 
. what is argued here is that the 
second two diagrams are perturbed versions  via a map 
  of the first two  but the same transformation t relation holds. in fact  this can be made precise by saying 
that the diagrams commute as indicated. this argument shows that the relative ratio a:b is not material  but does not meet the criticism that an absolute magnitude for  say a  is used in the diagram. to meet this we need the second part  which is a scaling argument. that is  to the a a b  and b a b  diagrams and the operations t  we have a scaled counterpart  with the same operations. 
　　the second solution  analogous to logic  is the diagrammatic version of the theorem called  generalization on constants   also known as the theorem on constants  toc for short . one statement of it  see  e.g.  shoenfield 1   is as follows. suppose t is a set of formulas and a x  is a formula with free variable x  and the constant d does not appear in any formula in t. further  suppose   where the notation  signifies the substitution of d for x in . then we may infer 
   	and hence 
　the discussion below is an outline of how the toc is applied. the details require attention to the admissible operations on  and inferences from  diagrams; these we postpone to a later paper  but see  hayes and laforte 1  for some current insights. 
　the relevance of the toc as a response to specificity of the diagrammatic proof of the pythagoras theorem lies in the implicit hypotheses t of the proof. we enumerate some members of this t: first  there are the euclidean geometric propositions used  e.g.  properties of triangle congruence  the sum of angles of any triangle being 1 degrees  properties of squares  invariance of shapes and areas under rotations and translations. there are also some algebraic identities involving additions and subtraction of areas  and formulas about the area of any square given the length of its side. none of these mention the constants a  b and c. the construction of diagram a a 1   and the subsequent operations  call them t  to transform it to diagram b a b   are the steps in the diagrammatic proof. the conclusion of the proof is   in symbolic notation 
　　　　　　　　　　　where none of a  1 or c occur in t. here is the diagrammatic analog of textual proof  i.e.    
in diagrams  principally diagrammatic operations supplemented by reasoning about invariants like areas  etc.  the details of which we will elucidate in a future paper. the toc now authorizes generalization of the conclusion  to arbitrary values for these constants. these two responses to category 1 diagram specificity 
	f1  pagnucco and nayak 	1 

extend to many other proofs in which ostensibly particular dimensions are named  e.g.  nelsen's own diagrammatic proof  op. cit. p.1  of diophantus*  sum of squares identity . 
1 	category 1 proofs 
the main feature of category 1 proofs is an ellipsis  the classical         notation used in suggesting the infinite completion of  say  a series such as      . this ellipsis is used in category 1 diagrams to similarly suggest that the reasoning applied so far to a finite diagram can be successfully completed to infinity by some implicit induction. the most well-known example of this is the diagrammatic proof of the sum of the geometric series 
      attributed by nelsen  op. cit. p.ll1  to page. it is reproduced here as diagram a in figure 1. 
　we will now provide justifications for the diagrammatic steps in the proof  and a semantics for the ellipsis in the diagram. the key idea is to view the completed square as the limit of a sequence of constructions  each of which is a  monotonic  and  markovian  addition to its predecessor. it is monotonic because each construction stage adds new information that is distinctly represented without retracting old information. it is markovian because only the most recent piece of information  construction  is used to construct the next one. the usual diagram with its ellipsis notation is reproduced as diagram a in the figure. the diagram b corresponds to the sum . the next diagram c corresponds 
1 	cognitive modeling 
to the sum where 
s1 abbreviates the second grouping of summands. each group is colored differently for ease of viewing. proceeding likewise  the diagram d corresponds to the sum 

1 	meaning of the ellipsis 
this subsection assumes some mathematical background that can be found in standard texts such as  simmons 1 . let us denote by . the area corresponding to the summand   i.e.  each is an l-shaped region typically indicated by the differently colored pieces in figure 1. the regions can be placed in the first quadrant of co-ordinate axes so that the initial a  diagram  b in figure 1  has the origin at its left bottom corner  and the x- and y-edges have length 1. the second region will have its left bottom corner at the point  1 1   and edge lengths 1. with this convention  each lpiece in the later pictures can be described as an affine transformation of the preceding l-piece. 
　identifying the l-piece  with the co-ordinates of its points  this transformation t can be specified as follows  where is the  co-ordinates of the point at the  left bottom corner of 
the diagram d in figure 1 can then be denoted as which by the definition of the 
affine transformation can equivalently be written as  iu 
　　　　　  where i is the identity operator. using this notation as a basis we can express the progression from one diagram to the next as a larger transformation f as follows: 
  
　this is the formal expression of the geometric intuition that the next diagram in the sequence is obtained by gluing a smaller  scaled and translated  l-shape onto it at the appropriate corner  making explicit its markovian character. 
　　there is an obvious way to describe the difference between  say  diagrams b and c  which is just the additional l-piece added to b to yield c. this way to view the difference between two diagrams by observing the difference in regions they occupy is a special case of the measure of the symmetric difference between two sets . it is well-known that this is a metric. thus  the collection of diagrams is a metric space under the d metric. it is therefore possible to consider sequences of such diagrams and ask if such sequences converge under this metric. we have observed in examples of proofs involving ellipses  the collection of diagrams has been broad enough to guarantee that convergent sequences have a limit that is also a diagram in the collection. formally this says that the diagram space is a complete metric space. 
a map  on a metric space u with metric d 
is a contraction if for all 
for some k   1. the banach fixed point  bfp  theorem 

says that a contraction g in a complete metric space has a unique fixed point  i.e. there is one  and only one  
such that . moreover  this fixed point can be 
constructively obtained from an arbitrary initial point y by repeated application of g starting from y  i.e.   = 
 this theorem cannot be directly applied to explicate the efficacy of the diagrammatic proof  but a weaker form of it is relevant. the weaker statement  wfp  still relies on g being a contraction on a subspace        consisting of the terms in the sequence generated by g starting from a given initial point such a sequence will still converge to a fixed point  a result that follows directly from the standard proof of the bfp theorem. 
observation 1 the transformation f defined above on the space of t-generated l-shapes is a contraction map. hence it has a unique fixed point  which is the square a in figure 1. 

figure 1: summing overlays is perceptually difficult. 
　the fact that the general form of the bfp is not helpful in explicating the visual persuasiveness of this diagrammatic proof suggests some cognitive hypotheses that cry out for testing. to explain the hypotheses  let us examine the transformation f more closely. suppose the initial diagram is not a unit edge l-shape but a unit square instead. the underlying transformation t as defined before will now work on this square to produce a scaled version of it  then translate this version so that its top right corner coincides with that of the original square. figure 1 shows the first three members of this sequence. now  if this is intended to represent the sum of the geometric series        we have to redefine the transformation f to be not the union of the diagram sequence as before  but the sum of the overlaid areas  so that multiple overlays are counted area-wise as many times as they occur. with this re-definition the wfp theorem will still hold  so convergence is guaranteed. but unlike figure 1  the corresponding visual task is no longer easy. indeed  the area addition at each stage in figure 1 is not monotonically distinct in terms of representation  as each new piece intersects prior peices. the crucial difference from figure 1 appears to be this - the set unions for the l-shaped sequences in figure 1 are disjoint unions  that moreover are contiguous  so that sums of areas are easy to see. we therefore con-
jecture that disjoint unions  especially contiguous ones  are free ride features. 
　there is an important point we note about the choice of the initial shape fed into the constructor t. in figure 1 we chose an l-shape. we could have conceivably chosen  say  the left tall rectangle in diagram b. if we did that  then the second stage will be the addition of the right square in diagram b. this leads to a more complex constructor t which has to be decomposed into two stages - it is no longer markovian in the strict sense  but is nevertheless still finite memory. in essence  the choice boils down to how long a preceding sequece is needed to define the next piece s  of the sequence. 
　so that we can use         as a meta-notation in our description of ellipses  it is convenient to adopt the alternative notation &c to denote the ending ellipses signifying continuation to the limit in both diagrams and sequential expressions. with these remarks  we propose that the the semantics of ellipses be as follows. 
definition 1 we interpret the meaning of the ellipsis &c in the diagram  kc to be a constructor function application written in  suffix form  with argument the diagram and whose value is the diagram 
. more generally  &c denotes a function 
&c defined as follows: the diagram &c has the intended meaning &c which evaluates 
to the diagram f ' 
　this has the effect of making &c denote a  lazy expander  of the finite diagram so far constructed. a more formal approach to the semantics of &c appeals to the notion of recursive domains  stoy 1  in which the diar grams are the solutions  up to isomorphism  of the domain equation 

and the  completed   infinite  diagram  i.e.  the square in this case  is the least upper bound of these solutions. here the function end extracts the last component of the instance of  is the ordered union operation. 
1 	construction invariants 
another example of a category 1 proof  attributed by nelsen  op. cit. p 1  to ajose  is shown in figure 1. the diagram a in it is the proof of the sum 
	diagrams b  c and d 
show the analogs of the construction leading to diagram a as was explained for the proof in figure 1  with the 
l-shapes as before. as the semantics for the ellipsis &c is similar to that above  we will omit it. however  in this proof a new feature is present that requires justification. as can be seen from the diagrams b c and d  we have at each stage to  see  that the colored area is 1 of the total area  l-shapes  constructed so far  and that eventually the total area is 1. that the eventual area is 
1 is reached exactly as in the proof in figure 1. how 
	f1  pagnucco and nayak 	1 

do we account for the other piece of inference - that the colored area is always 1 of the total  we propose that the underlying idea is a construction invariant this is closely related to the idea of a loop invariant in the semantics of programming languages. there  a first-order formula is a loop invariant in loop l if its truth at the point of entry into the loop guarantees its truth at the end of it  denoted likewise  in the present construction  let ~ stand for the statement:  colored area = 1 total area . then we have the visual proof rule: 
  where f is the one-step constructor 
above. 
　the visual proof rule is a formal statement of the conjecture that such uniform invariants across uniform constructions are inductive  free rides . in other words  such proof rules capture the essence of cognitive induction in diagram completions or fixed points. 

b 

	c 	d 
 construction steps in the proof of the sum 
1 	schroder-bernstein theorem 
as yet another instance of a category 1 type proof which illustrates the ellipsis and construction invariant features  we will now examine the diagrammatic aid to the proof of the schroder-bernstein theorem in set theory  kamke 1 . this theorem states that if there is an injection  from set 1 into set u and also an injection x from set u into set 1  then the sets have the same cardinality  i.e.  there is a bijection n between them. the usual proof uses a  back-and-forth  argument  but there is a less well-known proof that establishes a  apparently stronger  but actually equivalent  statement which implies the theorem  and is arguably easier to expound. this statement is as follows: if there is an injection from set s into a proper subset a1 of itself  then there is a bijection between s and all subsets  such that 
 it is this latter statement whose proof is usually accompanied by a diagram  the appeal to which is inessential only to the most experienced and sophisti-
1 	cognitive modeling 
cated of set theorists. all others  the authors included  appear to find the diagram indispensable. the use of this diagram further exhibits some of the properties discussed in the preceding sections  and invites similar conjectures. 

　figure 1 illustrates the reasoning steps. it is adapted from  kamke 1 . the successive arguments are represented by different views of the same set  each view being a strip partitioned as shown. for instance  the original set s is  represented by  the first strip  with the labelled 
partitions  having the following roles: a1 is as above  being the assumed injective image subset of 
1  i.e. ; and is what is  left over . now  the next strip has partitions and with the following roles: . - - ~   and . the subsequent layers are interpreted likewise. 
the diagram i shows a way to decompose the set 1. 
it yields the equation -
　　　　　　　　　　　. the diagram ii shows a way to decompose the set . it yields the equation 
. then 
by aligning these equations as indicated in figure 1  we see that the disjoint components are in one-to-one correspondence with each other  bearing in mind that by assumption   thereby establishing the bijection between 1 and s  as required. 
　what devices have been used in this appeal to the diagrams  first  the layout of the successive strips emphasized the disjoint components  much as in the proofs of the sums of series above. second  the decompositions used the elliptical &c as above. third  the apparently textual alignment of the two decompositions were used to argue for extension of pairwise correspondences between components to the entire set union. we submit that the third device is at least as much diagrammatic as it is textual  depending as it were on appeal to a linear layout and the elliptical &c for its  free ride  cogency. 

   we note in particular the implicit appeal to an invariant and a visual proof rule. let stand for the statement:   where means a termwise 
1 correspondence between the two sequences s1 and then we have the visual proof rule: 
  where f is the one-
step constructor for extending the partitions to the next layer. 
1 	conjectures for  free rides  
in the preceding analyses we suggested a number of features of diagrams in mathematical proofs that seem to resonate with cognitive ease of processing. it is convenient to summarize them here as challenges for controlled experiments. if validated  they can form the basis for the automation and generation of diagrammatic proof systems  and of related hci designs for diagrammatic reasoning. invalidation of any of them will prompt alternatives  and certainly prevent some blind alleys from being pursued. some diagrammatic features that facilitate proofs are conjectured to be: 
  continuous transformations of proof constructions. 
  disjoint unions or decompositions. 
  contiguous pieces in these unions. 
  monotone sequences of areas with a  markovian  uniform rule that generates the next element from the last one. 
  limits are upper or lower bounds of such sequences. 
  simply shaped upper or lower bounds. 
  contractive mappings with simple  see below  met-rics like symmetric difference. 
  ellipses represent implicit uniform constructions with lazy evaluation semantics. 
. simply perceived relations between areas. 
  relations true in the limit are exactly those invari-ant with respect to one step uniform  markovian  constructions. 
　we end this concluding section by remarking on metrics for sets. it would not have escaped the attention of readers familiar with work in fractals  peitgen  et. al. 1  that diagrams such as figures 1 and 1 are reminiscent of such recursively generated images. in fractal topology  the convergence metric normally used is the hausdorff metric. we believe that this is not a  free ride  metric  and hence is not simple  for reasons that we will explain elsewhere. 
1 	acknowledgements 
we thank donald michie  pavlos peppas  yusuf pisan and yan zhang for their comments on earlier versions of this paper. this research is supported in part by a grant from the australian research council. 
