 
the representational issues of preferences in the framework of a possibilistic  qualitative/ordinal  decision model under uncertainty  were originally introduced few years ago by dubois and prade  and more recently linked to case-based decision problem by dubois et al.. in this approach  the uncertainty is assumed to be of possibilistic nature. uncertainty  or similarity  and preferences on consequences are both measured on commensurate ordinal scales. however  in case-based decision problems  similarity or preferences on consequences may sometimes take values that are incomparable. in order to cope with some of these situations  we propose an extension of the model where both preferences and uncertainty arc graded on distributive lattices  providing axiomatic settings for characterising a pessimistic and an optimistic qualitative utilities. finally  we extend our proposal to also include belief states that may be partially inconsistent  supplying elements for a qualitative case-based decision methodology. 
1 introduction 
assuming that uncertainty about the actual state may be represented by possibility distributions  dubois and prade  proposed a qualitative counterpart to von neumann and morgenstern's expected utility theory  von neumann and morgenstern  1 . both uncertainty and preferences arc valued on linear ordinal scales of plausibility and preferences on decision consequences. 
　gilboa and schmeidler  have proposed a casebased decision theory  cbdt  based on the choice of decisions according to their performance in previously experienced decision problems. this theory assumes a set m of decision problem instances storing the performance of decisions taken in different past situations as triples  situation  decision  consequence   and some measure sim of similarity between situations. the decision maker  dm   in face of a new situation so  is proposed to choose a 
on leave from universidad nacional dc rfo cuarto 
 argentina  
1 	automated reasoning 
decision d which maximises a counterpart of the expected utility  namely the expression 

where sim is a non-negative function which estimates the similarity of situations and u provides a numerical utility for each consequence x. gilboa and schmeidler axiomatically characterise the preference relation induced by this umaximisation. 
　in a recent paper  dubois et al  1   an adaptation of the mentioned possibilistic decision model to the framework of case-based decision problems was suggested. but it was pointed out that some problems may appear in doing that. in order to cope with such problems  it has been proposed  zapico and godo  1  an extension of the possibilistic decision model to deal with non-normalised possibility distributions  i.e. distributions accounting for partial information that can be inconsistent to some extent. 
in these proposals it is assumed that both uncertainty 
 similarity  and preferences are measured on linearly ordered scales  however  these hypotheses may not hold in many problems. there are real problems where we are not able to measure similarity and preferences in such linearly ordered sets but only in partially ordered ones. this situation may occur in case-based decision when the degrees of similarity on problems are only partially ordered. for example  consider that each situation is described as s = 
 suppose we arc provided with a similarity function on situations sim: defined in function of 
the b-features similarity functions. that is  let 
given  that measures the degree of 
similarity between two k-features  where e is a finite linear scale  the similaritv on situations is defined by sim s s'  =  being  with the 
product ordering on v. in this case  the set of values for similarity  is a lattice. if we arc not provided with an aggregation criterion for similarity vectors that summarises the criteria on an ordinal linear scale  we are not able to apply the previously mentioned models. in a similar way  we may have that dm's preferences on consequences are only partially ordered  maybe as a consequence of a previous aggregation of various criteria. indeed  a preference relation among consequences is usually modelled by a utility function u:  where u is a preference scale  frequently a  numerical or a qualitative  linear scale. 

however  in many cases  this preference function may be a vectorial one on a lattice. hence  we are now interested in a 
qualitative decision model that let us make decisions in cases where the dm's preferences on consequences are only partially ordered or when the uncertainty on the consequences is valued on a lattice. 
　in this work  we propose axiomatic settings for qualitative decision making under uncertainty  requiring only finite distributive lattices for valuing uncertainty and preferences. two qualitative criteria are axiomatized: a pessimistic and an optimistic one  respectively obeying an uncertainty aversion axiom and an uncertainty-attraction axiom. in order to be able to apply the model to case-based decision  we extend our initial proposal to include belief states that may be partially inconsistent. 
　in the following section we provide a background on lattices. in section 1 we propose two axiomatic settings for characterising both pessimistic and optimistic qualitative utilities  requiring only finite distributive and commensurate lattices for assessing uncertainty and preferences. an extension that lets us make decisions in contexts in which possibly partially inconsistent belief states are involved  is summarised in section 1. in section 1  it is shown how this extended model may be applied to case-based decision problems. 
1 	background on lattices 
lets us recall many definitions related with lattices  for more details  davey and priestley  1    that we will use in the following. 
1 some previous definitions and results 
 is a lattice if  are associative  commutative  satisfy idempotency and the absorption laws. the induced order in a lattice is: will denote a bounded lattice with 
involution  i.e. l satisfies that 1  1 l and being a decreasing function s.t. nl nl x   = x. 
observations. given a lattice  then 
  
  
definition. given a partially pre-ordered set reflexive and transitive  the associated indifference relation  is defined by 
　now we introduce some results that will be used in our proposal. 
proposition 1. let  be a partially pre-ordercd set  then  is an equivalence relation. 
　　definition. given  a partially pre-ordered set  we denote by the quotient set w . r . t . i s a preaattice iff is a lattice  defining 
theorem 1.  a   is a pre-lattice iff  a  is a partially pre-ordered set  such that satisfies 

1 possibility distributions and lattices 
now  let us introduce the context of our work. let be a finite set of consequences. we will a finite distributive lattice of 
uncertainty values with minimum 1  maximum 1 and an the order induced by  in v. will be a finite distributive lattice of 
preference values with involution nu. the indifference and incomparability relations are: 

　now  we consider the set of consistent possibility distributions on x over v  i.e. 
　　as usual  order induced by 
　at first  we will be interested in a subset of pi x   the set of normalised possibility distributions  i.e. 

　for the sake of simplicity  we shall use x for denoting both an element belonging to x and the normalised possibility distribution on x such that  1 and for in general  we shall also denote by a both a subset a x and the normalised possibility distribution on x such that 	otherwise. hence  we can 
consider x as included in 
　　given 	the qualitative i 	is the consistent possibility distribution on x  defined as 	equal to if z = y and 1 otherwise. 
　the so-called possibilistic mixture is an operation defined on pi x  that combines two consistent possibility with 

	zapico 	1 

　　in order to have a closed operation on the mixture operation is restricted to requiring the scalars to satisfy an additional condition  i.e.  if we 
consider 	with 	v and 
it is not difficult to verify that reduction of lotteries always 
note. in order to simplify notation  we use for denoting both operations on v and u  although they may be different  hoping they may be understood by the context. 
1 	our proposal 
consider u: x  u a preference function that assigns to each consequence of x a preference level of u  requiring v and u to be commensurate  i.e. there exists h:v  u a 
-homomorphism relating both lattices v and u. let n be the reversing homomorphism n: v u defined as 
it also verifies n 1  = 1  n l  = 1. for any consider the qualitative utility functions 
　now  we will introduce the axioms that characterise the preferences relations induced by these functions and some results that we need for the representation theorems proofs. 
note. as u is a distributive lattice with involution  qu  and  preserve the possibilistic mixture in the sense that the 
following expressions hold  

then 


1 	automated reasoning 
lemma 1. let 	be two distributive lattices with involution  n: a reversing epimorphism  and u: consider 
then 
a  there exists 
b  qu  is onto. 
lemma 1. let n: be an onto decreasing function also satisfying that if then  then  n is a reversing epimorphism. 
finally  let 	be the preference ordering on 
induced by qu   i.e. 	in the following  we state that the set of axioms axp characterise these preference ordcrings 
representation theorem 1.  pessimistic utility  a preference relation  satisfies axioms axp iff there exist 
 i  a finite distributive utility lattice 
 ii  a preference function u: and 

 iii  an onto order reversing function n: 
1 and n l  = 1  also satisfying 
 1  
 1  
in such a way that it holds: 

proof:  now  we verify that the preference ordering on pi* x  induced by qu  satisfies the above set of axioms. is a partial order  is reflexive and transitive. 
q u   is onto  	so we may 	define 	sup 
	and inf 	=  qu   1 
	. then  by theorem 1   pi* x   	is a 
pre-lattice. 
　　a1 results from the fact that  and are non-decreasing in u and n is a reversing function. while  a1 is a 
　consequence of the fact that qu  preserves mixtures. 

a 
and s.t. 
	zapico 	1 

decision or action d can be identified with a possibility distribution on consequences. they define the distribution associated to d and so and obviously depending on sim and on the set of consequences  as 
where  by convention  max represents the plausibility of x of being the consequence of by d. hence  
the proposal was to evaluate d  in terms of 
   if  is normalised  then it is always the case that optimistic criterion scores a decision higher than the pessimistic one  but if the distribution is not normalised it may not. this problem is solved in  zapico and godo  1  extending the model to include non-normalised distributions that represent belief states that may be partially inconsistent. a similar analysis is valid for our work  hence  in order to apply the model to case-based decision that may involve non-normalised distributions  we provide now the corresponding extension of our proposal. first  let us introduce the concepts of normalisation and height of a distribution. define  the height of a distribution  as  and for each distribution consider the subset of 
consequences with maximal plausibility 
	we define 	as the normalised 
distribution 
　we extend the set of possibilistic lotteries to the set piex x  of non necessarily normalised distributions on v. 
hence  we need to extend the concept of possibilistic 

may consider the qualitative  or ordinal  utility functions on corresponding to those considered previously 
　　let be a preference relation in we will denote by q its restriction to and the corresponding indifference relations. in order to characterise the preference orderings induced by the utilities  and we extend the axiom sets axp and axp+  defined on in section 1  with 
  azee: for all 
the intuitive idea behind this axiom is that  according to the above utility functions  a non-normalised possibilistic lottery is indifferent to the corresponding normalised lottery provided that this is modified in terms of an uncertainty level related with the normality degree of the lottery expressed by its height  for  example if we consider  is weighted by the  negation  of the height of the original distribution. 
　　we say that a preference relation axiom set 
1 	automated reasoning 
resp.  iff its restriction to denoted by  satisfies axp resp.  and also satisfies a1pf. 

1 	case-based decision: an application of the model 
now  we may apply this model to case-based decision  for example  in the context1 of the comr1s project  plaza  et a/.  1 . suppose we have different agents  called personal representative agents  pra for short   each of one pursuing a different interest for a same user  and a pa  personal assistant  agent coordinating the proposals presented by pras. each pra presents its most relevant proposal among one of the following : 
  an appointment with a person  app  
  an alert about the proximity of a person or event of interest for the user  pro  
  a proposal of receiving propaganda related with events like demonstrations  future conferences  etc.  rp  
  a reminder of an event that will happen soon  rem   together with a degree of the estimated proposal relevance: great importance  gi   moderate importance  mi   doubtful importance  di   null.  for more details see  plaza  et a/.  1  . 
　the pa has to choose one of the pras' proposals to send it to the user  with its own evaluation of relevance: gi  mi  di  null. 
　suppose we have a memory of cases storing the performance of proposals made in the past by the pa with the respective user opinions about pa's behaviour. a case is represented as a triple c =  vs  winner  x   with: 
  vs =  where  di reli  describes the proposal made by the prai and the importance that it assigned to its proposal  
  winner =  pa's proposal  pa's evaluation of the importance of its proposal . 
  finally  x is a pair reflecting the user opinion. its first component is user's evaluation on pa's proposal  while the second one is his evaluation of the relevance pa has assigned to it. user opinion is measured on 
being  w i t h a n d n e its reversing involution. 
1 actually  we will consider a simplified perspective of the problems involved in this project. 

the similarity function on proposals  s prop  defined over 
e  is described in table 1  
table 1: similarity on proposals 

while the similarity on labels of relevance  s rel  is defined in table 1. 
table 1: similarity on relevance labels. 
s rel ip mi di null gi 1 u x 1 mi u 1 x 1 di x x 1 1 null 1 1 1 1 now  we define the similarity on states as: 

suppose there are 1 pras  being available the memory of cases m described in table 1. 
table 1: memory of cases 

1 	conclusions 
in this paper  we propose a framework that allows us to make decisions in contexts in which we only have partially ordered information  in the sense that dm's preferences are valued on a distributive lattice  and that the valuation set of uncertainty  or similarity  is partially ordered too. 
we axiomatically characterise these criteria. 
　as the problem of partially ordered information may have been originated in a case-based decision problem with similarity degrees valued on a lattice involving belief states partially inconsistent  we extended our initial proposal to non-normalised distributions  obtaining two criteria for case-based decisions. 
　up to now  we have considered  and as the available operations  now we are considering other operations defined in the lattices  letting us defining other utility functions which we are characterising. 
acknowledgements 
the author wishes to thank the valuable support of her advisor llufs godo. she is also grateful to j. arcos for his comments on comris project  and to the three anonymous referees for their comments that have helped to improve the paper. this research is partially supported by the 
universidad nacional de rfo cuarto  argentina  and by the cicyt project smash  tic1-c1 . 
references 
 davey and priestley  1  b. davey and h. priestley. introduction to lattices and order. cambridge univ. press. 
 dubois et al  1  didier dubois  llufs godo  henri prade and adriana zapico. making decision in a qualitative setting: from decision under uncertainty to case-based decision. in proce. of the sixth international conference on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning  pages 1 - 1. trento. 
 dubois and prade  1  didier dubois and henri prade. a fuzzy set approach to case-based decision. in proc. of the second european workshop on fuzzy decision analysis and neural networks for management  planning and optimization   pages 1. dortmund  1. 
 dubois and prade  1  didier dubois and henri prade. possibility theory as a basis for qualitative decision theory  
proc. of the 1th int. joint conf on artificial intelligence  pages 1  montreal. 1. 
 gilboa and schmeidler  1  itzhak gilboa and david schmeidler .case-based theory  the quarterly journal of economics  1 : 1. 1. 
 plaza et at.  1  enric plaza  josep li. arcos. pablo 
noriega and carles sierra. competing agents in agentmediated institutions. personal technologies  1: 1. 
 von neumann and morgenstern  1  john von neumann and oscar morgenstern theory of games and economic behaviour . princeton univ. press  princeton. 
 zapico and godo  1  adriana zapico and llufs godo. on the possibilistic-based decision model: p