 
in this paper  we construct a new concept description language intended for representing dynamic and intensional knowledge. the most important feature distinguishing this language from its predecessors in the literature is that it allows applications of modal operators to all kinds of syntactic terms: concepts  roles and formulas. moreover  the language may contain both local  i.e.  state-dependent  and global  i.e.  state-independent  concepts  roles and objects. all this provides us with the most complete and natural means for reflecting the dynamic and intensional behaviour of application domains. we construct a satisfiability checking  mosaic-type  algorithm for this language  based on  in  i  arbitrary multimodal frames   ii  frames with universal accessibility relations  for knowledge  and  iii  frames with transitive  symmetrical and euclidean relations  for beliefs . on the other hand  it is shown that the satisfaction problem becomes undecidable if the underlying frames are arbitrary linear orders or the language contains the common knowledge operator for 1 agents. 
1 	introduction 
description logics are often characterized as logic-based formalisms intended for representing knowledge about concept hierarchies and supplied with effective reasoning procedures and a tarski-style declarative semantics. a standard example is the description logic   see 
 schmidt-schaub and smolka  1   in the syntax of which the  definition  above can be represented as follows: 
descriptionjogic = knowledgerepresentationjanguage 
logic  decided by. 	algorithm 	-semantics  
 descriptionjogic 
 here descriptionjogic  knowledge-representation language  logic  algorithm  tarski-semantics are concept names 
 unary predicates   is decided by and has are role names 
1 	automated reasoning 
 binary predicates  and is an object name  individual constant  . 
¡¡created in the 1s as a direct successor of semantic networks and minsky frames  description logic has found numerous applications and given rise to a rich family of languages  see e.g.  brachman and schmolze  1; donini et al.  1  . but as the application areas are becoming more and more sophisticated  new  more expressive description logics are being called for. sometimes it is possible to comply with the application demands by enriching a  standard  description language with new constructs and retaining basically the same semantical paradigm. e.g.  de giacomo and lenzerini  extend  by providing means to form the union  com-
position  inversion  transitive reflexive closure of roles and to use the number restrictions for quantification over roles; baader and hanschke  add concrete domains to  however  some constructs require more drastic changes in the standard semantics. this happens  for instance  when one has to take into account various dynamic aspects of knowledge representation  say time- or agent-dependence of knowledge like 
.mailbox  
i.e.  a received mail has been put into the mailbox some time ago  john will always love the same woman  and john believes that sometime in the future everybody will love somebody. 
¡¡several approaches to the design of  dynamic  description logics were developed in the 1s  see e.g.  schmiedel  1; schild  1; baader and ohlbach  
1; baader and laux  1; donini et a/.  1; wolter and zakharyaschev  1a; 1b; 1c    and all of them share one important feature: their models become multi-dimensional in the sense that besides the usual  object dimension  they may contain a time axis  possible worlds or states for beliefs or actions  etc. 
¡¡perhaps the most general multi-dimensional perspective was proposed by baader and ohlbach  1; 1 . roughly  each dimension  object  time  belief  etc.  is represented by a set   of objects  moments of time  

possible worlds  etc.   concepts are interpreted as subsets of the cartesian product  and roles of dimension i as binary relations between n-tuples that may differ only in the ith coordinate. and one can quantify over roles not only concepts  but also roles themselves and concept equations. however  the constructed language turned out to be too expressive. at least no sound and complete reasoning procedure for it has appeared  baader and ohlbach provide only a sound satisfiability algorithm for a restricted fragment of their language . moreover  under the natural assumption that some dimensions may be  independent  the language becomes undecidable.1 
¡¡trying to simplify this semantics  baader and laux  noticed that different dimensions may have a different status. for instance  time should probably be the same for all objects inhabiting the object dimension of our knowledge base. this observation led to a somewhat more transparent semantics: models now consist of worlds  or states  which represent-in terms of some standard description logic the  current state of affairs ; these worlds may change with time passing by or under certain actions  or they may have a number of alternative worlds reflecting the beliefs of agents  and the connection between concepts and roles from different worlds is described by means of the corresponding temporal  dynamic  epistemic  or some other  modal  operators. 
¡¡there are several  degrees of freedom  within this semantical paradigm. 
¡¡1. the worlds in models may have arbitrary  or expanding  with respect to the accessibility relation between worlds   or constant domains. of course  the choice depends on the application we deal with. however  from the technical point of view the most important is the constant domain assumption: as was shown in  wolter and zakharyaschev  1b   if the satisfaction problem is deeidablc in models with constant domains then it is decidable in models with varying or expanding domains as well. this is the reason why in this paper we adopt the constant domain assumption. 
¡¡1. the concept  role and object names of the underlying description language may be local or global. global names have the same extensions in all worlds  while local ones may have different extensions.  for example  an agent a may regard the role loves to be local  while the role believes to be global.  in principle  we may need both kinds of names. however technically  local object names present no difficulty as compared with global ones  and global concepts are expressible via local concepts and the modal operators. 
¡¡1. as we saw above  in general one may need modal operators applicable to concepts  roles and formulas. 
¡¡and finally  depending on the application domain we may choose between various kinds of modal operators  e.g. temporal  epistemic  action  etc.   the corresponding accessibility relations  say  linear for time  universal 
1
¡¡¡¡ franz baader has kindly informed us that the language is undecidable without this assumption as well. 
for knowledge  arbitrary for actions   and between the underlying pure description logics. 
¡¡the main objective of this paper is to analyze a number of basic multi-dimensional modal description logics based on  and having the most expressive combination of the listed parameters. in particular  we show that the satisfaction problem  and so many other reasoning problems as well  for the logics with modal operators applicable to arbitrary concepts   local and global  roles and formulas is decidable in the class of all  multi-modal  frames  in the class of universal frames  corresponding to the modality  agent  a knows   and in the class of transitive  symmetrical and euclidean frames  corresponding to the modality  agent a believes  . 
¡¡multi-dimensional modal description logics of such a great expressive power have never been considered in the literature. languages with modal operators applicable only to axioms were studied by finger and gabbay  and laux ; schild  allows applications of temporal operators only to concepts. baader and laux  prove the decidability of the satisfaction problem for extended with modal operators applicable to concepts and axioms  but only in the class of arbitrary frames and under the expanding domain assumption. wolter and zakharyaschev   1a; 1b; 1c  have obtained a series of decidability results for the most important epistemic  temporal and dynamic description logics  based on the description logic  of  de giacomo and lenzerini  1   under the constant domain assumption and with modal operators applicable to both concept and formulas. 
¡¡however  the computational behaviour of the modalized roles  i.e.  binary predicates  has remained unclear. it should be emphasized that this problem is not of only technical interest. modalized roles are really required for expressing the dynamic features of roles while passing from one state to another  which is usually much more difficult than to reflect the dynamie behaviour of concepts . for instance  to describe the class of people alwrays voting for the same party we can use the axiom 
faithfulvoter = 
 by swapping  and  always  we get the class of people always voting for some party.  
¡¡the price we have to pay for this extra expressive power is that only a limited number of logics in this language enjoy decidability. we show  for instance  that the satisfaction problem in linear frames or in universal frames with the common knowledge operator for  1 agents is undecidable  but it becomes decidable if the language contains neither global nor modalized roles . 
¡¡to simplify presentation  we will be considering first description logics with only one modal operator and then generalize the obtained results to systems of multimodal description logic. a full version of the paper is at http://www.informatik.uni-leipzig.de/~wolter. 
	wolter and zakharyaschev 	1 

1 	the language and its models 
 the primitive symbols of the modal description language we deal with in this paper are: concept names role names  and object names ¦Á1 ¦Á1  - starting from these we construct compound concepts and roles in the following way. let r be a role  c  d concepts  and let and be the  dual  modal  necessity  and  possibility  operators  respectively. then  are 
concepts. 	atomic formulas are expressions of the form 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡where are object names. if and are formulas then so are   and 
¡¡the intended semantics of is a natural combination of the standard tarski-type semantics for the description part of  and the kripke-type  possible world  semantics for the modal part. 
definition 1  model . an 
¡¡¡¡since many reasoning tasks are reducible to the satisfaction problem for formulas  see e.g.  donini et a/.  1  and  wolter and zakharyaschev  1b    in this paper we focus attention only on the latter. our first aim is to show that the satisfaction problem is decidable in the class of all -models. 
¡¡by the modal depth md of a formula we incan the length of the longest chain of nested modal operators in 
1
¡¡¡¡w is a non-empty set of worlds and  a binary accessibility relation on w. 
1 	automated reasoning 
¦Õ  including those in the concepts and roles occurring in ¦Õ . it is well known from modal logic  see e.g.  chagrov and zakharyaschev  1   that every satisfiable purely modal formula can be satisfied in a finite intransitive tree of depth we remind the reader that a frame is called a tree if   i   i s rooted  i.e.  there is    a root of such that for every w € w  where is the transitive and reflexive closure of  and  ii  for every w  the set is finite and linearly ordered by . the depth of a tree is the length of its longest branch. and by the codepth of w we mean the number of worlds in the chain {v € w :  * w}. a tree is intransitive if every world v in  save its root  has precisely one predecessor  i.e.  
 {u € w : u   } | = 1  and the root wq is irrefiexive  i.e.  -vivo   wo- using the standard technique of modal logic one can prove the following lemma. 
lemma 1. every satisfiable formula is satisfied model based on an intransitive tree of depth  but possibly with infinitely many branches . 
1 	quasimodels 
fix an f o r m u l a b e the set of all object names in and by and we denote the sets of all concepts  roles  and subformulas occurring in €  respectively. 
¡¡in general  -models are rather complex structures with rich interactions between worlds  concepts and roles. that is why standard methods of establishing decidability  say  filtration  do not go through for them. our idea is to factorize the models modulo  in such a way that the resulting structures-we will call them quasimodels can be constructed from a finite number 
of relatively small finite pieces called blocks. 
definition 1  types . a concept type for is a subset t of amy  such that 
a named concept type is the pair 
concept type and a formula type and a named formula type for are defined analogously as saturated subsets of finally  by a type for we mean the pair -   where t is a concept type and a formula type for is a named type for 
	to simplify notation we write 	and 	when-
ever 	wo types and are formula-equivalent if 
	let 	be a model over 	and 
an intransitive tree of depth without loss of generality we may assume also that  and 


clearly  is a type for the set of  labelled  types w  with the relation  defined by iff is a tree isomorphic to but modulo only a finite part of this tree is enough to represent all the essential information it contains. 
definition 1  type tree . by a type tree for we mean a structure of the form   where is a finite set of labelled types for  so that one type may have many occurrences in 1   and an intransitive tree 
¡¡it should be clear that there exist at most nd ip  pairwise non-isomorphic type trees of depth d  where 
¡¡to represent worlds in models with their inner complex structure we require the following definition. 
definition 1  run . a run of co-depth d through a type forest 
a weak run 
of co-depth d. and if a weak run  satisfies  f  for some particular in   then is called a weak -saturated run of co-depth d. instead of we will write 
¡¡models as a whole are represented in the form of quasimodels. 
definition 1  quasimodel . a triple is called a quasimodel for is a type forest of depth for over some a set of runs through and is an intransitive tree order on  such that the following conditions hold: 
 j  for every  of runs of co-depth d in is non-empty; 
	is satisfiable 	iff  is satisfied 
be a quasimodel over o r some  possibly empty  t a role name. consider 
	universal. 	this name 
is explained by the fact that if r is -universal then we have .  which can be easily established by induction on the length of m. using the standard unravelling technique of modal logic  see e.g.  chagrov and zakharyaschev  1   one can prove 

1 	satisfiability checking 
we are in a position now to show that a formula  is satisfiable iff one can construct a  possibly infinite  quasimodel satisfying  out of a finite set of finite pattern blocks. 
definition 1  block . let be a type forest for of depth over a finite which is disjoint from an object i n a set of weak . -saturated runs through such that the set of pairs with for some r that is not universal  is 
an intransitive tree order on with root and let be an intransitive tree order on we say is  block for  if it satisfies conditions  j   n . 
	wolter and zakharyaschev 	1 

definition 1  kernel block . a kernal block over is a structure of the form in which 
	is a type forest over of depth t 	 it con-
tains only type trees named by the elements of a set of weak runs through  and an intransitive tree order on satisfying  j - n . 
definition 1  satisfying set . a set of blocks s for ¦Õ is called a satisfying set for if 
 o  s contains one kernel block for 	whenever 
 p  in every block 	there is  such that 
 q  for every in s and every  there is precisely one   block in s. 
theorem 1. a formula is satisfiable iff there is satisfying set for  the domain of each  non-kernel  block in which contains at most objects. 
as an immediate consequence we obtain: 
theorem 1. the satisfaction problem for formulas is decidable. 
so far we were considering satisfiability in arbitrary 
-models. however  various specializations of the modal operators may impose different restrictions on the structure of underlying frames in our models. for instance  if we understand  as  it is known   we may need frames that are transitive  reflexive and symmetrical  i.e.  s1-frames in the modal logic terminology  and if  is intended to stand for  it is believed   then we may need kd1-frames which have the form of an s1-frame possibly with one irreflexive predecessor. 
¡¡it is not hard to adopt the developed technique to prove the following: 
theorem 1. there is an algorithm which is capable of deciding  given an arbitrary formula   whether  is satisfiable in an -model based upon  i  an s1-frame or  ii  a kd1-frame. 
¡¡¡¡in some applications we may need -models with global roles  i.e.  roles r which are interpreted by the same binary relation in every world of a model. in quasimodels  we can reflect this by requiring that 
implies  for 	a	l	l	i	n other 
words  global roles correspond to binary relations between type trees. by a straightforward modification of the proof of theorem 1 one can show the following: 
theorem 1. there is an algorithm which is capable of deciding  given an arbitrary -formula with global roles  whether  is satisfiable in an -model based upon  i  an arbitrary frame   ii  an s1 -frame or  hi  k d 1 -frame. 
¡¡¡¡when dealing with intensional knowledge  one usually needs one modal operator  for each agent   meaning that  agent i knows  or  agent i believes  ; see e.g.  fagin et a/.  1  for a discussion of prepositional multimodal epistemic logics. let denote the modal description language with modal operators  so that 
1 	automated reasoning 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡-models are based on kripke frames with  accessibility relations  these frames are called 
¡¡-frames. s1n-frames and kd1n-frames are those frames all monomodal fragments of which are s1-frames and kd1-frames  respectively. the developed technique provides a satisfiability checking algorithm for this multimodal case as well. 
theorem 1. for every     there is an algorithm which is capable of deciding  for an arbitrary with global roles  whether  is satisfiable %n an -model based upon  i  an arbitrary  -frame   ii  an s1n-frame or  hi   k d 1  frame. 
¡¡it would also be of interest to extend the constructed epistemic description language  with the com-
mon knowledge operator c which is interpreted by the transitive and reflexive closure of the union 
 for various applications of c in the analysis of multiagent systems see  fagin et a/.  1 .  another important kind of modality often used in applications is the temporal operator  always in the future   or the operators  since  and  until   interpreted in linearly ordered sets of worlds  see e.g.  gabbay et a/.  1  . the satisfaction problem for these languages without global and modalized roles is known to be decidable  see  wolter and zakharyaschev  1a; 1b; 1c  . however  this is not the case for the language constructed in this paper: 
theorem 1.  i  the satisfaction problem for formulas in linearly ordered transitive frames is undecidable; it is undecidable in  as well. 
¡¡ ii  the satisfaction problem for the epistemic description formulas with 1 agents and the common knowledge operator is undecidable in the class of  -frames. 
1 	discussion and open problems 
this paper makes one more step in the study of concept description languages of high expressive power that are located near the boarder between decidable and undecidable. we have designed a  full  multidimensional modal description language which imposes no restrictions whatsoever on the use of modal operators  they can be applied to all types of syntactic terms: concepts  roles and formulas  and contains both local and global object  concept and role names. using the mosaic technique we have proved that the satisfaction problem for the formulas of this language  and so many other reasoning tasks as well  is decidable in some important classes of models. on the other hand  it was shown that the language becomes undecidable when interpreted on temporal structures or augmented with the common knowledge operator. 
¡¡the obtained results demonstrate a principle possibility of using this highly expressive language1 in knowledge representation systems. further investigations are required to make it really applicable. in particular  itwould be of interest to answer the following questions: 
 1  do the logics considered above have the finite model property  

our conjecture is that they do have this property  and so the finite model reasoning in those logics is effective. 
 1  what is the complexity of satisfiability checking in these logics  
we only know that the satisfaction problem in all of them is nexptime-hard. 
¡¡to increase the language's capacity of expressing the dynamics of relations between individual objects in application domains it would be desirable also 
 1  to extend  with  some of  the booleans operating on roles  
 1  to extend the underlying description logic with new constructs and  of course  retain decidability. 
acknowledgements 
the work of the second author was supported by u.k. epsrc grant no. gr/m1. 
