 
this paper presents the 1 permitted relations between two rectangles whose sides are parallel to the axes of some orthogonal basis in a 1-dimensional euclidean space. elaborating rectangle algebra just like interval algebra  it defines the concept of convexity as well as the ones of weak preconvexity and strong preconvexity. it introduces afterwards the fundamental operations of intersection  composition and inversion and demonstrates that the concept of weak preconvexity is preserved by the operation of composition whereas the concept of strong preconvexity is preserved by the operation of intersection. finally  fitting the propagation techniques conceived to solve interval networks  it shows that the polynomial path-consistency algorithm is a decision method for the problem of proving the consistency of strongly preconvex rectangle networks. 
1 	introduction 
spatial representation and reasoning concern many areas of artificial intelligence: computer vision  geographic information  natural language understanding  computeraided design  mental imagery  etc. these last ten years  numerous formalisms for reasoning about space were proposed  egenhofer et al  1; mukerjee et ai  1; freska  1; randcll et ai  1 . we can mention as an example the well-known model of the regions proposed by cohn  cui and randell  randell et ai  1  whose objects are the regions of a topological space and relations are eight topological relations  and for which renz and nebcl  renz et ai  1  characterize a maximal tractable subclass of relations. although this formalism is very attractive  it suffers from the impossibility of expressing orientation relations. 
　an example which enables this is the rectangle algebra  ra   giisgen  1; mukerjee et ai  1; balbiani et al.  1 . it is an extension for the space of the better known model for reasoning about time: the interval algebra  ia  proposed by allen  allen  1 . the basic ob-
jects of this spatial formalism are the rational rectangles 
1 	constraint satisfaction wrhose sides are parallel to the axes of some orthogonal basis in a 1-dimensional euclidean space. though re-
strictive  it is sufficient for applications in domains like architecture or geographic information. the relations between these objects are the 1 x 1 pairs of atomic relations which can hold between two rational intervals. these relations are very expressive  with them we can express both directional relations such as left-of  rightof above  etc.  and topological relations such as disjoint  overlap  etc.  between two rectangles. 
　in ra  spatial information are represented by spatial constraint networks which are special constraint satisfaction problems  csps . in these csps  each variable represents a rational rectangle and each constraint is represented by a relation of ra. 
　given a spatial constraint network  the main problem is to know whether or not it is consistent  i.e  whether or not the spatial information represented by the network is coherent. generally  this problem is np-complete  but we can find subsets of the whole relations of ra for which this problem is polynomial  as in ia  nebel et al  1; beek  1 . notably  in  balbiani et ai  1   balbiani et al  presented a tractable set of relations called saturated-preconvex relations. in this paper  we present a new tractable set: the set of strongly-preconvex relations. this set contains the saturated-preconvex relations. we also prove that the well-known method  the path-consistency method  is complete for this set. to prove these results  we introduce a new method  called the weak path-consistency method  which is almost the path-consistency method. 
the remainder of the paper is organised as follows. 
in section 1  we make some recalls about ra  moreover we introduce the weakly-preconvex relations. section 1 is concerned with some properties of fundamental operations: composition  intersection and inverse. in section 1  we discusse spatial constraint network and we present the weak path-consistency method. section 1 
is concerned with the tractability results. in section 1  we define the strongly-preconvex relation and section 1 concludes with suggestions for further extensions. 

1 	the rectangle algebra 
the considered objects are the rectangles whose sides are parallel to the axes of some orthogonal basis in a 1-dimensional euclidean space. the basic relations between these objects are defined from the basic relations of the interval algebra  denoted by  and represented in the figure 1  in the following way : 

　　　　constitutes the exhaustive list of the relations which can hold between two rational rectangles. for example  in figure 1  two rational rectangles satisfy the basic relation  m p  of  the set of the relations of the rect-

figure 1: two rational rectangles satisfying the basic relation  m p  . 
angle algebra is defined as the power set of  each relation of can be seen as the union of its basic relations. we obtain relations. let r be a rectangle relation of we call the projections of it the two relations of denoted by and and defined bv: 

figure 1: the set  of the basic relations of 1a. 
　ligozat  ligozat  1  arranges the basic relations of the interval algebra in a partial order  which defines a 

lattice called the interval lattice  see fig. 1 . from this partial order we define the partial order on  
	and 	with 	 a b   
defines a lattice that we call the rectangle lat-
tice. the eon vex relations of ia and ra correspond to the intervals in the interval lattice and in the rectangle lattice respectively. we can prove that a convex relation r of ra is the cartesian product of its projections and that its projections are both convex relations of i a. 
　for each relation r. of ia and ra  there exists a smallest  convex relation of 1a and ra respectively  which contains r. according to ligozat's notation  we denote this relation by   the convex closure of ft . we can easily prove the following proposition: 
proposition 1  
　in  ligozat  1   a basic relation of 1a is represented by a region of the euclidean plane and a relation of ia by the union of the regions representing its basic relations. with this representation two concepts are defined - the dimension and the topological closure of a relation of ia in the following way: 
  the dimension of a basic relation a  see figure 1   denoted by dim a   corresponds to the dimension of its representation in the plane  i.e. 1  1 or 1. the dimension of a relation is the maximal dimension of its primitives. 
  the topological closure of a basic relation a  denoted by c a  is the relation which corresponds to the topological closure of the region of .1  see table 1 . for a relation   is the union of the topological closure of its basic relations. 
these definitions use a geometrical representation of the basic relations  but we shall express them differently. in i a  each basic relation forces zero  one or two endpoint equalities. for example  between two intervals the basic relation eq imposes the first and the second endpoints to be equal whereas the basic relation p imposes no equality. we can use the following definition: 
definition 1 the dimension of a basic relation a of is the maximal number of equalities which can be imposed by a basic relation  minus the number of equalities imposed by the basic relation a. 

balbiani  c1nd1tta  and farinas del cerr1 	1 

relation topological relation topological closure closure p {p  m} pi {pi mi} m {rn  mi {mi} o s 
d {rn o fi s eq} 
{s eq} 
{d s f eq} oi si di {mi oi f  si eq} 
  {si  eq} 
- rit  si  fi eq  f {f eq} fi {fi eq} eq {eq} table 1: the topological closure of the atomic relations ofla. 
then we can easily extend this definition to ra: 
definition 1 the dimension of a basic relation of is the maximal number of endpoint equalities that a basic relation can impose between the orthogonal axe pro-
jections of two rectangles  minus the member of endpoint equalities imposed by the basic relation. 
for example  the dimension of the basic relation  m p   see figure 1  is 1. the dimension of a relation r of is the maximal dimension of its basic relations  and we suppose that the dimension of the empty relation is - 1 . it is easy to prove the following facts: 
proposition 1 
  let  a  b  be a basic relation of  dim  a  b   = dirn a  + dim b ; 
	be a convex relation  	= 
to extend the definition of the topological closure to 
ra we use directly the topological closure of the atomic relations of 1a  see table 1  by the following ways: 
definition 1 

although speaking of topological closure doesn't  make any sense because we don't use regions to represent the relations of r a  we shall continue to use the term as in i a. we can prove the following proposition : 
proposition 1 

proof. sketch  ligozat proves the first part of this proposition for two relations of i a. using this result we can also prove this for ra. the proof of the second part is obvious. to prove the third one  first we prove it for 1a by examining the exhaustive list of the convex relations of ia. and from this result and the first two parts in  ligozat  1   the preconvex relations of ia are defined in the following way: a relation of ia is a preconvex relation iff an equivalent 
definition is: r is a preconvex relation iff the set of preconvex relations coincides with the set of the well known ord-horn relations  which is the maximal tractable set of ia which contains all basic relations  nebel et al.  1 . using the convex closure and the dimension of a relation of ra  now  we are ready to define the preconvex relations in ra. we shall call these relations the weakly-preconvex relations. 
definition 1 is a weakly-preconvex relation iff dim  
using proposition 1  we can prove: 
proposition 1 a 	relation 	r of ra 	is a 	weakly-
preconvex relation iff  
from this proposition it follows that: 
proposition 1 a relation r of ra is a weaklypreconvex relation iff  is a convex relation. 
proof. 	let r be a weakly-preconvex relation of ra. 
from proposition 1  	so  
                                   since 	we deduce that 	given that every convex relation of ia has a convex topological closure  ligozat  1   from propositions 1 and 1 we deduce that  is convex. let  	be such that  is convex. since 
bv definition of / we deduce that 
c fi .  
1 	fundamental operations 
the set  is enriched with the fundamental relational operations  the binary operations  i n t e r s e c t i o n c o m position  o  and the unary operation inverse the composition of two basic relations and the inverse of a basic relation in ra can be computed from the same operations in ia in the following way : 	= and 	com-
position between two relations in 	is defined by : 
the inverse of a relation in is the union of the inverse of its basic relations. is stable for these three operations. considering a subset of firstly we must look whether this subset is stable for these operations. we  'an easily prove the following proposition: proposition 1 for every relation  
consequently  the set of the convex relations of is stable for the operations: intersection  composition and inverse. hence the set of the convex relations of  is a subclass of ra. from all this it follows that: proposition 1 for all relations  and 

we prove the result for ra.  	
1 	constraint satisfaction 

indeed  is a convex relation and contains the 
relation  
　now  let us consider the subset of the weaklypreconvex relations  we denote this set by  we have the following result: 
proposition 1  is stable for the operations but it is not stable for the operation  
proof. the proof of the stability of the composition is the same as the one given in  ligozat  1  for the stability of the preconvex relations of ia: for all relations 

ing to the symetry of the rectangle lattice  we have 
 from these results  the stability of w for the operation inverse is obvious.  
　unlike the case of ia  the weakly-preconvex relations in ha are not stable for the intersection. we can see it with the following counter-example. let consider the two 
weakly-preconvex relations r  s of 	defined by r = and  
　　　is the relation this relation is not weakly-preconvex. 'this lark of stability - as we may see in the sequel will raise some problem. 
1 	constraints networks 
we start  this section with some reminders about constraints networks of ra  balbiani el al.  1 . a rectangle network is a structure  where  = 
　　　　　　　　　　　is a set of variables which represent  ratio ual rectangles  and 	is a mapping from  to the set 	which represent the binary constraints between 

　an interval network is defined in the same way except that bv represents a set of rational intervals and c is to 
 zl  v c  be a rectangle network  the consistency' and the path-consistency of  is defined in the following way: 
   is consistent iff there exists a mapping m from v to the set of rational rectangles such that  for every i j 	there exists a basic relation p and  and  satisfy 	we 
call such a mapping m. a satisfying instaneiation of the network  
	  for 	every 
and for everv  
we have the same definitions for the interval networks. 
a convex  respectively weakly-preconvex  network is a network which contains only convex relations  respectively weakly-preconvex relations . 
　we define another property  the weak pathconsistency. a weakly path-consistent network is an almost path-consistent network: 
 definition 1 a rectangle:  or interval  network is weakly path-consistent when  for every  and for every  
a path-consistent  network is obviously weakly pathconsistent  the contrary is not true. 
   a well-known polynomial method to see whether a network is consistent  is the path-consistency method it consits to iterate on the network the triangulation operation:  for al 1 until we obtain a stable net work. 
it is sound but not complete as a decision procedure for the issue of the consistency of a network. indeed  if after applying the method we obtain the empty relation then the network is not consistent  in the contrary case we do not know whether the network is consistent. 
　similarly  we define a weaker method that we call the weak path-consistency method. it consists to iterate the weak triangulation operation  
the time complexity is the same as the one of the pathconsistency method. moreover  since   this method is sound but not complete like 
the path-consistency method. 
1 	results of tractability 
let be a network and be a satisfying instaneiation of we shall sav that is maximal iff for all 	with p the basic relation satisfied between and  
ligozat  ligozat  1  proves this important theorem: 
theorem 1 let  be an. interval network which contains only preconvex relations  if  is path-consistent then there exists a maximal instaneiation of  
from this theorem we can prove the following lemma : 
lemma 1 let  -  v  c  be a convex rectangle network  if n is path-consistent then there exists a maximal instaneiation of 
proof. let. 	and 	be two interval networks defined bv 	and for all and 	we 
can prove that and are path-consistent  sec  balbiani et al.  1 . moreover they are convex  a fortiori 
preconvex 	1 . so there exists a maximal instaneiation 
of  and 	let us call them 	and 	respec-
tively. let us consider the instaneiation m of such that for every is the projection of the rational rectangle onto the horizontal axis and  is the projection of onto the vertical axis. 
　　1  we remind that the set of the preconvex relations contains the set of the convex relations in ia. 

balbiani  condotta  and farinas del cerro 	1 

it is easy to see that  is a satisfying instanciation of 
moreover   respectively  and   respectively satisfy a. basic relation a  respectively b  such that 
dirn a  = 	 respectively dirn b  =  
so 	and 	are such that 	= 
because 	is a convex relation. so  	is a maximal 
instanciation of   
   consequently  for the weakly-preconvex relations of we have the following result: 
lemma 1 let xy =  vr c  be a weakly-preconvex rectangle network  if n is weakly path-consistent then n is consistent  moreover there exists a maximal instanciation of n. 

　because a path-consistent network is also weakly pathconsistent too  this lemma is true as well for a weaklypreconvex network  which is path-consistent instead of weakly path-consistent. 
when we apply the path-consistency method from a weakly-preconvex network  we are not sure to obtain a weakly-preconvex network  because the set of the weakly-preconvex relations is not stable for the operation intersection  likewise with weak pathconsistency method because the intersection between a weakly-preconvex relation and a convex relation is not always a weakly-preconvex relation. 	for example  the intersection between the weakly-preconvex relation 	and the convex relation is  which 
is not weakly-preconvex. hence  despite the previous lemma  we cannot  assert that the path-consistency method or the weak path-consistency method are decision procedures for the issue of the consistency of a rectangle network which contains only weakly-preconvex relations. but we can characterise some subsets of for which it works: 
theorem 1  main result  let  stable for the intersection with the convex relations. the weak path-consistency method is a decision procedure for the issue of the consistency of a rectangle net-
work which contains just constraints in e. 
1 	constraint satisfaction 
proof. from the previous lemma the proof is direct. let  be a rectangle network whose constraints are in 
e. after applying the weak path-consistency method from  we obtain a network  whose constraints are always in  e and consequently which is weakly-preconvex. moreover   is equivalent to so if  contains the empty relation then  and are not consistent. else  from the previous lemma we deduce that there exists a maximal instanciation of  and consequently n are consistent.  
　moreover  we can assert that path-consistency method is also complete for rectangle networks whose relations are in such a set e. 
　let  us denote by  the closure of a set f of relations by the operations intersection  composition and inverse. nebel and burckert  nebel et al.  1  show that from an interval network whose constraints are in  we can construct  in polynomial time  another interval network whose constraints are in f and such that the former network is consistent  if and only if the latter is consistent. we can prove the same thing in ra. hence  if e is a set of rectangle relations having the properties of the previous theorem  then the problem of the consistency of the networks whose relations belong to is a polynomial problem. 
1 	the strongly-preconvex relations 
in this section  first  we are going to define a new set with the properties of theorem 1: the set of the stronglypreconvex relations of ha. then  we shall prove that this 
set is the maximal set for these properties. 
the strongly-preconvex relations of ra are defined by: 
definition g let r be a relation of  r is a strongly-preconvex relation if  and only if  for all convex relations s  is a weakly-preconvex relation. 
the universal relation of is a convex relation  from this we deduce that a strongly-preconvex relation is a 
weakly-preconvex relation. we denote the set of the strongly-preconvex relations by s. the convex relations are stable for the intersection and are weakly-preconvex relations. so  they belong to ts. what is more: 


         are weakly-preconvex relations  and hence let q be any basic relation belonging to t from proposition 1  we can deduce too 
weakly-preconvex relation of   
moreover  we can prove the following result: 
proposition 1 s is stable for the intersection with the convex relations of  
proof. let r and s be two relations of  such that r is a strongly-preconvex relation and s a convex relation. let us prove that  is a strongly-preconvex relation. 
let t be any convex relation  we have :  = 
 is a convex relation too. /＊   is a stronglypreconvex relation  we can deduce that a weakly-preconvex relation  hence preconvex relation.  
consequently  we can apply theorem 1 on the set s. 
from the last two propositions we can easily prove that 1 is stable for the intersection. s is stable for the inverse operation too. but we have not yet succeeded in proving the composition stability  so perhaps = s. moreover  let e be a set with the properties of theorem 1  we can easily prove that  from all this it follows: 
theorem 1 s is tractable and s is the maximal set included in  and stable for the intersection with the convex relations. 
　hence   is the maximal set with the properties of theorem 1. 
　a saturated-preconvex relation of  corresponds to the cartesian product of two preconvex relations of  balbiani et al.  1 . by using this and the fact that the set of the saturated-preconvex relations is stable for the intersection  balbiani et al. 1   from proposition 1 we can prove that the set of the saturated-preconvex relations is a subset  of 1. moreover  it is a proper subset of ts. for example  let us consider the relation  which is strongly-preconvex 
but not saturated-preconvex. so  now  is the largest known set. to be a tractable set which contains the basic relations. this result provides also another proof of the traetability of saturated-preconvex relations. 
1 	conclusion 
the subclass generated by the set of the stronglypreconvex relations is now the biggest known tractable set of ra which contains the 1 atomic relations. an open question is: is this subclass a maximal tractable subclass which contains the atomic relations   
　another future development  is to extend r.a. to a greater dimension than two. for dimension n   the considered objects will be the blocks whose sides are parallel to the axes of some orthogonal basis in a ndimensional euclidean space. the atomic relations between these objects are the relations obtained by the cartesian product  of atomic relations of ia. a first attempt shows that  the previous tractability results of ra can be easily extended to this structure. 
