 
this paper presents exclaim  a hybrid language for knowledge representation and reasoning. originally developed as an operationalization language for the kads knowledge based systems  kbs  development methodology  exclaim has a meta-level architecture: it structures the knowledge on three levels  namely the domain  inference and task level. an extension of a description logic is used for implementing the domain level. the inference and task levels are general logic programs integrated with the domain level by means of upward and downward reflection rules which describe the automatic domain operations performed whenever arguments of inferences or tasks are accessed. inferences and tasks support non-deterministic reasoning  which in turn requires a non-monotonic domain level. 
description logics offer a set of inference services  some not available in other knowledge representation languages  which are extremely useful in knowledge modeling. such inference services include domain-level deduction  semantic consistency verification and automatic classification of concepts. we argue that such validation and verification facilities are important in assisting a knowledge engineer in developing models. these models are reusable due to the layered architecture as well as to the possibility of writing generic inferences using a reified membership relation. 
1 	introduction 
knowledge based systems  kbs  are typically large and complex software systems aiming at solving difficult problems in knowledge-intensive domains. knowledge engineering in general and kbs development in particular are notoriously difficult not only because of the sheer size of the problem description  but also because they typically involve complex ontologies  which are usually not easily representable in a single knowledge representation formalism. 
in order to assist the knowledge engineer in developing 
kbss  a large number of kbs development tools have been built since the eighties. two main tendencies were followed in the early years. 
   on one hand  a great number of expert system  shells  were put forward. systems like kee  art  knowledge craft  nexpert object etc. were successfully used in building a large 
	knowledge-based 	applications 
number of expert systems. these  shells   however  had an important drawback: they used a given symbol-level representation  for instance a frame-based system augmented with rules  daemons  message passing  etc.   which is usually not appropriate for describing reusable knowledge-level models. 
   an alternative approach to building kbs development tools was inspired by the traditional software engineering  se  tools. se tools are nevertheless inappropriate as kbs tools since the domain knowledge  the ontology  is much more complex in the case of a kbs than in the case of a typical software system. 
   the remarks above suggest the need for a knowledge-level kbs development tool that would provide at least some of the nice simulation facilities offered by traditional se tools. such facilities are much harder to develop in the case of kbss  since  as already mentioned above  we are dealing with much more complex domain knowledge. an extreme approach would be to use full predicate logic as a domain description language and to support the reasoning involved with a full first order logic theorem prover. this approach can be very inefficient in complex cases. also  the readability of model specifications may sometimes be quite low  especially when dealing with complex logic formulae. 
   in order to support knowledge-level knowledge modeling  a series of methodologies and specification languages have been put forward  the most important ones being the kads methodology   kif and ontolingua  etc. a number of kads operationalization languages and environments have been developed for supporting the kads methodology with executable tools: si ml 1  omos  momo  karl  modelk  fork ads   etc. most of these languages are either very expressive  formally sound but computationally inefficient  sometimes even intractable   or they have a more procedural semantics  being less expressive  but more tractable. 
   this paper presents a hybrid architecture aiming at integrating description logics  viewed as domain description languages  and logic programming  used for representing inference and control knowledge  in a declarative knowledge modeling environment. the main byproduct of this declarative approach is the possibility of developing reusable libraries of problem solving methods. 
1 	brief description of exclaim 
exclaim  executable commonkads language for integrated modeling  is a knowledge modeling environment integrating description logics  used for representing domain knowledge  and logic programming  for dealing with inference and control knowledge . originally developed as an op-


 'rationalization language for the; commonkads knowledge based systems methodology   exclaim has a meta-level architecture which structures the knowledge corresponding to a model on three levels  namely the domain  inference and task level. figure 1 presents a graphical representation of the exclaim architecture  which is typical for the kads expertise model . although the decomposition of a given model in the three knowledge levels may not be unique  it is usually relatively easy to map an informal description of the model onto this three-level architecture. 
   the domain level encodes the domain ontology. the domain knowledge is mainly expressed in a description logic  dl  which provides fairly sophisticated inference services  such as domain-level deduction  semantic consistency checking  automatic classification of concepts  knowledge structuring and indexing . 
   the inference level consists of a set of primitive problem solving actions  whose internal functioning is irrelevant from the point of view of the conceptual problem solving model. inferences  represented graphically as ovals  have a set of input and output roles  depicted in diagrams as rectangles   which denote  roughly speaking  the arguments of the inference.  inference roles represent a kind of meta-level abstraction of domain level objects  concepts  relations  etc .  
   although the execution of inferences induces domain level operations  inferences do not manipulate domain level objects directly. since they refer to domain object only indirectly via inference roles   partial  models in which the domainlevel has been stripped off can be easily reused in a different domain. reusability is thus a key feature of kads expertise models as it enables the construction of domain-independent libraries of models. 
   the inference structures represent the data-flow of a given model. the control of the various inferences is accomplished at the task level  
1 	the domain level 
the exclaim domain level is an extension of a description logic  dl   with the concept  relation and attribute constructors from table 1 and the terminological and assertional axioms shown in table 1.  the dl implementation used in exclaim is the motel system .  unlike most implemented 

table 1: concept/relation constructors 

table 1: terminological and assertional axioms 
logical and database systems1  dls use the open world assumption  it is not automatically assumed that all the individuals known at one moment are all possible individuals . 
   the inference services provided by the dl include satisfiability  consistency  and subsumption testing  automatic classification of concepts in a hierarchy and instance retrieval. 
   in a language including concept negation  all of the* above services make use of the knowledge base consistency algorithm . for example  subsumption testing subsumes c d  reduces to unsatisfiability testing of the con-
cept and  not  c   d . 
1 	the domain level extension 
in order to be usable in real-life applications  our k r & r language will have to be able to describe collections of objects 
 such as sets or lists of instances/tuples . however  existing  implemented  dl systems usually lack constructors for sets or lists of objects1 and we therefore have to extend the description logic with such collections of concept instances or relation tuples. this does not affect the completeness of the dl inferences since the terminological and assertional levels of the dl are completely separated  it is impossible to 

have a dl instance that represents a collection of other dl instances . 
   this domain extension leads to a hybrid domain level in which simple instances are represented in the dl  while collections  sets or lists  are stored in the extension. 
   the internal representation of a so-called domain store element is the following: 

   a domain-level concept or  binary  relation can have an associated dl description  represented as 
	dl 	 description 
here c and r stand for domain level concept/relation names  while dl-c and dljl. represent their associated dl descriptions. 
1 	the inference level 
inferences are primitive problem solving actions which perform elementary problem solving operations  i.e. operations whose internal functioning is irrelevant from the point of view of the conceptual model . 
   inferences operate on inference roles1  which can be either inputs or outputs. inference roles represent a kind of metalevel abstraction of domain level objects  concepts  relations  etc . in order to enhance the flexibility of the mapping between inference roles and domain level objects  the following types of inference role domain links have been introduced: 
  simple  the role refers a single dl instance  
  set  the role refers a single domain level instance representing a set of dl instances  
  list  the role refers a single domain level instance representing a list of dl instances . 
domain links are represented in exclaim as: 
domainjink  
   input roles implement the upward reflection rules of the meta-level architecture  i.e. they are responsible  broadly speaking  for retrieving domain level instances. more precisely  input roles can perform the following types of domain operations: 
  retrieve  retrieve an instance of the domain level object linked to the input role  but do not remove the instance afterwards  
  noretrieve  no instances are retrieved from the domain  as if no domain operation was performed; the value of the role is set in the call of the inference rather than retrieved from the domain  
  delete  retrieves a domain level instance and subsequently removes it; the domain level description logic must provide facilities for knowledge revision in order to support this operation . 
1ln kads  the arguments of inferences are called roles. 
knowledge-based applications 

figure 1: role mapping types 
   output roles implement the downward reflection rules of the meta-level architecture since they are responsible mainly for storing object instances in the domain level. more precisely  output roles can perform the following types of domain operations: 
  store   instances  of the given output role are asserted in the domain  
  nostore  the  instances  of the output role are not reflected in the domain; instead  their value is passed to the caller of the inference . 
   inferences perform automatic domain operations on their input/output roles. since no direct domain reference is made in inferences  or tasks   these levels of the model are domainindependent and thus reusable  the code of the inference can remain exactly the same even after changing the domain level . 
   the automatic domain operations in inferences can be regarded as a more evolved form of parameter passing in an inference call. for instance  the operation types  noretrieve  and  nostore  perform no actual domain operations and rely on the explicit parameter passing mechanism in the call of the inference. on the other hand  the operation types  delete  and  store  perform domain operations and should be backtrackable if we intend to provide a non-deterministic computation model. this in turn requires the non-monotonicity of the domain level and the existence of knowledge revision facilities in the corresponding description logic. 
   the backtrackability of domain operations requires that whenever the inference  that performed the corresponding domain operation  fails  the state of the domain store and the description logic is restored to the state before the call of the failing inference. the same happens when new solutions are sought for by backtracking. 
   in order to further enhance the flexibility of the inference level primitives  two types of role mappings have been provided  see also figure 1 : 
  simple  refers to a single domain store element associated with the inference role  
  set  refers to the set of all simple domain store elements associated with the inference role  
   the exclaim representation of role mappings and the associated role operations is: role ..mapping 
   note that a  simple  role operation involves a single* domain store element of the form: doinain store  
   irrespective of the domain link type  which can be: simple  set or list. 

   from the conceptual point of view  inferences are primitive problem solving actions and their internal structure as well as their functioning need not be further detailed. however  if we are aiming at an operational system  the knowledge engineer would have to provide the  code  of the inference in order to be able to execute the model. 
   in exclaim  inferences are normal logic programs  i.e. sets of clauses of the form  we are using a prolog syntax : 
inference.name  input.role.i = value.i  . . .    
              output.role.j = value.j  	. . .     	:inference.body. 
   the heads of such clauses have two arguments representing the lists of input and output role bindings. a role binding is a term of the form role name = rolevalue  rolevalue can be a variable or a  partially  instantiated prolog term . the order of the role bindings in the binding lists is irrelevant. 
   an inference body can contain calls to other inferences or tasks  but this is not recommended as a good modeling approach  since inferences should be thought of as primitive executable objects . 
   in exclaim  inferences are executed using the following primitive: 
exec inference inference name  
 input.role.i = inputvalue.i  . . .    
 output.role.j = outputvalue. j   . . .     . 
which perforins the following operations: 
  unify the input arguments of the inference with those of the call 
  perform domain operations for the input roles  nore-trieve  retrieve  delete  
  execute the inference body 
  unify the output arguments of the inference with those of the call 
  perform domain operations for the output roles  nostore  store . 
all the above steps of exec inf erence are backtrackable. as already mentioned  backtracking to a domain operation may involve domain level knowledge revision too. 
1 	the task level 
the task level embodies the control knowledge of a model. tasks do not perform domain operations since they are viewed as composite executable objects  only the primitive executable objects  i.e. the inferences  are allowed to perform domain operations . 
   since no domain operations are associated to task roles  tasks are  from an operational point of view  like inferences with  noretrieve  input roles and  nostore  output roles. 
   one and the same role can be an inference role and a task role at the same time.  for example  the input role of a composite task can also be the input role of a component inference or subtask. the actual domain operations are performed when the inference is executed.  
   parameter passing in tasks is done explicitly in the call of the task. from the programmer's point of view  tasks have the same syntax as inferences: 
task.name  input.role.i = inputvalue.i  . . .     
        output.role.i = outputvalue j  . . .     	:task.body. 
   task bodies can  of course  contain calls to other inferences and subtasks. executing a task with exec.task task.name  
 input.role i = inputvalue.i  . . .     
　　　　　　 output.role.j = outputvalue.j  . . .     amounts to 
  unifying the input arguments of the task with those of the call 
  executing the body 
  unifying the output arguments of the task with those of the call. 
all the above execution steps of exec.task are backtraekable. 
1 	a simple example 
a very simple example of a resource allocation problem will be used to illustrate the facilities of exclaim. in a university department there is a set of classes to be taught by a set of lecturers. classes can be either courses or seminars  but not both   while lecturers are either professors or assistants  but not both . let us further assume that assistants are allowed to teach only seminars and that the list of classes familiar to  known by  the various lecturers is also given. of course  a lecturer can teach a given class only if he knows it. also  we require that each class should be taught by a lecturer and that a lecturer cannot teach more than one class  of course  there may be lecturers that don't teach any class at all . the goal of the problem is to find an assignment of lecturers  resources  to classes  requests  such that all the above constraints are verified. 
   the most straightforward conceptualization of this problem involves defining the following concepts and relations: 
defconcept lecturer  or prof  assistant  . defpriraeconcept prof  lecturer . 
defprimeconcept assistant  all teaches  seminar  . disjoint   prof  assistant  . 
defconcept class  or course  seminar  . defprimeconcept course  class . defprimeconcept seminar  class . disjoint  course  seminar  . defprimerelation knows . defprimerelation teaches . 
   the relations teaches and knows link a lecturer with the course he teaches or knows respectively. 
   given the relation knows  one must find the relation teaches subject to all the problem constraints. some of these constraints are easily expressible in the description logic  like the ones presented above . other constraints may not be expressible in the dl and we may have to take them into account at the inference level. for instance  the constraint mentioning that  a lecturer can teach a given class only if he knows it  cannot be represented in the dl unless the particular dl we are using allows the famous role-value map constructor: 
equal subset teaches  knows   top . 
however  since role-value maps  together with relation composition and concept conjunction  induce the undecidability of the dl inference services   they are usually not provided in implemented dl systems with complete algorithms. therefore  we will have to encode this constraint at the higher levels of the model  inference and/or task level . 
	badea 	1 

   on the other hand  the constraints that each class should be taught by a lecturer and that a lecturer cannot teach more than one class could easily be represented in existing dls as: 
defprimeconcept class  exists inv teaches   lecturer   defprimeconcept lecturer  atmostd  teaches  . 
   in fact  if all the problem constraints could be represented in the description logic  we could use the dl inference services to solve our problem without additional support from the inference or task level  dl inference services are usually reducible to the knowledge base consistency test  which typically works by constructing models of the kb. the model constructed while proving the kb consistency can then be used to extract the solution of the problem . 
   however  not all constraints are expressible in a given dl  so that the additional levels are really necessary. also  we may wish to exert a tighter control on the problem solving process and thus inference and task levels are again needed  relying entirely on the description logic inference services may turn out to be too expensive from a computational point of view . 
   last  if we are trying to develop reusable models  having separate domain  inference and task levels turns out to be again very useful. for instance  stripping off the domain level from our simple allocation example leads to a reusable problem-solving model for general resource allocation problems  lecturers are abstracted as resources  while classes are viewed as requests . we could also reuse the domain model in a different problem involving lecturers and classes. 
   after having completely described the domain level of our simple model  we proceed to the construction of the inference level. an extremely simple non-deterministic approach will be followed. 
   assume that a partial assignment  of the teaches relation  has been constructed up to this point and that we are currently attempting to extend this partial assignment with a new tuple for teaches chosen from the tuples of knows and linking a class that has not already been assigned and a lecturer who is still free  teaches no other class . the corresponding inference structure is depicted in figure 1. note that we have used generic  abstract  names for the inference roles denoting lecturers  classes and the relations teaches and knows. classes are regarded as requests  whereas lecturers are the resources to be allocated to these requests. the tuples of teaches are thought of as assignments  whereas the tuples of knows are just candidate assignments. 
   the inference get.request chooses a request that has not been assigned yet. this chosen request is passed on to assignoresource  which tries to retrieve a candidate-assignment for this request. if it succeeds  the assignment is stored in the domain level. the whole process is repeated  at the task level  until there are no more unassigned requests  case in which it terminates with success  or until a failure occurs  case in which the system automatically backtracks to a previous state . backtracking involves not only the inference and task levels  but also the domain level since the dl has to be restored to its previous state  before the call . 
   inference and task bodies are extremely simple since we are heavily relying on the automatic domain operations performed by inferences. we are also relying on the powerful description logic inference mechanisms  mainly when doing domain store retrieval but also when checking for global consistency after a solution has been found . 
1 	knowledge-based applications 

figure 1: the non-deterministic inference structure for the lecturer allocation problem 
   note that the problem-solving process involves computations  deduction  at two different levels:  1  at the domain level  dl deduction  and  1  at the inference and task levels  execution of inferences and tasks . 
   this observation shows that not only the description of the problem  but also the problem-solving process itself is distributed at different levels. we feel that this separation of computations  performed while solving the problem  is extremely useful and natural  leading to a higher reusability of the models. for instance  a change in the domain model does not require modifications at the inference or task levels. let us illustrate this with an example. 
   consider a problem instance in which there are only two lecturers  l1 and /1   two classes  a course c  and another class c1  and in which  and fa know both c1 and c1-
　　if we are not told whether or are professors or assistants  the system will return two alternative allocations  
namely  and 	 
   however  if we now specify that is an assistant  only the second assignment will be retained as a consistent one  since an assistant  cannot teach a course  
1 	generic inferences and reification 
for achieving reusability of the models we need to open the possibility of writing generic inferences  i.e. inferences parametrized by the types of their arguments  which will be known only at runtime. 
　　consider  for example  the following situation. if we want to describe the staff of some research institute  we may want to introduce concepts like director  secretary  researcher and instances like tom  joan  mary  peter  fred etc: torn director  joan secretary  mary  secretary  peter researcher  fred researcher. note that the concepts director  secretary and researcher represent positions in the research institute. they are therefore not only concepts  but also instances of the  meta-level  concept position: director  position  secretary  position  researcher  position. 
the meta-level concept position should not be confused 

with the concept employee  which is a super-concept of director  secretary and researcher director  employee  secretary employee  researcher  employee. 
   now suppose we would like to write separate inferences for retrieving directors  secretaries and researchers. this would amount to writing three separate pieces of code that are extremely similar. for instance  the inference for retrieving secretaries would be described by 

choose secretary  candidate * cand   	 chosen.candidate = cand  . 
   if we would like to avoid writing three separate pieces of code  we would have to write a generic inference that would be parametrized by the position of the person we'd like to choose. this can be accomplished by using an input role  called type  linked to the concept position and which is supposed to specify the position of the person to be chosen. 
domain link candidate  simple  concept  employee . role mapping generic choose  candidate  simple  r e t r i e v e   . domain link type  simple  concept  p o s i t i o n     role.mapping generic.choose  type  simple  r e t r i e v e   . 
domain link in  simple  r e l a t i o n   i n   . role mapping generic choose  i n   simple  r e t r i e v e   . domain link chosen candidet   simple  concept  employee . role mapping generic choobe  chosen.candidate  simple  nostore . 
generic choose  candidate = cand  in =  cand type   
	type   type  	 chosen.candidate = cand  . 
note that we are making use of the built-in relation in 
 in links an instance x with a concept c whenever a' is an instance of c . it is usually enough to have a single role called in  and linked to the predefined relation in  since all inferences that need to refer to it can do so. of course  in can be used as input and output role at the same time.1 whenever the role in is used as an input  output  role  it retrieves  stores  tuples of the form  x  c  whith x  c. 
   the predefined relation in allows therefore a kind of rnetalevel  generic  inferences which are sometimes very important for writing domain-independent and reusable models.1 this is achieved by abstracting not only the arguments of inferences  but also their  types1.  more theoretical details on reifieation can be found in .  
1 	related approaches and conclusions 
the following advantages of the approach presented in this paper can be mentioned: 
  the meta-level architecture of the system enables the de-velopment of reusable domain-independent problem solving models  psms  and of application-independent ontologies. 
  the possibility of developing domain-independent executable libraries of psms  as in . 
  supporting the process of kbs validation by using the infer-ence services offered by the domain-level language: semantic 
1
it can be an input for some inferences and an output role for others. 
1
　　by using a generic inference in our example  we don't have to write any more separate inferences for each type of position  director  secretary or researcher . not only is it cumbersome to have three identical pieces of code  but these pieces of code would depend on the domain level  the types of positions - director  secretary and researcher are domain-dependent; we cannot change the domain level  for example by introducing a new position  without having to modify the inference level too  since we would have to add a new inference for the new po-
sition type. on the other hand  if we are using the generic inference above  we would only have to change the domain link of the role type . 
consistency checking  domain level deduction automatic concept classification  knowledge structuring and indexing. most kbs development tools do not provide all of these inference services. also  most of the existing tools provide symbol-level inference services  as opposed to exclaim  in which knowledge is represented at the knowledge-level  due to its clean integration of the domain-level description logic with the inference and task-level logic programs . 
  the description logic used at the domain level can be re-garded as a reasonable compromise between expressiveness  readability of formulas and runtime efficiency. 
  exclaim provides non-deterministic inference and task levels  which rely on a non-monotonic domain level. the lack of non-determinism in a kbs is  in our opinion  an important drawback  since algorithms in kbss  as opposed to traditional software engineering environments  are complex and usually non-deterministic. 
  exclaim provides the reified membership relation in which can be used to write generic inferences. these inferences increase the domain-independence and reusability of models. 
   several previous works have dealt with hybrid representation languages combining description logics with logic programming  for example al-log 1   carin   f-logic . however  none of these systems allows the kbs developer to specify reusable models  as in exclaim. 
   the main goal of this research is the creation of domainindependent executable libraries of problem solving models. 
acknowledgments 
the research presented in this paper has been partly supported by the european community project pekads  cp1 . i am indebted to doina tilivea for developing the graphical user interface of exclaim  to jan wielemaker for support on using the xpce environment  l1  as well as to ullrich hustadt and renate schmidt for permitting the use of the motel terminological system  in this research. 
