 
we present a formal characterization and semantic representation for a number of credulous inference relations based on the notion of a n epistemic state. it is shown  in particular  that credulous inference can be naturally represented in terms of expectations  see  gardenfors and makinson  1  . we describe also the relationships between credulous and usual skeptical nonmonotonic inference and show how they can facilitate each other. 
1 	introduction 
the approach to nonmonotonic and commonsense reasoning based on describing associated inference relations forms one of the most influential and effective tools in studying such a reasoning in ai. a number of fundamental works in this area have reached its first 'saturation* in the so-called klm theory  kraus et a/.  1 . in these works a semantic representation of nonmonotonic inference relations was developed based on sets of states ordered by a preference relation: a nonmonotonic inference rule a - b was assigned a meaning that b should be true in all preferred states satisfying a. 
　the above notion of nonmonotonic inference was designed to capture a skeptical approach to nonmonotonic reasoning  according to which if there is a number of equally preferred alternatives  we infer only what is common to all of them. however  works in nonmonotonic reasoning have suggested also an alternative approach  usually called credulous or brave reasoning  according to which each of the preferred alternatives is considered as an admissible solution to the nonmonotonic reasoning task. actually  there are many important reasoning problems in ai and beyond  such as diagnosis  abduction and explanation  that are best seen as involving search for particular preferred solutions. this idea is implicit also in the notion of an extension in default logic  reiter  1  as well as in similar constructs in autoepistemic and modal nonmonotonic logics. 
　there have been a few attempts in the literature to investigate the properties of credulous inference  mainly 
1 	automated reasoning 
with negative conclusions that such an inference does not satisfy practically all 'respectable' rules  see  e.g.   brass  1; cayrol and lagasquie-shiex  1  . for example  a distinctive feature of credulous reasoning is that it does not allow to conjoin different conclusions derivable from the same premises  because they might be grounded on different preferred solutions . in other words  it renders invalid the following well-known rule:  and  
　in fact  we will establish below that and can be seen as a culprit distinguishing credulous and skeptical nonmonotonic inference. accordingly  inference relations satisfying this rule will be called skeptical in what follows. 
　we suggest below both a formal characterization and semantic interpretation for a number of systems of credulous nonmonotonic inference based on the notion of an epistemic state. the latter are quite similar to cumulative models of skeptical nonmonotonic inference  described in  kraus et  /.  1   though they will be used in a somewhat different way. despite this  we will see that skeptical inference is also definable in the framework of epistemic states  and this will give us a good opportunity to compare these two kinds of inference and study their relationship. 
　we will establish also a close connection between credulous inference relations and ordinary tarski consequence relations. in fact  we will see that practically all kinds of nonmonotonic inference relations  both skeptical and credulous  can be described in these terms. among other things  this will allow us to give a representation of credulous inference in the expectation-based framework suggested in  gardenfors and makinson  1   
　below we will follow david makinson in distinguishing monotonic tarski consequence relations from nonmonotonic inference relations. this terminological distinction will be especially suitable in the present context. 
1 	preliminaries: supraclassical consequence relations 
in what follows we will use ordinary tarski consequence relations defined in a language containing the classical connectives  will denote the classi-

cal entailment with respect to these connectives. also  a  b c ... will denote propositions  while a b  c .. finite sets of propositions 
a tarski consequence relation  will be called supra-
classical if it satisfies 
 supraclassicality  if a  then  a 
　thus  a consequence relation is supraclassical if it subsumes classical entailment. supraclassicality requires all theories of a consequence relation to be deductively closed. it allows for replacement of classically equivalent formulas in premises and conclusions of the rules. in addition  it allows to replace sets of premises by their classical conjunctions: ah a will be equivalent to / a h a. this implies  in particular  that any supraclassical consequence relation can be seen also as a certain binary relation among propositions. in fact  such binary relations are partial orders that will be used below as a 'partial* generalization of expectation orders from  gardenfors and makinson  1   since they have all the properties of the latter except connectivity. 
1 	epistemic states 
the notion of an epistemic state  defined below  will provide a uniform semantic framework for representing nonmonotonic inference relations. it is based on a quite common understanding that nonmonotonic reasoning uses not only known facts  but also defaults or expectations we have about the world. such defaults are used as auxiliary assumptions that allow us to mump' to useful conclusions and beliefs that are not logical consequences of the facts alone. such conclusions are defeasible and can be retracted when further facts become known. this indicates that our epistemic states can be seen as structured entities determined  or generated  by admissible sets of defaults. furthermore  our defaults and expectations are often conflict with each other  and this may create situations in which we have a number of different plausible 'views of the world'. such situations are actually quite common in nonmonotonic reasoning. in addition  not all defaults or expectations are equally plausible or acceptable  and this creates  in turn  priorities and preferences among otherwise admissible combinations of defaults. if we identify each such admissible set of defaults with the  deductively closed  set of its consequences  we will arrive at the following picture: 
definition 1. an epistemic state ♀ is a triple  /   where s is a set of objects called admissible belief states  is a preference relation on 1  while / is a labeling function assigning each admissible state a deductively closed theory. 
　　epistemic states turn out to be quite similar to preferential models of makinson  makinson  1  and cumulative models from  kraus et a/.  1j. indeed  labeling with a deductively closed theory can be equivalently described using labeling with a set of worlds  as in  kraus et aif 1   see  dix and makinson  1  for the relation between these two kinds of representation . epistemic states in whteh / is an injective function will be called standard. clearly  for standard epistemic states  admissible belief states can be safely identified with their associated theories. so  a standard epistemic state can be described as a pair where is a set of deductively closed theories and is a preference relation on 
　　a state s s will be said to support a proposition a if a state s will be said to be consistent with a if -*a l s . the set of states consistent with a will be denoted by  a . 
　　according to  kraus et ai  1   a subset p of states is called smooth with respect to if  for any s p  either s is minimal in p or there exists t s such that t is minimal in p. an epistemic state will be said  negatively  smooth if any set of states  a  is smooth. 
skeptical and credulous validity. the informal understanding of epistemic states  sketched earlier  gives raise to the notions of skeptical and credulous validity  given below. to begin with  a sceptically entails b if all preferred sets of defaults that are consistent with a  taken together with a itself  logically imply b. this leads to the following definition of skeptical validity that is somewhat different from the standard one  given in  kraus et a/.  1 . 
definition 1. a conditional a b will be said to be sceptically valtd in an epistemic state ♀ if all preferred states in  a  support a  b. 
similarly  a credulously entails b if a allows to explain 
b in the sense that there exists a preferred set of defaults that is consistent with a and  taken together with a  will logically imply b. an inessential modification of this description will give us 
definition 1. a conditional a b will be said to be credulously valid in an epistemic state ♀ if either  .1  
is empty or at least one preferred state in  a  supports 
a  b. 
　we will provide below a syntactic characterization for the above two kinds of validity. 
1 	basic inference relation 
as we mentioned  credulous nonmonotonic inference invalidates the basic postulates of skeptical nonmonotonic inference  such as cut  cautious monotony or and. this means that in order to obtain a broader picture of nonmonotonic inference that would encompass both credulous and skeptical kinds  we need to find an alternative ground for classifying inference relations. below we take as a basis a system suggested in  benthem  1   the latter will give us a rather rich and neat picture that avoids complications and fancy elaborations created by alternative approaches. 
　the main idea behind van benthem's approach is that a conditional can be seen as a special kind of a generalized quantifier representing a relation between the respective sets of instances or situations supporting its premise and conclusion. in this setting  the nature of a 
	bochman 	1 

conditional can be described in terms of possible changes made to these sets of situations that still preserve its validity. such changes can involve adding new confirming instances  deleting refuting ones  etc. as is shown in  benthem  1   this naturally leads to the set of postulates  given below. 
　by abasic inference relation b we will mean a relation on propositions satisfying the following postulates: 
 reflexivity  
 left logical equivalence  if then 
 bight weakening  if 	b and b c  then a c  
 antecedence   i a 	b  then a 	aab; 
 deduction  if a 	b 	c  then a 	b 	c  
 conjunctive cautious monotony  if a b c  then a b c . 
　the most salient feature of the above list is that all the above postulates involve no more than one conditional premise. consequently  the system says nothing about how to combine different conditionals. as a result  a conditional is derivable in b from a set of conditionals only if it is derivable from one of them. the following result gives a direct characterization of this derivability relation.1 
theorem 1. 	is derivable from 	iff either d and 
　using the terminology of  benthem  1   the above theorem says that a conditional implies another one if all confirming instances of the former are confirming instances of the latter and all refuting instances of the latter are refuting instances of the former. 
　as we will see  the system b is sufficiently powerful to capture exactly the one-premise fragment of both credulous and skeptical inference relations  and hence can be seen as their common core. 
regularity. an inference relation will be called regular if it satisfies the rules of b and the following rule  where f denotes an arbitrary contradiction : 
 preservation  if 	then 
　　the conditional f says  in effect  that a is seen as impossible with respect to the inference relation  that is  no imaginable situation assumed by is compatible with a. it is reasonable to conclude then that -a should hold in all situations  and consequently it can be conjoined to consequences of any proposition. 
duality. it turns out that  for any regular inference relation we can define a dual inference relation as follows: 
 dual  	
1due to space limitations  we omit all proofs. 
1 	automated reasoning 
　the above notion of duality can be seen as an abstract form of the -relation between ordinary conditionals and their corresponding mght-conditionals  well-known in the literature on conditional logic at least since the time of david lewis. 
　the following result can be proved by a straightforward check of the relevant rules. it shows that the set of regular inference relations is closed with respect to taking duals. 
theorem 1. is a regular inference relation  then  is also a regular inference relation. moreover  
coincides with 
1 	credulous nonmonotonic inference 
in this section we will give a characterization of a basic credulous inference relation. 
definition 1. a nonmonotonic inference relation will be called credulous if it is regular and satisfies rational monotony: 
 rm  if a then 
　so  credulous inference is a subsystem of rational inference from  kraus et a/.  1 . as we will see  the latter can be obtained simply by adding the rule and. 
　the following theorem shows that the semantic definition of credulous validity  given earlier  determines a credulous inference relation. 
theorem 1. if s is a smooth epistemic state  then the set of conditionals that are credulously valid in ♀ 
forms a credulous inference relation. 
　in the next section we will show that our postulates provide a complete description of credulous validity. 
1 credulous inference generated by consequence relations 
in this section we introduce an alternative representation of credulous inference relations as generated by supraclassical tarski consequence relations. 
　for any supraclassical consequence relation define the following inference relation: 
 ic  
b holds if either no the-
ory of is consistent with a or a  b belongs to at least one maximal theory of  that is consistent with a. now we may consider the set of theories of  as a standard epistemic state ordered by set inclusion. then the above description will immediately give us that the above definition provides a description of a credulous inference with respect to this epistemic state. as a result  we obtain the following 
corollary 1. 	is a supraclassical consequence relation  then 	is a credulous inference relation. 

　it turns out that a credulous inference relation determines  in turn  its generating tarski consequence relation via the following equivalence: 
 ci  
　the following result shows that tarski consequence relations are strongly equivalent to credulous inference relations. 
theorem 1. is a supraclasstcal consequence relation  then is a credulous inference relation. moreover  the corresponding consequence relation determined by  ci  coincides with 
1. if is a credulous inference relation  then  is a supraclasstcal consequence relation. moreover  the credulous inference relation generated by  via 
 ic  coincides with 
　an important consequence of the above result is that any credulous inference relation is generated by an epistemic state  corresponding to theories of the associated consequence relation . therefore  we have the following 
representation theorem 1. an inference relation is credulous if and only if there exists a smooth epistemic state  that credulously validates conditionals from 
1 	credulous inference based on expectations 
there exists a strong connection between the above representation of credulous inference in terms of consequence relations and representation of nonmonotonic inference relations based on expectation orders described in  gardenfors and makinson  1 . 
at the beginning of their paper  gardenfors and 
makinson suggested two general ways of understanding nonmonotonic inference. the first formulation was as follows: 
a nonmonotonically entails b iff b follows logically from a together with  as many as possible  of the set of our expectations as are compatible with a. 
　on the other hand  expectations can be reflected in the form of an ordering between propositions  and then this relation can be used in the nonmonotonic inference as follows: 
a nonmonotonically entails b iff b follows logically from a together with all those propositions that are  sufficiently well expected  in the light of a. 
　as was rightly noted by the authors  though the two ideas are closely related  the former tends to suggest a multiplicity of possible sets of auxiliary premises  while the second formulation points towards a unique set of such premises. in other words  the first formulation admits a credulous reading  while the second formulation is primary a skeptical one. nevertheless  the authors have shown that the two formulations can be 'reconciled' in a single framework. as we will see  however  this possibility depends on a particular structure of expectations chosen that gives rise to rational inference relations; for the latter  credulous validity will actually coincide with the skeptical one. 
　as we mentioned  a supraclassical consequence relation  viewed as a binary relation among propositions  is actually a 'partial' generalization of an expectation order from  gardenfors and makinson  1 . moreover  the above definition  ic  of credulous inference relation generated by a consequence relation can be equivalently expressed as follows: 

as was shown in  gardenfors and makinson  1   
theorem 1  the above description is equivalent to the 'standard' definition of expectation inference relations. thus  our notion can be considered as a generalization of the corresponding interpretation for expectation inference given in  gardenfors and makinson  1 . informally  it corresponds to the following modification of 
the second formulation above: 
a nonmonotonically entails b if b follows logically from a together with some consistent set of propositions that are  sufficiently well expected  in the light of a. 
1 	permissive inference 
in this section we will describe another interesting kind of brave nonmonotonic inference. 
definition 1. an inference relation will be called permissive if it satisfies the basic postulates and the cut 
rule: 
 cut  
　it can be shown that  in the context of b  cut implies the rule or: 
 or  if 
　the following theorem gives a more 'traditional' characterization of permissive inference relations: 
theorem 1. permissive inference relations are completely characterized by the postulates reflexivity  left logical equivalence  right weakening  conjunctive cautious monotony  cut and or. 
　if we compare the above list of postulates with the characterization of preferential inference  given in  kraus et a/.  1   we can notice that the distinction of per-
missive inference from preferential one amounts simply to replacement of standard cautious monotony by con-
junctive cautious monotony. still  permissive inference is not skeptical  since it does not satisfy and. 
　the following result shows that permissive and credulous inference relations are duals. 
theorem 1.  is a permissive inference relation iff is a credulous inference relation. 
	bochman 	1 

　using the above duality  we can immediately obtain the following semantic characterization of permissive inference in epistemic states: 
definition 1. a conditional  will be said to be permissively valid in an epistemic state ♀ if any preferred state in  a  is consistent with a  b. 
　so  permissive conditional says informally  a is normolly consistent with b . 
　again  the duality of credulous and permissive inference immediately implies that any supraclassical consequence relation generates a permissive inference relation via  pc  
and that any permissive inference relation can be produced in this way from some consequence relation. 
x-logics.  siegel and forget  1  suggested a new description of nonmonotonic inference relations that they called x~logics. for any set of propositions x  they defined an inference relation  ~x as follows: 

　a detailed study of such inference relations and their use for describing circumscriptions is given in  moinard and rolland  1 . the latter authors have established  in effect  that any x-logic is a permissive inference relation in our sense. actually  the following result shows that  for finite languages  the two notions turn out to coincide. 
theorem 1. any x-logic is a permissive inference relation. moreover  for any permissive inference relation  in a finite language there exists a set of propositions x such that  coincides with 
　since any preferential inference relation is permissive  the above result immediately implies that in the finite case any preferential inference relation will also coincide with some x-logic. 
1 	preferential and rational inference relations 
preferential inference relation v from  kraus et a/.  1  can be obtained by adding the rule and to the postulates of b. 
　it has been shown already in  adams  1  that the condition described in theorem 1 is actually necessary and sufficient for 'one-premise' derivability in preferential inference relations. consequently  we immediately obtain that preferential inference is a 'conservative extension* of the derivability in b: 
theorem 1. a conditional c d is derivable from a b inp if and only if it is derivable already in b. 
　the next result shows that our modified definition of skeptical validity is nevertheless adequate for characterizing preferential inference. 
1 	automated reasoning 
representation theorem 1. an inference relation is preferential iff there exists a smooth epistemic siatt that sceptically validates conditionals from 
　as a result  both skeptical and credulous inference acquire a semantic representation in the same framework of epistemic states. we will use this fact in the next section. 
rational inference. 	rational inference relations  see 
 kraus et a/.  1   are preferential inference relations that satisfy also rational monotony. so  they are both credulous and skeptical  and hence obliterate  in effect  the distinction between skeptical and credulous inference. a semantic representation of such inference relations can be obtained by restricting epistemic states to standard states in which the set of admissible theories is linearly ordered by set inclusion. as can be easily checked  a conditional  will be sceptically valid in such a state iff it is credulously valid in it. 
1 	interplay 
in this section we will invariably use  to denote a skeptical  preferential  inference relation  while  will denote a credulous inference relation. 
　any epistemic state determines both a credulous and skeptical inference relation. clearly  the two will be related. below we will give a number of conditions that relate the two kinds of inference. 
　to begin with  skeptical consequences of some proposition can always be added to its credulous consequences: 
lemma 1.  are  respectively  a credulous and skeptical inference relations determined by the same epistemic state  then 

strengthening the antecedent. there are some useful conditions allowing strengthening the antecedent for skeptical conditionals - a well-known problem for defeasible inference. to begin with  we have the following 
lemma 1.  are  respectively  skeptical and permissive inference relation determined by some epistemic state  then 

the above condition is a kind of a 'mixed' cautious 
monotony rule that is valid for any skeptical inference relation. in this rule the permissibility claim' serves precisely the same role as irrelevance conditions in  geffner  1 . 
　unlike credulous inference  skeptical inference relations do not satisfy  in general  rational monotony. still  the following lemma establish two weaker variants of'rational monotony* that hold for skeptical inference relations and their credulous counterparts: 
lemma 1. //  respectively  skeptical and credulous inference relation determined by some epistemic state  then 


　the last condition above is especially interesting  since it describes a transition from skeptical to credulous inference. the following example of nixon diamond illustrates the use of these rules. 
example 1. let p  q and r denote  respectively  
 nixon is a pacifist    nixon is a quaker  and  nixon is a republican . assume that and .  are sceptically acceptable conditionals. then if q and r are compatible  that is and we can use the above rule to conclude both 
thus  in this situation we can credulously infer incompatible conclusions. 
credulous rules as defeaters. credulous inference rules can be considered as mi af-conditionassaying that if a holds then it might be the case that b. such conditionals play an important role in nute's defeasible logic  nute  1  where they function primarily as defeaters that block applications of skeptical defeasible rules. this function can be justified via the following condition relating skeptical inference and its counterpart credulous inference: 

　the above condition says that if  given a  it might be the case that -b  then a should not sceptically entail b. actually  instead of credulous inference in the above condition  we could as well use permissive inference. so  brave inference rules can indeed function as defeaters of ordinary skeptical rules. 
1 	conclusion and perspectives 
the main conclusion of this study is that credulous nonmonotonic inference admits a rigorous semantic and syntactic characterization. moreover  both credulous and ordinary skeptical inference are representable in the same semantic framework of epistemic states. 
　as is well-known  common systems of skeptical inference  namely preferential and rational entailment  are too weak  too skeptical  to account for some natural forms of defeasible inference. in this respect  the most promising perspective suggested by the present study  briefly sketched in the last section  consists in a joint use of skeptical and brave inference rules in order to achieve a more fine-grained representation framework for nonmonotonic inference. as has been shown in the lastsection  brave inference rules can be used both for deriving new plausible skeptical inferences and for defeating implausible ones. accordingly  brave conditionals can be used as additional assumptions that allow  e.g.  strengthening antecedents of skeptical rules with irrelevant propositions or sanction certain instances of transitive chaining for such rules  etc. in short  brave inference can facilitate skeptical one in order to achieve an adequate representation of defeasible inference. further work is needed  however  in order to clarify the perspectives of this approach. 
