 
in this paper  we develop a conceptual framework in which acts of manipulation are undertaken for the sake of perceiving material. within this framework  we disambiguate different materials by actively contacting and probing them  and by sensing the resulting forces  displacements  and sounds. we report experimental results from four separate implementations of this framework using a variety of sensory modalities  including force  vision  and audition. for each implementation  we identify sensor-derived measures that are diagnostic of material properties  and use those measures to categorize objects by their material class. based on the experimental results  we conclude that the issue of shape-in variance is of critical importance for future work. 
1 	introduction 
most past and present research in robotic perception concerns shape and position. relatively little research addresses material properties  such as compliance and density. for robots to go beyond their current limits and reach their potential  they must understand not only where things are and what they are shaped like  but also what they are made of. 
　by definition  a material property is independent of the size and shape of a particular sample. although there are visual cues to material properties  e.g.  surface luminance is a cue to the coefficient of friction   reliable determination of the material composition of an unknown object generally requires contact with it. humans who wish to determine material properties show stereotypical patterns of manual exploration; they press  poke  tap  heft  squeeze  shake  rub  and strike  according to the type of information desired  lederman and klatzky  1 . 
　to formalize this kind of information gathering  and to understand it well enough to program a robot to perform it  we must answer some fundamental questions. what physical principles relate the acts of manipulation to percepts such as forces  torques  displacements  and vibrations  what material properties can be inferred from a given act of manipulation such as tapping  what acts of manipulation best reveal a given material property  which material properties can be determined only by contact sensing  which combinations of 
1 	action and perception 
sensing modalities are most informative about a given material property  how can material and shape properties be deconflated  
　let us elaborate further this last question by way of an example. consider a metal rod and a wooden rod of exactly the same length. when you strike the metal rod with your knuckle  it rings; when you strike the wooden rod  it produces a much shorter  thud  sound. this difference in the sound despite the same excitation is due to the difference in the way that the materials vibrate  which in turn is due to stress/strain properties. the rods sound different because they have fundamentally different material properties  so sound waves travel through them quite differently. 
　now consider two metal rods that are identical except that one is twice as long as the other. given the same excitation  the shorter rod will  ring*' at a higher frequency than the longer rod. the rods sound different because the waves travel different distances inside them. 
　how can these differences in the way things sound  one due to material and one due to shape  be resolved  or  in other words  what perceptual information is diagnostic of material  but invariant over object shape  
　we will address this question in section 1. for the moment  we content ourselves with the observation that this fundamental question  which is just one of the several posed earlier  has barely been explored in the perception literature. one reason is that  compared to the perception of shape or position  perception of material properties is a field in its early infancy  unsure of its vocabulary  models  and strategies. 
　to supply answers to the fundamental questions  we have been advancing toward a theory that specifies constructively the joint perception and manipulation operations that are necessary and sufficient to identify what things are made of. as a first step toward such a theory  we have begun to develop and demonstrate the robotic capability to distinguish a wide variety of materials. 
　in our approach  materials are disambiguated by actively contacting and probing them and by sensing the resulting forces  displacements  and sounds. one can visualize this capability by imagining a game of non-verbal 'twenty questions   in which one player is the robot and the other player is any object placed in the robot workspace. the robot probes  presses  pokes  taps  etc  the object  in effect asking questions about the object stiffness  strength  density  and other material properties. at the end of the game the robot announces its decision about the material composition of the object. 

　in this paper  we report on our first steps in achieving this capability. in the next section  we describe potential applications of the capability to perceive material  and in the following section we review related research. in section 1  we present results in identifying materials and their properties from several robotic probing tests implemented with the diverse sensing modalities of force  vision  and audition. we conclude the paper with a critical discussion of progress to date  and a statement of future work. 
1 	potential applications 
knowledge of material properties and classes can improve performance of many tasks involving physical interaction. in many real-world scenarios  such knowledge is not given in advance; instead  it must be determined at a worksite or in the field  without jigs or fixtures. 
grasping grasping is a generic capability required for a wide variety of manipulation tasks. typically  to plan grasping actions  current robots analyze geometric properties of the hand and of the object. however  there are classes of objects  among which are slippery objects like a wet bar of soap or deformable objects like a ripe peach  for which the geometric information is not sufficient. robots that perform initial probing actions to learn the object's material properties can exploit that non-geometric information to successfully plan and execute grasping tasks for a larger class of objects under a larger class of conditions. 
non-destructive evaluation and inspection consider a manufacturing process that employs a finite element cad model for producing a part. once manufactured  the question is whether the manufactured part meets specification tolerances. to determine the answer to that question  a robotic inspection strategy can be automatically generated from the cad model. first  the robot would derive from the cad model the mass  damping  and stiffness matrices of the ob-
ject. these matrices specify the relationships between each point within the part. next  by applying the finite element method and using the matrices  predict how the part will respond to impinging forces. then  command the robot to probe the part  for instance by tapping it  to excite a characteristic response  for instance a vibration . finally  compare the predicted and observed responses  which will agree if the part is well-formed. 
reasoning about functionality perception of material types and properties will contribute significantly to the emerging area of research on reasoning about object functionality. most of this research has concentrated on geometric reasoning  for example  recognizing a pair of scissors by analyzing visual image sequences showing the articulations of its handles and blades  stark  1 . the ability to classify objects by their material properties will permit deeper reasoning  for example  recognizing that a hard-heeled shoe could substitute for a hammer  even though their shapes differ dramatically. 
handling hazardous waste one of the world's urgent needs is to clean up hazardous waste. a key challenge is to sort and process mixed waste  including more than 1 cubic yards of low level solid waste and 1 cubic yards of transuranic waste. stored in drums and boxes  much of the waste is wrapped in multiple layers of plastic film  which makes non-contact analysis difficult or impossible. robots capable of probing the waste items and classifying them based on their material properties could serve as the basis of a sorting workcell. this advance will permit human operators to avoid these dangerous substances. 
recycling an emerging national priority is to recycle nonhazardous waste. in most current recycling systems  human operators sort cans  bottles  and newspaper. recycling robots will not be able to rely on shape  because cans of different composition  aluminum  tin  steel  may have identical shapes  as may bottles of different composition  glass  plastic . nor will they be able to rely on appearance  because labels may cover the object surface. to automate recycling and free human operators from working with garbage  the robots must be capable of probing objects and discriminating between diverse substances. 
excavating the excavation industry must handle many different materials  ranging from soil to pipes to boulders. an excavator must respond to the mechanical properties of both surface and sub-surface materials. when it encounters buried obstacles such as rocks or timbers or utility pipes  it must decide whether to lift them out  slide them away  or work around them. a robot excavator capable of probing an obstacle and inferring its material type has a solid basis for selecting the proper actions. this could relieve human operators from long duty in harsh  dirty environments. 
traversing natural terrain consider an outdoor mobile robot that must traverse rugged natural terrain. without prepared surfaces such as floors and roads  the robot risks traveling over unstable or hazardous regions. with active probing techniques  the robot can evaluate the trafficability of the terrain  and follow routes that avoid treacherous regions. 
1 related research 
the artificial intelligence  robotics  civil engineering  mechanical engineering  and materials literature documents two families of techniques to estimate mechanical and mass properties  one employing non-contact sensing  the other employing contact sensing. 
1 non-contact sensing 
non-contact sensing can provide significant information about the material composition of objects. indeed  this is an area of intensive research in physics-based vision. the work of  wolff and boult  1  exemplifies this field. they developed methods to analyze the magnitudes of the polarization components of reflected light  which permitted them to segment material surfaces according to varying levels of relative electrical conductivity  and in particular to distinguish dielectrics from metals.  caillas  1  developed analytical techniques operating on thermal images to produce estimates of material grain size sufficient to distinguish between dust  sand  and rock. the remote sensing literature cites many other techniques  such as a back-scattering and impulse radar. 
	krotkov 	1 

　non-contact methods suffer from two fundamental deficiencies: they are superficial and indeterminate. they are superficial to the extent that they are sensitive only to the surface of the object. an adhesive label or a coat of paint can mask the underlying material composition and properties. they are indeterminate in the degree that they cannot directly measure properties such as density and friction. the properties of interest must be observed using methods providing richer information than non-contact sensing can provide. 
1 contact sensing 
contact sensing techniques draw from diverse sensing modalities  including force  tactile  vision  and temperature. 
　force sensing has a long history in the recovery of material properties. load cells are used in civil engineering laboratory devices such as shear boxes and tri-axial test cells. the shortcoming is that the sample must be collected and placed inside the instruments. the cone penetrometer is appropriate for field tests  but it estimates only a few mechanical properties  bekker  1   and does not permit identification of mass properties. 
in recent research with force sensing   pentland and 
williams  1  formulated estimators for stiffness  strength  and mass  they used both contact and non-contact sensors .  bicchi et al.  1  assessed the deformation of rubber blocks and estimated coefficients of static friction with an instrumented leg-ankle-foot system. in a separate effort   bicchi et al.  1   evaluated friction characteristics with an articulated robotic hand. by using a compliant wrist mounted on a puma 1 manipulator   sinha et al.  1  implemented procedures to recover mechanical properties such as penetrability  hardness  and surface roughness. by using a robotic backhoe for excavation   bernold  1  estimated soil properties from cutting forces and moments. 
　employing tactile sensors and kinesthetic feedback   stansfield  1   developed exploratory procedures to extract naptic primitives such as compliance and elasticity. using vision sensors   gandolfo etal  1  developed methods for determining the stability and rigidity of a struck object by analyzing optical flow fields. applying temperature sensors   campos et al.  1  describe an exploratory procedure that returns the thermal property of an unknown object  thereby enabling discrimination of materials such as aluminum and wood. 
1 unresolved issues 
these efforts in contact and non-contact sensing each advance the state-of-the-art. still  the capability to sense and manipulate varying materials and substances remains to be either formulated or demonstrated. we believe there are two shortcomings of current work responsible for this state of affairs. 
　first  the surveyed works described actions such as looking  pressing  shearing  and heating. these actions are dainty and timid and do not reveal enough about the state of nature. we need to develop more aggressive probing actions such as striking  tapping  and poking. 
　second  the current generation of exploration procedures is piecemeal and partial. in most cases they estimate no more than one or two of the many material properties. we must extend the robotic repertoire by developing techniques that take into account all of the key variables  instead of only a 
1 	action and perception 
few. further  in most cases  they execute according to a preplanned script. we need to develop procedures that use sensor feedback on-line to guide further exploration. 
1 experiments 
before mounting an extensive effort to address the outstanding issues  we conducted preliminary experimental investigations to better understand the general nature of the material perception problem  and to learn about the constraints imposed by using different sensors and different materials. we were particularly motivated to gain practical insight into sensor characteristics  and the transduction of material properties into sensor signals. this led us to conduct four investigations  using force  vision  and acoustic sensors. 
1  whack and watch  
the objective of the  whack and watch  effort is to estimate the mass and friction properties of an unknown object. in this preliminary work  we strike a variety of objects with a home-made wooden pendulum  and observe their trajectories with a camera. then we estimate the object's mass and the coefficient of sliding friction. 

figure 1: image sequence of pendulum striking object 
　we use the pendulum because its dynamics are simple enough to permit advance calculation of the instantaneous force  eliminating the need for force sensing. we acquire a 
　sequence of images  figure 1  of the pendulum making contact and of the object sliding. for each image  we employ basic blob-finding techniques to determine the position of the 

figure 1: force-displacement characteristics for sand  soil  and sawdust 
struck object. from the sequence of positions we derive the velocity and acceleration of the object. 
　we determine the mass of the object using the equality between the impulse of the force and the momentum of the object after impact 

we determine the coefficient of sliding friction us using the equation of motion under constant acceleration as 

 alternatively  we could use the definition of work as the change in kinetic enerev. and determine the coefficient of sliding friction a s v h e r e / is the distance the body slides.  the computed masses are within a factor of two of the true masses  and the coefficients of friction are within 1 percent of the values listed in the crc handbook of chemistry and physics. for the purposes of these preliminary trials  we performed neither detailed modeling nor calibration  so the factor of two accuracy can easily be improved. 
1  step and feel  
the objective of the  step and feel'' effort is to identify the compliance of natural terrain. in this work  a robot leg steps on different terrains and measures normal forces exerted on the foot. then we interpret the forces in terms of the compliance of the terrain.  krotkov  1  presents the methods and results in detail. 
　we use one leg of a walking robot as the testbed because it is instrumented with a six-axis force-torque sensor and is readily available. we suspend the leg above the ground  and attach cables to prevent it from moving in the plane parallel to the ground. 
　we measured the applied normal force / and the vertical displacement z while stepping on different materials: sand  sawdust  and soil. we drive the foot into the terrain at low velocity  typically 1 mm/s  in order to minimize dynamic effects such as strain-rate hardening. we sample the normal force and vertical position at a fixed rate  typically 1 hz  and continue stepping until reaching a specified load  typically 1 n . 
　the observed vertical force-displacement response  figure 1  differs dramatically for the three materials tested  demonstrating that the samples can be discriminated without great difficulty. 
1  hit and listen  with fixed-shape objects 
the objective of the  hit and listen  effort is to classify objects from the sounds they make when struck. in this preliminary work  we hit a variety of objects by dropping a blind person's cane from fixed heights  and listen to the sounds of impact with a microphone. then we classify the different objects by analyzing patterns in the frequency domain.  durst and krotkov  1  describe the approach in detail. 
　the apparatus includes a cane  selected because of its simplicity and low cost  and a cylindrical guide through which it is dropped. a condenser microphone element transduces the acoustic energy  and low-pass filters cut off the signal at 1 khz. the objects to be classified include a wooden block  a concrete brick  a clay brick  a zinc ingot  and a ceramic tile. 
　we digitize the microphone signal and extract spike features from its power spectrum  figure 1 . the feature extraction proceeds in two steps. first  it eliminates all points that are not local maxima in their immediate  three-point  neighborhood. second  it eliminates all of those surviving points that are not local maxima in a larger neighborhood  whose size is derived from a resolvable frequency tolerance  approximately 1 hz   which in turn is derived from the signal-to-noise ratio for the apparatus. 
　based on these features  we classify the test object as one of the five objects with a hybrid minimum-distance and decisiontree classifier. like a decision tree  the hybrid classifier refines its set of possible class assignments based on analysis of different features at different times. this analysis itself is a minimum-distance classification scheme: at each point  the hybrid classifier iteratively finds the nearest-neighbor prototypes in defined intervals around the test vector. the test sample is assigned to the closest matching prototype's class iff there are prototypes from a single class in the nearest occupied interval. if more than one classes' prototypes are in the nearest occupied interval  the hybrid classifier moves to the test vector's next feature. this is analogous to moving down a decision tree. the classifier achieves 1 percent accuracy on 1 training samples  and 1 percent accuracy on 1 test samples. 
1  hit and listen  with variable-shape objects 
the objective of the  hit and listen  with variable-shape objects effort is to formulate acoustic measures that are diagnostic of material properties  and hence invariant with respect to shape and size  and further  to use those measures to categorize objects by their material class. 
　 wildes and richards  1  have advanced a theoretical approach to recovering the material type of an object from the sound generated when it is struck. they restrict their attention to anelastic solids  and study the modulus of compliance as the key to understanding the vibration of the struck object. 
	krotkov 	1 
following classical analysis they relate the modulus of compliance to the angle of internal friction. this is an intrinsic  shape-invariant  property of a given material. 
　they propose two methods for determining the angle of internal friction of an unknown sample: one that impulsively excites the sample and then measures the acoustic decay rate; another that periodically  say  sinusoidally  excites the sample and then identifies the bandwidth of the acoustic signals. they did not experimentally verify either method  although they did cite evidence from earlier empirical studies  gemant and jackson  1 . 
　we have explored in some detail the decay rate approach. in this approach  the angle of internal friction 1 is determined by the time te it takes the amplitude of vibration to decay to 1/e of its original value after the material sample is struck. according to wildes and richards  
　to assess the validity of the decay rate approach to identifying the angle of internal friction  we produced thin rods of wood  brass  aluminum  glass  and plastic. for each material  we produced two rods  one of length l = 1 cm and one of length 1l = 1 cm. we suspend each rod  strike it impulsively  and digitally record the resultant sound. we analyze the digital signal x n  as follows: 
1. compute the spectrogram of the signal  which describes the distribution of the signal energy in the time-frequency plane. the spectrogram s l  k  is the squared modulus of x l  k   where 

is the discrete-time fourier transform of a windowed version x n g n - /  of the original signal. 
as an example  figure 1 shows the original signal recorded after striking an aluminum rod  and the spectrogram of that signal. the energy is concentrated in three main bands  at approximately 1  and 1 hz. 
1. determine where the signal begins. due to the impulsive contact  the early part of the signal contains energy at all frequencies. this transient effect  or click  does not convey meaningful modal information  so we desire to exclude this segment of the signal from analysis. 
for this  we examine temporal correlations between the spectrogram magnitudes. during the click  the spectrogram magnitudes are highly correlated from instant to instant. immediately after the click  as energy begins to concentrate in relatively narrow bands  the spectrogram magnitudes are poorly correlated. well after the click  the spectrogram magnitudes are again highly correlated. based on these observations  we determine where the signal begins by identifying when the correlation coefficients rise from the dip due to the end of the click. 
1. find bands of concentrated energy. first  for each time step  we threshold out those spectrogram magnitudes that contribute little to the total power at that time. next  we analyze the connectivity between surviving magnitudes. finally  for each connected component  we identify the minimum bounding rectangle  and call that a band. figure 1 shows three bands overlaid on the spectrogram. 
1. for each band  fit a line to the within-band log power. the slope of each line determines the log 1 term in  1 . now it is possible to determine tan nellset for each frequency band by substituting  1  into  1 . 
figure 1 illustrates the total power associated with the 

1 	action and perception 

three bands  band 1 is at 1 hz  band 1 is at 1 hz  and band 1 is 1 hz   and also the background  defined as all spectrogram magnitudes that did not pass the test in step 1 . in addition  the figure shows the lines fit to the three power curves. bands 1 and 1 are reasonably linear  r values above 1 percent  that is  the fit accounts for more than 1 percent of the variance   and band 1 is not  r value of 1 percent . 
　the results of these preliminary experiments indicate that the differences in slope between materials are significant  and that the differences in slope between lengths of the same 


figure 1: analysis of sounds generated by striking a thin aluminum rod: microphone output  top   spectrogram with bands identified  middle   linear fits to log power within bands  bottom . 
material are far less significant. it remains to perform the analysis described above on a statistically significant number of samples; only then will we be able to assess the practical effectiveness of the approach. 
1 	discussion 
in this paper  we have formulated a research agenda for the new field of perceiving materials. we explored the use of several sensory modalities  including force  vision  and audition. for each  we identified sensor-derived measures that are diagnostic of material properties  and used those measures to categorize objects by their material class. 
　we view the principal contributions of the work to be the following: 
  articulation of fundamental questions to be answered by future work on perception of material 
  development of a conceptual framework in which acts of manipulation are undertaken for the sake of perceiving material. within this framework  we disambiguate different materials by actively contacting and probing them  and by sensing the resulting forces  displacements  and sounds. 
  new robotic probing techniques to recover material prop-erties. 
　although we have made progress  much work remains to advance the new field of perception of material from its early infancy to childhood. we will concentrate our efforts in the near future on the auditory sensory modality  primarily because of the promising results from our preliminary investigations  sections 1 and 1   and secondarily for the relative simplicity of the experimental effort. 
　we take the primary challenge to be the formulation of shape-invariant acoustic measures of material properties.  as an aside  we observe a parallel between this challenge and one of the key challenges in visual perception. in audition  numerous factors are conflated in sound formation; specifically  the decay rate of an impact sound depends both on material composition and on geometry. in geometric vision  numerous factors are conflated in perspective image formation; for example  the size of the projection of an object depends both on its size and on its distance from the viewer. in both materialseeking audition and shape-seeking vision  the key problem is disentangling or deconflating the different factors.  we take the secondary challenge to be object categorization by material class. 
　in order to achieve shape-in variance  we relied heavily upon the concepts of the modulus of compliance and angle of internal friction in the work reported in section 1. however  there are numerous alternative approaches that merit exploration. 
　we will explore work in computer vision on view-invariant object recognition. the underpinnings of that work involve group theory and projective transformations. we will search for formulations of shape-invariance that parallel their formulations of view-invariance. 
　we will explore work in optics that studies point scattering within a medium and refraction at the interface between media. this may provide useful analogs for the acoustic phenomena of wave propagation within the solid material and 
	krotkov 	1 

impedance matching as the wave exits the solid and enters the  lederman and klatzky  1  s. lederman and r. klatzky. 
surrounding air as it travels to the microphone. hand movements: a window into haptic object recogniwe will also explore higher-dimensional representations of tion. cognitive psychology  1-1. 
the acquired acoustic data. for example  we will search for  pentland and williams  1  a. pentland and j. williams. structure in spectrograms  and such three-dimensional plots as perception of non-rigid motion: inference of shape  matematerial  angle of internal friction  versus structure  sample rial  and force. in proc. intl. joint conf. artificial intellilength  versus highest-frequency vibration. gence  pages 1  august 1. 
still more alternative approaches need to be pursued before 
the new field of perception of material emerges from its early infancy  and realizes its potential for revolutionizing robotic interaction with the real world. 
acknowledgments 
robert durst  wes huang  roberta klatzky  richard stern  and nina zumel have made significant contributions to the work reported here. 
