 
this paper advocates a microfeature based approach towards developing computational models for metaphor interpretation. it is argued that the existing models based on semantic networks and mappings of complex symbolic structures are insufficient and inappropriate for modeling metaphors. a connectionist model of metaphor interpretation based on microfeatures is presented  which tries to take into account some important issues  such as accurate capturing of similarity  automatic formation of features  contextual effects  elimination of long paths in conceptual hierarchies  salience imbalance  and feature enhancement. some of these issues have broad implications in cognitive modeling. 
1 introduction 
metaphor is an important cognitive phenomenon  and it is of great interest to ai  philosophy  psychology  linguistics  and literary studies. in fact there has been a surge of interests in the past few decades in the philosophy and linguistics communities in the nature and the process of metaphor interpretation; more recently  there are also increasingly more interests in the ai community in non-literal language and analogical reasoning  in both of which metaphor occupies a prominent place. among the voluminous studies of metaphor  computational models are relatively few. most existing computational models of metaphor are based on semantic networks and mappings of complex symbolic structures  or in other words  based entirely on the traditional symbolic ai methods. 1 would like to argue that such symbolic models are insufficient and inappropriate for modeling metaphor in general  on the basis of a number of important considerations. i will instead propose a microfeature based  connectionist  approach towards developing computational models for metaphor interpretation. 
1 semantic network based approaches 
most existing models of metaphor interpretation take semantic network based approaches: they represent the requisite linguistic  and world  knowledge in some 
1 
kinds of semantic networks with hierarchically structured concepts  and metaphor interpretation is accomplished through traversing and mapping the hierarchical conceptual structures in some ways. similarities of words and other linguistic entities are computed from structural relations among entities within a hierarchy. such models  especially  for example  martin 1 and fass 1  achieved certain successes within limited domains and/or strictly controlled environments. however  there are many valid questions and objections to these models. let us look into some representative existing models. martin  1  presents a system for dealing with conventional metaphors  i.e.  metaphors that reflect a core 
set of correspondences that can manifest in various ways  lakoff and johnson 1 . for example   how can i enter emacs   or  i am in lisp   where a computer pro-
gram is uniformly viewed as an enclosure. his system consists of large semantic networks with conceptual hierarchies and a set of procedures that operate on them. when a verb  e.g. enter  is found to be incompatible with  violating some constraints of  the object  e.g. emacs   a procedure is called to find a coherent mapping between the domain of the verb and the domain of the object  from a core set of conventional metaphors stored in the system; once such a mapping is found  the verb in the source domain is mapped into a corresponding concept in the target domain  i.e.  a concept suitable for the object  e.g. invoke emacs . new variations of known conventional metaphors can also be handled  through detecting their similarity to existing ones by finding a path through the conceptual hierarchy between the new instance and the known instances. for example  once the system knows  i am in lisp   it can also make sense of  i am in emacs  by finding the relation between lisp and emacs in the hierarchy  the sibling relation in this case  since they are both computer programs . 
　veale and keane  1  deal also with conventional metaphors. they divide the interpretation process into two steps: first a scaffold of core  semantic network  structures is constructed in accordance with some conventional metaphors which is already known and stored in the system; then the structure is fleshed out with details  from general world knowledge and/or the context. what attributes to transfer from the source domain  e.g. physical enclosures  to the target domain  e.g. computer programs  and their respective pre-conditions for valid transfers are specified a priori. 
　fass  1  views metaphor as the existence of constraint violation as well as a set of correspondences between a source domain and a target domain. the representation is based on a kind of semantic network  where graph search algorithms find different types of paths between different concepts represented in  semantic vectors   which include constraints and preferences that are used to keep mappings coherent. 
the shortcomings of these models are as follows: 
  in semantic networks  conceptual hierarchies require hand-coding  in any domain of realistic sizes  this poses a serious problem for practical reasons - the difficulty of knowledge acquisition in system building. 
  a more serious problem is that such semantic net-works are often made up of ad hoc concepts and hierarchies  that is  hierarchies specifically designed for one particular kind of circumstance or only for the purpose of getting one particular result  in the current context  for generating plausible interpretations of test examples of metaphors . 
  a related problem is the fixedness of such hier-archies. conceptual hierarchies are explicitly and manually constructed a priori. however  in cognition  at least some concepts  if not all  can be more flexible; that  is  they can have one or the other superordinate concept  depending on  1  the current context  e.g.  contextual priming; cf. barsalou 
1    1  the current goals  cf. schank 1   and  1  even personal  idiosyncratic connections  i.e.  individual differences; cf. barsalou 1 . thus a more flexible representation is required. 
it may be argued that this problem can be remedied by introducing some new components to a semantic network that can modify the connections on the fly in accordance with various factors. although this is theoretical possible  semantic networks are notoriously complex and difficult to modify  even statically  let alone dynamically. therefore  it seems that some fundamentally different approaches are called for. 
  with semantic networks  it may also be difficult to find certain information  and complex search algorithms are required. such algorithms typically trace links in various ways. one ramification of this is that time required to process the relations between two concepts is proportional to the length s  of the path s  between the two concepts  which does not seem plausible cognitively. this is especially troublsome  considering the ad hoc-ness of the conceptual hierarchies as mentioned before. 
there are some more specific issues that are directly related to metaphor interpretation: 
  similarity in these models  which is necessary for determining the relation between two concepts  is determined mainly from the sibling relation between the concepts involved. this may not be flexible enough. for example  whales are closer in a conceptual hierarchy to bears  both can be represented as siblings  with mammals as their parent   but in a metaphor whales may be closer to sharks instead  based on some of their attributes prominent in the context. in other words  similarities in metaphor may not reflect  or be restricted to  conceptual hierarchical structures  especially when such structures are artificially and inflexibly constructed. 
  another way of capturing similarities is to have ex-plicit links in semantic networks that directly indicate pair-wise similarities  cf. eskridge 1 . the problem with such an approach is the complexity of representation: everything is somehow similar to everything else in some ways  and therefore there may need to be pair-wise connections between  almost  every pair of concepts. the number of similarity links is thus 1*c1n = n* n - 1   where n is the total number of concepts. this is much too complex representationally  and is even more so dynamically  for search algorithms to go through . 
  most importantly  metaphor cannot be simplisti-cally construed as constraint violation  structural mapping  or selective inference - there is more to 
it. in interpreting metaphors  certain subtle senses are brought up from metaphoric interaction  black 1 . such senses are not apparent from mapping structures across domains; consequently they are not dealt with in many existing models. an example will help to illustrate the issue: in martin's model  the metaphoric use of the word enter as in  how can i enter emacs   is mapped to invoke based on the structural correspondence of  agent of entering = agent of invoking  and  the place to enter = the program to invoke . however  what is missing is the sense inherent in the metaphor of getting into an enclosure of some sort  and therefore the model also misses the sense that an agent is now able to access everything inside but is insulated somewhat from everything outside. these senses are strong in the word enter  but not in the word invoke. through metaphor  a new sense is added  transferred  to the target domain  from the interaction with the source domain. 
an even more illustrative example is from ortony  1 :  billboards are warts.  in this metaphor  one of the prominent features in the source domain  the ugliness of warts  is transferred to the target domain to achieve the effect of  billboards are as ugly as warts . and in this process  the ugliness of warts is becoming even more prominent in the source domain. 
1 	a microfeature based approach 
now i want to argue that a radically different approach  a microfeature based approach  can better deal with these problems  and can thus produce better computational models of metaphor interpretation. 
　let us look into microfeatures. many connectionist models emphasize  distributed  representation that employs fine-grained meaning elements  microfeatures  for capturing the meaning/semantics of concepts  in addition to  or instead of  explicit  conceptual links. such microfeatures can either be extracted manually from  macro-level  domain theories  such as in sun  1   or acquired through applying learning algorithms that automatically develop a fine-grained internal  uninterpretable  representation. 
　representations with microfeatures have some interesting properties that are especially relevant in the current context. firstly  with such representations  we do not have some of the ad hoc-ness of hand-coded hierarchies  because we no longer make arbitrary design decisions. secondly  because the representation is  flattened   i.e. there is no path to trace   the problem of the complexity of search algorithms and the time needed to traverse links is no longer existent. thirdly  microfeature representations tend to be more context sensitive  and are thus more flexible. fourthly  similarities are easy to compute with microfeature representations; various similarity measures can be implemented with slightly different node activation functions and link weights  see sun 1 for details   without either explicit similarity links or explicit conceptual hierarchies. lastly  although there is no explicit hierarchies  hierarchies can nevertheless be embodied in microfeatures and used in inference  as demonstrated by sun  1 . 
　the question now is exactly how we use microfeature based representations for metaphor interpretation in a computational architecture. one possible candidate architecture is consyderr  sun 1   a connectionist architecture that utilizes both localist and distributed representation and embodies all of the aforementioned properties of microfeature based representation. it is meant to be a comprehensive model of robust commonsense reasoning  and as such  it should be able to handle metaphor and non-literal language as well. 
　the most important idea behind consyderr is the two-level dual-representation scheme  that is  there are two parts  levels  in the model: one is localist  representing concepts as individual nodes  and the other is distributed  representing concepts as microfeatures  hence the dual representation . there are two-way connections between each pair of corresponding representations across levels. the working of the model is divided into three phases. in the top-down phase  the computation is as follows: 

where aj is any node in the top level  the concept level  or cl  and xi  is its microfeature  in the microfeature level  or cd . in the settling phase  the computation is as follows: and 
where wk's and wk's are intra-level links weights  and 
ik's and ik's are the activations of related nodes. 1 in this phase will not be used in the present work. 
1 
the bottom-up phase  the computation is as follows: 
is its mi-
crofeature set  and is the size of the microfeature set. through the interaction of the two levels  many difficult patterns in commonsense reasoning can emerge naturally  sun 1 . 
　now the question is as follows: how can we utilize this model to implement a microfeature-based computational model of metaphor  there are some existing theories that we may draw upon regarding detailed metaphoric interaction. 1 ortony  1  posited a theory of metaphor based on salience imbalance and attribute enhancement: as touched upon before  a metaphor enhances  or highlights  some attributes in the target domain that are highly salient in the source domain but are far less salient in the target domain; therefore something new will be produced in the target domain as a result of the metaphor  so in some sense  we can say that some highly salient attributes get transferred from the source domain to the target domain . 
　there are  however  many unanswered questions and unspecified details that need to be looked into. for one thing  the idea of  attributes  needs to be better characterized: what constitutes an attribute  how can we ascertain if a concept has a certain attribute or not  what is the proper granularity of such attributes  and so on. another related question is how attributes of different concepts are compared: how corresponding attributes are found  tourangeau & sternberg 1   and how similarities between these attributed are determined  as touched upon in ortony 1 under the rubric of attribute inequality   since slightly different attributes can be matched  or one can be converted into another as appropriate when transfers occur. if we start to allow certain structures among attributes in order to handle such matches  then we open the door back to the full-fledged semantic networks  which has already been shown as inappropriate. 
　another particularly important issue in relation to this theory is what attributes should or should not get transferred from the source domain to the target domain  since surely not all the highly salient attributes in the source domain can be transferred. so the question is how the selection can be done. one question that i raised earlier in relation to semantic network based approaches is also relevant here and is not dealt with in ortony's theory: how does the context affect the salience of attributes of a concept and thus affect the outcome of metaphoric interaction  certainly the claim that the salience of each attribute will stay the same always  regardless of circumstances  is an indefensible position. 
　the solution below  albeit a little simplistic  captures the basic ideas discussed above. in consyderr  a 
　1the interaction of the two semantic domains of the two terms involved is hypothesized by black  1  to be the main factor underlying metaphor interpretation. this work is based on the belief that the process can be captured in micorfeatures. 


layer of nodes  cl  is established for representing concepts in a domain  including physical objects and their properties  e.g.  big  billboard  etc. as in  the billboards are big    and another layer  cd  is established for representing microfeatures that may be needed in processing the meaning of metaphoric  and non-metaphoric  statements. the weight on a link from a concept node to a microfeature node represents the salience of that microfeature in relation to the concept. what we want to achieve is the following: when a predicate metaphor  such as  billboards are warts   is presented to the concept layer by the activation of the nodes for  billboard  and  wart   these activated nodes in turn activate the related microfeature nodes in cd  and then  through nonlinear interaction in the microfeature layer  a proper interpretation emerges in the form of proper activations  that is  those and only those microfeatures involved in the final interpretation remain activated ; these activated microfeatures will then go back up to activate the proper nodes in the concept layer that represent the proper interpretation of the metaphor   ugly  in this case . see figure 1 for a sketch of the model. 
　1 will start tabula rasa  without hand-coding any a priori knowledge of microfeatures and concepts. thus the knowledge must be acquired through learning. i first fully connect the two layers with small random initial weights  in order for them to develop proper connectivity patterns through data presentation using connectionist learning procedures. although there is apparently no readily applicable learning algorithm for such a two-layer three-phase model  we can  unfold  the model to come up with an equivalent three-layer model by duplicating the concept layer and having the duplicated layer carry the bottom-up weights  while the original concept layer retain its top-down weights . the input activations in the training data will be applied to the original concept layer and the output activation representing the right interpretation of the input will be applied to the duplicated concept layer. see figure 1. since the metaphoric interaction is rather complex  ortony 1  black 1  a linear combination operation may be insufficient. to improve the processing power  i adopt a sigmoidal activation function instead of the operations specified earlier. now the backpropagation algorithm can be applied directly to update the two sets of weights  until the correct interpretation is obtained for each training case. proper microfeatures are developed in the mean-

time. the weights acquired in the end represent the salience of the respective microfeatures formed in the cd layer. 
　an example test domain is as follows. there are two sets of concepts: one set includes five facial objects and the other includes four land objects  see figure 1 . each object has a number of properties  which should be activated properly upon the presentation of a corresponding objects. all the properties together form another set of concepts. each of the above three sets is represented by a corresponding collection of concept nodes in the cl layer of the model. the interpretation of the meaning of each object concept is based on the properties listed in figure 1. metaphoric statements are constructed systematically from applying a concept from one set of objects to another concept from the other set  such as 
billboards are warts 
warts are billboards 
noses are gates 
　　gates are noses including all the possible combinations  there are 1 * 1 * 1 = 1 of them . a subset of these constructed statements is used for training  and the rest for testing. with the resulting network  given the sentence  billboards are warts   the node in the subject segment of the concept layer representing  billboard  is activated and the node in the predicate segment representing  wart  is also activated; with these input activations  during the top-down phase  some of the microfeatures in the bottom layer are activated in response to the top-down activation flow; then in the bottom-up phase  those activated microfeatures in turn activate the proper nodes in the property segment of the top layer  which in this case include  most prominently   ugly . therefore the resulting interpretation is  billboards are ugly   among some other less prominent properties. see figure 1 for more examples of metaphor interpretation. 
　there is another issue that is worth mentioning. context can force changes in feature salience; that is  a microfeature that is very prominent in one context can be negligible in another. i need a way to modulate microfeature salience  i.e.  weights   which can be accomplished by including an extra set of nodes  a context module  in 

the concept layer  which receives inputs and sends out signals that change the weights on the link connecting concepts and their corresponding microfeatures. in other words  these signals are used to manipulate or modulate microfeatures on the fly  sun 1 . this change  or modulation  is done by higher-order links  three-way connections  of concepts and microfeatures; that is  the link weight between a concept and a microfeature is: 

where wc is a modulation signal from the context module. see figure 1. the same idea in developing training procedures is again applied  by unfolding the architecture into multiple layers and by handling the updating of high-order weights  details omitted . 
1 	further steps 
this model produces the desired outcomes  through handling the metaphoric interaction by two sets of non-linear  sigmoidal  operations successively applied  which have been shown to be able to approximate any measurable function and are thus sufficient for the purpose. however  we may want a more linear and more precise characterization. 
　in the interest of specifying the detailed operations of metaphoric interaction  i propose to use a process that involves enhancement. that is  we selectively enhance the links between the target concept and some of its microfeatures  this is similar in a way to  slippage  as proposed by hofstadter . in accordance with the theory of salience imbalance  ortony 1   these microfeatures selected to be enhanced are among those that have strong links with the source concept  i.e.  highly salient for the source concept  but weak links with the target concept. after the enhancement  there will be some highly salient microfeatures shared by both the source concept and the target concept  so these microfeatures have been transferred   which is not the case before the enhancement  provided that the statement to be interpreted is metaphoric; ortony 1 . 1 
　to perform enhancement  let us go back to the original consyderr architecture: without the sigmoidal operations  the concepts/microfeatures relations are once again transparent. enhancement can then be accomplished by setting up links with high weights between the target concept and the microfeatures that have strong connections with the source concept  with each weight proportional to  a function of  the corresponding weight between the microfeature and the source concept and the original weight between the microfeature and the target concept. that is  
are of t he same sign  where 
are parameters  i is the currently activated tar-
get concept  k is the currently activated source concept  and j is the microfeature in question. these parameters can be chosen in such a way that  1  the first fraction will have a steep slope  when  is large   because only those microfeatures of the source concept that are highly salient can get transferred  and  1  the second fraction will have a gentle and low slope  when  is small and n is used to compress its range   because we want the amount of transfer to correspond  to a small degree  to the original weight between the target concept and the microfeature in question since that weight represents a propensity of the target concept to obtain that microfeature.  therefore  we have 
　with this update rule  if the source weight and the target weight are both high  then the target weight will basically remain the same  as it should be in case the statement is a literal comparison; if both are low  there will be very little enhancement as expected; if the target weight is high and the source weight is low  there will be little enhancement; if the source weight is high and the target weight is low  there will be significant enhancement; in this last case  however  the higher the 


figure 1: the overall architecture for metaphor interpretation 
1 
target weight the more enhancement there will be  up to a certain limit . 
　with the enhanced top-down links from the target concept  and without the source concept   the three 
　1according to ortony  1   if the source concept and the target concept originally share some highly salient features  then the statement will not be metaphoric  but a simple literal comparison. metaphors occur when none of those highly salient features of the source domain are highly salient features of the target domain. 
phases of consyderr are reenacted. from this three-phase cycle  some properties representing possible interpretations will be activated  in the end  in the property segment of the cl layer. we then use the most strongly activated properties as the interpretation of the metaphor. 
1 	discussions 
going back to the issues raised earlier  we see that the model fare well in all of these aspects: 
  first of all  with the microfeature based approach there is no need for complex search algorithms and the time needed to reach a conclusion is not dependent on the path length between them. simple microfeature transformation generates the equivalent of complex search behavior without actually performing the search  see sun 1 for more details . 
  there is no hand-coding that creates arbitrary con-ceptual hierarchies; rather  conceptual structures are embedded in microfeature representation and  more importantly  are extracted from data. 
  the microfeatures themselves are not arbitrar-ily chosen either; they are formed automatically through learning correct mappings. 
  because such automatic formation of microfeatures  they naturally capture the similarity of concepts  as demonstrated by the resulting correct interpretations in the experiments. 
  because of automatic formation of microfeatures  attribute inequality is avoided  since there will be automatic decomposition of attributes to microfeatures that capture similarities among attributes through distributed representation. 
  the models are capable of highlighting certain as-pects of the target domain by transferring highly salient features from the source domain in metaphor interpretation. thus  metaphors are not simply constraint violation  mapping between domains  or selective inference  although these are all integral part of metaphor interpretation and are embodied in the model . 
  the effect of context is taken into consideration in the model; with microfeature  this effect can be realized by context modules and high order links. 
　there exist other related connectionist models  see  e.g.  eskridge 1  lange and wharton 1 . these models are mostly localist  and as such  they are more akin to semantic network based approaches than to the microfeature based approach proposed in the present work. these models  however  do have some noteworthy features; for example  they allow very complex structures in their representations and they compute and utilize complex structural correspondences  e.g.  eskridge 1 . they are also capable of explicitly expressing goals and plans. i should note that these representations are possible in consyderr  since it has a localist level  cl  that can readily implement the aforementioned structures  as in sun 1 . 
　one advantage of the models proposed is that they employ the same mechanism for both metaphoric or literal statements. metaphors are not viewed as an extraneous process serving only ornamental purposes. since the model presented here is a variation of consyderr  which is a unified model of various kinds of commonsense reasoning  ranging from inheritance reasoning  sun 1  to evidential causal reasoning  sun 1  and to similarity-based induction  sun 1   the model is integrative and not ad hoc. some of the issues addressed in this work are also applicable to other areas. 
　moreover  because of the possibility of incorporating structural correspondences and structural similarities into consyderr  it is possible to extend the proposed models of metaphor interpretation to deal with more sophisticated kind of analogy and analogical reasoning  involving complex relations . some work is currently being carried out in this direction. 
acknowledgements 
i thank john barnden and larry bookman. 
