 
this paper proposes a method of nonmonotonic theory change. we first introduce a new form of abduction that can account for observations in nonmonotonic situation. then we provide a framework of autoepistemic update  which describes nonmonotonic theory change through the extended abductive framework. the proposed update semantics is fairly general and provides a unified framework for various update semantics such as first-order update  view update of databases  and contradiction removal of nonmonotonic theories. 
1 	introduction 
a lot of theories for belief change have been proposed in ai and related fields. at abstract and philosophical levels  the belief dynamics have been studied as rationality postulates to be satisfied by belief sets  e.g.   alchourfon et a/.  1; katsuno and mendelzon  1b  . in the 
field of ai and databases  various researchers have proposed revision  contraction  and update methods of data and knowledge bases. on the ai side  revision and update methods mainly cope with knowledge bases which consist of first-order theories. according to  winslett  1   those methods are classified into formula-based and model-based approaches. in the formula-based update such as  fagin et al.  1   the units of change are formulas  and the syntax of formulas in a theory influences the result of update. in the model-based update  on the other hand  update does not care about formulas in a theory but cares about changes of models during update. in both approaches  however  the underlying language for describing beliefs is a monotonic  mainly propositional  logic. in fact  not much is known about update of nonmonotonic theories. note that this fact should not be confused with the well-known fact that the process of belief change itself is nonmonotonic even when our beliefs are represented in monotonic logic  makinson and gardenfors  1 . 
　using nonmonotonic logics  one expects that some previously derived formulas are automatically retracted when our belief set changes. however  the present nonmonotonic formalisms are not strong enough to revise 
automated reasoning 
chiaki sakama 
department of computer and 
communication science 
wakayama university 
1 sakaedani  wakayama 1  japan sakama center. wakayama-u .ac.jp 
even a simple belief set. for instance  let us consider an example  due to  konolige  1   of autoepistemic logic  where an agent's belief is given by the theory ko-

the formula in k1 can be read as: if she does not believe that  the repairman has arrived  p   then  the copier must be ok   q  . suppose further that she then found that  the copier is broken  -q  . then her beliefs are revised as 

the theory k1 now does not have any stable expansion  because while bp is derivable p is not. we thus need a revision method for nonmonotonic theories that can retract previously derived formulas automatically. 
　in the context of databases  on the other side  update of deductive databases is usually captured as the view update problem  abiteboul  1 . namely  in a 
deductive database  update on virtual relations in an intensional database has to be translated into update on real facts in an extensional database. it is also known that database update is closely related to abduction in ai. kakas and mancarella  present that view update in deductive databases is realized by an abductive procedure of logic programming by considering update requests as observations and extensional relations as abductive hypotheses. this close relationship between abduction and update  however  need not be limited within the area of deductive databases. we consider that abduction can play a fundamental role in a wide class of ai and database problems. that is  abductive methods would contribute to better understanding of various belief change semantics as well as better implementation of them. 
　in this paper  we characterize update of nonmonotonic theories through abduction. for this purpose  we first extend the abductive framework to autoepistemic theories. the notions of negative explanations and antiexplanations are introduced to account for observations in nonmonotonic setting. then we define autoepistemic update through the extended abductive framework. it is shown that autoepistemic update can provide a uniform framework for various update semantics. in particular  update of first-order theories  view update of deductive databases  and contradiction removal of nonmonotonic 

theories are expressed as special cases of the new update semantics. 
　the rest of this paper is organized as follows. the next section reviews autoepistemic logic. section 1 defines a new abductive framework for autoepistemic logic. the abductive framework is applied to formalize an update semantics for autoepistemic theories in section 1. various forms of update semantics are expressed in terms of autoepistemic update. section 1 discusses related work  and section 1 concludes the paper. 
1 	autoepistemic theory 
we briefly review autoepistemic logic by moore . autoepistemic logic is obtained by extending a first-order language  with the modal operator b. a formula in autoepistemic logic is called objective if it does not contain the modal operator b; otherwise it is subjective. intuitively  the formula bf is read as ''f is believed . 
by an autoepistemic theory  or simply a theory  we mean a set of formulas in autoepistemic logic. in this paper  we allow open variables  and each formula with variables stands for the set of its ground instances. this means that an autoepistemic theory is essentially equivalent to a set of countably many propositional formulas in autoepistemic logic. 
　a theory is stable if it is closed under the logical and introspective consequences. namely  a stable set t satisfies the conditions:  i    where cons t  denotes the set of logical consequences  in the sense of classical first-order logic  of   and  iii  	the meaning of each autoepistemic theory is usually characterized by the following stable set that is expanded from the theory: given an autoepistemic theory k  a set t is a stable expansion of k iff it satisfies that 

note that an autoepistemic theory may have none  one  or multiple stable expansions. we say that an autoepistemic theory k is consistent if it has a consistent stable expansion; otherwise k is inconsistent 
　it is well known that for each set of objective formulas  there is a unique stable set . containing such that the objective formulas in are exactly the same as those in . moreover  if a theory k contains only objective formulas  then is a unique stable expansion of a   moore  1 . 
　by  we mean that every stable expansion of an autoepistemic theory k contains a formula f. for exam-
reading of the entailment relation in autoepistemic logic generalizes the meaning of the classical entailment relation.1 namely  for a first-order theory and a first-order 
formula f  it holds that 
　　1  we can give an alternative  credulous meaning to k = f: that is  there is a stable expansion of k containing f. note that in this weaker reading  again the notion is a generalization of the first-order entailment relation since any first-order theory has the unique stable expansion. 
　autoepistemic logic and the notion of stable expansions have a close relationship with the answer set semantics  gelfond and lifschitz  1  for logic programming with negation as failure and classical negation  see  lifschitz and schwarz  1; inoue and sakama  1   for instance . hence  the theory of belief update developed in this paper can directly be applied to the update 
problem for such extended logic programs. 
1 	new form of abduction 
abduction is one of the three fundamental modes of reasoning characterized by c. s. peirce  the others being deduction and induction. the most popular formalization of abduction in ai defines an explanation as a set of hypotheses which  together with the background theory  logically entails the given observations. a traditional  logical framework of abduction is defined as follows. let 
 background theory  and t  hypotheses  be two sets of first-order formulas. given a formula f  observation   a set e of ground instances of elements from t is an explanation of f with respect to if 
an explanation e is minimal if no is an explanation of f. suppose  for example  that we are given 

here  the hypothesis -ab x  means that for any ground term t  -ab t  can be hypothesized. in other words  a hypothesis containing variables is shorthand for the set of its ground instances. in this case  a minimal explanation of the observation flies tweety  is as a result of assimilating the observation flies tweety   our background theory is changed as 

　suppose we later find that tweety losts his flying ability for some reasons  e.g.  injured  fatted  etc . in this case  -flies tweety  should be explained by assuming ab tweety  instead of -ab tweety . retracting the previous assumption -ab tweety  is vital  since flies tweety  should not be explained any more. to formalize such a situation  we extend the above abductive framework in the following three respects: 
1. the background theory  and the candidate hypotheses t can be autoepistemic theories. thus  the belief operator b may appear in 
1.hypotheses can not only be added to the theory  but also be discarded from to explain observations. when for some set e of hy-
potheses  we call e a negative explanation of f. an ordinary explanation e such that is now called a positive explanation. 
	inoue and sakama 	1 


automated reasoning 


	inoue and sakama 	1 

automated reasoning 


1 	related work 
it is recognized that nonmonotonic theory update is an important future topic in ai and nonmonotonic reasoning. however  not much work exist on this topic. 
　there are some work which relate update semantics to abduction. boutilier  relates abduction to katsuno and mendelzon's   1lb  propositions! update semantics  but does not consider nonmonotonic theories ae background theories. kakas and mancarella  characterize update semantics through abduction  while their concern is limited to view update in databases. 
　marcus and subrahmanian  recently established the relationship between fagin et al.'s  update and default/autoepistemic logic  but they do not discuss the issue of updating nonmonotonic theories. there are some proposals for removing inconsistency from logic programs with negation as failure. those approaches in  pereira et a/.  1; giordano and martelli  1; witteveen et al  1  recover consistency by adding some new formulas  while  inoue  1  discards some beliefs to this effect. in contrast to them  our framework performs update by both inserting and deleting hypotheses based on the extended abductive mechanism. 
　in the field of theory revision  the agm-postulates  alchourfon et al.  1  and their applications to various revision/update systems are thoroughly studied by katsuno and mendelzon  l1a; 1b . however  those postulates are defined for monotonic propositional theories  and not applicable to our nonmonotonic autoepistemic theory in their present forms. moreover  many of the revision systems are model-based and deal with belief sets  which are closed under logical consequences. by contrast  our approach is formula-based and deals with belief bases  which are not necessarily closed under logical 
consequences  and is syntax-dependent in its nature. in logic programming and deductive databases  formulas included in a theory have their own intended meaning and syntax plays an important role to represent commonsense knowledge. nebel  l1l  proposes a syntax-based revision system and relates it to some default reasoning systems  but he considers only propositional theories and its applications to logic programming and deductive databases are not addressed. 
1 	conclusion 
we have proposed a new framework for nonmonotonic theory change. this framework is based on a new form of nonmonotonic abduction  which can explain observations not only by adding some hypotheses to the theory but by retracting some previous hypotheses. with this abductive framework  autoepistemic update was defined for nonmonotonic theory revision and contraction  and then applied to account for view update of deductive databases  first-order theory revision  and contradiction removal for autoepistemic theories. future work includes devising postulates for nonmonotonic theory change like  alchourfon et a/.  1; katsuno and mendelzon  1a; 1b   developing an efficient mechanism for computing negative and anti- explanations  and investigating connections to update specification languages like  marek and truszczynski  1 . 
　our abductive framework is fairly general and can deal with nonmonotonic theories as background theories. the notions of explanations are extended to allow positive and negative explanans and anti-explanans. an inserted formula that changes the world is an explanandum sentence  and a contracted formula is an anti-explanandum sentence. this extended framework is  we believe  much closer to peirce's theory of abduction  in which a series of explanatory hypotheses accounting for observations must be revised by experimental testing. the theory of abduction thus relies on the continuous cycle of experiments  observations  hypothesis generation  hypothesis verification  and hypothesis revision. 
	inoue and sakama 	1 
