 
terminological knowledge representation formalisms can be used to represent objective  time-independent facts about an application domain. notions like belief  intentions  and time which are essential for the representation of multi-agent environments can only be expressed in a very limited way. for such notions  modal logics with possible worlds semantics provides a formally well-founded and wellinvestigated basis. this paper presents a framework for integrating modal operators into terminological knowledge representation languages. these operators can be used both inside of concept expressions and in front of terminological and assertional axioms. we introduce syntax and semantics of the extended language  and show that satisfiability of finite sets of formulas is decidable  provided that all modal operators are interpreted in the basic logic k  and that the increasing domain assumption is used. 
1 	introduction 
terminological knowledge representation languages in the style of kl-one  brachman and schmolze  1  have been developed as a structured formalism to describe the relevant concepts of a problem domain and the interactions between these concepts. various terminological systems have been designed and implemented that are based on the ideas underlying kl-one  see  woods and schmolze  1  for an overview . representing knowledge of an application domain with such a kind of system amounts to introducing the terminology of this domain via concept definitions  and then describing  an abstraction of  the relevant part of the  world  by listing the facts that hold in this part of the world. in a traditional terminological system  such a description is rigid in the sense that it does not allow for the representation of notions like time  or beliefs of different agents. in systems modeling aspects of intelligent agents  however  intentions  beliefs  and time-dependent facts play an important role. 
　modal logics with possible worlds semantics is a formally well-founded and well-investigated framework for 
1 	knowledge representation 
the representation of such notions. the present paper is concerned with integrating modal operators  for time  belief  etc.  into a terminological formalism. the first task is to find an appropriate semantics for the combined language. in addition  if such a language should be used in a system  one must design algorithms for the important inference problems  such as consistency of knowledge bases  for the language. 
　several approaches have been proposed for the combination of terminological formalisms with notions like time or beliefs. a very simple possibility to represent beliefs of agents is realized in the partition hierarchy sbpart  kobsa  1   which is an extension of the sbone system. in this approach  each agent may have its own set of terminological axioms  tbox   and these tboxes can be ordered hierarchically. however  this extension lacks a formal semantics and it does not allow for representing properties of belief  such as introspection  or interactions between beliefs of different agents. a more formal approach is used in m-krypton  saffiotti and sebastiani  1   where a sub-language of the krypton representation language is extended by modal operators bi  which can be used to represent the beliefs of agent i. properties of beliefs are taken into consideration by using the well-known modal logic kd1. due to the undecidable base language  however  
 saffiotti and sebastiani  1  just introduces a formal semantics  without giving any inference algorithms for the extended language. in  schild  1   it has been shown that terminological systems already have a strong connection to modal logic. in fact  the concept language acc is nothing but a syntactic variant of the propositional multi-modal logic k   m   . building upon this observation   schild  1  augments acc by tense operators. the two approaches that come next to the one we shall introduce below are described in  laux  1a; 1b  and in  ohlbach and baader  1 . both extend acc by modal operators  but with different emphasis. 
the differences between these approaches and ours are clarified in the next section. 
1 	classification 
when extending a terminological knowledge representation language by modalities for belief  time  etc. one has various degrees of freedom. before describing the specific 

choices made in this article  we shall informally explain the different alternatives. 
　for simplicity  assume that we are interested in time and belief operators only. thus  in addition to the ob-
jects we have time points and belief worlds. this means that the domain of an interpretation is the cartesian product d = dobject x dtime x dbeltef of the set of ob-
jects  the set of time points  and the set of belief worlds. concepts are no longer just sets of objects; their interpretation also depends on the actual belief world and time point. thus  they can be seen as subsets of d  and not just as subsets of dobjtct. roles operate on objects  whereas modalities for time  like future or tomorrow  operate on time points  and modalities for belief  like hel-john  operate on belief worlds. as for concepts  however  the interpretation of roles and modalities depends on all dimensions. thus  a role loves is interpreted as a function from d into 1 dobject relates any individual in dobject  say john  with a set of individuals  the individuals john loves   but this set depends on the actual time point and belief world. modalities like future are treated analogously. modal operators can now be used both inside of concept expressions and in front of concept definitions and assertions. for example  we can describe the set of individuals that love a woman that- according to john's belief-is pretty by the concept expression 1 loves. woman l~l  bel-john pretty   and we can express that-according to john's belief-a happy husband is one married to a woman whom he  john  believes to be pretty by the terminological axiom 
 bel-joh n   happy-h usband -
1 m arried- to.  worn an    bel- joh n  pre tty  . 
the assertion  bel-john  future   peter married-to mary  says that john believes that  at some point in the future  peter will be married to mary. 
　with the usual interpretation of the boolean operators  of value and exists restrictions on roles  and of box and diamond operators for the modalities  this yields a rnulti-dimensional version of the multi-modal logic km. as described until now  this logic is a strict sub-language of the one introduced in  ohlbach and baader  1 . the restriction lies in the fact that  unlike in  ohlbach and baader  1   we do not consider roles and modalities that have a complex structure  such as  wants own  where the modality wants is used to modify the role own . there are several reasons why this approach is not  yet satisfactory. first  the object and the other dimensions are treated analogously. this means  for example  that the interpretation of the modality future depends not only on the actual time point  but also on the current object and the belief world. whereas the dependence from the belief world may seem to be quite reasonable  it is rather counterintuitive that the future time points reached from time t1 are different  depending on whether we are interested in the individual sue or mary. thus  it seems to be more appropriate to treat the object dimension in a special way: whereas the interpretation of roles should depend on the actual time point etc.  the interpretation of modalities should not depend on the object under consideration. 
　the need for a special treatment of the object dimension can also be motivated by considering the semantics of concept definitions  and assertions . in  ohlbach and baader  1   concept definitions are required to hold for all objects  time points  and belief worlds. this is a straightforward generalization of the treatment of definitions in terminological languages  where a definition c = d must hold for all objects  i.e.  in a model of c - d all objects o must satisfy that o belongs to the interpretation of c iff it belongs to the interpretation of d. for the other dimensions  however  this differs from the usual definition of models in modal logics  where a formula is only required to hold in one world. 
　another problem is that not only the roles  but also all the other modalities are just interpreted in the basic logic k  i.e.  they are not required to satisfy specific axioms for belief or time. in the present paper  we shall not take into account this last aspect  but we shall treat the object dimension in a special way  thus eliminating the problems mentioned above. in  laux  1a; 1b  both aspects are considered. however  modal operators are not allowed to occur inside of concept expressions  which considerably simplifies the algorithmic treatment of the formalism. the difference to  ohlbach and baader  1  is  on the one hand  the special treatment of the object dimension. in addition   ohlbach and baader  1  does not consider assertions  and even though concept definitions are introduced  they are not handled by the satisfiability algorithm. on the other hand   ohlbach and baader  1  allows for very complex roles and modalities  which are not considered here. 
1 	syntax and semantics of accm 
first  we present the syntax of our multi-dimensional modal extension of the concept language acc. as for acc  we assume a set of concept names  a set of role names  and a set of object names to be given. beside the object dimension  which will be treated differently from the other dimensions   we assume that there are v   1 additional dimensions  such as time points  epistemic alternatives  or intensional states . in each dimension  there can be several modalities  which can be used in box and diamond operators. for example  in the dimension time points we could have future and tomorrow  and in the dimension belief worlds we could have belief-john and belief-mary. if o is a modality of dimension t we write dim o  - i. in this case   o  and  o  are modal operators of dimension i. 
definition 1  syntax  concepts of accm are tn~ ductively defined as follows. each concept name is a concept  and t and  l are concepts. if c and d are concepts  r is a role name  and o is a modality then c h d  concept conjunction   cud  concept disjunction   -c  concept negation   r.c  value restriction   r.c  exists restriction    o c  box operator   and  o c  diamond operator  are concepts. 
　terminological axioms of accm are of the form m  c = d  where c and d are concepts of accm and m is a  possibly empty  sequence of modal operators. assertional axioms of accm ore of the form m  xry  or 
baader andlaux 


	1 	knowledge representation 
the domaini all worlds w1 and w1. 
	1 	testing satisfiability of 
	accm 	-formulas 
1o for each world constraint 
straint system w is satisfiablt iff there exists a kripke structure satisfying w. of a set 
baader and laux 
f 
  

	1 	knowledge representation 

	figure 1: propagation rules of the 	accm-satisfiability 	algorithm. 

baader and laux 

bel /  it is not sufficient to consider only accm-formulas that are labeled with /. a straightforward generalization of the notion of blocked objects  called cd-blocked  is obtained by allowing for different labels / and /' when considering the sets of concept assertions for the objects x and y. 
   although this modification can handle the above example correctly  it is not sufficient in general. on the one hand  it can become necessary to consider accm~ formulas with more than two different labels as well as information about role-successors in the current world constraint when testing whether or not an object should be blocked. on the other hand  the test whether or not the - b rule must be applied in a world constraint system w may depend on the information w  implicitly  contains about the accessibility relations of kripke structures satisfying w. the full paper  baader and laux  1  contains examples that illustrate these problems. due to these rather complex interactions  we did not yet succeed in finding an appropriate definition of cdblocked objects in world constraints. we thus leave this definition as an open problem for the moment.1 
1 	conclusion 
the framework for integrating modal operators into terminological knowledge representation languages presented in this paper should be seen as the starting point for developing more elaborate hybrid languages of this type. extensions in at least two directions will be necessary. 
   first  for the adequate representation of notions like belief and time  the basic modal logic k is not sufficient. instead  one must consider modalities that satisfy appropriate modal axioms. second  the multi-dimensionality of our language has not really been made use of. in fact  it is easy to see that with respect to satisfiability there is no difference between the v-dimensional and the corresponding 1-dimensional case  see  baader and laux  1  for details . we have introduced a multidimensional framework since it is more flexible. in an extended language  different dimensions could satisfy different modal axioms  e.g.  kd1 in the belief dimension  and at least s1 in the time dimension .1 in addition  one might want to specify certain interactions between different dimensions such as independence of one dimension from certain other dimensions. 
　the reason for considering a simplified framework without any of these extensions in the present paper is that in this context it is possible to design a rather intuitive calculus for satisfiability. also  the proof of soundness  termination and completeness of this calculus is still relatively short and comprehensible. for this reason  we claim that this calculus can serve as a basis for satisfiability algorithms for more complex languages. 
1
　　  donini et al.} 1  use constant domain assumption in their epistemic extension of acc. however  since they consider a nonmonotonic version of s1  the algorithmic problems are quite different. 
1
　　in the prepositional case  the combination of different modal logics obtained this way corresponds to what gabbay calls  dove-tailing of propositional modal logics   gabbay  1 . 
1 	knowledge representation 
another topic of future research will be investigating the constant domain assumption and its algorithmic ramifications. the answer to the question whether constant domain assumption or increasing domain assumption is more appropriate from the semantic point of view strongly depends on the intended interpretation of the modalities  belief  knowledge  time  etc. . 
