 
we develop a methodology for comparing knowledge representation formalisms in terms of their  representational succinctness   that is  their ability to express knowledge situations relatively efficiently. we use this framework for comparing many important formalisms for knowledge base representation: propositional logic  default logic  circumscription  and model preference defaults; and  at a lower level  horn formulas  characteristic models  decision trees  disjunctive normal form  and conjunctive normal form. we also show that adding new variables improves the effective expressibility of certain knowledge representation formalisms. 
1 	introduction 
many important knowledge representation formalisms have been proposed  used  and studied during the past fifteen years  including various forms of propositional logic  nonmonotonic formalisms  decision trees  and so on. there is now a host of methods available for representing complex knowledge  and for reasoning about it. an interesting question thus arises: how is one to evaluate and compare different knowledge representation formalisms  besides the practical aspect of this question with respect to choosing the  best  formalism for a given application  environment  and resource constraints  a methodology for comparing and evaluating knowledge representation methods may lead to useful introspection  new insights  and to the discovery of better approaches. 
　in this regard  one must consider several aspects of the desirability and effectiveness of a knowledge representation formalism: 
   *a part of the work was done while the author was employed at at&t bell laboratories  murray hill. research supported by an nsf grant. 
* research supported by an nsf grant. 
1 	knowledge representation 
henry kautz 
ai principles research department 
at&t bell laboratories 
 murray hill  nj 1  usa email: kautz research.att.com 
bart selman 
ai principles research department 
at&t bell laboratories 
　murray hill  nj 1  usa email: selman research.att.com * 
　 1  does it support efficient reasoning  the most common use of a knowledge base is for deciding whether a statement can be inferred from the available knowledge  and hence this question is of central importance. much research effort has been invested in recent years to clarifying this issue  and this aspect of knowledge representation is by now very well understood. in brief  all knowledge representation formalisms can be subdivided into three categories with respect to the complexity of their inference problem. 
　 la  classical propositional logic  perhaps the most basic knowledge representation formalism  has an npcomplete inference problem  cook  1 . 
　 lb  more sophisticated and non-monotonic formalisms  such as circumscription  default logic  nonmonotonic logic  autoepistemic logic  etc.  have inference problems that are even harder: complete for the second level of the polynomial hierarchy  see  cadoli and lenzerini  1; eiter and gottlob  1; gottlob  
1 ; model preference default theories  selman and kautz  1  have even higher complexity  papadimitriou  1 . 
    lc  finally  weaker versions of the above formalisms provide polynomial-time inference at the expense of our next criterion  expressibility. these include horn clauses  dowling and gallier  1   horn model preference defaults  selman and kautz  1   restricted forms of default logic  kautz and selman  1   etc. 
    1  an orthogonal criterion for the desirability and usefulness of a knowledge representation method is  how expressive is it  first we must formalize what we mean 
by  expressive.  the most natural notion of expressiveness is provided by model theory: since the propositional case of each of these formalisms has semantics in terms of models or truth assignments  any knowledge base can be thought of as representing a set of truth assignments  that is  of  possible worlds.  this suggests a notion of equivalence: two knowledge bases  possibly in different formalisms  are equivalent if they encode the same set of possible worlds. thus  here is a first try at a framework for comparing formalisms in terms of expressibility: consider formalism a at least as expressive as formalism b if and only if any knowledge base in b has an equivalent knowledge base in a. 
　there are serious drawbacks to this proposal. first  all diverse formalisms in la and lb above are trivially equally expressive  since any set of models can in principle be expressed by each of them. for example  propositional logic is exactly as expressive as the more sophisticated default logics  even the  soon to be proved  much more powerful preference defaults. only the formalisms in  lc  above are provably inferior; however  this is the result of a conscious sacrifice of expressibility in the interest of efficiency. as we shall point out in section 1  where we compare sublanguages of propositional logic  it is more meaningful to compare knowledge representation formalisms in terms of their relative performance at sets of models that they can both express. 
    1  a much more interesting  but also more subtle  question one can ask about a knowledge representation formalism is this: how succinctly can the formalism express the sets of models that it can  we think that this is the more interesting expressibility criterion; it is the main methodological contribution of this paper. that is  we consider formalism a to be stronger than formalism b if and only if any knowledge base in b has an equivalent knowledge base in a that is only polynomially longer  while there is a knowledge base in a that can be translated to b only with an exponential blowup. using this criterion  we show that the known knowledge representation formalisms form a hierarchy  fig. 1  which is rather surprising in its strictness  as well as in the outcomes of the particular comparisons. 
    1  we should mention here that another important question is  how does the knowledge representation formalism fare in the face of change  change is important in knowledge representation  for example  nonmonotonicity is a dynamic property . there are many formalisms in the literature for knowledge base updates and revisions; as was pointed out in  eiter and gottlob  1; gogic et a/.  1   none of the known formalisms supports efficient changes.  gogic et a/.  1  propose a tractable revision mechanism using the theory approximation technique of  selman and kautz  1; selman and kautz  1 . incidentally  change has its own expressiveness aspect  which changes in the set of models can be expressed  and how succinctly    which is not at all understood at present. 
　in this paper we find that the representational succinctness criterion  1  above can tell us interesting and unexpected things about familiar knowledge representation formalisms. there is a tempting argument purporting to prove that our criterion of representational succinctness  criterion 1  is just a disguise of computational complexity of inference  criterion 1 above . the argument would be this: 
// reasoning in formalism a is computationally harder then reasoning in formalism b  i.e.  there is a polynomial-time reduction from the satisfiability problem in the latter to the former  then any sentence from a can be translated  with polynomial blow up  to an equivalent sentence in b. 
　this argument is wrong. the difference between reductions and representational simulations between knowledge bases is subtle but important. a reduction must be computationally efficient  and must preserve the answer to the satisfiability problem  the emptyness/nonemptyness aspect of the corresponding set of models   whereas representational simulations must maintain the precise set of models  and need not be computationally efficient  the simulating knowledge base need not be efficiently computable  as long as it exists . this difference manifests itself in many comparisons. for example  one of our main results is that default logic is strictly more succinct than circumscription  despite the fact that their inference problems are known to be computationally equivalent  gottlob  1; eiter and gottlob  1 . for another example  characteristic models  whose satisfiability problem is trivial  can be sometimes more succinct than cnf  whose satisfiability problem is  of course  np-complete . finally  we know how to translate default theories to model preference defaults only in a nonconstructive way  proposition 1 . evidently  the complexity arguments involved in such comparisons have to be much more subtle than the crude one outlined above.  however  a more sophisticated version of this  translation via complexity  argument is used in proposition 1.  
　we next highlight our results on the representational succinctness criterion  see fig. 1 for a full depiction of our results . 
　1. circumscription and default logic are more pow-erful with respect to representational succinctness then propositional logic  this had been observed for the case of circumscription by  cadoli et a/.  1; cadoli et a/.  1  . this result provides a  silver lining  for the high intractability of circumscription and default logic: in these formalisms one may need exponentially more succinct expressions  and thus increased intractability is not necessarily a real threat. 
　1. default logic can be exponentially more succinct than circumscription. this is a rather surprising result in view of the computational equivalence of the two formalisms  and it is perhaps quite revealing of the relative power and desirability of these formalisms  heretofore indistinguishable in terms of their inference complexity . also  model preference defaults can be exponentially more succinct than default logic  or any other formalism whose inference problem can be done in polynomial space; this is rather unexpected  since model preference defaults had been considered as a rather crude and unsophisticated knowledge representation formalism. 
　1. lower in the hierarchy  cnf and dnf have no advantage over horn formulas and characteristic models  when a horn set is to be represented  recall that we are comparing knowledge representation formalisms at the intersection of their expressibility domain ; this suggests that we should choose a horn formula representation 
	gogic  etal 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

	gogic  et al 	1 
tn 
1 	knowledge representation 

	gogicetal 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 

proposition 1 let a be any knowledge representation formalism such that the model-checking problem of a can be carried out in polynomial space in the number of variables and the size of the representation. then for any knowledge base k in a on n variables and representation size s there is a set of model preference defaults a of size at most polynomial inn + s such that the projection of the set of models of a to the original n variables is 
precisely the set of models of k. 
　as noted earlier  this result implies that by allowing for additional variables mp can simulate any knowledge representation formalism whose model-checking problem is solvable in polynomial space. default logic and autoepistemic logic are just two examples of such formalisms  gottlob  1; eiter and gottlob  1 . 
1 	conclusions 
knowledge representation formalisms are usually compared with respect to their computational properties and expressive power. expressive power is characterized in terms of what can and cannot be represented in a formalism. often little consideration is given to the question to what extent the formalisms allow for a compact encoding of information. we presented a series of results showing that systems with similar expressive power can differ dramatically in the size of the shortest encoding of certain kinds of information. 
　fig. 1 summarizes our main results. each upward arrow leads to a provably more succinct representation formalism.  some results are based on certain standard complexity theoretic assumptions.  for example  we have shown that there exist sets of models with short  polynomial  encodings in default logic  but that can only be captured by exponential size circumscriptive theories. on the other hand  however  any set of models with a compact encoding using circumscription can also be captured by a short default logic theory. one surprising aspect of our analysis is that we found many strict separations between formalisms. this suggests that succinctness is indeed useful dimension along which to compare representation formalisms. 
