 
in this work we use contact alignments as qualitative landmarks to discretize the relative motion between two 1d objects. we use assembly planning as a sample domain  and address the question of obtaining the assembly blocking graphs from the geometry and the motion constraints. starting from a geometrical description of the objects we characterize contacts involving topologically distinct feature 
sets  called contact formations  cf   and obtain a qualitative decomposition of the configuration space based on cfs. we show how standard algorithms for finding the configuration-
space routinely discard cf information  and how these can be extracted at no additional computational cost. finally we show how cfs can be used to generate assembly solutions and for correcting jamming and other assembly er-of how to develop this type of discretization - in the assembly problem  for example  the question is: given two objects in contact  how can one characterize the relative motion between them into regions that are qualitatively distinct  
　such a discretization is crucial to reducing the size of the search space for fine motions  which in a general configuration space approach results in a topological partition with an exponential number of manifolds   and in practice  it is unlikely  pspace hard   that one can test the feasibility of the large number of proposals made by the typical assembly sequencers . computationally such a discretization reduces the search from the continuous domain of part configurations to a finite 
set of contact regions. furthermore  associated characteristics of each region help in correcting errors - e.g. when jammed  the reason can be found by investigat-
ing neighbouring contacts  see  for an error recovery application . 　yet  surprisingly little work has been done on the process of finding such discretizations for general geome-
	keywords: qualitative spatial reasoning  assembly 	tries. in constructing assembly plans  one assumes the 
planning  contact formations 	existence of such a decomposition: 	and/or graphs 
  precedence graphs   backward assembly plan-
1 	introduction 	ning   assembly constraint graph   etc. 	the 
closest approach to handling general geometries is that 
contact preserving motions between spatial objects is of wilson and latombe   which extends the blocking 
a question that is central to qualitative spatial reasongraph model to identify a discretization in the transla-
ing  l   constructing assembly plans   kinematics   tion space in two dimensions. the model works only for 
fine motion planning   gross motion planning   and assembly  and is not useful in spatial reasoning  kine-
other tasks. in this work we use contact alignments as matics  or other tasks. also  it is restricted to 1d and 
qualitative landmarks to discretize the relative motion does not handle rotations. another class of models used 
between 1d objects. we focus on assembly planning as in qualitative kinematics  also approaches this work by 
an example domain  and show how to obtain a search forming discretizations along the boundaries of the con-
space from geometric and motion constraint considerafiguration . however  these approaches discard the 
tions and provide algorithms for the 1-body motion probinternal points of the c-space  which are necessary for 
lem in any dimension. recording relative motions between faces in 1-d for ex-
consider a sequence of motions such as:  incline the ample  and do not use contact analysis as a mechanism 
peg and trail it along the top face until you find the hole. for capturing the discretization in the spatial positions as 
align the edges  straighten and insert it. if jammed  such. in terms of the assembly problem  some special-
you may be touching a side wall.  intuitively this inized geometries belonging to classes like nuts on bolts 
volves a decomposition of the motion space between the can be analyzed using knowledge-based techniques  but 
peg and the hole into regions such as  inclined-peg-topthis cannot extend to the general class of geometries  nor 
face    aligned-edges    straight-peg    touching-sidecan the correctness of the knowledge database be verified 
wall  etc. much of ai is concerned with the problem without more general purpose algorithms. 
in what sense is this a  qualitative  discretization of 
1 

the spatial 1-body problem  many applications of qr involve parameter spaces that reduce to one-dimensional points   -   1   +   or intervals on the real line   . we were encouraged in this work by qualitative models that discretize visibility regions of an object into  aspect graphs   ll   and by recent work on modeling 1d positions using a qualitative-quantitative hybrid . earlier work in modeling contacts  using the name contact formations   uses boundary features such as edges  ver-
tices  faces  to generate a search space in error recovery situations. other models of qualitative spatial reasoning have attempted connections among spatial objects using rectangular enclosures or other approximations   and have failed to define a clearly defined  usable set of parameters for qualitatively discriminating the interactions. cognitive studies of assembly tasks also seem to indicate the importance of  haptic landmarks  which are formed while playing around with the parts prior to actual assembly. thus just as the alignment orientation provide  visual landmarks  in constructing a qualitative model for recognition  the contact formations provide a qualitative set of haptic landmarks for fine motion  kinematics  and other tasks. in connection with recognizing landmarks  the new statistical learning techniques for finding landmarks is of particular note . 
that involving an edge from one 1d object and a face in another . such alignments mark regions of change in the contact forces as the set of surface features in contact are altered. for example  considering purely sliding motion  we observe that the transitions closely resemble the interval relations well-known in temporal logic and onedimensional qualitative spatial reasoning  fig. 1 . as the edge b slides along the edge a and its interval relations change  so does the set of contacts occurring between boundary features in a and b. thus the b overlaps a configuration is characterized by the following contacts: 

this is represented as a contact formation with three elemental contacts:  the entire set of transitions possible in such motion is illustrated in the transition graph  fig 1    where the tri-furcation indicates the three possibilities with relative size: 
 a  b 	smaller 	than 	a 	 starts  
 b  a 	equal 	than 	b 	 equals  

  	 b   	: 
1 	knowledge representation 


1 

1 	knowledge representation 

ject a  a b g ed  in a face-alignment configuration  a rotation invariant space   find the cf map ft  i.e.  all cfs that result from contact preserving motions in this slice. let the faces in alignment be fa and fb. 
 the contact formations in this slice will involve the faces that are in contact  such as the triangular bottom face of the prismatic peg and the top face of the cube in fig. 1a. in this configuration  the two faces are parallel  but also one of the edges of the bottom face is aligned with an edge of the top face; this is not the case in fig.1c. the objective of this algorithm is to find all the cfs possible in this sliding motion. note that the objects concerned do not have to be convex  and may even include holes. 
　given the cf maps for the alignment configurations  all configurations in the intermediate qualitative zones have identical topologies  which can be constructed by considering any instance of a configuration in that zone. thus  for the middle configuration of fig 1  the cf map is obtained by sweeping the edge of the prism along the rectangle face. non-alignment motions have no internal features and are added to ft directly. 
1 

convex cases . a simple strategy like plane-sweep can be used to determine the boundary of the map which is then the c-space of the objects in question. note that taking just the convex hull  as suggested earlier  will not give the c-space. a traversal through the face-list in this map  yields the cf connectivity graph as in figure 1 which can be used for assembly. in the following section  we integrate the above methodology to provide a search space for fine motion planning. 

figure 1: a cf map for a non-convex peg on a rectangle with hole. 
1 	the 1-body problem 
the assembly problem consists of taking a set of bodies that were initially separated into contact. the principal difference with path planning is that there are multiple bodies  although they are often considered monotonically in subassemblies   and that the initial configuration is not fixed. other differences include the occasional need to find space to temporarily hold subassemblies. the part of this problem that has received the maximum attention is the sequence planning problem  and the part that has received the least attention  undoubtedly because of its intrinsic difficulty  is relating it to the geometry. in the following  we present an algorithm for obtaining the contact motions of two objects  or what we call the 1-body problem. this constitutes a single link in an and/or or other  high-level  assembly graph. to our knowledge this is the first model that provides a reasonable process for mapping these connectivity links directly to the geometries of the objects. we now give an algorithm for assembly by searching through the contact formations . 
algorithm 
1. construct the contact formation map assuming full domain degrees of freedom  i.e. no limit angles etc . 
　this returns a cf graph indicating connections in the contact formation space and provides a very basic search space for further queries and operations. each region in this space can be directly related to boundary features on the object. all standard ai methodologies such as learning based on densities  incremental definition etc. can be used on this graph to reduce the search complexity. it may be noted that all those regions which formed the boundary of the original c-space are part of the boundary of the constrained c-space also  except that they have added internal features on these indicating the richness of the cf structure in it. 
　the cf graph is useful in solving a variety of spatial problems. to answer the query about the cube rolling down a plane  originally posed in  l   we can move from slice to slice as the cube rotates  to obtain directly the sequence of vertex edge and face contacts as they are made and broken. to investigate the kinematic problem posed by forbus et al in  lo   where one would like to say how two wheels  one with a bump on it and the other with a notch carved out of it  will travel  one can build the cf map  which provide a discretization for the configuration space methods proposed earlier. as for assembly  we illustrate the applicability of the cf map by outlining the solution to the peg insertion problem posed  fig. 1 . the graph resulting from the cf map is shown in fig. 1  and the set of cfs is listed below  the edge between vertices i and j is represented by ij . 
　another aspect of the cf graph is that each constraintreveals the degrees of freedom that exist in maintaining that constraint  e.g in fig. 1 i   the slice is fully con-
strained in rotation  and hence the vertices in the graphs represent zero degrees of freedom  annotated as  cf＜'s . the edges in this diagram  as well as the vertices in  iii  which permit a rotation  permit one degree of freedom and constitute c f ' s . the intersection process results in a depletion of freedom; the intersection of cfr and cfq results in a cfs  where s - d- d-r - d-q  - r+q-d. 
this is an important notion in designing assemblies to have certain d.o.f's and reveals where on the surface to place constraining grooves or other similar questions. 
example 


also  obtain the c-space in this process. 
　1. adding the constraints  consider the surfaces caused by the constraints. these surfaces do not have any internal cf features  since the entire surface corresponds to a stop position. in other words  these surfaces can delete some cf maps that arise in inaccessible regions  but cannot add any new cfs. 
　1. for each cf identify the configuration patch  cp  corresponding to it on the c-space. if this region is not connected  e.g. for null cf  then split the separate connected components  and label these as separate sub-cfs. 
　1. scan all the cps and connect adjacent cf's corresponding to adjacent regions on the slice by undirected edges. 
1 	knowledge representation 


	mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 	1 
mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 

mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 

mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 









mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 

mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 

mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 

mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 

mukerjee  agarwal  and bhatia 













