 
letizia is a user interface agent that assists a user browsing the world wide web. as the user operates a conventional web browser such as netscape  the agent tracks user behavior and attempts to anticipate items of interest by doing concurrent  autonomous exploration of links from the user's current position. the agent automates a browsing strategy consisting of a best-first search augmented by heuristics inferring user interest from browsing behavior. 
1 introduction 
 letizia alvarez de toledo has observed that this vast library is useless: rigorously speaking  a single volume ＊ would be sufficient  a volume of ordinary format  printed in nine or ten point type  containing an infinite 
number of infinitely thin leaves.  
- jorge luis borges  the library of babel 
1 	knowledge representation 　　the recent explosive growth of the world wide web and other on-line information sources has made critical the need for some sort of intelligent assistance to a user who is browsing for interesting information. 
　　past solutions have included automated searching programs such as wais or web crawlers that respond to explicit user queries. among the problems of such solutions are that the user must explicitly decide to invoke them  interrupting the normal browsing process  and the user must remain idle waiting for the search results. 
　　this paper introduces an agent  letizia  which operates in tandem with a conventional web browser such as mosaic or netscape. the agent tracks the user's browsing behavior ~ following links  initiating searches  requests for help - and tries to anticipate what items may be of interest to the user. it uses a simple set of heuristics to model what the user's browsing behavior might be. upon request  it can display a page containing its current recommendations  which the user can choose either to follow or to return to the conventional browsing activity. 
1 interleaving browsing with automated search 
　　the model adopted by letizia is that the search for information is a cooperative venture between the human user and an intelligent software agent. letizia and the user both browse the same search space of linked web documents  looking for  interesting  ones. no goals are predefined in advance. the difference between the user's search and letizia's is that the user's search has a reliable static evaluation function  but that letizia can explore search alternatives faster than the user can. letizia uses the past behavior of the user to anticipate a rough approximation of the user's interests. 
　　
　　critical to letizia's design is its control structure  in which the user can manually browse documents and conduct searches  without interruption from letizia. letizia's role during user interaction is merely to observe and make inferences from observation of the user's actions that will be relevant to future requests. 
　　in parallel with the user's browsing  letizia conducts a resource-limited search to anticipate the possible future needs of the user. at any time  the user may request a set of recommendations from letizia based on the current state of the user's browsing and letizia's search. such recommendations are dynamically recomputed when anything changes or at the user's request. 
　　letizia is in the tradition of behavior-based interface agents  maes 1    lashkari  metral  and maes 1 . rather than rely on a preprogrammed knowledge representation structure to make decisions  the knowledge about the domain is incrementally acquired as a result of inferences from the user's concrete actions. 
　　letizia adopts a strategy that is midway between the conventional perspectives of information retrieval and information filtering  sheth and maes 1 . information retrieval suggests the image of a user actively querying a base of  mostly irrelevant  knowledge in the hopes of extracting a small amount of relevant material. information filtering paints the user as the passive target of a stream of  mostly relevant  material  where the task is to remove or de-emphasize less relevant material. letizia can interleave both retrieval and filtering behavior initiated either by the user or by the agent. 
1 modeling the user's browsing process 
　　the user's browsing process is typically to examine the current html document in the web browser  decide which  if any  links to follow  or to return to a document previously encountered in the history  or to return to a document explicitly recorded in a hot list  or to add the current document to the hot list. 
　　the goal of the letizia agent is to automatically perform some of the exploration that the user would have done while the user is browsing these or other documents  and to evaluate the results from what it can determine to be the user's perspective. upon request  letizia provides recommendations for further action on the user's part  usually in the form of following links to other documents. 
　　letizia's leverage comes from overlapping search and evaluation with the  idle time  during which the user is reading a document. since the user is almost always a better judge of the relevance of a document than the system  it is usually not worth making the user wait for the result of an automated retrieval if that would interrupt the browsing process. the best use of letizia's recommendations is when the user is unsure of what to do next. letizia never takes control of the user interface  but just provides suggestions. 
　　because letizia can assume to be operating in a situation where the user has invited its assistance  its simulation of the user's intent need not be extremely accurate for it to be useful. its guesses only need be better than no guess at all  and so even weak heuristics can be employed. 
1 inferences from the user's browsing behavior 
　　observation of the user's browsing behavior can tell the system much about the user's interests. each of these heuristics is weak by itself  but each can contribute to a 
judgment about the document's interest. 
　　one of the strongest behaviors is for the user to save a reference to a document  explicitly indicating interest. following a link can indicate one of several things. first  the decision to follow a link can indicate interest in the topic of the link. however  because the user does not know what is referenced by the link at the time the decision to follow it has been made  that indication of interest is tentative  at best. if the user returns immediately without having either saved the target document  or followed further links  an indication of disinterest can be assumed. letizia saves the user considerable time that would be wasted exploring those  dead-end  links. 
　　following a link is  however  a good indicator of interest in the document containing the link. pages that contain lots of links that the user finds worth following are interesting. repeatedly returning to a document also connotes interest  as would spending a lot of time browsing it  relative to its length   if we tracked dwell time. 
　　since there is a tendency to browse links in a top-tobottom  left-to-right manner  a link that has been  passed over  can be assumed to be less interesting. a link is passed over if it remains unchosen while the user chooses other links that appear later in the document. later choice of that link can reverse the indication. 
　　letizia does not have natural language understanding capability  so its content model of a document is simply as a list of keywords. partial natural language capabilities that can extract some grammatical and semantic information quickly  even though they do not perform full natural language understanding  lehnert 1  could greatly improve its accuracy. 
　　letizia uses an extensible object-oriented architecture to facilitate the incorporation of new heuristics to determine interest in a document  dependent on the user's actions  history  and the current interactive context as well as the content of the document. 
	ueberman 	1 
　　

later  the user independently browses a personal web page  with a publications list. letizia recommends articles having to do with  agents . 
1 	knowledge representation 
1 an example 
　　in the example  the user starts out by browsing home pages for various general topics such as artificial intelligence. our user is particularly interested in topics involving agents  so he or she zeros in on pages that treat that topic  such as the general agent info page  above. many pages will have the word agent in the name  the user may search for the word agent in a search page  etc. and so the system can infer an interest in the topic of agents from the browsing behavior. 
　　at a later time  the user is browsing personal home pages  perhaps reached through an entirely different route. a personal home page for an author may contain a list of that author's publications. as the user is browsing through some of the publications  letizia can concurrently be scanning the list of publications to find which ones may have relevance to a topic for which interest was previously inferred  in this case the topic agents. those papers in the publication list dealing with agents are suggested by 
letizia. 
　　letizia can also explain why it has chosen that document. in many instances  this represents not the only reason for having chosen it  but it selects one of the stronger reasons to establish plausibility. in this case  it noticed a keyword from a previous exploration  and in the other case  a comparison was made to a document that also appeared in the list returned by the bibliography search. 
1 persistence of interest 
　　one of the most compelling reasons to adopt a letizialike agent is the phenomenon of persistence of interest. when the user indicates interest by following a link or performing a search on a keyword  their interest in that topic rarely ends with the returning of results for that particular search. 
　　though the user typically continues to be interested in the topic  he or she often cannot take the time to restate interest at every opportunity  when another link or search opportunity arises with the same or related subject. thus the agent serves the role of remembering and looking out for interests that were expressed with past actions. 
　　persistence of interest is also valuable in capturing users' preferred personal strategies for finding information. many web nodes have both subject-oriented and personoriented indices. the web page for a university or company department typically contains links to the major topics of the department's activity  and also links to the home pages of the department's personnel. a particular piece of work may be linked to by both the subject and the author. 
　　some users may habitually prefer to trace through personal links rather than subject links  because they may already have friends in the organization or in the field  or 
	lieberman 	1 
　　
just because they may be more socially oriented in general. an agent such as letizia picks up such preferences  through references to links labeled as  people   or through noticing particular names that may appear again and again in different  though related  contexts. 
　　indications of interest probably ought to have a factor of decaying over time so that the agent does not get clogged with searching for interests that may indeed have fallen from the user's attention. some actions may have been highly dependent upon the local context  and should be forgotten unless they are reinforced by more recent action. another heuristic for forgetting is to discount suggestions that were formulated very far in  distance  from the present position  measured in number of web links from the original point of discovery. 
　　further  persistence of interest is important in uncovering serendipitous connections  which is a major goal of information browsing. while searching for one topic  one might accidentally uncover information of tremendous interest on another  seemingly unrelated  topic. this happens surprisingly often  partly because seemingly unrelated topics are often related through non-obvious connections. an important role for the agent to play is in constantly being available to notice such connections and bring them to the user's attention. 
1 search strategies 
　　the interface structure of many web browsers encourages depth first search  since every time one descends a level the choices at the next lower level are immediately displayed. one must return to the containing document to explore brother links at the same level  a twostep process in the interface. when the user is exploring in a relatively undirected fashion  the tendency is to continue to explore downward links in a depth-first fashion. after a while  the user finds him or herself very deep in a stack of previously chosen documents  and  especially in the absence of much visual representation of the context  this leads to a  lost in hyperspace  feeling. 
　　the depth-first orientation is unfortunate  as much information of interest to users is typically embedded rather shallowly in the web hierarchy. letizia compensates for this by employing a breadth-first search. it achieves utility in part by reminding users of neighboring links that might escape notice. it makes user exploration more efficient by automatically eliding many of the  dead-end  links that waste users' time. 
　　the depth of letizia's search is also limited in practice by the effects of user interaction. web pages tend to be of relatively similar size in terms of amount of text and number of links per page  and users tend to move from one web node to another at relatively constant intervals. each user movement immediately refocuses the search  which prevents it from getting too far afield. 
　　the search is still potentially combinatorially explosive  so we put a resource limitation on search activity. this limit is expressed as a maximum number of accesses to non-local web nodes per minute. after that 
1 	knowledge representation 
number is reached  letizia remains quiescent until the next user-initiated interaction. 
　　letizia will not initiate further searches when it reaches a page that contains a search form  even though it could benefit enormously by doing so  in part because there is as yet no agreed-upon web convention for timebounding the search effort. letizia will  however  recommend that a user go to a page containing a search form. 
　　in practice  the pacing of user interaction and letizia's internal processing time tends to keep resource consumption manageable. like all autonomous web searching  robots   there exists the potential for overloading the net with robot-generated communication activity. we intend to adhere to conventions for  robot exclusion  and other  robot ethics  principles as they are 
agreed upon by the network community. 	1 
1 related work 
　　work on intelligent agents for information browsing is still in its infancy. the closest work to this is  armstrong  et. al. 1   especially in the interface aspects of annotating documents that are being browsed independently by the user. letizia differs in that it does not require the user to state a goal at the outset  instead trying to infer  goals  implicitly from the user's browsing behavior. also quite relevant is  balabonovic and shoham 1   which requires the user to explicitly evaluate pages. again  we try to infer evaluations from user actions. both explicit statements of goals and explicit evaluations of the results of browsing actions do have the effect of speeding up the learning algorithm and making it more predictable  at the cost of additional user interaction. 
　　 etzioni and weld 1    knoblock and arens 1   and  perkowitz and etzioni 1  are examples of a knowledgeintensive approach  where the agent is pre-programmed with an extensive model of what resources are available on the network and how to access them. the knowledge-based approach is complementary to the relatively pure behaviorbased approach here  and they could be used together. 
　　automated  web crawlers   koster 1  have neither the knowledge-based approach nor the interactive learning approach . they use more conventional search and indexing techniques. they tend to assume a more conventional question-and-answer interface mode  where the user delegates a task to the agent  and then waits for the result. they don't have any provision for making use of concurrent browsing activity or learning from the user's browsing behavior. 
　　laura robin  robin 1  explored using an interactive  resource-limited  interest-dependent best-first search in a browser for a linked multimedia environment. some of the ideas about control structure were also explored in a 
　　different context in  lieberman 1 . 
　　
1 implementation 
　　letizia is implemented in macintosh common lisp. it uses netscape as a web browser and user interface. the agent runs as a separate process  and communication between lisp and netscape takes place using appleevents and applescript interprocess communication. currently  we are severely limited by the extent to which netscape is programmable via appleevents. html is parsed using the zebu parser-generator  laubsch 1 . 
acknowledgments 
　　this work has been supported in part by research grants to the mit media laboratory from alenia  arpa/jnids  apple computer  the national science foundation  and other media lab sponsors. 
