 
any phenomenon can be seen under a more or less precise granularity  depending on the kind of details which are perceivable. this can be applied to time and space. a characteristic of abstract spaces such as the one used for representing time is their granularity independence  i.e. the fact that they have the same structure under different granularities. so  time  places  and their relationships can be seen under different granularities and they still behave like time places and relationships under each granularity. however  they do not remain exactly the same time places and relationships. here is presented a pair of operators for converting  upward and downward  qualitative time relationships from one granularity to another. these operators are the only ones to satisfy a set of six constraints which characterize granularity changes. they are also shown to be useful for spatial relationships. 
1. introduction 
    imagine  you are biking in a flat countryside. at some distance ahead of you there is something still. you are just able to say  a  that a truck  t  is aside a house  h   it seems that they meet. when you come closer to them  b  you are able to distinguish a bumper  b  between them  and even closer  c   you can perceive the space between the bumper and the house.  
   this little story shows the description of the same reality perceived at several resolution levels: this is called granularity. granularity would not be a problem if different individuals  institutions  etc. would use the same granularity. this is not the case and  moreover  these individuals communicate data expressed under different granularities. there could be a problem if  for instance  someone at position  a   asked  how would you call that which is between h and t   because at that granularity  the description of the scene would assume that there is nothing between h and t. the study of granular knowledge representation thus tries to express how the same phenomenon can  in some sense  be consistently expressed in different manners under different granularities. this is achieved through operators which  for a situation expressed 
1 	knowledge representation 

figure 1. the same scene under three different granularities. 
this is taken as a spatial metaphor for time granularity and is used throughout the paper. 
   granularity can be applied to the fusion of knowledge provided by sources of different resolution  for instance  agents - human or computers - communicating about the same situation  and to the structuring of reasoning by drawing inference at the right level of resolution  in the example of figure 1  the granularity  a  is informative enough for deciding that the truck driving wheel is on the left of the house - from the standpoint of the observer . 
   on one hand  in  hobbs 1   granularity is expressed in an abstract way  i.e. not connected to time  between two  more or less detailed  logical theories. on the other hand  the physical time-space and its representation have been wellstudied because many applications require them. a very popular way to deal with time  allen 1  and space  egenhofer& 1; randell& 1  is the representation of relationships between areas of these spaces.  montanari& 1; ciapessoni& 1  introduced operators for quantitative time granularity which share a common ground with those of  euzenat 1 . 
   the paper first recalls some basics about time representation  ′1 . this section can be skipped by those who already know the subject. then  the usual interpretations of time and granularity in this context are 

introduced. afterwards  required properties for granularity change operators in the classical time algebra are presented 
. this part is very important since  once accepted  the remainder is directly deduced. the only set of operators  for instant and interval algebra  satisfying the required properties are thus deduced in . the extension of granularity operators towards space representation is then briefly discussed 
   the proofs of all the propositions  but the  only  part of the first one  can be found in  euzenat 1 . 
1. background 
   classical notions about temporal algebras  neighborhood structures and instant-interval conversions are presented here. 
1. temporal algebra 
   there has been considerable work carried out on qualitative time representation. here are reminded several notions about the algebra of topological and vectorial relationships holding between time entities. 
   an instant is a durationless temporal entity  also called time point by analogy with a point on a line . it can be numerically represented by a date. qualitatively representing these instants requires identifying them and putting them in relation. there are three possible mutually exclusive relationships between instants. they are called  before        after      and  simultaneously   = . the set {  =  } is called a1. 

table 1. the 1 relationships between instants xl and x1. 
   it is sometimes possible to deduce the relationship between two instants x and z  even if it has not been provided  by propagating the otherwise known relationships. for instance  if x is simultaneous  { = }  to y which is anterior       to z  then x is anterior to z; this is called composition of temporal relations. the composition operator x1 is represented by a composition table  table 1  which indeed indicates that =x1  gives {  . 

table 1. composition table between instant relationships. 
   a  continuous  period is a temporal entity with duration. it can be thought of as a segment on a straight line. a numerical representation of a period is an interval: a couple of bounds  beginning instant  ending instant  or a beginning instant and a duration. intervals can be manipulated through a set of 1 mutually exclusive temporal relationships between two intervals  see table 1 ; this set is called a1. 

table 1. the 1 relationships between two intervals xl and x1. 
   the composition operator x1 is represented by a composition table  allen 1   similar to the table 1  which allows to deduce  from a set of intervals and constraints between these intervals  the possible relations between any two of these intervals. 
1. 	extensions of notations 
   let be the logical disjunction and x be the composition operator on t  the following notations are used  in a general manner   is an algebra of binary relationships . the lack of knowledge concerning the actual position of some temporal entity x with regard to the temporal entity y is expressed by a sub-set p of t which is interpreted as the disjunction of the relations in p: 

   thus  x{b m}y signifies that the temporal entity x is anterior to or meets the temporal entity y. the following conventions are used below: 
  when a result is valid for both algebras  no distinction is made between the temporal entities concerned. the base sets  a1  a1  and maybe others   as well as the composition x and reciprocity 
-1
 operators are not distinguished; 
  the letter p represents a sub-set of the corresponding base set of relations ; the letter  r  represents a relationship. 
  p 1 represents the set of relations reciprocal of those 
	  	
1. neighborhood structure 
   two qualitative relations between two entities are called conceptual neighbors if they can be transformed into one another through continuous deformation of the entities  freksa 1a . a conceptual neighborhood is a set of relations whose elements constitute a connected sub-graph of the neighborhood graph. 
	euzenat 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 
1. properties for granularity change operators 
   anyone can think about a particular set of such operators by imagining the effects of coarseness. but here are provided a set of properties which should be satisfied by any system of granularity conversion operators. in fact  the set of properties is very small. next section shows that they are sufficient for restricting the number of operators to only one  plus the expected operators corresponding to identity and conversion to everything . 
self-conservation 
   self-conservation states that whatever be the conversion  a relationship must belong to its own conversion. it is quite a sensible and minimal property: the knowledge about the relationship can be less precise but it must have a chance to be correct. 
		 self-conservation  
neighborhood compatibility 
   a property considered formerly is the order preservation property  hobbs 1  which states  a part of this : 
 order preservation  
   however  this property has the shortcoming of being vectorial rather than purely topological. its topological generalization  is reciprocal avoidance: 
  reciprocal avoidance  
   reciprocal avoidance  is over-generalized and causes problems with auto-reciprocal relationships  i.e. such that 
. the neighborhood compatibility  while not expressed in  euzenat 1  has been taken into account informally: it constrains the conversion of a relation to form a conceptual neighborhood  and hence the conversion of a conceptual neighborhood to form a conceptual neighborhood . 
	 1  	
 neighborhood compatibility  
   this property has already been reported by christian freksa  1al who considers that a set of relationships must be a conceptual neighborhood for pretending being a coarse representation of the actual relationship.  1  is weaker than the two former proposals because it does not forbid the opposite to be part of the conversion  but  in such a case  it constrains whatever be in between the opposite to be in the conversion too. neighborhood compatibility seems to be the right property  partly because  instead of the former ones  it does not forbid a very coarse grain under which any relationship is converted in the whole set of relations. it also seems natural because granularity can hardly be imagined as discontinuous  at least in continuous spaces . 
	euzenat 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

proposition: the upward/downward operators for a1 of table 1 are the only one to satisfy the property  1  with regard to the operators of a1 of table 1. 
proposition: the upward/downward operators for a1 of table 1 satisfy the properties  1  through  1 . 
   the reader is invited to check on the example of figure 1  that what has been said about instant operators is still valid. the upward operator does not satisfy the condition  1  for bfigure 1. the representation and relationship implied by  respectively  a global cartesian reference frame  a global sectorial reference frame and a local sectorial reference frame. 
   these two schemes are either too rigid or too loose. the ideal solution would be to treat independently concepts such as containment  topology  or orientation  vectorial spaces . there are various ways to deal with orientation: global reference frame  gusgen 1   global sectorial reference 
	euzenat 	1 

frame  hernandez 1  and local  to each object  sectorial reference frame  freksa 1b . granularity has been introduced in the former while the two latter introduce a new problem: the expression of orientation is also subject to granularity. however  the formal treatment presented above does only consider the structure subject to granularity. such a structure  t -1  x n  is made of: 
  a set of relations t; 
  a converse operator  t is closed by  1 ; 
  a composition operation x; 
  a neighborhood relation n. 
   it seems that such a structure can be given to orientation representation as introduced in  freksa 1b; 
hernandez 1   the existence and unicity of granularity operators  seem intuitively correct  but remain to be proved. 
1. related works 
   jerry hobbs introduced the concept of granularity from the non distinguishability of particular terms with regard to a given set of predicates  these terms can be substituted in the range of any of the predicates without changing their validity . here  the granularity has been given a priori  in the structure of time and the scaling notion  while hobbs defines a granularity with regard to relevant predicates. to our knowledge there is no other proposal for integrating granularity into qualitative time representation. 
　　there has been tremendous work on granularity in metric spaces. one of the more elaborate model is that of  montanari& 1; ciapessoni& 1 . it proposes a quantitative temporal granularity based on a hierarchy of granularities strictly constrained  to be convertible  divisible  etc.  which offers upward and downward conversion operators for instants and intervals  instead of their relationships .  euzenat 1  offers a more general  i.e. less constrained  framework for quantitative relationships and thus achieves weaker properties. hence  the properties obtained here for qualitative representation are compatible with the quantitative representation of  montanari& 1; ciapessoni& 1 . 
1  conclusion 
　　in order to understand the relationships between several granularities  a set of requirements have been established for conversion operators. the only possible operators filling these requirements have been defined. moreover other properties of the operators have been established 
 preservation of the relationship between points and interval  and other operators for other kind of spaces can be derived for the actual operators for time. these operators can be used for combining information coming from different sources and overcoming their contradictory appearance.  euzenat 1  provides more results about the relationship between granularity and inference which can be used for implementing reasoning algorithms. 
1 	knowledge representation 
acknowledgements 
   many thanks to hany tolba who carefully commented a longer version of this paper. 
