 
we present efficient techniques for computing near optimal strategies for a class of stochastic commodity trading problems modeled as markov decision processes  mdps . the process has a continuous state space and a large action space and cannot be solved efficiently by standard dynamic programming methods. we exploit structural properties of the process  and combine it with montecarlo estimation techniques to obtain novel and efficient algorithms that closely approximate the optimal strategies. 
1 	introduction 
investment is an act of incurring immediate cost in the expectation of future rewards. investments options are typically characterized by three parameters: the initial and accumulated costs  the uncertainty over the future rewards  and the leeway in timing the actions. investors try to optimize their decision with respect to these parameters. modern economics theory models the uncertainty of future rewards as a stochastic process defining future price curves. the process is typically an ito process  dixit and pindyck  1  that is markovian  thus investment decision can be modeled as a markov decision process  mdp  where a state of the underlying process needs only to include the current investment portfolio and current prices. while the mdp gives a succinct formalization of the investment decision processes it does not necessarily imply efficient algorithms for computing optimal strategies. the markov decision process has a continuous state space and a potentially large action space and cannot be solved efficiently by standard dynamic programming methods. a challenging goal in this research area is to characterize special cases of the general investment paradigm that are interesting enough from the application point of view while simple enough to allow efficiently computable analytic solutions. 
　in this work we focus on stochastic planning in the context of commodity trading. commodity can be bought  stored and eventually sold. in addition to the initial cost of buying the commodity  the investment decision must take into account the accumulated cost of storage till the commodity is sold. a standard assumption in mathematical economics is that commodity prices  e.g oil and copper  are best modeled as a mean re verting stochastic process. we study several versions of the commodity trading problem. in the simplest version we assume that there are no restrictions on the amount of commodity that an investor can buy  store or sell at a given time. we give an efficiently computable optimal analytic solution for that case. the problem becomes significantly harder when we turn to a more realistic setting in which there are constrains on the amount of commodity that a trader can buy store and in particular sell at a given time. we present an efficient montecarlo technique that generates an approximate optimal trading policy with volume and storage constrains. 
　there has been extensive research in ai in recent years on solving mdps with large state spaces exploiting specific problem structures  in particular through factoring and decompositions  boutilier et a/.  1; dearden and boutilier  1; dean and lin  1; meuleau et a/.  1 . however  all these work assume finite or at least discrete state space. our solution relies on structure analysis of the problem combined with a monte-carlo approximation technique. we show that when prices follow a mean-reverting process  the optimal policy for the constrained commodity trading problem has an elegant compact parametric form. this observation allows for a significant reduction in the space of possible optimal policies. furthermore  we show that individual parameters  which represent a stack of decision thresholds  can be optimized incrementally thus further reducing the complexity of the problem-solving task. 
1 the model 
mathematical economics models commodity price fluctuations as an ito mean-reverting process  ornstein-uhlenbeck process   dixit and pindyck  1   where changes in price satisfy a stochastic differential equation 

such that  is the  random  increment of a wiener process  brownian motion with normally distributed increments   is the long term average price of the commodity i.e. a value to which the process reverts   is the speed of reversion  and  is the standard deviation of the random component. 

1 	uncertainty and probabilistic reasoning 

　　trading occurs at discrete time steps  and price fluctuation between two consecutive steps is modeled by the discrete version {dixit and pindyck  1 : 
1  
where  is a sequence of independent random variables with normal distribution  
　the agent  investor  can buy and sell the commodity at different time steps. there is a fixed cost  for storing a unit of community for a unit time interval. the cost of money  the interest rate  is denoted by  we assume that the volume of commodity traded by the agent is small with respect to the total market of that commodity  so that the agent's strategy does not affect the above parameters. in the more general setting there are limits on the number of units a trader can buy and sell in every step  and on the total number of units that can be stored  denoted respectively . 
objectives 
our goal is to determine the best  profit maximizing  trading strategy for a given initial state  which is determined by the current price and amount of commodity the agent owns. we use the standard valuation method  the expected net present value  npv  function  see e.g.  brealey and myers  1; trigeorgis  1  : 
is a 
discount factor  is the decision horizon  and mt is cash flow at time  thus our goal is to find such that  s  is maximized. the objective function corresponds to discounted versions of standard finite or infinite horizon criteria  see  bellman  1; puterman  1   where rewards correspond to cash flows. 
　　in the following we focus on the infinite horizon investment problem. the trading strategy for this case is represented as  mapping the current price pt and number of units of commodity we own to the number of units to be held in the next step the results for the infinite trading horizon can be adopted to the finite horizon problem. 
example 
our model fits a variety of applications. a typical example is oil-trading problem. oil can be bought and sold in the market. the changes of oil prices on the market follow the mean reverting process  dixit and pindyck  1  and individual trading activities do not affect the market price. oil can be stored at a fixed cost per unit  and there are obvious constraints on the amounts that can be stored and released in short time intervals. 
1 	standard approach and its shortcomings 
the value  expected npv  of a strategy can be expressed using the bellman equation  bellman  1 : 

 where a state is a cross-product of a commodity price and the amount of commodity held denotes the 
expected one-step cash flow resulting from action maps the current commodity holdings to the next state commodity holdings under the action dictated by the policy and denotes a distribution of next state prices  a normal distribution defined by equation 1 . in general it is extremely hard to evaluate a given strategy because of the size of a state space we face  in one step we can reach any price  and there is no closed form solution to the integral part. the task of finding the optimal policy is even worse as the space of policies we need to choose from is even larger. thus  standard dynamic programming approaches cannot be applied directly and we must resort to methods that exploit the problem structure. 
1 trading without constraints 
to solve the case with no limits on buy  sell and store activities  it is sufficient to study the problem of investing one unit of commodity  since the strategy for one unit can be replicated for any number of units. 
　a strategy for the one-unit problem at any point in time is restricted to only two choices: 1  do not invest  do not hold the commodity  and 1  hold  invest in the commodity . because buy and sell prices are always the same and prices change independently of our trading  the expected net present value of a one-unit strategy  can be expressed in terms of step-wise gains: 

　　intuitively  we can replicate payoffs from any strategy by always selling the commodity held at the end of the step and buy it back when the strategy requires us to hold the commodity in the next time step. the term reflects the fact that we always sell  pretend to sell  the initial commodity at price thus  we can restrict our search to policies of the form mapping prices to actions. the value function for such a policy can be rewritten as: 
where is the value function for the policystarting  from a zero commodity state. satisfies 
 1  
is the expected gain for holding the commodity for 
is a storage cost and 
             is the expected next step price. a nice feature of equation 1 is that the contribution from following the policy in the future  integral part  is independent of the action choice 
hauskrecht  pandurangan  and upfal 	1 

in the first step. this leads to the fact that the greedy one-step lookahead strategy is optimal.1 
theorem 1 the strategy n maximizingthe expected one-step gain is optimal. 
proof follows directly from equation 1 and the independence of future values on current actions. 
the value of the optimal one-unit policy can be written as: 
 1  
denoting the expected gain for holding 
zero units of commodity. the optimal policy satisfies: 

the important thing about this is that we know how to find the optimal policy easily and this despite the fact that its value is hard to compute. 
1 	decision threshold 
as the expected gain from not holding the commodity is 
1  the choice to hold the commodity is justified only when that is  when the expected gain is positive. 
using equation 1  we get the condition for choosing the  hold  action: 
		 1  
thus  we obtain a simple and compact policy: hold the commodity when the price is lower than  note that the optimal threshold price depends solely on the parameters of the mean reverting process and discount  
1 	trading with constraints 
we consider three types of constraints: buy  sell and store limits. we start with buy and store constraints. 
1 	buy and store constraints 
the buy and store constraints are relatively easy to handle when no restriction on the sell is imposed simply  we always want to take the maximum advantage of a positive gain for investing in the next step. thus  we always hold the maximum amount of commodity allowed by the buy and store limits  whenever the optimal one-unit policy recommends to hold. that is: 

　　1  we note the optimality of a greedy one step lookahead strategy holds not only for the mean reverting process  but also for a more general ito process. 
1 	sell limit problem 
the sell limit is tricky  since .trader may not be able to immediately realize all gains if he holds more units than the sell limit a naive solution would be to limit the holding to the sell limit  but such policy is obviously sub-optimal. 
　in studying this case we can assume w.l.o.g. that the sell limit is 1. the solution for an arbitrary sell constraint 1 is then obtained by replicating the optimal strategy with sell limit 1. in the following we first study a special case in which a trader is allowed to hold at most 1 units of commodity  with sell constraint 1  and find the corresponding optimal policy. later we generalize the idea to any number of units. 
1 	trading two units under sell limit 
to solve the two units case we restrict our attention to strategies that always try to trade the first unit using the optimal one-unit strategy. then our goal is to simply find how and when to invest in the second commodity. we show later that this approach indeed leads to the optimal solution. 
	let be a set of policies 	mapping cur-
rent prices to commodity choices  such that always follows the optimal one-unit strategy for the first unit and chooses to hold the second unit arbitrarily but only when  thus  is described as: 
may not be directly appli-
cable to the two-unit case and can violate the sell capacity. this happens when recommends to hold two units of the commodity for some price in one step and is forced to recommend 1 units when the next step price jumps above 

　　to fix this problem we define a set of policies ii1  such that for every there is a policy  mapping current price and current commodity holding to the next step commodity choice and is defined as: 
 1  
the idea behind ti1 is that it replicates when it is consistent with sell constraints  otherwise it recommends to reduce the number of units of commodity held by 1. because  induces  we call it a generating policy. 
     to find the optimal investment rule for the second unit we try to quantify its added value. to do this  we create a strategy that recommends to hold two units of commodity when and this only for the first step  otherwise it follows the optimal one-unit policy. the value for such a policy for price and zero units of commodity in terms of gains is: 
 note that due to the sell limit the second unit of commodity is always held also in the second step. this is captured by the the key trick now is to rewrite for 

1 	uncertainty and probabilistic reasoning 

where 
		 1  
is the expected added gain for investing in the second unit of commodity for  represents the difference from investing in the second unit of commodity at compared to the optimal one-unit strategy. it consists of two terms: the expected gain from holding the commodity for one step plus a correction term  a kind of expected loss or negative gain  for holding it one more step in the case we would like to sell it but sell constraint does not allow us to do that. note that depends solely on the price of a commodity and also  
　the other important feature is that by substituting  p  1  from equation 1  the value equals: 

which means that the integral part of the expression now becomes independent of the commodity held in the first step and disregards any units we were not able to sell. intuitively  under expectations  the term  allows us to pretend that we were able to sell both units at the end of the previous step without restriction  though in reality when the price  climbs above we have to keep one unit and sell it later when the sell capacity is available. 
　using the fact that allows us to disregard any commodity left from previous steps we can express the value 
function for an arbitrary policy 
　the theorem shows how to get the optimal policy from ti for the zero commodity start state. this policy can be applied also to the non-zero commodity state in a straightforward way. 
　up to this point we know how to find the best  optimal  policy from  this policy is no worse than  that trades only one unit  simply because however  this does not necessarily imply that the optimal two-unit strategy  is also globally optimal. 
theorem 1 is the optimal two-unit strategy. 
proof to prove this we need to show that the optimal policy always resides in  the opposite can happen only when:  1  the optimal strategy is not incremental  the optimal choice for the first unit does not imply the optimal choice for two units case  and  1  the optimal strategy depends on c  such that the relation is not captured by equation 1  and relation . 
   the incremental property follows from the fact that the maximum gain we can capture by any unit is  which equals the expected gain for the first unit. thus the policy must always trade the first unit optimally. using the incremental result  the relation in equation 1 can be violated only when the globally optimal policy at some point recommends to hold 1 units and does not  or vice versa. however  this cannot happen as it would mean that we choose to hold the second unit when is negative or not to hold it when it is positive. thus must be the optimal policy. 
threshold price for the second unit 
the optimal two-unit strategy says that we want to invest into the second unit only when  the question now is if we can come up with a compact representation of this 

proof using equation 1  and the fact that the integral part becomes independent of the amount of commodity we actually held in the previous step  we can maximize the value of condition  similarly to the threshold price for the one-unit case. indeed  we can show that if ever becomes positive  there is a unique threshold value such that when then is guaranteed. this follows di-
decreasing is that there is a unique zero point such that for any 1. therefore  the optimal gen-
erating strategy 	for trading two units of commodity  with 

 a policy by maximizing the sum of expected gains. that is: the sell constraint 1  can be defined compactly using a set of  threshold prices 
	hauskrecht  pandurangan  and upfal 	1 

the optimal strategy  is then compactly represented 
as: 

1 	trading -units under sell limit 
in principle the same ideas as used for the two-unit case can be applied to find the optimal strategy  for trading at most  units of commodity. such a policy is guaranteed to be no worse than the policy for trading smaller number of units. we summarize the main results and conclusions  the detailed analysis is deferred to the full paper. 
　the expected added gain from holding  unit of comis defined recursively as: 
equals: 


 for the sell limit 1 can be then compactly rep-
resented as: 

1 	solution for buy  sell and store limits 
the optimal policy for at most  units of commodity and the sell constraint  can be derived directly from the solution for the sell limit 1: 

　adding buy and store constraints to this result is easy and results in the following policy: 

1 finding optimal thresholds 
the optimal policy for  units can be represented compactly using a set of threshold prices  the threshold price for unit is the zero of the the expected added gain for the unit  = 1. as the value of depends only on threshold prices 
the set of threshold prices can be built 
incrementally. 
　the main problem in this process is that there is no closed form solution for finding the zero point of  

figure 1: the optimal generating policy with sell limit 1  
 1   1   1   1   1. stepwise changes reflect positions of thresholds. 
 is the only exception . thus  in order to find the threshold values for  we resort to stochastic  monte carlo  approximation techniques  see  kushner and yin  
1  . in particular we use the robbins-monro scheme  which finds the zero of the function  iteratively using the update 
where   is the price value at the 	iteration  	is 
the  noisy  estimate of the function at obtained by monte carlo sampling from equation 1. the sequence e  is used to  average out  the  noisy  estimates from the monte-carlo sampling. we use the standard sequence   which converges  under reasonable assumptions  to the zero value with probability one. since is monotonous there is a unique root such that 
 kushner and yin  1  also give more 
details on the rate of convergence. 
　the process for finding new thresholds can be applied incrementally to find the solution for an arbitrary number of units. the issue that remains open is that there can be an infinite number of thresholds to define the complete solution. however  thresholds for larger values of are less likely to be used  as they cover the range of prices with extremely small chance of occurrence. thus if the initial price is in a reasonable range more complex policies tend to contribute less. 
　to provide for more robustness  we propose an on-line algorithm that keeps building thresholds on the demand basis. that is  only when price encountered in not covered by a current set of thresholds  we start to work on thresholds for higher values of  note that this algorithm can be further refined into an anytime scheme  dean  1   suitable for time critical settings. 
1 experimental results 
we have tested our approach on several sets of parameters. 
figure 1 illustrates a typical policy. to find the zero points of expected added gain functions  we used the basic 

1 	uncertainty and probabilistic reasoning 


figure 1: average npv for strategies with varying number of thresholds and different initial prices. 
robbins-monro algorithm for 1 steps. we use the average of 1 runs. the thresholds were computed incrementally starting from the interesting observation is that for larger values of thresholds become about equally spaced. in such a situation the policy can be more compactly represented using a linear function  directly mapping prices to recommended commodity holdings. 
   the effect of strategy refinement  adding more thresholds and potentially investing more units  on the quality of the solution is illustrated in figure 1. the results show average profit over 1 runs for different policies and different starting prices. we see that more complex policies with more thresholds tend to improve the profit performance initially. this effect becomes less significant for larger and expected profits converge to the optimal value since the prices reach lower values very rarely  the probability of using thresholds for larger  is very small and corresponding more complex policies are only rarely utilized. 
1 	conclusion 
we have presented an efficient method for finding the near optimal policies for the commodity planning problem with trading and storage constraints. the problem has continuous state space and large action space and cannot be solved efficiently by standard dynamic programming solutions. our solution relies on the analysis of the domain and takes advantage of a problem structure and monte carlo approximation techniques. we showed that the optimal policy for the commodity trading problem with a mean-reverting price model and trading constraints can be represented compactly using a stack of decision  price  thresholds for investing in additional units of commodity. the thresholds correspond to zero points of expected added gain functions  which we also derived. as these functions do not have analytical solution  we apply monte carlo approximation techniques to find their zero points. the properties of the functions guarantee uniqueness of the solution and convergence of the approximation scheme. interesting questions and opened issues that remain to be addressed include the theoretical bound on the number of thresholds necessary to guarantee the near optimal strategy  and exploration of more compact parametric representations of the policy  mapping prices to the number of units to hold directly  these would eliminate the need to remember all threshold values . finally  a number of interesting problems will arise if we relax some of the current assumptions of the model. possible refinements may include price spreads  concurrent trading at multiple interconnected sites  or demand/supply sensitive price models. 
acknowledgement 
we wish to thank oliver frankel of goldman sachs for introducing us to this problem and for valuable technical discus-
sions. 
