 
a theory of shape is important for ai both for recognition and description of objects and for reasoning about the possible behaviours of objects. theories of shape may be loosely classified as either volume-based or outline-based. we present a theory of the latter type  initially confined to two-dimensional outlines. we represent outlines by means of strings over an alphabet of seven qualitative curvature types  and give a regular grammar which generates the strings corresponding to possible outlines. we use subsets of the curvature-type alphabet to characterise cognitively salient subclasses of outlines  with corresponding regular subgrammars  and use decusping  smoothing  and merging operators to simplify outlines for representation at coarser granularity. we give an algorithm for deriving the curvature sequence of an outline  using only local information obtained as the outline is traversed. finally  we indicate how more detailed  including quantitative  information can be incorporated into the theory. 
1 	introduction 
the recent upsurge of interest in qualitative spatial reasoning in artificial intelligence has given rise to prolific work in the analysis of such spatial attributes as position  orientation  and connectivity  but comparatively little seems to have been done on the equally important attribute of shape. one reason for this is surely that shape is by far the most complex  and hardest to specify  of ail spatial attributes; of the aforementioned attributes  only connectivity comes anywhere near shape in the number of degrees of freedom it exhibits. the one area of artificial intelligence in which shape has been studied in some detail is computer vision. here the approach tends to be rather more quantitative in nature than has been the norm in the knowledge representation community in which qualitative spatial reasoning 
   * richard meathrel's research is supported by epsrc award no. 1. 
has been developed. outside artificial intelligence we must look to cognitive psychology for the most pertinent work on the subject of shape  some of which will be briefly discussed below. 
　a theory of shape is important for ai on at least two counts. first  shape plays an important part in the recognition and description of objects. this is the aspect that has been focussed on in computer vision. second  since the possible behaviour of an object  particularly in interaction with other objects  is strongly constrained by its shape  reasoning about the behaviour of objects needs to be informed by a theory of shape. this reasoning may be concerned with something as simple as whether an object can fit into a container  size as well as shape is important here  of course   or whether one object can be concealed behind another  or it may be some much more complex chain of deductions concerning the behaviour of a complexly interlocking mechanism such as a clock  cf. faltings  . 
　existing approaches to shape may be loosely classified as either volume-based or outline-based. a complex solid object is composed of a number of smaller solid pieces put together in a particular way  as for example a coffeepot might consist of a body in the form of a truncated cone  with a handle in the form of a half-torus and a spout in the form of a cylinder obliquely cut off at one end. this type of volume-based description is exemplified by the work of biederrnan  and of marr and nishihara 1. the alternative approach is to characterise the form of the outline of the object  for example by noting the variation in curvature across different positions. examples of outline-based approaches to two-dimensional shape are those of ley ton  l1  and of hoffman and richards   as well as the  multiresolution  approach of cinque and lombardi . 
　in this paper we propose an outline-based approach to the classification of shape which is in certain respects more general than those just mentioned. leyton's work  for example  assumes that the shapes being studied have smooth outlines with continuous derivatives. while any shape can be approximated by such outlines  it seems to us to be something of a limitation of 
1  in two dimensions   volume  becomes  area . 
	galton and meathrel 	1 

a shape-classification system if the only way it provides to describe a triangle  for example  is as something approximated to by a certain class of smooth curves  those having just three curvature maxima . in our system  a triangle is given an exact representation1 which distinguishes it from any smooth curve. 
1 	existing outline-based approaches 
in this section we briefly review a number of existing outline-based approaches to shape  in order to provide a basis for comparison with the system we propose. it should be emphasised that any such scheme can be evaluated from three quite different standpoints. one of these concerns the techniques required for generating qualitative representations of shape from some antecedent  exact  representation  be it in the form of a digitised image or some continuous analogue of the shape itself. the second   internal   point of view presupposes the existence of qualitative representations within the scheme and considers issues such as their expressive scope  manipulability  and relationships to other such representations. the third point of view is concerned with the applicability of the scheme to new or pre-existing problems. we shall not attempt a full analysis of any of the schemes from all three points of view. 
1 	hoffman and richards 
hoffman and richards  view the identification of an object as a process carried out by the visual system  in which the description ascribed to the shape of an object is used as an initial index into a stored library of shapes. they see the primary problem of shape-description as that of correctly segmenting a shape into constituent parts. the key to such segmentation is provided by the following transversality regularity: 
 when two arbitrarily shaped surfaces are made to interpenetrate they always  i.e.  almost certainly  meet in a contour of concave discontinuity of their tangent planes.  
extrapolating from this principle  they base their object recognition system on the idea of identifying negative curvature minima on the outline of an object as points at which to segment it into parts. one problem with this  which these authors do not appear to address  is that in many cases these curvature minima alone do not determine where the segmentation lines should be drawn in the interior of the figure. given that we know the whereabouts of the part-defining boundary points  how do we complete the segmentation  
1 	ley ton 
leyton  presents a theory of shape which  like that of hoffman and richards  accords key importance to the curvature extrema around the outline of a shape. leyton uses curvature extrema  both maxima and minima  not 

to segment an object into parts  but to infer the history of processes that have acted on a shape to produce it. 
　the idea is that each type of curvature extremum is associated with a different kind of process in the deformational history of a shape  as follows: 

　with each process type is associated a continuation rule and a bifurcation rule defining the possible development of the process through time; by the table above a developmental sequence generated by these rules is translated into a corresponding sequence of outline types. by reasoning backwards one can use the current shape of an object to infer the processes which have acted on it to produce that shape. 
　the scope of leyton's theory is clearly limited to the shapes of objects which do acquire their shapes through a developmental sequence of the kind it is able to describe. this primarily limits it to  natural shapes such as tumors  clouds  and embryos . it cannot apply  for example  to most human artefacts  which are typically assembled out of separate components rather than formed by a process of deformation. another limitation is that the theory  as stated  can only apply to shapes whose outlines are smooth  continuously differentiable curves: no cusps  angles  or straight sections are allowed. 
1 	cinque and lombardi 
the multiresolution approach of cinque and lombardi 
 enables them to generate a sequence of strings characterising the same shape analysed at different levels of resolution  an idea that also appears in a somewhat different context in the work of witkin . the example they give is the outline of a fish  which  at the highest resolution level  is divided into segments bearing the  cyclically-permutable  label-sequence yscycscycycycycs  where 'c' 's' and 'y' stand for  concave    straight   and  very convex  respectively  other possible labels being 'w' for  very concave  and 'x' for  convex  . at the lowest level of resolution shown  the string becomes xsxcxcs. the labels are obtained by simulating a heat-diffusion process on the shape  resulting in concave and convex boundary elements ending up at lower and higher  temperatures  respectively. it is essentially a quantitative technique  although the symbol strings derived from it may be regarded as qualitative in nature. 
1 	qualitative outline theory 
we offer here a system for the qualitative description of two-dimensional outlines; the system has a number of interesting and cognitively salient subsystems. 
　it is a formal language for shape  with interesting sublanguages. we give a regular grammar for the full ian-

1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 

guage  and illustrate how grammars for the sublanguages can be derived from it. 

1 	qualitative curvature types 
we build our shapes from the following seven qualitative curvature types: 
straight line segment 
convex curve segment concave curve segment 
outward pointing angle 
inward pointing angle outward pointing cusp 
inward pointing cusp 
the shape illustrated in figure 1 contains two straightline segments and one of each of the other curvature types  as indicated. 

figure 1: the seven qualitative curvature types. 
　there are a number of ways of grouping the seven types  of which perhaps the most fundamental is the separation between linelike elements   which con-
tribute to the length of an outline  and pointlike elements 
                     which do not. another important grouping is outward versus inward   with / belonging to neither category. 
　a possible eighth curvature type is a point of inflection  where a convex curve segment meets a concave one without an angle or cusp at their meeting point. it was not felt necessary to include this since it provides no information over and above that provided by the seven types listed above. 
1 	figures 
a figure is defined by a cyclically permutable string of curvature-type symbols subject to the following constraints: 
  the string must contain either  or at least three convex points  to ensure boundedness . 
  it must not contain two consecutive occurrences of the same curvature-type symbol. 
  it must contain no two consecutive points. 
  any occurrence of either  must be adjacent  on at least one side  to an occurence of  or respectively. 
by  cyclically permutable  we mean that the last symbol in the string must be regarded as being followed by the first  producing a ring rather than a string. 
　we believe that these constraints are sound and complete in the sense that 
1. any ''well-behaved  figure1 has a ring description satisfying these constraints. 
1. any finite ring which satisfies the constraints defines a bounded figure  indeed a whole class of them . 
　　the outline pictured in figure 1 can be described  running clockwise from the bottom  by the string and equally by any cyclic permutation of this string  e.g.  or of its reversal  e.g.  
  
1 	sublanguages 
the following subsets of the set of qualitative curvature types generate important classes of outlines: 

note that the class ot convex smooth outlines is isomorphic to the class of convex curvilinear outlines: each element of the former can be converted into an element of the latter by replacing / by    and vice versa. similar isomorphisms exist between other classes not listed above  e.g.   nephroids   generated by  and  astroids   generated by 
1 	qualitative outline grammars 
the constraints enumerated above can be captured by means of a formal grammar which generates all and only those rings which satisfy the constraints. more exactly  for each admissible ring  the grammar will generate at least one string which represents it. the grammar  which is regular and contains 1 rules with 1 non-terminal symbols  is given in the appendix. in this grammar   a  denotes the empty string. 
　formal grammars for each of the sublanguages discussed above can be derived from the full grammar by selecting an appropriate subset of the rules. for example  convex polygons  which contain only the curvature types / and   are generated by the rules: 

this excludes fractals and other  pathological  outlines. 
	galton and meathrel 	1 

which can be simplified to 

similar grammars can be constructed for the other sublanguages  with simplification possible in most cases. 
the idea of a grammar for shape is not new  cf. stiny 
  leyton   but our grammars are not closely related to this earlier work. 
1 	relations amongst the subclasses 
typically the smaller subclasses can be seen as homomorphic images of larger ones  under certain natural transformations involving a systematic loss of information. this idea is related to the phenomenon of granularity which has received considerable attention in the knowledge representation community. 
　from a distance  a cusp looks very much like an angle. we can therefore apply a decusping operation to convert every instance of  respectively. if we started with the full set of outlines  the resulting outlines belong to the class defined by 
　other transformations are smoothing  by which angles are rounded off to convex curves  so that     are replaced by  respectively  with subsequent collapse of any resulting sequences of the form respectively   and merging  by which a straight section of outline is merged with an adjacent curve  thus   /and 
/  become   and / and /  become   again with collapse of consecutive duplicates if necessary . 
under these transformations  an outline such as 

 becomes successively transformed to 	  then to   and finally to 	   see figure 1 . 

figure 1: transformation of an outline by decusptng  smoothing and merging. 
   figure 1 shows all the symmetrical subclasses  i.e.  those for which each of the pairs  and  is present or absent together. the arrows indi-
cate how the transformations of decusping  smoothing and merging operate on these subclasses.  note that merging applied to does not give  as one might expect  ; this is because a sequence such as is unaffected by merging.  
1 	extracting the curvature sequence 
to be useful  a representational formalism needs to be accompanied by a procedure for generating representations from the objects that they are representations of. 
in the case of qualitative outline theory  this means that 
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 

figure 1: transformations on symmetrical curvaturetype classes. 
we need to be able to extract the curvature sequence of an outline from the outline itself  or at any rate from a pictorial representation of it. the outline might be presented as a closed curve or colour-edge on a flat surface  or it might be the boundary of a sheet of material; we need not at this stage specify its nature in more detail. what we do assume is that we have a mechanism for tracing round the outline  keeping track of how the bearing  measured clockwise from an arbitrary fixed reference  e.g.   north   is changing. this enables us to give an algorithm for deriving the curvature sequence of an outline  using only local information obtained as the outline is traversed. 
　we begin anywhere we like on the outline and follow round clockwise. 
  so long as the bearing varies continuously  we must have one of /   according as the bearing is constant  increasing  or decreasing. 
  if there is a discontinuous change in the bearing  we have one of . if the  clock wise  increase in bearing is less than 1＜  we have    if it is greater than 1＜  we have    and if it is exactly 1＜  we have  to distinguish the last two cases  we have to keep track of where the section of outline just before the cusp is in relation to the section just after it. if the former is to the left as seen from the latter  we have  if to the right  . 
  if on returning to the starting point the last curva-ture type is the same as the first  omit it. 
　the above procedure can be followed with  clockwise  and  left  swapped with  anticlockwise  and  right   and the bearings measured in the anticlockwise sense. 
1 	canonical form of a sequence 
in the above procedure we will obtain different results depending on where we start and whether we trace the outline clockwise or anticlockwise. but any such result can be converted to any other for the same outline by means of an appropriate cyclic permutation together with  if necessary  reversal. 

　to facilitate recognition and indexing of qualitatively identical outlines  we select just one of its curvature-type sequences as canonical. to do this we first establish an  essentially arbitrary-but see below  canonical ordering of the curvature types  e.g.   this determines a lexicographic ordering on curvature-type sequences. for a given outline we choose that curvaturetype sequence that comes earliest in this ordering. to convert an arbitrary curvature-type sequence into canonical form we must find that permutation or reversed permutation of it which is lexicographically earliest. 
　it should be noted that the grammar given in the appendix does not  in general  generate only the canonical curvature-type sequence for a given outline. for example  as well as the canonical string   the grammar also generates the non-canonical permutations  but none of the other 
six possibilities. the ordering of the curvature types is not entirely arbitrary: the ordering of the three linelike elements is tailored to the way the grammar is organised  in such a way as to guarantee that the canonical sequence is always generable. 
1 	quantitative considerations 
it is in the nature of a qualitative representation system that one representation can correspond to many different objects. objects which are indistinguishable within the system may nonetheless differ markedly with respect to features not accessible to the system. for a qualitative representation such as ours  this will include all the quantitative features whose exact expression requires the use of real-number measurements. an example of this is shown in figure 1  where five different exemplars are given of the qualitative outline type  it would not  perhaps  be true to say that the differences amongst these figures are purely quantitative-but they are quantitative inasmuch as they have to do with the relative lengths and curvatures of the linelike segments. an obvious limitation of our system  as it stands  is its inability to discriminate between these different outlines. 

figure 1: distinct exemplars of the outline type 
　　our qualitative representations could be extended in various ways to capture some of these distinctions. for example  each  symbol could be annotated with indices such as  u  d  l  r  for  upward pointing    downward pointing    left pointing  and  right pointing  . under this scheme  the first two outlines in the figure are represented as   the others as 
. these representations are 
still qualitative  and allow considerable lee-way  but they certainly come closer to capturing the essential elements of the visual appearance of the outlines. 
　other aspects of the outlines might be captured by annotating the linelike elements  in these examples  by indices denoting their relative lengths. this could be done in a  semi-qualitative  way by adopting  say  a three-point scale of  short   1    medium   m  and  long   l -with an inevitable attendant arbitrariness as to the demarcations between these categories. similarly  the angle types  could be annotated with an indication of the size of the angle as well as the direction it is pointing in. 
　clearly  our qualitative outline theory can be extended in many ways to include more precise information about the outlines it represents. it will be necessary to investigate how different such extensions interact with each other  e.g.  fixing the orientations of the pointlike elements could impose constraints on the possible relative lengths of the linelike ones. the detailed working out of these constraints is likely to be problematic. 
　we advocate our theory as an appropriate baseline on which may be built more elaborate outline-based theories of shape to suit the particular needs of different areas of artificial intelligence and related disciplines. 
1 	relation to other systems 
hoffman and richards  segment an outline at curvature minima  using maxima and zeros to describe the shape of each segment. this results in four basic types of segment  loosely analogous to our curvature types  but restricted to smooth curves   which they call contour codons1. 
　leyton  classifies outlines in terms of the processes that might have given rise to them: each curvature extremum is taken as indicative of an appropriate process that has led to the formation of that extremum by acting on some initially simpler outline:  each curvature extremum implies a process whose trace is the unique symmetry axis associated with  and terminating at  that extremum . again there is a restriction to smooth curves. 
　our system does not deal with extrema except in so far as the  point-like  curvature types  can be so regarded; curvature extrema in smooth curves are not singled out by our system. given that both the above systems restrict themselves to smooth continuously differentiate curves  the motivation for this being that it opens the way for a mathematical treatment using the tools of differential geometry   all the curves they consider belong to our class   but within this class they can make finer discriminations than we can-for 
　　1 this approach has been extended by rosin  to include angles  cusps  and straight segments. 
	galton and meathrel 	1 

example all convex curves in this class are described as  in our system  but ley ton can recognise infinitely many varieties of this basic type according to how many protrusions and squashings they exhibit. 
　cinque and lombardi  do not specify the cut-off point between  concave  and  very concave   or  convex  and  very convex   and it would seem that there is inevitably something rather arbitrary about it. even so  however the distinctions are defined  they afford discriminations beyond the capabilities of our system. 
　in summary  the other systems considered here handle a restricted subset of the full range of outlines that our system handles  but on the other hand within this subset they are capable of making finer discriminations. there is a trade-off between scope and detail. 
1 	concluding remarks 
we have proposed a formal language for the qualitative representation of two-dimensional outlines. we have discussed both the scope and limitations of the language and have compared it with some other systems in the literature. we have indicated how the language may be extended  if desired  to enable finer shape-discriminations to be made. we have not addressed the problem of extending the theory to three dimensions  although this is an obvious next step to consider. this work forms part of an ongoing investigation of formalisms for the qualitative representation of shape  on which we hope to report further at a later date. 
