 
given a set of m observations on n variables  an 1 mn1  algorithm is proposed to find a basis of all affine relations between these variables satisfied by the observations. on a 1 variables example  this new algorithm is 1 times faster than the  all subsets  option for linear regression of the sas package which is a non polynomial alternative. extension to the cases where squares  ratios  products of pairs of variables or logarithms of such terms appear in the relations is straightforward and remains polynomial. the method is first tested with data for several classical discoveries studied previously by the bacon programs. then it is added to the autographix system for computer-aided graph theory thus making it entirely automated. to demonstrate the power of the resulting system  five novel relations  or conjectures  in graph theory are found  two of which pertain to mathematical chemistry. three conjectures involve five invariants  which is more than in most propositions of graph theory. proofs of two con-
jectures are also given. 
1 	introduction 
given a set of observations of several variables  to find efficiently parsimonious relations that they satisfy is a basic problem in the study of scientific discovery  langley et a/.  1    simon et a/.  1  and  possibly  in its enhancement. more generally  one may seek relations between a subset of the given set of variables. enumerating all subsets and considering them in turn reduces this problem to the former one  but entails a combinatorial explosion. the purpose of this paper is to show that  for large classes of relations  the latter problem can be solved in polynomial time. more precisely  a polynomial algorithm is proposed for finding a basis of all affine relations between the variables  or powers  ratios  products  or logarithms of them . this algorithm uses basic results of linear algebra  also exploited in data analysis  and in particular in principal component analysis  pontier et a/.  
1 	machine learning 
1 . however  the purpose there  i.e.  to explain differences between observations  is the reverse of ours  i.e.  to find what properties the observations have in common. 
　the method is described in the next section. in section 1 it is applied to several classical discoveries already studied previously by the bacon programs  langley et al  1 . in section 1  results of its embedding in the autographix  agx  system for computer-aided graph theory are presented. the resulting entirely automated system discovers five novel relations  or conjectures  in graph theory  two of which pertain to mathematical chemistry. three of these conjectures involve five invariants  which is more than in most propositions of graph theory. conclusions are drawn in section 1. proofs of two among the five conjectures are given in the appendix. 



　centering variables  the first step of our algorithm  thus transforms the problem of finding affine relations into the problem of finding linear ones. 
　consider then the variance-covariance matrix v defined by 
if the relation 
		 i  
holds  then 

　which means that if the linear relation  1  holds for the columns of x' it also holds for those of v. as v is symmetric  it still holds for its lines. the second step of our algorithm is thus to compute v. 
　the third and last step is to diagonalize v  with  however  some empty lines if there are relations . this can be done  by gaussian elimination. in the resulting matrix v  dim im v   lines contain non-zero terms and correspond to independent variables. the remaining n - dim im v   lines contain only zeroes and correspond to dependent variables which may be expressed as linear combinations of the independent ones. these relations form a basis of the null-space of v. using the initial data one can then compute the right-hand sides of the corresponding affine relations. 
　the case were a dependent variable is expressed as a monomial of several independent ones  instead of an affine expression is easily reduced to the previous one. indeed  assume 
		 1  
where the et and / are constants. taking logarithms  this relation becomes 
		 1  
　so the method just described can be used to find exponents et  equal to 1 if does not appear in the monomial  and the initial data to find /. 
　the proposed algorithm is illustrated on several examples in section 1. 
1 	extension 
the two classes of relations described in the previous subsection can be easily and substantially enlarged by computing additional terms from the initial data. the easiest case is to take  in addition to the given variables  all squares and products of pairs of them. then one uses 
＊ variables instead of n. the formulas 
have the form 

ratios  higher powers than two or products of three variables may also be considered. if xj is expressed as a monomial  sums or differences of variables may be taken as additional terms. 
1 	complexity 
the first step of the method  computing centered values involves computing   in 1 mn  time and subtracting from each f again in 1 mn . the second step  computing the variance-covariance matrix v  t a k e s t i m e . the third step  diagonalizing v by gaussian elimination requires 1 n1  time. in order to avoid spurious relations  one must have m n. thus the overall complexity is in  if one makes the reasonable assump-
tion that m is 1 n  . if squares and products of pairs of variables are added the complexity rises to . such problems  with n moderate  are still solvable in a reasonable time. 
　as an example for comparison  using linear regression allows at most one relation to be found at a time while our method finds a basis of all the relations underlying the data. furthermore  linear regression needs one variable to be explained by the others  which means that a regression must be computed for each of the n - 1 first variables to be explained by the next ones. to ensure that all relations are found  one cannot escape the  best-subset  criterion for each regression  thus trying all combinations of variables  which has exponential complexity. treating a 1 variables and 1 observations example with the sas statistical software needs 1 seconds while our system needs 1 sec  on a sun ultra i  1 mhz . using 1 variables instead of 1 and still 
1 observations  the time required by sas increases to 1 minutes and a half while our method only needs 1 seconds  1 times faster . 
1 	rediscovering known laws 
1 	kepler's third law 
kepler's third law is that where p denotes the period of a planet's orbit and d its average distance to the sun. as all those considered in this section  this law was rediscovered by one of the bacon programs  langley et al.  1 . the computing time they use is much larger than with our method. note  however  that the aim of these programs is different from that pursued here: i.e.  to understand the reasoning which led to the discovery 
	cap1ssi and hansen 	1 

rather than to find an efficient but computer-dependent way to discover the corresponding relation. 
　a generator was used to produce the following four simulated observations of p and d  taking units such that ct = l : 

or  switching to logarithms  

the corresponding variance-covariance matrix is 

diagonalization leads to 

which shows that a relation of the form log p  = holds. then using  we find ctf = 1  and an equivalent form of the original relation  p - d1. computing time is too small to be measured. 
1 	ideal-gas law 
the ideal gas law is pv = nrt where p is the pressure  in pascals   v the volume  in cubic meters   n the number of mote and t the temperature  in kelvins . r - 1 is the universal ideal gas constant. the generator gave simulated observations of p  v  n and t. these were then converted to the older units  to simulate the situation prevalent at the time of discovery  i.e.  before absolute temperatures were used. then the pressure p is measured in atmospheres  the volume v in liters and the t temperature in celsius degrees. the conversion rules are p = 1p  v = v/1 and t = t+1. using 1 observations and the extended set of terms including squares and products of pairs of variables led to the relation nt = -1n + 1pt/ in less than 1 of a second. converting back to the si system units gives nt = 1pv  which is an equivalent form of the law presented above. 
note that this relation is even easier to find  using the 
si system units  if we switch to the logarithms of the values; then an extended data set is not needed. 
　sixteen observations are enough and the variancecovariance matrix for these data is 

diagonalizing this matrix becomes 

which shows that a relation of the form log t  log p  + log f  - log n  + ct holds. from the logarithms of the data  we find ct = 1. so the equivalent form t = 1pvn-1 of the ideal gas law is found instantaneously. 
1 	n e w t o n ' s gravity law 
newton's law is that where m and m are the masses of two bodies  d the distance between them  f their force of attraction and  the universal gravitational constant. the problem is formally very similar to the previous one  as one seeks a monomial involving three variables. 
the generator provided 1 simulated observations of 
f  m  m and d  then the system obtained from their logarithms the relations  which is equivalent to the law given above. again the derivation was instantaneous. 
　in addition to this result  the system gave spurious laws  i.e.  m+f = m  m + f = m and d + p = p. it is easy to recognize that they are incorrect  and due to numerical errors. a more careful scaling of units before computation avoids this error. 
1 	o h m ' s law 
ohms' law is that il = rl + v where i denotes current intensity  l inductance  r resistance and v tension. the generator provided 1 simulated observations of j  
l  r and v. using an extended data set with squares and products of pairs of variables  i.e.  1 terms  or 1 when seeking for expression of a dependent variable as a monomial  because in that case sums of twice the same variable are redundant  the relation rl = -v + il was found in less than 1 of a second. 
　note that using only the original observations would not have allowed to find this relation. 
1 finding new relations in graph theory 1 the autographix system 
several systems have been proposed for computer-added or automated discovery of relations in graph theory  prominent among which are graph  cvetkovic et a/.  1 ;  cvetkovic and simie  1   and graffiti  fajtlowicz  1 ;  fajtlowicz  1 . they work with graph invariants  i.e.  quantities such as the number of vertices  number of edges  stability number  chromatic number  radius  diameter  etc.   see  berge  1  for unde-

1 	machine learning 

fined terms  which do not depend on labeling of vertices or edges. recently  a new system  called autographix  agx  has been developed  caporossi and hansen  1 . its basic idea is to consider the problem 

of determining extremal graphs for some graph invariant  possibly subject to constraints  and related problem such as refuting conjectures  as problems of combinatorial optimization defined on an infinite family of graphs. then  powerful heuristics may be brought to bear to find presumably extremal graphs  of moderate size  from which much information may be gathered. more precisely  agx addresses the following problems: 
 a find a graph satisfying given constraints. let denote invariants of a graph the values they should take. consider the problem where denotes the set of graphs with n vertices  and n may be varied. any graph for which / g  = 1 satisfies the given constraints. 
 b  find optimal or near optimal values for an invariant io g  subject to constraints. consider the problem 

where m is a sufficiently large constant. 
 c  refute a conjecture  expressed as h g    g g  where h g  and g g  are formulas depending on one or more invariants of g. consider the problem 
if a graph g for which is found  the conjecture is refuted. 
 d  suggest a conjecture. this can be done in various ways  which use parameterization on the number n of vertices and m of edges of g or other invariants. surfaces of values for the invariant or formula under study can be displayed graphically  which often suffices to obtain conjectures  and presumably extremal graphs can be studied  which gives further information. 
 e  suggest a proof. checking if presumably extremal graphs found are also obtained with simplified heuristics  such as e.g. local search with a single type of move may suggest ways to prove conjectures for all graphs  or for some classes of them  e.g.  by showing that such a move can always be performed on any non-extremal graph and is an improving one. 
　the heuristics used in agx fit into the variable neighborhood search metaheuristic framework  hansen and mladenovic  1 . a local search routine is applied to g  which employs several types of moves: add or remove an edge  displace one or two edges  add or remove a pending vertex  insert a vertex in an edge  etc. once a locally optimal graph g1 has been found  one considers a set of neighborhoods increasingly far from g1 and defined by addition or removal of 1 ... kmax edges. a graph g1 in the neighborhood . etc.  is drawn at random and 
a local search performed leading to a graph g1. if g1 has a better value than g1 the search is recentered there. agx has been applied to a series of problems of graph theory  some of which pertain to mathematical chemistry  caporossi and hansen  1 ;  caporossi et a/.  1a ;  cvetkovic et at  1 ;  caporossi et a/.  1b ;  caporossi et a/.  1 . 1 conjectures have been obtained up to now  1 of which have been proved and none of which has been refuted. in addition  agx alone refuted 1 conjectures of graffiti  caporossi and hansen  1  and  together with some enumeration routines 1 more  pujol  1 . as described  agx is a tool for computer-assisted discovery. however  addition of a routine implementing the algorithm for finding relations described in section 1 transforms it into an entirely automated system. results obtained when doing so are next presented. 
1 a property of color-constrained trees w i t h m i n i m u m index 
a tree is a bipartite graph  whose vertices may be colored in black and white such that no pair of adjacent vertices have the same color. if the numbers of black and of white vertices are fixed the tree is color-constrained. in  cvetkovic et a/.  1  agx is used to study colorconstrained trees extremal with respect to their index  or largest eigenvalue of their adjacency matrix. six conjectures are obtained  and four of them proved. 
　to explore further the extremal trees found  values of the following fifteen invariants were recorded: number n of vertices  number n1 of pending vertices  number m of edges  diameter d  radius r  stability number a  i.e.  maximum number of pairwise non-adjacent vertices   average degree 1  average distance and sum of distances between pairs of vertices  energy  sum of the absolute values of the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix   maximum degree  largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix  hyperwiener index  sum of the squares of distances between pairs of vertices   randic index x see below   and chromatic number 
　then the algorithm of section 1 was used to find a basis of affine relations on those invariants. in addition to well-known relations  such as to = n - 1 and  = 1 which are valid for all trees  the unexpected following one was obtained 
		 1  
and the remaining 1 invariants are proved to be linearly independant from any of the considered ones. 
this result can also be expressed as follows. 
conjecture 1. for all color-constrained trees with minimal index 
		 1  
	caporossi and hansen 	1 

furthermore  agx was used to see whether this conjecture could be extended to all trees. minimizing and maximizing the left-hand side of  1  then led to the following results. 
conjecture 1* 	for all trees 
 1  
let 
conjecture 1. 	for all trees 
		 1  
conjecture 1 is proved in the appendix. 
1 t w o bounds for t h e connectivity index of chemical graphs 
chemical graphs are extensively used to represent hydrocarbons. vertices correspond to carbon atoms and edges to bonds between them  hydrogen atoms are usually not represented as their number and bonds are uniquely defined . consequently the maximum vertex degree is 1. moreover  chemical graphs are connected. the connectivity index  or randic index   randil  1  has been introduced as a measure of molecular branching. it is defined as follows. let  denote an edge of a graph g  dj and dj the degrees of its end-vertices. then the weight of that edge is  and the connectivity index x{g  *s the sum of the weights of all edges of g. this index is one of the most frequently used molecular structure-descriptors  and the only one to which two books  kier and hall  1 ;  kier and hall  1  and numerous articles have been devoted. 
　in  caporossi et al.  1b  chemical trees with extremal connectivity index are studied  based on results of agx  and folly characterized. applying agx  with the relation-finding routine  to chemical graphs with presumably minimal connectivity index  did at first give no relations. however  considering the set of local minima among these graphs gave two new relations: 
conjecture 1. 	for all chemical graphs 
		 1  
conjecture 1. 	for all chemical graphs 
		 1  
conjecture 1 is proved in the appendix. 
1 machine 	learning 
1 	concluding remarks 
an algorithm for finding automatically from observations of a set of variables a basis of affine relations between these variables  or products  ratios or powers of them  or between logarithms of such terms has been presented. as it is polynomial in the number of variables considered  the combinatorial explosion encountered when each potential relation is considered in turn is avoided. 
　moreover  adding a routine implementing this algorithm to the system agx led to an entirely automated system for finding relations in graph theory. its use is illustrated by the derivation of five novel conjectures  two of which pertain to mathematical chemistry. many more applications are expected in the near future. 
a 	proofs of two conjectures 
theorem 1  conjecture 1 . for all trees with stability number   m edges  ni pending vertices  diameter d and radius r 

proof. 	recall that in a tree  is even and  if jo is odd. hence  d - 1r = - d mod  1  . assume first that d is even. define the star of a vertex vi to be the set of edges incident with . clearly  stars of vertices of a stable set are disjoint. consider a maximum stable set s with 	pending vertices and   inner vertices. then  	and 
　assume then that d is odd. consider a path p of length d. either only one end vertex of p belongs to 
s or there is a pair of consecutive vertices 
p which do not belong to 1  and the edge not belong to the star of any vertex of 1. in both cases 

theorem 1  conjecture 1 . for all chemical graphs g with connectivity index x g   n1 pending vertices and 
m edges 



obtained by counting vertices and degrees. these equations are clearly independent. solving for 
and substituting y1 and 1 
in the objective function 
		 1  
leads to the relation 

conjecture 1 can be proved in a similar way. 
aknowledgments 
the authors thank francois bellavance and robert latour from ecole des hautes etudes commerciales de montreal for their advices on statistical methods  and ivan gutman from university of kragujevac  yougoslavia  for discussions about agx and its results. this work was supported by nserc grant ogpoo 1  fcar grant 1eq 1 and a grant from cetai-hec. 
