 
this paper conducts an experiment to investigate the effect of a physical constraint on a sub-
ject's viewpoint when using spoken language to navigate a robot. in addition  a robot navigation environment named spondia-ii has been developed for the experiment with an actual autonomous mobile robot. it is well known that the meaning of an utterance  such as a demonstrative pronoun  depends on the viewpoint of the speaker or the hearer. in a conversation between people  the primary factor in determining viewpoint is the physical constraints that are mediated by their body movements. this paper notes that these physical constraints also have an effect on viewpoint even when people instruct a robot. furthermore  it is argued that  the utterance process also would greatly improve if the robot were able to comprehend the constraints. 
1 	introduction 
according to the development of personal robots  yamasaki and anzai  1; burgard et a/.  1  and robot entertainment  fujita and kageyama  1   we can suppose that someday  all people will have the chance to interact directly with robots. in the near future  a robot house-maid wearing an apron may be responsible for cleaning your house. such dreams have appeared to come true with the appearance of honda's robot p-1/p-1  hirai  1 . however  the actual appearance of the personal robot will require considerably more breakthroughs in the sensors  actuators  and robotics technologies to be used. to contribute to technologies for face-to-face interaction  this paper studies a natural conversation between a human and an autonomous mobile robot. 
1 	robotics and perception 　dialogues between people proceed with the people referring to the situations surrounding them. a natural dialogue system must have the same capabilities as people. for example  the interpretation and the generation of utterances requires information on the locations of the speaker and the hearer  the object positions surrounding them  or their actions. 
　there are several studies  imai et al.  1; nagao and takeuchi  1; neal et al.  1  on dialogue systems dealing with external world information. for example  linta  imai et al.  1  is one dialogue system for a robot  able to interpret and generate utterances by extracting external information from the robot's sensors. in addition to robots  multi-modal dialogue systems  nagao and takeuchi  1; itoh et a/.  1  have also been developed for computer applications using a camera or a touch panel for extracting nonverbal information from a user. in addition  barwise and perry formalized relationships between certain situations and the semantics of utterances with logical expressions  barwise and perry  1 . there has also b een a study on language evolution between two robots  steels  1 . in the system  words the robots have developed are connected to external information through the robots' cameras. 
　in addition to external information  humans also use physical constraints on their conversations. these physical constraints appear to be mediated by the body movements of people. for example  a relationship may emerge when people face each other. another relationship may emerge when people walk together. in these situation  the meaning of a word like the demonstrative pronouns  here  or  there  varies according to changes in the physical constraints. to date  however  dialogue systems for computer applications have not dealt with physical constraints because computers do not have an actual body. on the other hand  a robot can handle such constraints because it can interact with people based on its movable body. if a robot were able to comprehend the physical constraints  this would greatly improve the utterance process. however  there are some questions in trying to apply physical constraints to human-robot interactions: what are the actual physical constraints between two people  in particular  what kinds of constraints emerge in human-robot interactions  the answers to these questions still need clarification. 
　this paper conducts an experiment that investigates the usage of a japanese demonstrative pronoun under a physical constraints in order to examine the effect of such constraints on human-robot conversations. for the experiment  we have developed an experimental environment named spondia-ii  where the experimental subject 

could navigate the robot using the demonstrative pronoun. 
　the reason that spondiarll focuses on employing the demonstrative pronoun is that the meaning of the pronoun varies according to the physical constraints. for example  the word  this  suggests an object in front of the speaker when the speaker and the hearer are facing each other. in contrast  if two people are walking together   this  may suggest their shared destination. the meaning of  this  frequently differs depending on the physical constraints of the situation. spondia-ii uses the difference in the usage of the demonstrative pronoun to find out the effect of physical constraints. 
　the rest of this paper is organized as follows. section 1 describes the features of demonstrative pronouns  and explains the effect of a viewpoint and physical constraints on the pronouns. section 1 describes an experimental environment named spondia-ii and also explains the experimental conditions under spondiarll. section 1 describes an experimental method for spondia-ii and the outcome of trials involving the method. in section 1  we discuss the result of the experiment and the importance of physical constraints on conversations. section 1 concludes the paper with a summary and future works. 
1 demonstrative pronoun 
1 	force of viewpoint 
the viewpoint that a speaker has is the deciding factor in the meaning of a demonstrative pronoun  mcneill  1 . a demonstrative pronoun suggests something directly  regardless of abstract matters or matters of substance. such a function of the pronoun is called deixis in psycholinguistics. for example   left  and  right  are deixis  levelt  1 . to accurately understand the meanings of these type of pronouns  the hearer must notice the viewpoint of the speaker. since a viewpoint is crucial to such meanings  we need to focus on the variety of viewpoints before examining how demonstrative pronouns are used. 
　the relationship between the meaning of a demonstrative pronoun and a speaker's viewpoint can be formalized as follows. 
rule 1 
 here  p is the meaning of the pronoun  s is the situation around the speaker   is the viewpoint of the speaker  and d is a demonstrative pronoun. rule 1 indicates that a robot must not only extract the information from a situation s but must also guess the user's viewpoint  in order to understand the demonstrative pronoun 
d. in addition  when generating the pronoun  the robot must be able to select a viewpoint that allows the user to easily understand the demonstrative pronoun generated. 
　ullmer  ullmer-ehrich  1  has carried out an experiment in order to determine the movements of viewpoints when using deixis expressions. in his experiment  he made subjects describe objects in themselves' room. 
l
   we use the same notation as in mcneill's book  mcneill  1 . 

figure 1: default meaning of japanese demonstrative pronouns. 
as a result  almost all of the viewpoints stayed at the door to the room. based on their viewpoint  they moved their focus of attention across the room as they described objects. ullmer called each viewpoint a gaze tour  gt . 
　klein  klein  1  has also examined the transition of a viewpoint. he measured viewpoint by questioning pedestrians about a path to somewhere. as a result  the viewpoint moved along their walk. he called this viewpoint a walk tour  wt . 
　the studies of ullmer and klein indicate that the viewpoint of a speaker varies according to the condition of the speaker when he/she says a demonstrative pronoun. this fact can be formalized as follows. 
rule 1 
this rule expresses that the speaker's viewpoint  is selected depending on condition e  as we mentioned in the explanations of gt and wt. for example  in klein's experiment  e is the walk condition. according to rule 
1  the effect of the walk condition can be expressed as 
walk -  wt  where e = walk and 
　the aim of this paper is to find the e in robot navigations. in particular  we would like to investigate the physical constraints of a situation as e. 
1 japanese demonstrative pronoun there are three japanese demonstrative pronouns: 
 atchi    kotcii1   and  sotchi.  the meanings of these words are similar to  that way    this way   and  there  in english  respectively. figure 1 indicates the default meanings of these japanese demonstrative pronouns. in the figure  the meanings depend on the viewpoint of the speaker. the utterance  kotchi  suggests a direction towards the speaker  the utterance  sotchi  suggests a direction near the hearer  and the utterance  atchi  suggests a direction away from both the speaker and the hearer. 
　although speakers generally use the above default viewpoints for japanese demonstrative pronouns  some speakers may use other viewpoints. therefore  the hearer must notice changes in the speaker's point of view. 
	imai  hiraki  and miyasato 	1 


figure 1: effect of a physical constraint on the viewpoint. 
1 	effect of physical constraints 
physical constraints are defined as constraints placed on the viewpoint when a speaker uses a demonstrative pronoun. these constraints emerge depending on the combination of the actions of the speaker and the hearer. 
　figure 1 shows an example of a physical constraint when two persons are walking together. when people walk together  they frequently use  kotchi   this way  to suggest a direction toward their destination. in this case  the meaning of  kotchi  differs from that in figure 1. from the example  it is understood that the activity of walking together does affect the speaker's viewpoint. that is  a shared viewpoint emerges between the speaker and the hearer. as this example suggests  physical constraints have a significant effect on the viewpoint of the speaker and the hearer. because of the importance of the viewpoint  we should not ignore such physical constraints when developing a utterance process system for demonstrative pronouns. 
1 	spondia-ii 
we have constructed a robot navigation environment named spondiarll that consists of an experimental field and an actual autonomous mobile robot. the aim of spondia-ii is to investigate the relationship between a viewpoint and a physical constraint. for the investiga  tion  spondia-ii examines usage of demonstrative pronouns under two conditions: one is a condition with a 
physical constraint  and the other is a condition without any physical constraints. in the examination  the sub-
jects of spondia-ii must navigate the robot from a start 
point to a goal point in the field using the demonstrative pronouns  atchi    kotchi   or  sotchi.  
1 	experimental field 
the left side in figure 1 shows the experimental field of spondia-ii. as can be seen in the figure  the start point is in one corner and the goal is in the opposite corner  from the start point . the physical viewpoint of the figure is the same as the subject's viewpoint. in short  the start point is in front of the subject. thus  the start is nearer to the subject than the goal point. in spondiaii  the situation s in rule 1 can be defined using the field of figure 1. in short  s consists of the square field with the start point near the subject and the goal point far from the subject. 
1 	robotics and perception 

figure 1: spondiarll experimental environment and the mobile robot khepera. 
　spondia-ii also uses a small mobile robot named khepera. the right side in figure 1 shows the body of khepera. since the viewpoint  as we mentioned previously  significantly affects the interpretation of a demonstrative pronoun  we fixed the plastic doll's eyes on its body to make the khepera's viewpoint noticeable to the subject. khepera also has eight distance sensors and illumination sensors around its body. there is a flashlight at the goal position  so that khepera can adjust its orientation with respect to the goal  by using its illumination sensors. using the distance and illumination sensors  khepera is able to move around in the experimental field and change direction in response to the subject's commands of  atchi    kotchi   or  sotchi.  
1 	viewpoint in the field 
the viewpoints which subjects have in the field of spondia-ii are grouped into three families  figure 1 . 
the first viewpoint  shown in figure 1 a   is the same viewpoint as that of figure 1. the second viewpoint  shown in figure 1 b   is a shared viewpoint between the subject and khepera  which emerges by having them walk together as in figure 1. the third viewpoint  shown in figure 1 c   is a bird's eye view of the field. in the bird's eye view  the subject selects a demonstrative pronoun according to the distance between him/herself and the target to be mentioned because the subject only looks at the targets in the field directly  regardless of the location of khepera. 
　although we proposed three kinds of viewpoints  spondia-ii actually combines these into two viewpoints: the shared viewpoint of figure 1  b  and a viewpoint merged from in figure 1  a  and  c . the two viewpoints will be used in the rest of this paper. the merged viewpoint of figures 1 a  and  c  is called a daily viewpoint  dv   the viewpoint in figure 1 b  is called a shared viewpoint {sv . the reason for the division is that there is the difference of a dependency on physical constraints between the two viewpoints. more specifically  the viewpoint sv is dependent on physical constraints while the viewpoint dv emerges under almost all situations regardless of physical constraints. as a result  the two viewpoints are summarized as and 

　in spondia-ii  the subject will take one of the two viewpoints. therefore  the viewpoints of the subject and 

viewpoint of the subject is not necessarily the same as khepera's. 
　it is essential for khepera to adjust its viewpoint  o the subject's  in order for the given demonstrative jronoun to have an accurate meaning. to determine the conditions for the adjustment  spondia-ii examines what 'actors affect the subject's viewpoint . the examilation will help khepera gain knowledge for guessing a mbject's viewpoint. moreover  the knowledge will give khepera the ability to control its own viewpoint so 
 he subject can also easily understand a demonstrative pronoun from khepera. 
   before the explanation of the factor in the change in the viewpoint  let us consider rule 1 in order to get into specifics of the effect of viewpoint on a demonstrative pronoun. the situation s in rule 1 can be fixed on the field of spondia-ii  as we mentioned in 1  because we use the same field throughout the experiment. in addition  the demonstrative pronoun d is given by the subject directly. since khepera certainly has information on s and d  khepera need only decide on the subject's viewpoint in order to use rule 1. if khepera can guess   the meaning p of d will be determined. 
　what is the main effect e in rule 1 on the subject's viewpoint this paper proposes three possible effects for e. 1  the viewpoint  varies depending on the situation  like positions of objects. 1  the viewpoint i varies depending on khepera's viewpoint  . 1  the viewpoint  varies depending on a physical constraint. 
　spondia-ii investigates the effects of 1  and 1 . it does not deal with effect 1  because there have already been many studies on this type of situation  mcneill  1 . effects 1  and 1  are formalized as follows. 
rule 1 rule 1 
rule 1 represents the effect of khepera's viewpoint on the subject's viewpoint. in addition  rule 1 represents the effect of a physical constraint bi on the subject's viewpoint. spondia-ii makes a comparison between rule 1 and rule 1; i.e.  it decides which is most effective: khepera's viewpoint  or the physical constraint bi. 
1 	viewpoint model of khepera 
khepera has two different viewpoints dv and sv that are used to examine the effect of its viewpoint on the subject's viewpoint  rule 1 . khepera's viewpoints give it two models for interpreting demonstrative pronouns. however  khepera's viewpoint cannot be communicated to the subject directly. instead of directly communicating its viewpoint  khepera expresses the viewpoint by acting in response to the subject's utterance. there 

figure 1: viewpoints between a user and khepera. 
are two kinds of possible responses for khepera. one is an action in which khepera proceeds towards the goal when the pronoun  atchi  or  sotchf is given. the action corresponds to the daily viewpoint dv. in the other action  which corresponds to the shared viewpoint  sv   khepera proceeds towards the goal only when the utterance  kotchi  is given. the actions and viewpoints are formalized as follows. rule 1 

1 	physical interaction 
to investigate the effect of a physical constraint  rule 1   spondia-ii prepares two experimental conditions: one is an experiment with a physical constraint  and the other is an experiment without physical constraints. 
　in the actual condition for a physical constraint  the subject carries khepera to the goal on his/her hand instead of controlling khepera with vocal instructions. therefore  the following two conditions bi for the physical constraint exist. 
condition 1 b1= voice 
condition 1 bi = hand 
spondia-ii uses the  hand  condition to give the subject a shared viewpoint. in actuality  the shared viewpoint appears when they walk side by side. however  khepera is too small to walk with the subject. therefore  spondia-ii selects the  hand'' condition to adjust for the size of khepera. 
1 	experiment 
the purpose of spondia-ii is to examine the effect of a physical constraint on the subject's viewpoint when 
	imai  hiraki  and miyasato 	1 


figure 1: experimental scene: in the left picture  the subject navigates khepera with vocal instructions. in the right picture  the subject carries khepera to the goal by hand. 
he/she navigates khepera using a demonstrative pronoun. since the speaker usually takes the daily viewpoint dv with a japanese demonstrative pronoun  we want to note whether the shared viewpoint sv appears depending on the physical constraints or not. in short  
spondia-ii examines the occurrence of the following rule. 
rule 1 
　however  we cannot also observe the subject's viewpoint  directly  like khepera's viewpoint. thus  in order to determine the subject's viewpoint  spondia-ii observes the demonstrative pronoun the subject uses to suggest the goal. if the subject suggests the goal with the pronoun  atchi  or  sotchi   it is determined that he/she has the daily viewpoint dv. in contrast  if the subject uses the pronoun  kotchi   it is determined that he/she has the shared viewpoint sv. the decision is represented as follows. 
rule 1 atchi sotchi -+ dv 
rule 1 kotchi 	sv 
these rules are the reverse of rules 1 and 1. 
1 	subjects of spondia-ii 
there were 1 subjects  and their ages ranged from 1 to 1 years old. 
1 	experimental story 
　in spondia-ii  we gave the subjects a task in which they must navigate khepera from the start point to the goal. the story of the task has the following steps. 
1. the subjects tell khepera a demonstrative pronoun to move it towards the goal. 
1. khepera proceeds for a while  then stops and looks for the way to go by turning left or right quickly. the quick movement makes the subjects notice the unsettled feeling khepera has when it becomes lost. 
1. at this point  the subjects must take khepera to the goal with one of the following two methods. 
 a  the subjects give khepera a demonstrative pronoun again  left in figure 1 . 
 b  the subjects carry khepera by holding it in their hand while giving the goal's location with a demonstrative pronoun  right in figure 1 . 
1 	robotics and perception 

figure 1: rates of usage of each utterance under dv  


　according to the story  we recorded the demonstrative pronouns used by the subjects in 1  1.a  and 1.b of the story. for step 1  we examined the subjects' default viewpoint  dv or sv . step 1.a involved an examination under condition 1  and step 1.b involved an examination under condition 1. throughout steps 1.a and 1.b  we investigated the effect of the physical constraint on the subjects' viewpoint. 
　furthermore  we also studied the effect of khepera's viewpoint on the subjects' viewpoint. for the investigation  we gave each subject one of two kinds of khepera: one with a daily viewpoint dv and the other with a shared viewpoint sv. in other words  each subject interacted with khepera that had only one type of response method  that is  rule 1 or 1. in total  1 subjects were given khepera with the dv viewpoint  and 1 subjects were given khepera with the sv viewpoint. 
1 	outcome 
　from step 1 of the experimental story  we found the following usage rates for the demonstrative pronouns: 1% of the subjects used ''atchi  to refer to the goal  and the remainder  1%  used  sotchi.  
　figures 1 to 1 show the usage rates of each of the demonstrative pronouns in step 1 of the experimental story. 
figures 1 shows the data recorded using khepera with 
dv  and figures 1 shows the result of khepera with sv. the horizontal axis gives the experimental conditions  voice  and  hand  the vertical axis represents the percentage of the use of each demonstrative pronoun. the results of the statistical analysis on the usage data 


figure 1: rates of usage of each utterance under sv  	figure 1: rates of usage of each utterance  voice navi-

table 1: the value of  between two utterances under 
kotchi sotchi atchi kotchi 
sotchi 1* 1 1 gation   
table 1: the value of 	between two utterances 
 voice navigation   
kotchi sotchi atll kotchi 
sotchi 1* 1* 
1 
are given under each figure. we used a chi-square test for the analysis because the recorded data included the frequency of each demonstrative pronoun. tables 1 and 1 show the results of a multiple comparison between the demonstrative pronouns based on their respective viewpoints. 
　figure 1 shows the effect of khepera's viewpoint the horizontal axis shows each of khepera's viewpoints. 
the vertical axis is the same as in figures 1 and 1. table 
1 gives the results of a multiple comparison between the pronouns. 
1 	discussion 
in the outcome of step 1 of the experimental story  almost all of the subjects used the pronoun  atchi  to suggest the goal. this fact indicates that the subjects' default viewpoints were the same as dv. 
　figure 1 and table 1 show the significance of  kotchi  between the  voice  and the  hand  conditions. the usage rates of  kotchi  actually increased in the  hand  condition. according to rule 1  such an increase indicates that the subjects' viewpoints in the  hand' condition frequently became sv. on the other hand  dv appeared more frequently in the  voice  condition. as a result  this shows that the physical constraint is effective in the occurrence of rule 1. 
　we also compared the effect of khepera's viewpoint between dv and sv. figure 1 and table 1 show the comparison under the  voice  condition. the results show that the usage rates of each pronoun varied according to the change in khepera's viewpoint. moreover  it should be noticed that the usage rates of each pronoun were almost the same under sv. 
　from the same usage rates  we can understand that the subjects were confused about how to use the demonstrative pronouns. this is because they were unaccustomed to the action corresponding to rule 1. because of the confusing action  the subjects seem to use the demonstrative pronouns as nonsense symbols such as a  b  or c that have no meaning. in contrast to khepera with sv  the subjects could navigate khepera correctly in rule 1 because the action was based on the default viewpoint  dv. 
　figure 1 and table 1 compare the  voice  condition with the  hand  condition when khepera has sv. the figure indicates the significance of  kotchi  versus  sotchi . the data for the  voice  condition is the same as the data for sv in figure 1. from the discussion on figure 1  the subjects also appeared to be confused about the usage of the pronouns. in contrast to the  voice  condition  there was an increase in the use of  kotchi  in the  hand' condition. 
   the fact should be noted that the subjects  in spite of the confusion  frequently used the utterance  kotchi  under the physical constraint  hand1. in accordance with rule 1  it is noticed that the subjects' viewpoints  were attracted to sv naturally. this fact indi-
cates that the effect of a physical constraint is bigger than khepera's viewpoint  therefore  physical constraints are most useful for controlling a user's viewpoint towards a desired position. 
　the controlling method is particularly useful when the dialogue system interprets or generates a demonstrative 
	imai. hiraki  and miyasato 	1 

pronoun. for example  when a user walks along with the robot  the dialogue system can turn a viewpoint into a shared one to generate a pronoun  and it can interpret the pronoun based on the shared viewpoint. as a result  physical constraints should be used in human-robot conversions. 
1 	conclusion 
this paper investigated the effects of a physical constraint on a viewpoint for demonstrative pronouns for a user navigating a robot. for the experiment  we developed an experimental field named spondia-ii  which used a small mobile robot called khepera. 
　in the experiment  we analyzed the subjects' usage of demonstrative pronouns under two conditions. one condition had a physical constraint: the subjects held khepera in their hand and carried it to the goal. the other condition had no physical constraints: the subjects used only vocal instructions to navigate khepera. these results showed that the subjects frequently had a shared viewpoint with khepera under the physical constraints  and almost all of the subjects had a daily viewpoint under the vocal interaction conditions. the results indicate that physical constraints have an actual effect on human-robot interaction. 
　since the experiments of spondia-ii have just begun  we have not completely examined all aspects of physical constraints. in future work  we plan to investigate the effect of a robot's size  a robot's action  and the type of subjects. moreover  a very interesting question is whether a user will actually say a demonstrative pronoun to a robot. we plan to tackle these questions to improve the future of human-robot interactions. 
references 
 barwise and perry  1  j. barwise and j. perry. situations and attitudes. mit press  1. 
 burgard et a/.  1  w. burgard  a. b. cremers  d. fox  d. hahnel  g. lakemeyer  d. schulz  
w. steiner  and s. thrun. the interactive museum tour-guide robot. in aaai-1  pages 1  1. 
 fujita and kageyama  1  m. fujita and k. kageyama. an open architecture for robot entertainment. in proc. of autonomous agenv1  pages 1  1. 
 hirai  1  k. hirai. research of honda humanoid robot. in proc. of jsai '1  pages 1  1. 
 imai et al.  1  m. imai  k. hiraki  and y. anzai. human-robot interface with attention. tranc. of ieice  d-ii   j1-d-ii.1  1. 
 itoh et al  1  t. itoh  a. denda  and s. nakagawa. evaluation of a sightseeing guidance dialogue system based on spoken japanese with multi-modal interface and cooperative response. in interactional  pages 1  1. 
1 	robotics and perception 
 klein  1  w. klein. speech  place  and action  pages 1. wiley  1. 
 levelt  1  w. j. m. levelt. limits on perception.  pages 1. vnu science press  1. 
 mcneill  1  d. mcneill. psychohnguxstxcs: a new approach. harper & row  1. 
 nagao and takeuchi  1  k. nagao and a. takeuchi. social interaction: multimodal conversation with social agents. in aaai'1  pages 1  1. 
 neal et a/.  1  j. g. neal  z. dobes  k. e. bettinger  and j. s. byoun. multi-modal 