 
robots are gradually entering into diverse application domains such as home  office  and playing field. this article presents advanced research activities related to these domains. first is robocup which is an attempt to promote ai and robotics research by providing a common task for evaluation of various performance  theories  algorithms  and robot architectures. in order for robots  both physical robots and soft agents  to play a soccer game reasonably well  a wide range of technologies need to be integrated and a number of technical breakthrough must be accomplished. the recent results from the last two robocups are reviewed and future leagues are introduced. second  the richer domain of service robotics has also received significant interest recently. the task here is to serve as a human assistant in an office or domestic environment  for tasks like cleaning and delivery. the human-robot interaction is a key issue to success  which poses new challenges in terms of integration of spoken dialogue  gestures  body language  etc. in addition mobile manipulation and safe navigation around humans is essential to success. these two areas integrates many different disciplines including control  perception  natural language processing  hybrid systems and handling of uncertainty  and applied to tour guiding  mail delivery  domestic services  and rescue activities. 
1 	introduction 
robotics offers a fertile ground for demonstration of artificial intelligence techniques. the domain provides a basis for real-world evaluation of techniques under realistic assumptions. construction of robotic systems requires at the same time integration of a diverse range of expertise in order to provide operational systems. traditionally robot systems have been used in manufacturing  in particular in the car industry. the majority of robots sold today are still deployed for spot-welding and car 
henrik i. christensen 
centre for autonomous systems 
royal institute of technology s-1 stockholm  sweden 
painting. mobile robots have so far not gained the expected wide-spread use. this is primarily due to two problems: i  adequate perception to enable deployment of systems is natural environments  and ii  lack of adaptive techniques for planning and error recovery in the context of rich environments. 
　recently a number of new application areas have received significant interest. already in 1 the farther of robotics  joseph engelberger  predicted that service robotics will be a major new business area for robotics  engelberger  1 . service robotics involves assistance to elderly  commercial and domestic cleaning  tour guides  and delivery services  medicine  mail  printer output  etc . in parallel the area of entertainment has begun to attract significant attention. excellent examples of entertainment robots include the mindstorm system sold by lego  an interactive toy for children  and the sonydogs  developed by sony  see next section . these applications clearly demonstrate that mobile robots gradually are becoming a part of our everyday life. 
in terms of entertainment a well-structured effort of 
robot soccer has been initiated  term robocup . we will here introduce the overall aim of robocup  review results from recent competitions and point to its utility to artificial intelligence research. in parallel we will review recent new results in the area of service robotics and illustrate how this field brings together a range of different methodologies to allow deployment of mobile robots in our regular life. 
1 	robocup - integrating ai and robotics 
robocup  the robot world cup initiative  is an attempt to promote intelligent robotics research by providing a common task for evaluation of various theories  algorithms  and agent architectures  kitano et a/.  1 . robocup has currently chosen soccer as its standard task. in order for a robot  a physical robot or a software agent  to play a soccer game reasonably well  many technologies need to be integrated and a number of technical breakthroughs must be accomplished. 
the range of technologies spans the gamut of intelli-
	asada and christensen 	1 

gent roboticsresearch  including design principles for autonomous agents  multi-agent collaboration  strategy acquisition  real-time reasoning and planning  robot learning  and sensor-fusion. 
　the first robot world cup soccer games and conferences  robocup-1  was held during the international joint conference on artificial intelligence  ucai-1  at nagoya  japan with 1 teams around the world  and the second robot world cup soccer games and conferences  robocup-1  was held on july 1 1 at la cite des sciences et de i'lndustrie  la cite  in paris with 1 teams. robocup-1 stockholm will be held 
in conjunction with ijcai-1 participated in by over 1 teams. a series of technical workshops and competitions have been planned for the future. while the competition part of robocup is highlighted in the media  other important robocup activities include technical workshops  the robocup challenge program  which defines a series of benchmark problems   education  and infrastructure development. as of april 1  robocup activity involves thousands of researchers from over 1 countries. further information is available from the web site: http: / / w w . robocup   org/ 
1 	what's robocup  
robocup has a series of activities such as competitions  conferences  robocup challenges  education  infrastructure  and secondary domain. among them  however  competition remains the most well-known component. we think competition has unique value in testing robots and software teams in environments outside of the laboratory. it also forces participants to build robot platforms which reliably perform the task  instead of showing superb performance once in a hundred times. and of course  competition is fun. it motivates students and appeals to spectators. 
　currently  robocup consists of three competition tracks: 
1. simulation league: each team consists of eleven programs  each controlling separately each of eleven team members. the simulation is run using the soccer server developed by noda et al. each player has distributed sensing capabilities  vision and auditory  and motion energy both of which are resource bounded. communication is available between players and strict rules of the soccer game are enforced  e.g. off-sides . this league is mainly for researchers who may not have the resources for building real robots  but are highly interested in complex multiagent reasoning and learning issues. 
1. small-size real robot league: the field is of the size and color of a ping-pong table  see figure 1 a    and up to five robots per team play a match with an orange golf ball. the robot size is limited to approximately 1cm1. typically robots are built by the participating teams and move at speeds of up to 1m/1. global vision is allowed  offering the challenge of real-time vision-based tracking of five 
1 	invited speakers 

	 a  	the 	 b  the middle size 
small size 
figure 1: competition sites 
fast moving robots in each team and the ball. 
1. middle-size real robot league: the field size is of the size and color of three by three ping-pong tables  see figure 1 b    and up to five robots per team play a match with a futsal-1 ball. the size of the base of the robot is limited to approximately 1cm diameter. global vision is not allowed. goals are colored and the field is surrounded by walls to allow for possible distributed localization through robot sensing. 
　aside from the winner of each league  robocup awards the scientific challenge award and engineering challenge award for the team which made a major challenge with some success. these awards were established to foster challenging scientific and engineering research in robocup. in general  the safest approach to winning the competition is to use conventional and reliable technologies well-tuned for the specific domain. the robocup domain is challenging enough so that any successful team must use some challenging technologies. however  these awards are given for truly high-risk and high impact design. 
　in robocup-1  the scientific challenge award was given to sean luke of the university of maryland for demonstrating the utility of evolutionary computation by co-evolving soccer teams. two engineering challenge awards were given to uttori-united  a joint team consisting of ustunomiya univ.  toyo univ.  and riken  japan  and rmit raiders  royal melbourne institute of technology  australia    for designing novel omnidirectional driving mechanisms. 
　in robocup-1  the scientific challenge award was given to three research groups  electrotechnical laboratory  etl   japan  sony computer science laboratories  inc.  japan  and german research center for artificial intelligence gmbh  dfki   for their simultaneous development of fully automatic commentator systems for robocup simulator league. 
　technical details of teams represented in robocup-1 as well as related research results was published as the of-

ficial publication  kitano  1   and those in robocup1 will appear  asada and kitano  1}  ai journal special issue on robocup features excellent works on robocup research issues about multiagent reinforcement learning  teamwork formation  and so on  kitano and asada  1  for the details of the results of all matches in robocup-1 and robocup-1  please visit the site: http://ww.robocup.org/ 
1 	research issues and approaches 
in this section  we discuss several research issues involved in the development of real robots and software agents for robocup. one of the major reasons why robocup attracts so many researchers is that it requires the integration of a broad range of technologies into a team of complete agents  as opposed to a task-specific functional module. 
　currently  each league has its own architectural constraints  and therefore research issues are slightly different from each other. we have published proposal papers about research issues in robocup initiative. for the synthetic agent in the simulation league  the following issues are considered: 
  teamwork among agents  from low-level skills like passing the ball to a teammate  to higher level skills involving execution of team strategies. 
  agent modeling  from primitive skills like recogniz-ing agents' intents to pass the ball  to complex plan recognition of high-level team strategies. 
  multi-agent learning  for on-line and off-line learn-ing of simple soccer skills for passing and intercepting  as well as more complex strategy learning. 
for the robotic agents in the real robot leagues  for both the small and middle-size ones  the following issues are considered: 
  efficient real-time global or distributed perception possibly from different sensing sources. 
  individual mechanical skills of the physical robots  in particular target aim and ball control. 
  strategic navigation and action to allow for robotic teamwork  by passing  receiving and intercepting the ball  and shooting at the goal. 
　more strategic issues are dealt in the simulation league and in the small-size real robot league while acquiring more primitive behaviors of each player is the main concern of the middle-size real robot league. 
architectural analysis 
there are two kinds of aspects in designing a robot team for robocup: 
1. physical structure of robots: actuators for mobility  kicking devices  perceptual  cameras  sonar  bumper sensor  laser range finder  and computational  cpus  microprocessors  facilities. 
1. architectural structure of control software. 
　in the simulation league  both of the above issues are fixed  and therefore more strategical structure as a team has been considered. on the other hand  in the real robot leagues  individual teams have devised  built  and arranged their robots. although the small league and the middle one have their own architectural constraints  there are variations of resource assignment and control structure of their robots. table 1 shows the variations in architectural structure in terms of number of cpus and cameras  and their arrangement. 
　three types a  b  and c indicate a variation adopted in the real robot small-size league. type a is a typical structure many teams used in this league: the centralized control of multiple bodies through a global vision. type b is a kind of multiagent system in which decision making is distributed and independent from each other although they share the global vision. cmunited-1 in the small-size league took this sort of architecture. type c features sensor coordination of global and local views based on the centralized control with multiple bodies. i-space  a joint team of utsunomiya univ. and univ. of tokyo  japan  in the small-size league adopted this type architecture. 
　on the other hand  type e is a typical architecture adopted in both the simulation league and the real robot middle-size league: a completely distributed multiagent system. type d used c. s. fveiburg team in the middlesize league adopted a combination of types a and e utilizing laser range finders mounted on players which make it possible to reconstruct the global view and to localize observed objects  teammates  opponents  and ball  in the field. that is  they changed the problem in the middle-size league into one in the small-size league. 
　communication between agents is possible in all of the leagues. the simulation league is the only that uses it except one team uttori in the middle-size league. in the following  we attempt to analyze the achievements in robocup-1 and 1 in terms of each league. 
1 	simulation league 
the simulation league continues to be the most popular part of the robocup leagues  with 1 teams participating in robocup-1  which is a slight increase over the number of participants at robocup-1. in robocup-1  because of the offside rule introduced from 1  most of matches are carried out in 'compact soccer' style like human soccer which provides two research issues closely related to each other: dynamic formation and opponent monitoring. this means the change from position based role assignment to context sensitive dynamic role assignment. 
　teams in the robocup simulation league are faced with three strategic research challenges: multi-agent learning  teamwork and agent modeling. all three are fundamental issues in multi-agent interactions. the learning challenge has been categorized into on-line and off-line learning both by individuals and by teams  i.e.  collaborative learning . one example of off-line individual learning is learning to intercept the ball  while an 
	asada and christensen 	1 

table 1: variations in architectural structure 


example of on-line collaborative learning is to adaptively change player positions and formations based on experience in a game. the detailed analysis is given in the paper in  kitano and asada  1 . 
　the stage in robocup-1 is still in the preliminary level. for example  tactics to escape from off-side traps was still passive even in champion teams. in future robocup  such tactics will require recognition of intention of opponent players/teams. in this stage  opponent modeling and management of team strategies would become more important. similarly  on-line learning will become more important  because team strategies should be changed during a match according to strategies of opponent teams. 
1 	small-size real robot league 
the environment in the small-size league is highly dynamic with robots and the ball moving at speeds between lra/s and 1m/s. an interesting research issue consists of the prediction of the motion of the mobile objects to combine it with strategy. in the case of the cmunited1 team  prediction of the movement of the ball was successfully achieved and highly used for motion  e.g.  ball interception  and strategic decisions  e.g.  goaltender behavior and pass/shoot decisions . 
　one of the main interesting open questions is the development of algorithms for on-line learning of the strategy of the opponent team and for the real-time adaptation of one's strategy in response. finally  similarly to the simulation and middle-size leagues  we want to abstract from our experience algorithms that will be applicable beyond the robotic soccer domain. 
1 	middle-size real robot league 
the performance of robot behaviors in robocup-1 was better than in robocup-1 although the number of teams in the middle-size league drastically increased from 1 to 1  more than three times. however  the level of skills is under development  mainly putting more focus on individual behavior acquisition than cooperative teamwork. engineering issues such as precise robot control and robust object detection are still main issues in this league. 
　the focus on colors to visibly distinguish objects exerts a strong bias for research in color-based vision methods. it is desirable to permit other approaches as well  
1 	invited speakers 
such as using edges  texture  shape  optical flow etc.  thereby widening the range of applicable vision research within robocup. 
　finally  the use of communication in the different leagues is also an active research topic. communication allows interesting research in a variety of topics  including multi-robot sensor fusion and control. we want to explore limited communication environments and its relationship to agent autonomy  and learning of cooperative behavior. 
1 	new leagues 
in robocup-1  sony legged robot exhibition games and demonstration were held  and they attracted many spectators  especially boys and girls  for its cute style and behaviors. figure 1 shows a scene from their demonstrations. in 1  sony legged robot league will be one of the robocup official competitions with more nine teams around the world. 

figure 1: a scene from sony legged robot demonstration 
　currently  except for sony legged robot league  games are played by wheel-based robots  soccer game by humanoid robot is the next major leap in the field which leads to the ultimate goal of the robocup  kitano and asada  1 . 
　before  actually play soccer with human players  robocup organize humanoid leagues in following categories  and start humanoid league competition from robocup-1  1 . fig.1 shows the performances by 
honda p1 in 1  and they will show 1 by 1 humanoid 


figure 1: shooting play by honda p1 
games in robocup-1  the year of world cup in japan and korea. 
1 	robocup n e w activities 
the comprehensive nature of robocup makes it an ideal subject for project-oriented ai and robotics courses. already  a few undergraduate and graduate courses are now being planned using robocup. further  an education infrastructure named robocup jr. is proposed  reflecting the needs of educational institutions. robocup jr. will use cheaper robots and a much simpler task domain  rather than the highly challenging arrangement seen in the current robocup competition. a prototype of platforms will make a debut in 1 or 1  and the official league robocup jr. will start from 1. 
　disaster rescue is one of the most serious social issue which involves very large numbers of heterogeneous agents in the hostile environment. robocup-rescue intends to promote research and development in this socially significant domain by creating a standard simulator and forum for researchers and practitioners. while the rescue domain intuitively appealing as large scale multi-agent domains  it has not yet given through analysis on its domain characteristics. robocup-rescue targets search and rescue activities for large-scale disaster like kobe earthquake in 1. 
1 	service robotics 
service robotics covers a range of robot applications including office automation  lawn moving  assistance to handicapped and elderly  and domestic services. the vision of a domestic servant is at least three decades old  yet little progress has been achieved until recently. by 1 engelberger  engelberger  1  predicted that service robotics would be a major commercial market for robotics by the end of the century  yet the large scale commercial potential is yet to be demonstrated. 
　the most dominating problems in development of service robots are reliable mapping and interaction with the environment. for operation in a regular home it is impossible to make strong assumptions about the layout  the materials encountered  the behaviour of other agents like dogs  children  etc. to provide a viable solution it is necessary to provide systems that are fully autonomous and which have extensive facilities for error detection and recovery. 
　research in perception  intelligent control  probabilistic mapping and human-robot interaction has generated results that recently have allowed demonstration of a range of service robots applications with a significant potential. in the following we will briefly outline several of these systems. 
1 	hospital automation 
over the last five year the company helpmate robotics have deployed more than 1 helpmate systems in hospitals. the robot system provides delivery services to the staff. typical services includes pick-up and delivery of meals and transport of medical records and specimens between the different departments and the laboratory. the system uses a touch screen in combination with spoken feedback for communication with users. the navigation is based on ultra-sonic sonars for obstacle detection  ceiling mounted landmarks for absolute localisation  and a laser radar for docking. the system operates in pre-specified environments and have no facilities for error-recovery. in the event of an error a radio modem is used for signalling for assistance. the helpmate system is one of the most widely deployed service robot today. the autonomy of the system has first and foremost been achieved through careful engineering of the system and its environment. this implies that the cost of deployment is significant and due to its limited ability to perform error recovery there is need for trained staff to operate the vehicle. 
1 	commercial cleaning 
another area that has received significant attention over the last 1 years is commercial cleaning of hotel corridors  conference facilities and more recently supermarkets. during early 1 the company kent inc. automated a series of their floor cleaners. the system uses a combination of ultra-sonic ranging and inertial sensing for navigation. the system  named robokent  drives through a specific area and builds up a map of the environment. once a map is available a zamboni pattern is used for traversal of the area. the system requires fairly well structured environment for its operation. i.e.  it is unable to clean small niches and narrow passages. the robot uses a simple depth-first strategy for traversal of multiple corridors. a total of 1 units have been sold. the units are all deployed in the us  as the unit is too large for operation in european style corridors. 
　recently siemens and hefter demonstrated a new vehicle for cleaning of supermarkets during opening hours  rencken et al.  1 . this vehicle uses also ultra-sonic and laser ranging for mapping of the environment and avoidance of dynamic obstacles like customers. this particular system can be seen as the next generation of 
	asada and christensen 	1 

cleaning robots with a more advanced user interface and the ability to operate in highly cluttered environments. 
　a characteristic feature of these systems is a very simple user interface as it is to be operated by unskilled labor. the user interface is typically a pimple 1 character display and four buttons. the system have a the same time very limited facilities for handling of errors. if an error situation arises then the operator is simply notified. 
1 	domestic cleaning 
domestic cleaning is a very tough task as few or no assumptions can be made about the environment. thus  few have tried to automate this market. recently the company electrolux demonstrated a behaviour based robot for automatic vacuuming of rooms. the system is a new ultra-sonic ranging system and a tactile array for mapping of the environment and detection of collisions. the robot drives along the perimeter of the room and afterwards it moves through the room at random. the robot uses a truly behaviour based method for navigation and room coverage  brooks  1 . the robot is expected to be available in europe and asia in a few years. this will be the first fully autonomous system for domestic use that will be mass-produced for regular customers. the robot is expected to cost less than $1. 
1 	tour guides 
all of the above examples have been commercial systems. there are however also a number of very interesting research platforms. one of the applications that has received the most attention is probably tour guides. the system that has been in operation the longest for autonomous navigation in an office environment is probably xavter that was developed at cmu by simmons et. al.  simmons et a/.  1 . this system uses a hybrid-deliberative architecture combined with partially observable markov processes  pomps  for automatic localisation  handling of obstacles and planning of missions. the robot has been in daily operation for more than four years and has a remarkable robustness of more than 1%. 
　at the university of bonn the rhino system was developed for tour guiding at the deutsches museum bonn  burgard et al.  1; beetz et al.  1 . the uses a probabilistic  markov  approach to localisation. combined with methods for obstacle avoidance the system was capable of guiding visitors between different displays at the museum over a period of six days. the user specified desired tours using a touch screen. the robustness of probabilistic localisation is most impressive. revised and updated version of the system have later been deployed by cmu in the minerva system  that operated for 1 weeks at the smithsonian institute during august - september 1  thrun et al.  1 . the minerva system included both vision and sonar for localisation. recently the use of condensation for robot localisation has been reported {dellart et al.  1 . through 
1 	invited speakers 
use of monto-carlo based sampling of multi-modal distributions it is possible to achieve real-time localisation in cluttered environments. 
　the sage system deployed at the carnegie museum of natural history was also developed at cmu  nourbaksh  1 . this system is a permanent part of the dinosaur hall where it provides tours and multi-media information about the items on display. the system  which has been in operation for since 1  uses color vision and artificial markers for navigation while sonars  infra-red ranging and bumpers are used for handing of obstacles. 
1 	office/domestic services 
service robots are gradually moving into the domestic market. the applications will here involve more complex tasks like cleaning of a table  locating objects  and assisting humans. one example of such a system is the intelligent service robot developed at the royal institute of technology  andersson et al.  1 . for operation in a natural environment it is necessary to use navigation techniques like the probabilistic mapping mentioned earlier  as robustness is an absolute requirement. to achieve robustness the robot uses vision  laser and ultra-sonic ranging. the system uses a hybrid deliberative architecture  arkin  1  with dedicated behaviours for exploration  door traversal  user-interaction  object recognition  point-to-point based navigation. the system uses a topology graph for planning of missions which in turn are expected by combinations of behaviours. the system is presently capable of delivering mail to a range of different researchers in the laboratory and operation in a natural ikea style living room. the robot is shown in figure 1. in addition to robust navigation the system 

figure 1: mail delivery by a service robot 

must have excellent facilities for interaction with users. speech technology is gradually reaching a level of maturity that enables a natural dialogue. large vocabulary speech recognizers like ibm via-voice and dragon dictate require user training to achieve reasonable performance  but research prototypes that uses limited vocabularies do provide an adequate robustness without user training. one major obstacle is natural language processing. it is unrealistic to require that end-users will be trained to instruct the robot. there is thus a need for natural language interpretation of spoken input to enable a flexible dialogue between the user and a robot. in addition there is a need for probabilistic  re- planning of tasks to enable handling of a diverse set of situations and errors  kristensen  1 . 
1 	research issues 
fully autonomous service robots for domestic applications is not yet possible. to provide such systems a number of fundamental issues must be resolved  including: 
  robust methods for localisation in cluttered dy-namic environments. today methods exist for robust localisation in static environments  but in a dynamic setting there is a need for automatic classification of structure into static and dynamic  which requires stronger temporal integration. 
  error recovery. for operation in dynamic setting it is essential to have facilities for automatic error detection and recovery. on research platforms a robustness of 1% might be enough  but that still corresponds to 1 minutes down-time per day  which is clearly unacceptable. methods for robust computing using methods like voting might be a possible solution to this problem. 
  intuitive user interfaces. almost all systems have a rudimentary interface that is acceptable to researchers but for regular users an intuitive interface is needed which requires new methods for dialogue interaction  natural language processing and methods for combination of speech and gesture. 
  software methods for configuration and deploy-ment. today a significant amount of resources is needed to deploy a system in a particular setting. to make these systems useful to a wider audience and to enable easy transfer of methods from one application to another there is a need for new methods that allow modular design and integration of different techniques. this in turn call for standard architectures and benchmarks. 
  object recognition. to enable intelligent interac-tion with objects in the environment there is a need for methods for robust recognition of diverse set of objects and object categories. this involved new methods for invariant recognition  memory organisation and task oriented sensing. 
1 	summary 
using the domains of robocup and service robotics we have tried out outline recent trends in robotics and their dependency on new research results in artificial intelligence. robotics requires integration of techniques into operational systems to demonstrate operation in and outside of the laboratory. for such applications robustness is a key issues. it is not enough that techniques operate 1% of the time. robustness must at least be of the order 1% to make the systems useful for entertainment or commercial tasks. to be useful in realistic tasks there is at the same time a need for high-level reasoning and planning about goals  contexts  actions and interaction to make these systems useful to end-users. the next generations of these systems will thus rely on a wide range of artificial intelligence techniques. 
acknowledgement 
the first author thanks to the members of international 
robocup committee  especially  dr. hiroaki kitano  sony csl  japan . 
　the second author gratefully acknowledges the support of the swedish foundation for strategic research and the support of the staff at cas. 
