 
     this paper describes a representation for time relations in narrative. the time relations are based on both explicit sources of time information  e.g.  adverbial expressions or tense  and i n p l i c i t sources  such as multiple reference to a single event  narrative time progression and earlier events implied by change of state words. natural language processing is used to analyse the input 
text into a set of subject-verb-object units  connected by binary connectives; these units correspond to the events of the narrative. with each event is associated a time in relation to another event  adjusted by an optional time quantity. these time relations have a natural representation as a directed graph whose nodes are time points and whose edges are time intervals. the algorithm for extracting the time relations from a text is i l l u s trated for an excerpt from a hospital discharge summary. 
	i 	introduction 
　　　an understanding of time relations is essent i a l to understanding narrative. for a computer program to  understand  narrative  it must process these time relations; this requires both a representation of the types of time information that i n terconnect narrated events  and an algorithm to extract this information from the natural language text. 
     the representation of time relations in narrative raises a number of complex problems. on the one hand  there are a multitiude of time words: prepositions  e.g.  during  before   adjectives 
 current  p r i o r     adverbs  then  now   and nouns  duration  week . these various words combine into time expressions  generally adverbial expressions  which must be analysed and reduced to a systematic representation. 
　　　on the other hand  most events in a narrative do not have an explicit time stated in the form of an adverbial expression. nonetheless the reader of 
　this research was supported in part by the national library of medicine grant number lm-1  awarded by the national institutes of health; in part by the national science foundation grant number ist-1; and in part by the national science foundation grant mcs-1. 
a narrative can determine the sequence of events even in the absence of explicit time information for each event. to do t h i s   the reader makes use of certain characteristics of narrative discourse  in order to assign time relations to events whose time is not e x p l i c i t l y given. one characteristic of connected discourse is reference: by identifying various mentions of an event as referring to 
the same event  the reader associates these mentions with the same time. the conventions of narrative discourse also provide certain default time 
relations between consecutive clauses and/or sentences. for example  the convention of  narrative time progression  provides that in narrative  time does not move backward unless an explicit time marker is provided. an algorithm for capturing time relations in narrative must make use both of the explicit time information and of the time i n formation conveyed implicitly by reference and by the default time relations. this paper w i l l present such an algorithm and outline i t s application to a sample text. 
	ii 	background 
　　　there have been several previous investigations of the representation of time relations  a l l within the context of question-answering systems.  focused on the specification of the temporal information provided by tense and described a program chronos that accepted a restricted set of english-like input  stored t h i s information and answered simple time-related questions based on the input. since the input was provided on a sentence-by-sentence basis  the issue of implicit time relations in narrative discourse did not arise in this work.  described a representation of 
time relations between sets of events   the representation was used in querying a data base consisting of events whose times were specified  sometimes incompletely  in terms of their duration and in terms of beginning and ending times in relation to another event. from this information  the program could determine whether an event preceded  overlapped  or followed another event. 
　　　more recently   and  described a  time specialist  program which accepted time information about events in a lisp-like form; the specialist stored this information  checked it for consistency  and answered queries about the events described in the input. although the time specialist handled only explicit time information provided in the input  there is a discussion in  about i t s ap-

1 

plication to a narrative-like situation  namely the specification of the time course of a disease and the matching of input data to the specified time course. 
     in contrast to the question-answering context of the work described above  this paper is based on research at the linguistic string project on the creation of a data base from natural language input. in our initial experiments using medical 
narrative  it quickly became clear that time relations between various medical events  e.g.  symptoms  therapies  were of central importance in capturing the significant information. the time algorithm described here is a modification of an earlier algorithm  developed for the analysis of 
medical records  and the examples in the paper are drawn from actual hospital discharge summaries. the algorithm should  however  be equally applicable to time relations in other narrative domains. 
     in the automatic analysis of the medical narrative material  various stages of natural language processing preceded the analysis of time information. these stages included 1  a parse  identifying  surface  syntactic relations; 1  transformational regularization  mapping more complex sentence types into a  canonical set  of simple subject-verb-object sentence types; 1  a  formatting  component  mapping the analysed sentence into a tabular representation of the medical information.  see  for a more detailed description of the stages of natural language processing . 
     these earlier stages of processing are relevant to the time algorithm because the time algorithm assumes that each sentence is broken down into syntactic units consisting of subject-verb-object combinations corresponding to events; these units are connected by binary connectives  with the main clause preceding the clause subordinated or conjoined to i t . binary connectives include  among oth-
ers  subordinate conjunction  e.g.  while in she developed dyspnea while she was in maryland ; co-ordinate conjunction  e.g.  and in her elbow became infected and she was treated.... ; and relative clauses  e.g.  she was treated with erythromycin which she took for 1 days. . as part of the syntactic analysis  each tense and each explicit time expression is identified and associated with the unit that it modifies. the output of the syntactic processing is thus a sequence of events with associated time information  connected by b i nary connectives. the time algorithm operates sequentially on the set of connected events obtained for a document; it starts at the beginning of the narrative and assigns to each event a time in terms of an already processed event  before going on to the next event. 
     the emphasis in developing this algorithm has been to use the available syntactic information to its fullest. we have not explored the question of 
whether the incorporation of domain-specific extra-linguistic knowledge would improve the processing of time  it almost certainly would   and whether the kinds of extra-linguistic knowledge needed to do this can be clearly delimited  a difficult task . it is our hope that the f u l l u t i l i zation of linguistic techniques will bring into sharper focus the kinds of information needed to supplement a linguistically based analysis. 
	i l l 	the representation of time 
     it is convenient to analyse the time of an event in terms of its relation to the time of another event  the  reference point   adjusted by an optional time quantity  see  1  and 1 . the reference point may be a date  which anchors the time to a fixed external scale  or it may be another event within the narrative. this analysis has a natural representation as a directed graph  where the nodes of the graph are the time points associated with the events and the edges represent the intervals between events. the time graph for a 
     short three sentence textlet is shown in fig. 1. 
     an event generally has a single time point associated with i t   although events with duration have both a beginning and an ending point. if two events occur at the same time  they will both be associated with the same time point. thus in the example of fig. 1  if admission to the hospital occurs on 1 and the patient develops a fever on 1  then these two events will both be associated with the same time point  point a in the graph of fig. 1 . 
     the time graph is useful in determining the relative order of the events displayed in the graph: an event i precedes an event j iff there is a path from the time point associated with event i to the time point associated with event j. the sum of the edges along the path gives the time interval between i and j. for example  in the graph of fig. 1  b precedes a. there are  in fact  two paths from b to a. in this case  the sum of the edges of the two paths must be equal: ba = bc + ca.  if the length of the two paths were not equal  an inconsistency would be detected . since ba has a 
＊ tv rsmmmmamaammimbssssssssssssssssaaasbssssss    sr 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　date of admission: 	1/xx text: 
1 weeks prior to the current adulation  a bright red patch appeared under the patient's eye. the patient developed a naculopapular rash over hands and knees. 1. 1 she began having a fever to 
1. 


1 

1 

progression. sentence 1 has an explicit time  1   but narrative time progression also applies; this provides the information that the time of sentence 1 is later than or equal to the time of sentence 1. as a result  a lower and an upper bound on the time of sentence 1 are obtained from the discourse context  although sentence 1 has no explicit time. these relations are represented by the graph in pig. 1. 
     a second hypothesis states that the time of a subordinate clause is equal to the time of its main clause  provided that no explicit time information occurs in the subordinate clause or in the subordinate conjunction. for example  in the sentence a 
sinai tap was performed which revealed 1 red ood cells  the subordinate clause  which revealed red blood cells  is assigned a time equal to that of the main clause  a spinal tap was 
performed . 	-
     co-ordinate conjunction poses some special and difficult problems for interpreting time information. the algorithm distinguishes two main cases. when the subject or object contains a conjoined noun or adjective phrase  the conjoined phrase is expanded during the transformational stage to yield two events; however  the algorithm assigns them the same time  specifically the second conjunct is assigned the time of the first oonjunct . thus in the sentence the maculopapular rash and the patch under her right eye gradually diaapppeared  the two events rash disappeared ana patch disappeared are assigned the same time 
     when there are two distinct predicates connected by a co-ordinate conjunction  then the two conjoined events behave like two independent sentences  and the algorithm assigns to the second a time later than or equal to the time of the first  as in narrative time progression. for example  in the sentence. the maculopapular rash and the patch under her right eye gradually disappeare and were. gone after the first twelve hours on therapy  the default timetnfonnation is used  together with the time information from the explicit adverbial after the first twelve hours on therapy  to determine that the time of the seoon  conjunct  rash and patch were gone  is later than the time of the first conjunct  rash and patch gradually disappeared ; in fact  the second conjunct marks the end point of the time period of the first conjunct  
vi time information from resolution of reference 
     if a single event is mentioned several times within a discourse  it is important to identify these mentions of the event and to equate the times associated with each mention  ignoring  for a moment  descriptions of states which can have a duration . for example  the events current hospitalization and current hospital stay have a special signifcance in a hospital discharge summary. they are associated with specific dates  provided in the header information  and appear as reference points in many time expressions  for example  she again spiked fevers on the 1th day of hospitalization  or patient was  afebrile on discharge . if a given mention of admission. discharge  or hospitalisation can be associated with the current hospitalization  then its time can be set equal to the date given in the header. for example  if the hospital admission occurred on 1  then the 1th dav;of hospitalization will be 1  provided that this is a reference to the current hospitalization. despite the fact that anaphoric reference is more difficult to detect in the note-taking style of the discharge summaries  articles  both definite and indefinite are commonly omitted   these references to the current hospitali-
zation are generally easy to resolve because they are the default reference; there are occasional references to previous hospitalizations  but these are flagged by various modifiers  as in the previous hospitalization. 
     the original program implemented to processtime relations  1  did anaphora resolution only when an event appeared as the reference point in a time expression. however  the current algorithm extracts more complete time information by comparing each new mention of an event  regardless of 
whether it occurs as a reference point  to previously mentioned events of the same type. when it identifies two mentions as referring to the same 
event  then it equates their times. 
     a simple technique is used for determining sameness of reference: a backward search is performed for events of the appropriate type  namely  events in the same synonym class. when a candidate event is found and its factuality is checked  negated events cannot be antecedents   then its time is compared to the time of the current event. if 
the times are compatible  that is  no contradiction arises from assuming that these events are the  same    then they are taken as referring to the same event; otherwise  the backwards search is continued until all events of the appropriate type have been tested. 
     this procedure has been adequate to identify sameness of reference in the hospital discharge summaries  which have a relatively simple referential structure. for more complex texts  it is clear that a more sophisticated technique for resolution of anaphora would have to be used. 
vii capturing time relations in a sample text 
     the two sentences below are the third and fourth sentences  events 1  from a paragraph of 
a hospital discharge summary. 
1. the patient became afebrile during the first day of hospitalization. 
1. she again spiked fevers on the 1rd and 1th day of hospitalization  but then became afebrile and remained afebrile for the remainder of her hospitalization. 
we will use these sentences to illustrate how the algorithm extracts and represents time information from a narrative. in the first sentence she became afebrile  there is an implicit reference  carried by the change-of-state verb become  to a state when the patient was not afebrile. this earlier implied state is entered as event e1; the state of becom-

1 


1 

narrated topic  namely el1; and it provides an ending  to  time = date of discharge. the time derived from conjoined predicate time progression  time  e1   = time  el1  is therefore redundant and is omitted. 
     e1: this event is derived from el1 by expansion of a conjoined adjective in the object: afebrile and asymptomatic; it is therefore taken as having the same time as e1. 
     the time graph for these sentences is shown in fig. 1. 
     in the course of computing the time relations  all events of a given type  for example  fever events  are collected into a set  in order to 1p cilitate determination of sameness of reference. this grouping has an additional advantage in that it makes it possible to graph a set of fever events 
against time. figure 1 shows a graph of fever against time for the sentences analysed in figs. 1 and 1. although it is not possible to determine the exact shape of the curve  or its height  since a numerical temperature is*not always given   the graph nonetheless provides an approximate picture of the patient's periods of fever during the hospital stay. 
	viii 	conclusion 
     in this brief discussion  only the broad outline of an algorithm to extract time information from narrative can be sketched. the algorithm described in this paper is a modification of a previously developed algorithm  that was implemented 


1 

and successfully tested on a set of eight hospital discharge summaries  each containing approximately 1 sentences of text . the original program contained an extensive treatment of explicit time expressions  covering same 1 time words. the modifications to the original program have been mainly in the handling of implicit time relations. 
　　　we are now in the process of implementing the new version of the algorithm and are s t i l l investigating several problems in this regard. these are: 1  maintaining a compact representation that permits detection of inconsistencies when a new time relation is added to the set of known time relations; 1  representing continuous states as opposed to time-point events: a state may change over time  but can s t i l l be identified as a single state   e . g .   a fever may rise and f a l l but it is s t i l l referred to as a single continuing fever ; 1  implemening a more sophisticated procedure for anaphora resolution  including the handling of references to continuous states; and 1  d i s t i n guishing between the two uses of durational expressions: 1  to define the lower and upper l i m i t s of a single time-point  as in she had a transfusion during her hospitalization; or 1  to define beginmng and end points of a continuous state: she was afebrile during her hospitalization. in adhition  there are a number of issues that we have not yet touched on  for example  the representation of imprecision in time specifications or the use of extra-linguistic knowledge to determine time relations. nonetheless  the general principles outlined in this paper appear to constitute an important f i r s t step in extracting time information from narrative in a way that captures many of the important relations between the narrated events. 
references 
bruce  b.c.  a model for temporal 