 
　　　although most commonly occurring default rules are normal when viewed in isolation  they can interact with each other in ways that lead to the 
derivation of anomalous default assumptions* in order to deal with such anomalies it is necessary to re-represent these rules  in some cases by introducing non-normal defaults. the need to consider such potential interactions leads to a new concept of integrity  distinct from the conventional integrity issues of f i r s t order data bases. 
　　　the non-normal default rules required to deal with default interactions a l l have a common pattern  default theories conforming to this pattern are considerably more complex than normal default theories. for example  they need not have extensions  and they lack the property of semi-monoto-
nicity. 
	i 	introduction 
　　　in an earlier paper  reiter 1a  one of us proposed a logic for default reasoning. the objective there was to provide a representation for  among other things  common sense facts of the form  most a's are b's   and to articulate an appropriate logic to characterize correct reasoning using such facts.* 	one such form of reasoning is the 
derivation of default assumptions: given a particular a  conclude that  this particular a is a b . because some avs are not b's this conclusion must be treated as a default assumption or belief about the world since subsequent observations in the world may yield that  this particular a is not a b . the derivation of the belief that  this particular a is a b  is a form of plausible reasoning which is typically required whenever conclusions must be 
drawn from incomplete information about a world. 
　　　it is important to note that not a l l senses of the word  most  lead to default assumptions. one can distinguish two such senses: 
this paper was written with the financial support of the national science and engineering research council of canada under grant a1. 
* other closely related work with much the same motivation is described in  mccarthy 1    mcdermott 1  and  mcdermott and doyle 1 . 
giovanni criscuolo 
i s t l t u t o dl flsica teorlca 
university of naples 
　　　1. a purely statistical connotation  as in  most voters refer carter.  here   most  is being used exclusively in the sense of  the majority of . this setting does not lead to default assumptions: given that maureen is a voter one would not want to assume that maureen prefers carter. default logic makes no attempt to represent or reason with such statistical facts. 
　　　1. a prototypical sense  as in  most birds f l y .   there is a statistical connotation here the majority of birds do f l y - but there is also the sense that a characteristic of a prototypical or normal bird is being described. given a bird polly  one is prepared to assume that it f l i e s unless one has reasons to the contrary.* it is towards such prototypical settings that default logic is addressed. 
　　　the concept of a prototypical situation la central to the frames proposal of  minsky 1  and is realised in such frame inspired knowledge representation languages as krl  bobrow and vinograd 1  and frl  roberts and goldstein 1 . that these are alternative representations for some underlying logic has been convincingly argued in  hayes 1 . default logic presumes to provide a formalization of this underlying logic. 
　　　the approach taken by default logic is to distinguish between prototypical facts  such aa 
 typically mammals give birth to live young   and  hard  facts about the world such as  all dogs are mammals.  the former are viewed as rules of inference  called default rules  which apply to the latter  hard  facts. the point of view is that the set of a l l  hard  facts w i l l f a l l to completely specify the world - there w i l l be gaps in our knowledge - and that the default rules serve to help f i l l in those gaps with plausible but not i n f a l l i ble conclusions. a default theory then is a pair  d v  where d is a set of default rules applying to some world being modelled  and v is a set of  hard  facts about that world. formally  v la a 
* one way of distinguishing between these two senses of  most  is by replacing i t s setting using the word  typically . thus   typically voters prefer carter  sounds inappropriate  whereas  typically birds f l y   seems more accurate. in the rest of this paper we shall use  typically  whenever we are referring to a prototypical situation. 

1 

the introduction of non-normal defaults like  1  is a particularly unpleasant solution to the 

　　　it is the purpose of this paper to describe a 
　　　variety of settings in which interactions involving defaults are important* and to uniformly generalize the notion of a normal default theory so as to correctly treat these interactions. the resulting semi-normal default theories w i l l then be seen to lack some important properties: for example they need not have extensions  and they lack the semimonotonicity property which a l l normal theories enjoy. we shall also see that the interactions i n troduced by default rules lead to a new concept of data base integrity  distinct from the integrity issues arising in f i r s t order data bases. 
　　　this paper is an abridged version of  reiter and criscuolo 1 . 

　　　in this section we present a number of examples of default rules which  in isolation  are most naturally represented as normal defaults but whose interaction with other defaults or f i r s t order for-
mulae leads to counterintuitive results. in each case we show how to  patch  the representation in order to restore the intended interpretation. the resulting  patches  a l l have a uniform character  transitivity problem  for as we shall see in section h i b   the resulting non-normal default theories lack most of the desirable properties that normal theories enjoy. for example  they sometimes f a i l to have an extension  they lack semi-monotonicity  and their proof theory appears to be considerably more complex than that for normal theories. accordingly  to the extent that it can be done  we would prefer to keep our representations  as normal as possible.  fortunately transitivity can be blocked using normal defaults whenever it is the case that in addition to  1  and  1  we have  typically b's are not a's . this is the case for example  1 :  typically adults are not high school dropouts . under this circumstance  the following normal representation blocks t r a n s i t i v i t y : 
 1  
 1  
* nor would we want to conclude that  typically high school dropouts are not employed.  rather we would remain agnostic about the employment status of a typical high school dropout. 
1 

 1  
　　　notice how  whem given that b a   a simple backchaining interpreter would establish the goal c a . back-chaining into  1  yields the subgoal b a  a - a a . this splits into the subgoal b a  which is given and hence solved  and the subgoal ~ a a . this latter back-chains into  1  yielding the subgoal b a  which is solved. there remains only to verify the consistency requirements associated with the defaults  1  and  1  entering into the proof i.e. to verify that  c a   * a a } is consistent with a l l of the f i r s t order formulae in force. such a back-chaining default reasoner is an incomplete realization of the complete proof procedure of  relter 1a . the reader might find it instructive to simulate this back-chaining interpreter for the case that a a  is given  in order to see how a derivation of c a  is prevented. 
　　　notice also that the representation  1    1  and  1  yields a very interesting prediction. given an individual a which is simultaneously an instance of a and b  nothing can be concluded about its c-ness. this prediction is confirmed with respect to example  1 : given that john is both a high school dropout and an adult  we do not want to assume that john is employed. notice that the nonnormal representation  1  and  1  yields the same prediction. we shall have more to say about defaults with common instances of their prerequisites in section i i c * 
　　　a somewhat different need for blocking transit i v i t y arises when it is the case that  typically a's are not c's  i.e. in addition to  1  and  1  we have 
		 1  
for example  
 typically university students are adults.    
 typically adults are employed.  	i 	 1  
 typically university students are not | employed.  	j 
under these circumstances  consider a prototypical instance a of a. by  1  and  1  c a  can be derived. but by  1  ~ c a  can be derived. this means that the individual a gives rise to two d i f f erent extensions for the fragment default* theory  1    1  and  1 . one of these extensions the one containing c a  - is intuitively unacceptable; only the other extension - the one containing   c a  - is admissible. but a fundamental premise of default logic is that any extension provides an acceptable set of beliefs about a world. the problem then is to eliminate the extension containing c a . this can be done by replacing the normal default  1  by the non-normal  1   exactly as we did earlier in order to block the t r a n s i t i v i t y of  typically . now  given a a   b a  can be derived from  1   and - c a  from  1 . c a  cannot be 
derived using  1  since its consistency requirement is violated. on the other hand  given a prot -
* 
typical instance b of b  c b  can be derived ualng  1 . 
　　　once again a non-normal default has been introduced  something we would prefer to avoid. as before  a normal representation can be found whenever it is the case that  typically b'e are not a v   this is the case for example  1 :  typically adults are not university students . under this circumstance the following normal representation w i l l do: 

　　　notice that this representation predicts that any individual which is simultaneously an instance of a and b w i l l be an instance of not c  rather than an inatance of c. this is the case for example  1 : given that maureen is both a university student and an adult one wants to assume that maureen is not employed. 
　　　figure 1 summarizes and extends the various cases discussed in this section. the f i r s t three entries of this table are unprobleratic cases which 
were not discussed  and are included only for completeness. 





	i l l 	discussion 
　　　in this section we discuss some issues raised by the previous results of this paper. specifically  we address the question of data base integrity a r i sing from default interactions  as well as some of the formal problems associated with the non-normal default rules introduced to correctly represent these interactions. we conclude with a brief discussion of semantic network representations for default reasoning. 
a. 	integrity of default theories 
　　　a very nice feature of f i r s t order logic as an a r t i f i c i a l intelligence representation language is the extensibility of any theory expressed in this language. that i s   provided that some axiomatlzation of a world has that world as a model  so that the axiomatlzation faithfully represents certain aspects of that world  then the result of adding a new axiom about the world is s t i l l a faithful representation. it is true that specialized deduction mechanisms may be sensitive to such updates  e.g. adding a new  theorem  to a planner-like data base ; but semantically there is no problem. unfortunately  as we have seen  default theories lack this semantic extensibility; the addition of a new default rule may create interactions leading to unwarranted conclusions  even though in isolation this rule appears perfectly correct. 
　　　this observation leads to a new concept of data base integrity  one with quite a different character than the integrity issues arising in data base 
management systems  hammer and mcleod 1  or in f i r s t order data bases  nicolas and yazdanian 1  relter 1b . for such systems an integrity constraint specifies some invariant property which every state of the data base must satisfy. for example  a typical integrity constraint might specify that an employee's age must l i e in the range 1 to 1 years. any attempt to update the data base with an employee age of 1 would violate this constraint. formally one can say that a data base satisfies some set of integrity constraints if the data base is logically consistent with the constraints. the role of integrity constraints is to restrict the class of models of a data base to include as a model the particular world being represented. now the objective of the default representations of section ii had precisely this character; we sought representations which would rule out unwarranted default assumptions so as to guarantee a faithful representation of real world common sense reasoning. but notice that there was no notion of an integrity constraint with which the representation was to be consistent. indeed  consistency of the representation cannot be an issue at a l l since any default theory w i l l be consistent provided its f i r s t order facts are  relter 1a  corollary 1 . it follows that  while there is an integrity issue lurking here  it has a different nature than that of classical data base theory. 
　　　we are thus led to the need for some form of integrity maintenance mechanism as an aid in the design of large default data bases. the natural i n i t i a l data base design would involve representing all default rules as normal defaults  thereby ignoring those potential interactions of the kind analyzed in section i i . an integrity maintenance system would then seek out possible sources of integrity violations and query the user as to the appropriate default assumptions to be made in this setting. once the correct interpretation has been determined  the system would appropriately re-represent the offending normal default rules. for example  when confronted with a pair of default rules of the form  1   the system would f i r s t attempt to prove that 
1 a and b can have no common instance i.e. that w u { ex .a x  a b x } is inconsistent  where w is the set of f i r s t order facts. if so  this pair of defaults can lead to no integrity violation. otherwise the system would ask whether a common instance of a and b is typically a c  a   c  or neither  and depending on the response would suitably rerepresent the pair  1   if necessary by nonnormal default rules. 

: m - a 
　 a is added to this theory a new theory is obtained with unique extension th {~ a}  and this does not contain th {b} . 
　　　most of the formal properties of semi-normal default theories remain unexplored. two problems in particular require solutions: under what conditions are extensions guaranteed to exist  and what is an appropriate proof theory  
	default inheritance in hierarchies; 	network 
representations 
　　　in section ii we focused on certain f a i r l y simple patterns of default rules. our choice of these patterns was conditioned by their frequent occurrence in common sense reasoning  and by the fact that they are typical of the kinds of default knowledge which various  semantic  network schemes presume to represent and reason with. most such networks are designed to exploit the natural hierarchical organization of much of our knowledge about the world and rely heavily for their inferencing 
power upon the inheritance of properties associated with a general class  down the hierarchy  to more restricted classes. 
　　　space limitations prevent a thorough discussion of the relationship between the considerations of this paper and network representations for default reasoning. instead we summarize various conclusions 
which are argued at length in  reiter and criscuolo 1 : 
1. except in the simplest of settings  network i n terpreters f a i l to reason correctly with defaults. 
1. network representations are best viewed as indexing schemes for logical formulae. 	an important role of indexing is the provision of an efficient path tracing heuristic for the consistency checks required by default reasoning. 
1. such consistency checks are examples of the kind of resource limited computations required in common sense reasoning  winograd 1 . 
	iv 	conclusions 
　　　default theories are complicated. unlike theories represented in f i r s t order logic  default theories lack extensibility. whenever a new default rule is to be added to a representation its potent i a l interactions with the other default rules must 
be analyzed. this can lead to a re-representation of some of these defaults in order to block certain unwarranted derivations. a l l of which leads to a new concept of data base integrity  distinct from the integrity issues arising in f i r s t order data 
bases. these observations also suggest the need for a default integrity maintenance system as a tool for aiding in the design of large default data bases. such a system would seek out potentially interacting defaults during the data base design phase and query the designer about the consequences of these inter-
actions. 
　　　semi-normal default theories are complicated. they have none of the nice properties that make normal theories so appealing. moat of their formal properties are totally unexplored* at the very least a proof theory is needed  as well as conditions under which extensions arc guaranteed to exist. 
acknowledgements 
　　　many of the results and examples of this paper were inspired by a conversation that one of us  r.r.  had with n. sridharan one afternoon in vancouver. it was he who f i r s t pointed out to us the need for non-normal defaults in common sense reaaonlng. 
　　　this work was done with the financial assistance of the national science and engineering research council of canada grant a1. 	g. criscuolo 
was sponsored by the council for a six month research position with the department of computer science at the university of british columbia. 
