 
	ii 	variable - depth 	processing 	 vdp  
standard a i representations of knowledge ope-
we propose to bestow the 
rate at fixed depth   i . e . the objects manipulated label to any system having one or more of the 
are described by an amount of information which rethroe following features :  a  progressive descrip-
mains constant for every task . contrary to this tion ;  b  multiple strategies ;  c  evaluation of 
approach  variable depth processing  vdp  uses a approximation. 
progressive description of objects  tries different strategies according to the quality of the result it needs  and continually controls this quality by 
a. progressive description 
means of an evaluation of the approximations it makes. 
the sharpness of a computational analysis 
contextual production rules are shown to be an needs not be the same for every word to process 
effective way to implement some features of vdp. 
  1   . however  we must be capable to deepen it on 
we are currently developing a vdp question any request  triggered by internal factors : a 
answering system which works on texts concerning coarse examination arouses our interest  or 
a non-technical subject  namely an excerpt of a external factors : intonation or typography induces 
general public - oriented encyclopaedia. to think that something is important in the author's mind . 
	i 	introduction 
　　　this implies that any word should be related to an ordered amount of knowledge  which is made 
the slogan  variable depth  appears from time progressively available as the depth of analysis 
to time in the a i literature  e.g. f.1 1    ; neverincreases. 
theless  nearly a l l knowledge representation systems can be said to operate at fixed depth. we 
remark : this order is not rigid ; there ought to 
shall f i r s t attempt to define these terms  fixed be strategies  see below  able to control 
depth vs. variable depth  ; we then propose a order shifts  something analogous to the 
scheme to embody the latter concept. 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　transformation of point of view in  section 1 . 1   . in a fixed - depth representation  the objects manipulated  usually words  are described by 
for instance  from a child's perspective  a 
an amount of information which remains constant for 
christmas - tree could f i r s t evoke the presents  
every task ; for instance : a formula in predicate the garlands  the evening spent with the family  
calculus ; a diagram in conceptual dependency ; to then - if needed - be defined in terms of a tree  
some extent  a  perspective  in a krl-like language. 
with trunk  branches  resin  and related to what the child happens to know about f i r s   then related 
fixed - depth representation is usually a step to more general topics  as winter  religion  etc. 
towards an alleged c a n o n i c a l r e p r e s e n t a t i o n of meaning. a representation is canonical with 
it is absolutely unnecesserary to make a l l 
respect to an 	e q u i v a l e n c e 	relation on meanings : these chunks of knowledge available at once : most 
two expressions yield the same representation i f f of the utterances produced or understood by the 
they have 	e q u i v a l e n t 	meanings. 
child w i l l need but the f i r s t levels. nevertheless  any cut-off in the definition - which would corres-
we claim that no universal equivalence pond to some   *a wni 'al  level - would be arbitrary 
relation can be interestingly defined 	; hence  the and exclude the comprehension of some situations 
quest for canonical representations is f r u i t l e s s   which are well understood by the child. 
unless it is' acknowledged as a f i r s t - order approximation to a much more complex phenomenon. 
this work has been done under contract n＜ 1 granted by l ' a g e n c e de 1 ' i n f o r m a t i q u e 
1 

b. 	multiple strategies 
　　　we get different - and hopefully compatible - interpretations when we skim through a text  or when we read it carefully. we make more or less 
text - driven inferences  take more or less time to cross - check what we understood with what we know  detect potential inconsistencies  point out spelling or syntactic mistakes  etc. 
　　　this means that we are able to process a same text under various strategies. 
　　　a vdp understander should be able to select a strategy according to its needs ; more importantly  it should switch from one strategy to the other as the analysis proceeds ; it shares its resources among different processes : syntax evaluation  tight logical processing  loose semantic evaluation  
　　　each of these processes may in turn send requests to the knowledge base  which recursively need vdp ; from time to time  the understander should look to what happens  and possibly modify the resource allocation or the strategy. moreover  it should be able to perform a general or partial reordering of the features stored with the words  in order to reflect a change of perspective. 
c. evaluation 	of 	approximation 
　　　the above strategies make use of incomplete descriptions  on the grounds of which they take decisions. this is a l l right  as long as we know the order of magnitude of the risk we take. 
to stick a label  on some knowledge  
or  approximate  on some methods  is far from adequate. we want a measure which classifies the knowledge and the processes in such a way that  according to one's needs  one can select a method compatible with the required degree of accuracy. 
　　　we have argued elsewhere that such a measure could neither be probabilistic  nor  fuzzy -like  and have proposed what we call 
   1   . this calculus relies on the assumption that only two composition laws may affect a plaus i b i l i t y   namely weakening  symbolized by i n f i x s   and re i n f orcemen t   i n f i x //   . 
	i l l 	contextual 	production 	rules 	 cpr  
　　　production rules are known to be an efficient tool for knowledge representation   1   . surprizingly  slight changes confer them the a b i l i t y to adapt to vdp. here is the syntax we use : 
- one interesting way to see the rule is to consider it as a set of n+1 rules arranged as an onion skin  ordered by decreased importance of the  ; according to the 
depth of analysis  one uses a more or less internal rule : 
- the plausibility pi is thus a residual uncertainty attached to the substitution a -* b   when a l l conditions are v e r i -
fied ; it copes for the factors one cannot or w i l l not identify  but s t i l l i n fluence the substitution ; 
- the 1; can be either texts - which must tnen be recursively validated 
through cprs - or function calls  to embody specific computations  generally at the morpho-syntactic levels  or local strategies. 
1 

	iv 	conclusion 	