 
　　　some formal representation issues underlying the interaction between an expert system and its knowledge base are discussed. it is argued that a language that can refer both to the application domain and to the state of the knowledge base is required to specify and to question an incomplete knowledge base. a formal logical language with this a b i l i t y is presented and its semantics and proof theory are defined. it is then shown how this language must be used to interact with the 
knowledge base. 
	1. 	introduction 
　　　an important characteristic of any knowledgebased system is i t s interaction with a knowledge base  or kb for short  that provides and maintains information about the application domain. in 
general  there are two distinct modes of interaction between an expert system and i t s kb: the system w i l l want to ask and to t e l l the kb about the application area. in this paper  i w i l l examine what special expressive requirements are placed on the language s  of interaction when a system must deal with a kb that is incomplete. 
　　　loosely speaking* a kb is incomplete when it does not have a l l the information necessary to answer some question of interest to the system. when a knowledge-based system is forced to depend on an incomplete kb  i t s a b i l i t y to make decisions or solve problems is seriously compromised. in some cases  the lack of knowledge can be circumvented using general defaults   1     while in other situations  special heuristics are required   1   . however  no matter how a system plans to deal with incompleteness  it must f i r s t be able to determine where this incompleteness lies. in other words  a system has to find out exactly where knowledge is lacking before it can decide what to do about it. this suggests that a kb must be capable of providing information not only about the application area  
but about itself as w e l l . thus  the language used to interact with a kb must allow a user to define 
and inquire about what the kb does and does not know. the major issue of this paper  then  is what impact this capability w i l l have on the language 
of interaction. 
this work was sponsored in part by the natural 
sciences and engineering council of canada and the department of computer science  u. of toronto. 
　　　the approach taken in my work  focuses primarily on the formal aspects of this issue. as described in section two  i w i l l be dealing with kb's consisting of formulas of the f i r s t order predicate calculus. in section three  i examine what questions one would like to be able to ask such a kb and conclude that these questions are best phrased in a superset of the predicate calculus 
i call kl. in section four  i examine the language kl in detail and provide a semantics and proof theory. given this analysis of kl  i then consider its use as a language to interact with a kb: in section five  the formulas of kl are used to query a kb and i show that this involves a non-monotonic version of the language; in section six  the formulas of kl are used to define a kb and i indicate 
why this requires converting the formulas into the language of the kb. 
　　　three areas of related research should be noted. first of a l l   my formalization of kl owes 
much to the work on the logic of knowledge and belief pioneered in  and continued in  1  and 
  though my application is somewhat different . secondly  there has been research on incompleteness from the database area     1       1     concentrating primarily on efficient query evaluation. finally  although the research here does not deal with defaults or assumptions  the work on non-monotonic reasoning    1       has provided technical inspiration. 
	1. 	first order knowledge bases 
　　　as described in   a f i r s t order kb is a f i n i t e set of closed formulas of f i r s t order logic  fol . i w i l l restrict my attention to consistent sets of formulas that do not contain function symbols other than a  possibly i n f i n i t e   set of o-ary symbols called constants. moreover  a bijection is assumed to exist between the set c of constants and the set d of entitles in the domain of discourse. 
　　　a query in this framework is any formula of fol and is answered by consulting the provability relation h to determine what does and does not follow from the kb. for each closed query there are three possible replies: yes  no or unknown  depending on whether the query  i t s negation or neither follow from what is available in the kb. a kb is incomplete when some query has an unknown answer and complete otherwise. 
consider a typical kb containing facts such as 

1 

teachea john  b i l l     student bill  ... 
to avoid having to include within this kb a l l the 
 negative  facts about the application such as 
-student  john   nteaches   b i l l   john  .     
an assumption is usually made  once and for a l l   that the negation of any atomic formula can be inferred from the inability to infer the atomic formula. this is the closed world assumption  cwa   which  along with the assumption that there is a bljection between constants and entitles in the domain  guarantees that any kb is complete. 
　　　i f   on the other hand  we have a kb that contains 
　　　 student mary  v student susan   but does not contain either 
student mary  or student susan   
the cwa cannot be used since it would allow us to conclude that neither mary nor susan are students  contradicting what is in the kb. this kb only partially describes a world  in that it specifies that one of mary or susan is a student but not 
which. thus  there is a query that is true in the intended application but whose truth cannot be determined on the basis of what is available in the kb. the kb i s   consequently  incomplete. 
　　　for the rest of this paper  i w i l l say that a kb knows a formula if it answers yes to the query and  for any predicate p and constant c  that c is a known p when the formula p c  is known. 
	1. 	the knowledge base query language 
　　　even though a kb is incomplete  there may be completeness in certain areas. for example  suppose that 
	kb 	 x  teacher x  =  x-john v x-jim   
in this case  not only are john and jim teachers  but the kb knows that they are the only teachers. it therefore has a complete picture of the teachers. 
on the other hand  it may be the case that 
	kb h 	 ex teacher x  
without there being any known teachers. in this situation  the kb knows that there is a teacher but does not know who and so does not have a complete l i s t of teachers. there i s   moreover  a third possibility which is that it cannot be determined from what is available in the kb whether or not it has complete knowledge of the teachers. so just as the question 
　　　is john a teacher  may be answered yes  no or unknown  the question 
are a l l the teachers known  
may also be yes  no or unknown depending only on what is in the kb. 
　　　if the purpose of a query language is to provide an accurate picture of what is and is not available in the kb  we should be able to formulate queries that ask the kb about i t s i n completeness. in fol  a query that asks if there is a teacher apart from the known teachers might be expressed by 
	 ex  teacher x  	-  x cl v . . . v x ck   
where the c f s are constants ranging over a l l the teachers known to the kb. 
　　　there are a couple of problems with this method of asking if a l l the teachers are known. first of a l l   there could be a very large number of known teachers. in some applications and for some predicates  there may even be an i n f i n i t e number. secondly  we have to know what these constants are in the f i r s t place to be able to formulate the query. for a large and complex kb  it could happen 
that only the kb has this information. 	one can 
also imagine situations where the kb w i l l not divulge this information for security reasons while s t i l l being w i l l i n g and able to answer questions about i t s incompleteness. 
　　　this suggests that the kb itself should keep track of its incompleteness in the same way it 
maintains knowledge of the application area. one possibility  for example  is to have a predicate  known-teacher  and to allow a kb containing the following: 
teacher john   known-teacher john   
 teacher  jim  v teacher  dan     -known-teacher  jim   -known-teacher  dan . 
the problem with this approach  and any other that involves a direct encoding into fol  is the management of this extended language. there is a very definite relationship between  teacher  and  known-teacher  that must be captured somehow. 
among other things  we want that whenever 
　　　teacher c  is in the kb  then 
known-teacher c  
is as well. the closest we can come to expressing this is by an axiom stating that 
 x  teacher x  = known-teacher x  . 
however  this does not work since this formula is inconsistent with the above kb. the correspondence 
between  teacher  and  known-teacher  is much more complex. in a nutshell   known-teacher  should not be a predicate for the simple reason that its truth or f a l s i t y does not depend on the domain being modelled but on the model   i . e . the kb  i t s e l f . 
the solution  then  is to leave the kb as is 

1 

but to extend the query language to allow questions that refer to the current state of knowledge of the kb. the query language i propose  called kl  contains a l l of fol and  in addition  has formulas of the form 
　　　ka read as 
the kb knows that a. 
this leaves us with a f i r s t order kb while s t i l l allowing us to query the kb regarding its i n completeness. in particular  we have a new form of query evaluation 

where  is some  as yet to be specified  provabil i t y relation and a is any formula of kl. for example  to find out if the kb has an incomplete l i s t of teachers  we ask if 
	kb 	 ex  teacher x   teacher x   . 
similarly  while the query 
　　　 ex teacher x  can be used to find out if there are any teachers  the query 

asks if the kb knows who any of them are. to be able to define the  relation  we must f i r s t look at the semantics of the language kl i t s e l f . 
	1. 	the language kl 
　　　the query language kl has the same formation rules as fol but also includes the rule 

there are  consequently  two kinds of formulas in kl: the f i r s t   l i k e 

w i l l be true or false depending only on how the world i s   that i s   on the interpretation of the constant and predicate symbols; the second  like 

w i l l be true or false depending only on how the kb i s   that i s   on what is and is not known. i w i l l call the latter formulas  there are also formulas in kl that are mixtures of the two types and whose truth value depends both on the world and the kb. kl also allows for  in 
formulas such as 
k  ex kp x   
which talk about the kb's knowledge of i t s own knowledge. 
　　　the semantic interpretation of a closed formula of kl w i l l depend on both a world description  or interpretation  in the tarsklan sense  and a description of a kb. in general  a kb can be viewed as a partial description of s world and can thus be characterised by a set of world descriptions. to make a l l of this more precise  f i r s t note that because of the assumed bljection between constants snd entitles in the domain  a world description need only assign a truth value to the atomic sentences. thus  we csn define the set of world descriptions as 

kb descriptions are  then  just non-empty sets of world descriptions: 

the interpretation of any closed formula a is provided by the function v. 

a formula is valid when it is true with respect to every world and kb description. in the case where a is pure  i w i l l use v a m  to refer to the truth value of a with respect to the kb described by m. 
　　　turning now to the proof theory for kl  since the language includes fol as a subset  we w i l l need the axioms of fol and its two inference rules: modus ponens snd universal generalization. to account for the k operator  we have to realize that it behaves like s provability relation in that something is known when it  follows  from what is available in the kb. we w i l l   therefore  insist that the axioms of fol are known and that the kb is able to perform modus ponens and universal generalization based on what is known. this might be called the assumption of competence. as for meta-knowledge  it is convenient to assume that the kb knows the correct truth value of any pure formul a . in other words  there is never any reason to t e l l the kb about itself nor is there any reason to doubt what the kb knows about i t s e l f . no matter 
how incomplete or inaccurate a kb can be about the world  it is assumed to be the f i n a l authority on itself. this might be called the assumption of closure. note that this assumption applies only to pure sentences. fortunately  these can be given a syntactic characterization: a formula is pure i f f every occurrence of a predicate symbol appears within the scope of a k operator. we therefore have the following axlomatization of the language 
kl: 


1 

rules of inference 
modus ponens and universal generalization 
if we let  denote the provability relation for this axiomatization  then the key result here is that the proof theory is both sound and complete with respect to the semantics given above: 
theorem: 
one thing to notice is that by the closure property  we have that for any pure a 

this i s   however  not the case for arbitrary a in that  for example  the set 

is satisflable and  hence  logically consistent. this is a situation where the kb is behaving properly but just happens to be mistaken about the world. so  in some sense  the k operator should be read as  believe  rather than  know . on the other hand  the kind of belief involved here is very special in that a kb w i l l always think it is dealing with knowledge since 

for any formula a. so there is an aspect of commitment to what is believed in that a kb w i l l never believe it has mistaken beliefs. 
	1. 	queries revisited 
　　　having examined the semantics and proof theory of kl  we are s t i l l faced with the problem of specifying what is meant by 

the idea here is that this should mean 

semantlcally  this is saying that ka is true with respect to the knowledge base that has the least amount of world knowledge consistent with knowing everything in kb. thinking of a knowledge base as described by a set of world descriptions  we want the least amount of world knowledge and  thus  the largest possible set. 

any knowledge base that knows more than what is in the kb is described by a subset of m jcb  and  so  has a more refined view of the world. this suggests how query evaluation can be defined semantlcally: 

so  the answer to a question is yes exactly when it is known to be true in m kb . 	for example  if 

the last statement above confirms that kb1 knows that it does not know if it has a complete l i s t of teachers. note that 1- is a non-monotonlc operator in that it is not the case that 

however  unlike a f u l l y general non-monotonlc logic as presented in  or   the  operator here has been given a simple and natural semantic characterization. below i w i l l present a proof theoretic analogue of this operator and claim a soundness and completeness type result  but before doing so it is necessary to examine how kl can be used to specify a kb. 
	1. 	the knowledge base definition language 
　　　since  for incomplete kb's  the cwa is not used uniformly  it would be extremely convenient to be able to t e l l the kb when   i f ever  the assumption could be used for special cases. conversely  
we should also be able to t e l l the kb when the cwa cannot be used. if we let 
then 	states that if someone is not currently 
known to be a teacher then he is not a teacher. so is the cwa relativized to teachers while 
i t s e l f is a statement that this assumption cannot 
be used  because there are teachers other than the currently known ones . the question immediately arises as to whether or not we can add formulas such as or to a kb  thus generalizing a kb to be any consistent set of formulas from kl instead of fol. 
　　　there are a number of problems with this generalization but i w i l l address only one of these relating to the formula  the idea here is that we would start off with a kb such as kb1 defined earlier. since kb1 does not know whether or not john is the only teacher  it is not the case that either 

suppose we consider t e l l i n g it that it does not have a l l the teachers and get 

if we now want to t e l l the kb that jim is a teacher  we get 
kb1 - kb1 + teacher  jim . 

1 

the problem here is that kb1 s t i l l contains end  consequently  s t i l l thinks it is missing a teacher. in fact  no matter how many teachers we t e l l the kb about  it w i l l s t i l l think it is missing at least one. moreover  if we try to t e l l it that it finally has a l l of them by adding  then we arrive at an inconsistent kb since it also contains 
　　　what should have happened here is somewhat different. once we arrived at kb1  the kb should know that it is missing a teacher and hence believe 
 however  once a new teacher is added to the kb to produce kb1  the kb has no way of knowing 
whether or not this is the last teacher it was missing and so it should be the case  as with kb1  that neither 

in other words  after the introduction of jim  the 
kb should no longer know whether or not it has a l l the teachers. in fact  the knowledge it had as kb1 is lost when it becomes kb1. 
　　　this is a strange kind of non-monotonicity. the usual symptom of a non-monotonic logic is that the addition of a new axiom invalidates a previous theorem. 	in our case  the addition of the new 
axiom invalidated a previous axiom. the curious puzzle here is that there is no  belief revision  going on in the sense of a realisation that an axiom was incorrectly added to the kb. similarly  there is no admission of the world having changed in the sense of someone becoming or ceasing to be a teacher. in fact  the only change that has taken place is a change in what is known about the world. but this is enough since  does make reference to the current state of the kb. so without admitting that the world has changed or that some previous state-
 ment about the world needs revision  we can s t i l l maintain that the truth value of  can change by noting that the state of the kb has changed. thus   cannot be part of the kb since the state of 
knowledge it refers to disappears as information is acquired. 
　　the solution to the problem of the addition of  to a kb i s   therefore  to treat the formula as ordinary world knowledge where the k operator is used to refer to the current state of the kb. this is only natural since a kb la assumed to have complete knowledge of i t s e l f . conaequently  any 
mention of what is known in a new piece of information must be  referential  and not  attributive . thus  the addition to the kb must be understood by f i r s t resolving these references. in other words  the solution to the problem is not to prohibit 
additions like but rather to allow in the kb definition language but not the kb i t s e l f . for example  kb1 now becomes 

where we have replaced the open formula 
　　　kfteacher x   by a f i r s t order formula that resolves this reference with respect to kb1: 
　　　 x-john . this produces the property that 

and neither kb1 a nor kb1 |  - - a as desired. 
　　　the solution i have proposed above presupposes that there w i l l always be a formula of fol that can 
be used to resolve any reference to what is known. it is worth noting that this cannot be done 
independently of a kb in that there is no formula of fol such that 
of course  a l l we really need is a formula for each kb and not a formula that works for every kb. fortunately  if we assume the availability of an equality predicate and restrict ourselves to f i n i t e kb's  this can always be done. 

the method of allowing a l l of kl to specify a kb is thus to let 

viewed more semantics uy in terms of world descriptions  we have that 

note that although the function resolve is not recursive  it is s t r i c t l y proof-theoretic. moreover  it can be shown that theorem: for any 
which defines a syntactic version of query evaluation that is exactly equivalent to the semantic one 
defined earlier. of course  the proof theory is not axiomatic but this is to be expected given that 

is not recursively enumerable. 	so  to summarise  

1 

although the interaction with a f i r s t order kb should allow the language kl to be used  this interaction can be understood in f i r s t order terms when 
the kb is f i n i t e . 
	1. 	conclusion 
　　　in this paper  i have considered from a formal standpoint the problem of interacting with an i n complete kb. the motivation behind the research is that  to effectively deal with partial knowledge  a system must f i r s t be able to determine the exact limits to what is known. this  in turn  places certain requirements on the language used to interact with a kb. in particular  the language has to be able to refer to the state of the kb as well as to the state of the application domain. 
　　　to this effect  i proposed a language kl for interacting with a f i r s t order kb and presented a proof theory and semantics which were direct extensions of their fol counterparts. kl was then applied to query evaluation and i showed that this required a non-monotonic operator. semantic and syntactic interpretations of this operator were provided. finally  kl was applied to kb definition and i demonstrated why this required reducing kl into the language of the kb  fol. in fact  the net result was that the kb remained f i r s t order  but that interaction with it took place in a more expressive language. 
　　　apart from the more practical implications of this work  there remain open questions even within the formal framework. 	i have not mentioned  for example  what impact the presence of an equality relation or non-constant terms would have on kl. also  a method of handling defaults  and exceptions  is a reasonable goal given that the framework allows one to determine where their application is needed. in summary  the framework provides not only a formal standard against which to measure representation languages  but also a basis for further exploration. 
