 entity are easily constructed  and could easily arise in an ai system  particularly one which 1s fed its knowledge piecemeal. 
　　　　this motivates the introduction of recursively defined semi-closed p-graphs m section 1. a semi-closed p-graph is either a closed p-qr ph  or a semi-closed p-graph with another semi-closed p-graph attached to it by one of its main roots. clearly the p-graph of f i g . 1s a 
* we take this opportunity to correct mn error in  1 : in the f i r s t sentence of sec. 1. the assumption that part-of 
has the extension property should be replaced by the assumption that the merge and overlap functions  u* and *rtn are mutually distributive  see below . 
   for the purposes of this illustration  we intend c to be interpreted as the  disconnected  physical whole composed of the department members  not as a set. thus the ef and ci are parts of c. not elements or subsets. semi-closed p-graph  since it consists of the closed commit tee-structure subgraph attached by its main root c 
to the closed faculty-roster subgraph 
　　　　in sec. 1 efficient complete algorithms for answering part-of and disjomtness questions on the basts of semi-closed p-graphs are developed. we feel that the class of semi-closed p-graphs is probably as large a class of p-graphs as 1s needed for most practical applications to taxonomlc structures  and as can be easily mechanized  
as far as answering part-of and disjomtness questions 1s concerned. 


1 

1 

　　　　the projection of a node n into the leaves of a closed p-graph q is the largest subset l of the leaves of g that are also leaves of a subhlerarchy rooted at n. 
　　　　it is shown in  1  that for every p-graph there 1s an equivalent closed p-graph. inference methods are given to answer the questions   b part-of a  and   a dlsjolnt-from b  for f u l l y consistent closed p-graphs. 1n linear space-time relative to the number of edges of the closed graph. 
　　　　it 1s proved 1n  that all the leaves of a f u l l y consistent  closed p-graph belong to a single  not necessarily unique  main hierarchy whose root represents the whole entity. such a root will be called a main root 
of the closed p-graph. 

　　　　semi-closed p-graphs relax soma of the restrictions of dos d p-graphs  thus forming a larger class. the tacit restriction to f u l l y consistent graphs should be kept 1n mind. 
def mi t ion 	a semi-closed p-graph is: 
 i  	a closed p-graph  or 
  i i   a semi-closed p-graph that has a semi-closed p-graph attached by a main root to one of its nodes.   i t is easy to see that a sent 1-closed p-graph  like a closed p-graph. must have at least one main root   
　　　　as semi-closed p-graphs are defined in terms of closed p-graphs  the inference methods presented here rely on those developed for closed p-graphs  1  
　　　　the design of the following algorithms is based on the observation that semi-closed p-graphs can be viewed as trees of closed p-graphs; each vertex represents a closed subgraph and each edge a common node of the two p-graphs  parent and child subgraphs  that it connects. since the closed subgraphs can have at most one node in common  this will be a tree. examples of corresponding trees for p-graphs are given in figure 1 c . d  and  e . 
　　　　note that edges out of distinct vertices correspond to distinct nodes in the p-graph while edges out of the same vertex may represent the same node 
　　　　for any given semi-closed p-graph  it is possible to attach labels to the nodes which indicate the position in the corresponding tree of closed p-graphs implementation details are of no concern at the moment; we assume semi-closed p-graphs to be searched by the algorithms of sec. 1 have been preprocessed  with labels being attached to all nodes which indicate their position 1n the corresponding tree of closed p-graphs. thus  for any pair of nodes of a semi-closed p-graph. it will be possible to arrive at a pair of  ancestor- nodes which both belong to the same closed subgraph tree vertex. note that one  or even both  of the  ancestors  sought may be the same as the corresponding i n i t i a l node. 
　　　　in figure 1 b . for example  for r and q the corresponding pair 1s r' and q '   while for r and s the corresponding pair  s r' and s. 
　　　　we have put  ancestors  in quotes above. since we are dealing with an ancestor  descendant  relation which is somewhat more general than that formally defined earlier r' is an  ancestor  of r if and only if r r' or r 1s projectible into a set of nodes n   ...nk such that for all 1  1 k either ni r' or r' 1s an  ancestor  of n   see fig 1   
　　　　algorithms for answering the questions   x part-of yj and   x disjolnt-from y  in fully consistent closed p-graphs have been developed in  and are incorporated in the methods given below. so. for any two nodes x.y of a f u l l y consistent closed p-graph g  
assume there are algorithms p x.y  and d x.y  that will return  yes    no  or  unknown  to the respective questions  on the basis of what can be logically deduced from the closed p-graph g. the algorithms are complete in the sense that they return  unknown  only if neither a 
positive nor a negative answer logically follows from the p-graph and the part-of axioms. the same property 1s desired for the new algorithms. 

fig. 1 some examples of semi-closed p-graphs. in  a   the 
 closed  p-graph consisting of nodes s. q and r 1s joined to the rest of the graph only through s  end no other nodes. similarly 1n  b  there 1s e main closed p-graph with two other p-graphs attached to it. one of which is itself a closed p-graph with another closed p-graph 
attached to it by the root   c  another representation for semi-closed graphs where the overall structure  rather than individual nodes  1s emphasized   d       e       f   
corresponding trees for the p-graphs of  a   b   c . 

fig. 1 the semi-closed p-graph g has closed subgraphs c1.....c1. the node r belongs to c1 but 1s not a descendant of the main root of c1  it is a  descendant  of r' as defined in this section. 
　　　　algorithms p x y  and d x.y  make use of a predicate n x1 xn  which is true if the merge of x r   . . .   x n 1s provably non-empty and false otherwise. it was noted in  that this predicate is efficiently decidable for closed p-graphs. in applying p x.y  and d x.y  to closed p-graphs embedded within semi-closed 
1 
p-graphs  wa need to assume that n 1s still e f f i c i e n t l y decldeble. with tha provability requirement now referring to the entire semi-closed graph. the assumption is justified since the only changes in the truth values of n xf xn  ovar nodas of a closed graph c. resulting from attachmant of semi-closed p-graphs to c  ara those duo to tha non-amptinesa of nodas to which a semi-cloaad graph containing a provably non-ampty noda was attachad  this information propagatas  upward  in tha traa of cloaad graphs ; and tha only changa potentially resulting from tha attachmant of c to   semi-closed p-graph is that dua to provable non-amptmass of tha noda to which c was attachad  this information propagatas  downward  via main nodas which ara points of attachmant 1n tha traa of closed p-graphs . tha amptlnass assart ions thus nacassmated at points of attachmant by tha upward and downward flow of information can ba computed  n ona  pass* aach ovar all tha nodas of tha aeml-cloaad p-graph   n tha worst ease 
1 


1 
