 
         common sense reasoning about the physical world must include an understanding of physical processes and the changes they cause. for example  heating a liquid causes its temperature to rise and if continued long enough may cause it to boil. a style of analysis is presented that combines dekleer's incremental qualitative analysis wjth the quantity space idea from naive physics to reason about the effects of physical processes and their limits. the analysis is demonstrated on an example with practical importance  and further possibilities for applications are discussed. 
1. introduction 
an important component of a naive physics 
 is the representation of the kinds of things that can happen to an object  the processes described by the physics that act to change a situation. for example  we know that when heat flows from a flame to water in a container  the temperature of the water will rise and it may boil. we can also deduce that if the container is sealed there is some chance that the increased pressure caused by the boiling fluid can cause it to explode. these deductions are interesting both because they are so easy for us to make and because they are important for certain applications. a program that understood a steam plant in order to explain or operate it  for instance  should be able to make this particular inference. this paper introduces a new style of analysis  called qualitative process analysis  to be used in performing such inferences. 
         one part of the problem is to represent how quantities change. dekleer's incremental qualitative  iq  calculus  can handle this. it represents the change in a quantity by one of four values  u  d  c  or    corresponding to  increasing    decreasing    constant   or  indeterminate   indicating knowledge of the sign of the derivative. while the iq calculus is very useful for causal reasoning  see  and  1  . it cannot be used to deduce the limits of physical processes. this is because iq analysis does not represent quantities  only changes in them. in the example above  we could deduce that the temperature of the water is rising  but not that it might boil this problem has appeared in studies of mental models of heat exchangers  as well. qualitative process analysis includes the iq calculus  but also incorporates notions of rates and amounts. 
         the conceptualization of amounts in qp analysis comes from the notion of a quantity scale in hayes* naive physics of liquids. a quantity scale ma p* amounts in the physics to a measure space  such as amount  whisk g  insldeljarm to i iterate.1 . in the analysis introduced here the property of real importance is the existence of an ordering among points in the scale. in determining whether or not a fluid will flow  for example  only the relative pressures need be known. the notion of a quantity space is introduced to serve as a partition of the possible values for a quantity which correspond to different processes occuring. 
	in 	the 	perspective 	of 	naive 	physics  
qualitative process analysis corresponds to a cluster   a collection of knowledge and inference procedures which is sensible to consider as a module. while the axioms for liquids hayes developed include some knowledge of process limits1 they also include a 
particular choice for the representation of the effects of the processes over time and a particular geometry. i believe the kind of reasoning discussed here is independent of these particular choices and thus should be considered separately. 
         what follows are the basic definitions of qp analysis and an example of its use. the details have been worked out by hand on several examples; an implementation is underway. 
ii definitions 
         a parameter of a physical system will be represented by a quantity. for purposes of qp analysis  a quantity will have three components: an amount  an iq value  and a rfite.. although an amount 
	1. 	set tot eiamplt aitomi 1 through 1 
1 

will be assumed to take on real values  the inferences a continuous process acts through time to discussed here do not require quantitative values  only vary one or more quantities/ the specification of a knowledge of the ordering between two quantities. process has four parts: preconditions  quantity the iq and rate of a quantity specify how it is conditions  relations  and influences. both changing; the iq value corresponds to the sign of the preconditions and quantity conditions must be true for change and the rate corresponds to the amount of the a process to be acting. the preconditions are those change. rates combine as do numbers and figure 1 factors that are external to the theory  such as someone illustrates how iq values combine. opening or closing a valve. the quantity conditions are those limits that can be deduced within the present the quantities in a situation which represent theory  such as requiring the temperature of two bodies a particular kind of parameter are grouped together in to be unequal for heat flow to occur. relations hold a partial order called a quantity space. the quantity between quantities affected by the process  and space for the levels of fluid in two tanks a and b influences are the contributions to the way a quahitity connected by a pipe might be: changes. relations concern amounts and rates  while 
	top-of a  	influences are assertions about the contribution to the 
bottom 	level  a  	level b   top-of b  
iq value for a quantity. to find out how a quantity is 
the arrow indicates that the quantity at the head is actually changing requires summing all of the 
greater than the quantity at the tail. as drawn  influences on it  since several processes may be acting 
level  b  andtop-of a  are unordered. we will call at once. figure 1 shows the definition of two 
two points which are ordered and with no points processes. known between them in the ordering neighboring points. in the quantity space above. level  a  has 
the physics of a situation determines the set 
bottom. top-of a   and level b  as neighbors  but of processes possible in it. the particular process es  not top-of  b . that are acting at some time can be determined by 
examining the preconditions and the orderings in the quantity spaces. using the level quantity space above  if the pipe between a and b is unobstructed  then there will be a flow from b to a because a simple 
quantity condtion for fluid flow is that level  aource  is greater than level  destination . 
fig. 1. combining iq values 
discontinuous changes in processes occur at 
this table specifies how iq values combine across limit points  which serve as boundary conditions. the 
addition and multiplication. rates and amounts are points are chosen according to the quantity conditions 
used to disambiguate cases marked by 't in dekleer's of the processes that can affect that parameter. for 
formulation. example  the temperature quantity space for a fluid could be: 
   t ice   t boiling  where temperatures at t ice  and below correspond to the solid state  temperatures of t boiling  and above correspond to the gaseous state  and any temperature in between to being a liquid. 
 i. a process is not equivalent to an episode in hayes* liquids theory. an episode includes time specifications and a geometry  while the part of a process we are considering does not. while a geometry representation is needed to set up the descriptions and a time representation to make sse of the 
results  the inferences themselves are nearly separable. 
1 


hi inferences about processes  
　　　　the definitions of quantities and processes above provide enough formal structure to deduce. given a physics and a very general description of a situation  what processes are occuring and the changes they will cause. the preconditions and quantity conditions can be used to determine what processes are operating within the situation. this information can in turn be used to deduce changes in the properties of the situation  such as a temperature rising or an amount dropping  and the limits of the processes involved. 
　　　　to infer the limits of a process  first find the influences on all affected quantities and determine the resulting iq value. then find the neighboring points within the quantity space. if there is no neighbor in a direction  then motion in that direction cannot affect the process. the ordering between each neighbor and the current amount of the quantity can be combined with the iq values of each to determine if the relationship will change  see figure 1 . if the neighbor is a limit point  some process may end there and others begin. thus the set of possible changes in ordering* involving limit points becomes the ways the current processes might change. this assumes that rates are non-infinitesimal  so that if a quantity is moving towards some point in its space  such as level  a  and level  b  above  it will actually reach that value in some finite time. 

　　　　more than one change is typically possible  as will be illustrated below. there are three reasons for this. first  if the ordering within a quantity space is not total more than one neighbor can exist. second  a process can influence more than one quantity. finally  more than one process can be occuring at once. for some kinds of tasks just knowing the possible changes is enough  such as envisioning  in  1j . if required  knowledge outside the scope of this theory can be used to disambiguate the possibilities. depending on the domain and the style of reasoning to be performed there are several choices: simulation  1   algebraic manipulation  1j  teleology   or possibly by default assumptions or observations  discussed in  . 
iv a demonstration of qp analysis 
　　　　to illustrate the use of this technique  let us consider the possible consequences of a situation  shown in figure 1. the situation consists of a container partially filled with water that can be heated by a flame; the container has a lid which can be sealed and is surrounded by air. the initial amounts are assumed to be those of standard temperature and pressure  all iq values are initially c. at some point in time the heat source is turned on. we will stipulate that if boiling occurs  the lid will be closed and sealed. some of the physics required for this problem is contained in figure 1. the rest of the details  and especially formalizing the geometry involved  will be ignored in this example. 
1 


         when the heat source is activated  there will be a heat path between the source and the container. assuming standard temperature and pressure in the environment  	and 	no 	unstated 	effects  	if 
t source   t  water  there will be a heat flow from the source to the water. being a heat source  the influence of the loss on the temperature is ignored and 
iq  t  source   -c. 	the 	only 	influence 	on 
t  container  is that of the heat flow  so lq t containter  -u. this in turn will cause a heat flow to the air surrounding the cup  the air inside the container  and the water. most of these temperatures will be ignored. the temperature quantity space looks like: 
if t source   t boh  and the process is unimpeaded  the next process that will occur is a boiling. 
         before considering the boiling  we can examine what happens to the air inside the container. the relationship between the parameters of air due to its gaseous state can be expressed as: 
p air -v air -a air *t air  
while the water is heating  iq v air  -c and iq t air  -u 
- iq p air  lq a air  1j 
         changes in-pressure and amount of something usually result from a flow. if there is a flow then it must be either inward or outward. first assume no flow occurs. then because the only way for 
amount-of of the air to change is a flow  
iq a air  -c. so iq p air  -u 
but initially p air  - p outside  so the conditions for a flow are established  contradicting the assumption. can the flow be inward  if so  lq a alr  *u. this requires lq p air  -u  which enables an outward flow  again a contradiction. finally  if there is an outward flow then 
iq a air  -1  which is not inconsistent with what we know. by exclusion we accept it  realizing that some 

 1. the details of how the pressure changes with time depend on more geometry than we have here. for example  if the top is very small the pressure might build up for a while  but if it is very large then the pressure might be essentially constant. the important point is that each model for outward now is consistent. 
1 

v conclusions 
         in this paper it has been argued that a fairly weak formalization of quantities  partially ordered 
amounts  iq values  and rates  and a simple description of physical processes are adequate for useful reasoning about the results and limits of these processes. it is evident that such inferences are a part of understanding common sense physics  so qualitative process analysis could be a useful component in programs that need to reason about the physical world. even in programs which have access to more specific knowledge  such as numerical simulations or sensory data  than the very general sort used here might profit from the ability to easily draw conclusions about the qualitatively distinct outcomes of a situation. 
         a specific application for this kind of analysis is the construction of programs that understand feedback mechanisms in a sophisticated way. when using only iq analysis  as in  1  and   phenomena such as damped oscillations and stability cannot be expressed or reasoned about. for example  within qp analysis inertia could be considered as a process spawned by matter in motion  with friction taking the form of an influence which retards the velocity. 
         it should be clear from the example that writing programs to perform this kind of analysis will not be trivial. while deducing the possible outcomes given a quantity space and the processes which occur is easy  setting up the quantity space and determining which parameters are indirectly affected  such as the boiling temperature being affected by the amount of steam in the example  requires fluent use of the domain physics. this is to be expected. it is hoped that separate consideration of reasoning about the limits of physical processes might make the construction of theories for specific domains easier. 
acknowledgements 
         discussions with gerald sussman  albert stevens  and dedre gentner provided considerable influence. this report describes research done at the artificial intelligence laboratory of the massachusetts institute of technology and at the steamer project at bolt  beranak  and newman. support for the laboratory's artificial intelligence research is provided in part by the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense under office of naval 
	research contract number n1-c-1. 	the 
steamer project is supported by navy personnel research and development center. 
