 
　　　in the course of a normal day  people effortlessly recall past events and episodes from their lives. a reasonable goal in the design of computer programs is to construct a memory with that same capability. to facilitate such retrieval of events from a computer memory  we must f i r s t specify a reasonable memory organization. we must then design updating and retrieval processes to build up and access that information. this paper w i l l present such a theory  and w i l l describe a computer program named cyrus which implements the theory. 
1.' introduction 
　　　how can a large memory be searched efficiently  this is one of the biggest problems facing the designers of large systems  yet one which has been sorely neglected. while there has been a lot of work done on problems of knowledge representation and inference processes  the assumption of most research projects has been that the necessary information would be available when needed without search. without a well-structured memory organization  however  this w i l l not always be true. this paper addresses the problem of organizing and retrieving events from a computer memory. there are three major questions to answer: 
1. what are the prooesses for retrieving events from memory  
1. what memory organization do the retrieval processes imply  
1. what are the processes for adding new events to memory  and how does memory organization change as new events are added  
　　　these questions cannot be independently answered. the organization of memory constrains the types of retrieval and updating processes the memory oan have. on the other hand  memory organization  and therefore procedures for adding information to memory  must be based on retrieval 
requirements. 
　　　in considering these problems  i w i l l present cyrus  a computer system that retrieves events from memory and automatloally reorganizes i t s e l f as new events are added to i t . cyrus  computerised yale retrieval and updating system  stores and retrieves episodes in the lives of former u. s. secretaries of state cyrus vance and edmund muskie. cyrus can answer questions posed to it in english about the events it stores. 
cyrus 	can 	be 	seen 	as both a model of human memory and an intelligent information retrieval system. as an information retrieval system  however  it bears l i t t l e resemblance to current systems. information retrieval systems have based their memory organizations on keywords and not on conceptual categories. because they do not organize their contents according to similarities of meaning  they cannot apply meaning-based heuristics for retrieval or for category reorganization. 
　　　within psychology  long term memory has been described as a reconstructive process   e . g .   .  . the processes that have been described by psychologists  however  have been described in very general terms  independent of a memory organization or a description of the knowledge guiding the processes. this research  which explains a memory organization and particular retrieval processes  can be thought of as complementary to the psychological research. 
1  	the nature of a long term memory for events 
　　　there are a number of features of human memory which are desirable in a computer system designed to retrieve events. people learn new things every day  but they do not get slower at remembering   1   . in a computer system  too  retrieval should not slow down significantly as new events are added to memory. this requirement constrains both the retrieval processes and the memory organization. it has been central to development of the memory processes that w i l l be presented. 
　　　retrieval from any category must be able to happen without enumeration of the category. within computer science  the traditional solution to this problem is to index items within categories. in adopting this solution  we must specify how to choose indices for an event in a particular category. if events are indexed in a category by a l l of their features which are salient to the category  then specification of an indexed feature w i l l enable direct retrieval of items with that feature. 
　　　the richer the indexing  however  the more spaoe is needed for storage. indexing must be controlled so that memory does not grow exponentially. similarities between events oan be used to control indexing. if memory keeps track of the similarities between events within a category  then indexing can be limited to the differences between events. it is the differences which w i l l discriminate events from each other. a long term memory should be able to maintain i t s e l f . it must be able to ooapute indloes for new events  creating new conceptual categories when necessary and build-

1 

ing up required generalized infomation. 
　　　slnoe people seem to be good at remembering  we have turned to people to try to find efficient algorithms for retrieval and organisation. in previous research    1   it has been proposed thst people remember by reconstructlng what must have happened. the retrieval process can be seen as a propose of specifying and elaborating contexts for  search. in terms of the computer 
implementstion  to retrieve any particular target event  it is necessary to  1  specify a memory category that the event might be found i n   and  1  compute differentiating features of the event within thst cstegory. in order to explain this process in more d e t a i l . it is f i r s t neoesssry to give sn overview of the memory organisation. 
1* 	an overview of the 	organisation 
　　　the memory organisation we are assuming is bssed on conceptual categories for events. these categories index similar episodes scoordlng to their differences and keep track of their similarities. these categories w i l l be referred to ss episodic memory organisation psokets  e-mops   or generlcslly ss  mops . these structures ere related to schank's  hop* and to lebowits's  s-mops  but the concerns in defining mops snd 
s-mops 	were 	different 	than 	those 	in 	defining e-mops. 
　　　sn e-mop is s net in which esch node is either an e-mop or an event. each e-mop has two important aspects -  1  generalited information characterising i t s episodes  snd  1  tree-like structures thst index those episodes by their differences. an e-mop's norms include information describing i t s events  suoh as their usual participants  locations  and topics  and their ususl reletionships to other events. 
　　　an e-mop's indices can index either individual episodes or speolsllsed e-mops. when an e-mop holds only one episode with s particular index  that index w i l l point to the individual episode. when two or more episodes in an e-mop shsre the same feature  i t s corresponding index w i l l point to s specislised sub-mop  with the structure just described  which organises the events with thst feature. in this way  mop/sub-mop hierarchies are formed. the mop below is part of cyrus' 
 diplomatic meetings* e-mop.  diplomatic meetings'* holds generslised information about  diplomatic meetings   while mop1 snd mop1 index  meetings with begin  snd  meetings about the camp david aooords  respectively. 
　　　indexing is two-tiered  where the f i r s t t i e r indexes types of features  and the second indexes vslues for the festures themselves. thus  by f o l lowing the index for  participants   snd from there following the index for begin  the sub-mop organising  meetings with begin  osn be found* following indices for  topic  and from there the index for  salt   one arrives st the individual event ev1  the only meeting about salt indexed in this mop. 
　　　this orgsnlsatlon provides rioh oross-indexing of events in memory. specification of any discriminating set of event features within an e-mop allows retrieval of the corresponding event. 
using s rlohly indexed organisation suoh as t h i s   enumeration of s memory category should never be neoesssry for r e t r i e v s l . instead  retrieval strategies osn be used to expend on question components  thereby inferring relevent psths through the memory structures. in this wsy  sesroh is directed only to ostegorles snd sub-ostegorles whose events are relevant. 

*. 	setrlevlmg an event from an e-mop 
　　　given appropriate features of sn event  i t s retrievsl from an e-mop israther t r i v i a l . conalder  for example the following question: 
 q1 : have you ever attended a diplomstic meeting about the camp david aooords with daysn  
the answer to  1  cn be found either by traversing the indioes for  has dayen as s participant  or by f i r s t following the indioes for  has topic the camp david aooords   snd then from there traversing those for  has dayan as s participant . either way  evs would be found. 
this retrieval process oan be characterized as 
  trsverssl prooess  s process of following appropriate indioes down s tree until sn event is found. an event to be retrieved from an e-mop is 
called a target event. 
　　　rich cross-indexins of events in e-mops t a b l e s directed seerch of memory. to ensure dlreoted sesroh  the f i r s t step of trsverssl must be speciflestlon of paths to traverae  or seleotion of indioes for traversal. 
1 　　　index seleotion is bssed on festures speolfied in the target event. 	indices ohoeen for 	trsverssl to 	find 	any 	target event should be features that would have been chosen ss indioes for thst event if it had previously been indexed in the e-mop. 	thus  the same index selection process is used both when adding an event to memory and during retrieval. index selection w i l l be discussed in section 1 . 1 . 
　　　traversal is a recursive process involving choloe of lndloes and traversal of those indices. it stops when an event is found  or when there are no additional specified indices to be traversed. thus  if there br% multiple paths to a target event  it w i l l be retrieved from the shortest path with a l l of i t s lndloes specified in the target event. we can think of traversal as a breadthf i r s t search which implements parallel traversal of a l l appropriate indices. 
1 	the need for elaboration 
　　　retrieval of a target concept which specifies an event feature or combination of features which are both indexed and unique can be done easily through traversal. when a target concept specifies an unindexed feature or does not specify a unique combination of features  the traversal algorithm presented above w i l l f a i l   as in the example below: 
 q1 : have you ever attended a meeting in jerusalem  
answering this question requires that a meeting 	in 
jerusalem be found. using the algorithm and mop above to answer  q1    there are no features specified by the question that can be used directly to find an event. the traversal process described must abort  even though there are events in the e-mop which might have occurred in jerusalem. 
although we have outlawed enumeration in the normal case  there must be a way of retrieving events from an e-mop even when indexed features are not specified in the question. 
　　　the traversal process can be continued if plausible lndloes can be computed. since m1 indexes events by  topic  and  participants   if either of those could be inferred for a meeting in jerusalem  then actual meetings could be retrieved from the mop. we call the process of specifying additional features of a target event elaboration. 
　　　the prooesses cyrus uses for elaborating on a retrieval specification are called instantiation strategies. they use information specified in a 
　　　target concept and information associated with the e-mops the target conoept f i t s into to better specify target ooncept features. the following is one of cyrus* instantiation rules: 
infer-participants 
infer participating people by retrieving representatives of specified organizations  members of known groups  representatives of known countries  or persons associated with known organisations  groups  or countries. 

　　　sinoe a  diplomatic meeting  is a p o l i t i c a l event whose participants are p o l i t i c a l dignitaries  this rule can be used to infer that possible participants in a  meeting in jerusalem  would have been important israeli dignitaries. a similar strategy associated with  topios  would allow the  camp david acoords  to be inferred as a possible topic for such a meeting. 
　　　cyrus uses these strategies to elaborate  a meeting in jerusalem  in the following way: 
 a meeting in jerusalem with begin  day an  or weismarm  with probable topic the camp david acoords  
it then attempts traversal of the appropriate lndloes. ev1 would be found in this way and would then be checked to make sure it had happened in jerusalem. mopm would also be reached during traversal  and additional elaboration would be done to traverse i t s indices. we oan envision the entire process as follows: 

1 	context construction 
　　　in order to search memory  a category for search must f i r s t be chosen - in cyrus  an e-mop. strategies in cyrus which choose i n i t i a l categories for search are called component-to-oontext instantiation strategies. these strategies use event information associated with question components to infer plausible e-mops. consider  for example  the following question: 
	 q1 : 	who have you talked to about salt  
in answering this question  cyrus uses information about salt to infer the context of a   p o l i t i c a l meeting*1  and searches memory for   p o l i t i c a l meetings with topic salt . it is able to make this lnferenoe because  salt  is an  international oontraet  and  international contracts  are known to be the topios of   p o l i t i c a l meetings . in this case  the strategy  infer-from-topio  does that work: 

infer-from-topic 
1 if the event is an mtrans  and i t s topic  mobject  is specified  then predlot oommunlcatory contexts associated with the topic. 

1 	alternate-context aearoh 
　　　in using elaboration to answer  q1   we ststed that'ev* would be found  and that mop1 would be found  but additional elaboration would be needed to traverse i t s indicts. suppose that there was not enough information available to do the additional elaboration neoessary for traversal of hop*  or alternatively  that the only meeting whloh had taken place in jerusalem waa the one indexed in  diplomatic meetings  as s  meeting about jerusalem . in either of those osses  elsborstion would not suffloe to snswer the question. 
　　　events  however  occur in the contexts of other events snd refer to those related events  an event can be found by finding an epiaode it was relsted to. when s relsted event is found  i t s context csn be sesrched for the target. thus  to search for s meeting in jerusalem  it might be appropriate to recall a t r i p to israel or negotiations involving isrsel whloh might hsve included such a meeting in i t s sequenoe of events. since trips snd negotistlons are less common than diplomatic meetings  they might be easier to retrieve   1   . 
　　　context-to-context instantiation strategies are used to construct slternste oontexts f1f sesrch. in order for possible related oontexts to be inferred from s target event  e-mops must specify both the types of episodes  other e-mops  they are often related to  and how those episodes sre relsted  i . e .   how their roles correspond to those of the relsted e-mop. a diplomatic t r i p related to a meeting in jerusalem  for example  can be inferred to have been to isrsel. 
　　　sesrch strstegles direct search for alternate contexts. they hsve the following steps: 
1. choose a context to be searched for  snd c s l l appropriate instantiation strstegles to construct and elaborate that context 
1. retrieve 	corresponding 	events 	from memory 
1. sesrch for the target event in the surrounding contexts of the events retrieved 
　　　in sesrchlng for  diplomatic meetings in jerusalem   a searoh strstegy whloh searches for episodes sn event could have been mart of would  1  construct contexts for  diplomatic trlpa to israel   and  negotiations concerning an israeli 
issue    1  traverse memory searching for eeoh of those  and  1  searoh the sequenoe of events of each epiaode found for an appropriate diplomatic meeting. the following la an example from ctrus which illustrates the retrieval process: 
 who hsve you discussed salt with  
inferring political meeting - sm-meeting 
sesrchlng memory for question concept 
additional information needed meeting could have oocurred in ussr or usa 
searching for meeting in ussr sesrchlng for meeting in usa 
searching memory for episodes meeting could have occurred in 
searching for i-negotiate 
searching i negotiate for meeting 
sesrchlng for conferences about salt aearohlng for diplomatic trlpa to ussr 
sesrohlng memory for standard types of meetings 
sesrohlng for diplomatic meetings about salt searching for briefings about salt searching for public relations meetings 
carter  brezhnev  gronyko  other american and russian diplomats  and mustafa khalil. 

　　　this retrlevsl process trades speed of retrieval for memory spaoe. it is fsster than enumeration would be  but needs more memory. it is also less accurate than enumeration would be. if cues necessary to choose an appropriate oontext are not available at the time of retrieval  then retrieval w i l l f a l l . similarly  if the knowledge necessary to do appropriate elaboration is not available  then retrieval w i l l f a l l . what this soheme does silow is  1  retrieval in most oases that is faster than enumeration and  1  retrieval of generalised information in exactly the same way actual events are found. 
1. 	maintaining memory orgsnixstion 
     in order for retrlevsl to work consistently as new events  1 added to memory  memory'a organisation must be maintained. when a new event la added to an e-mop  it must be indexed so that it can later be retrieved. new e-mops must be created aa neoessery  and generalised information neoesssry to aid retrieval must be built up. 
	the 	firat 	step 	in 	adding a new event to an 
e-mop la to ohoose appropriate feat urea of the event for indexing. each feature ohosen oan have one of four relatlonahlps to the e-mop : 
	1. 	there is nothing yet indexed 	in 	the 
e-mop with that feature 

1 

1. there is one other item with that feature indexed in the e-mop 
1. there is an 	e-mop 	indexed 	by 	that feature 
1. it is on of the e-mop's norms. 
　　　when there is not already an index for a feature  1   a new index is b u i l t   and the event is indexed at that point. when there is one other event with a particular feature  1   a new e-mop is formed based on the similarities between the new event and the previous one with that feature  and the two events are indexed in that e-mop. when there is already an e-mop indexed by a particular feature  1   the new event is integrated into that e-mop. that integration includes refining the 
e-mop's generalized information and indexing the event. if the feature is one of the e-mop's norms  1   no indexing is done. the remainder of this section w i l l describe index selection  and building up generalised information during processes associated with  1  and  1  above. 
1 	index selection 
　　　index selection is part of both retrieval and memory update. it takes an event and an e-mop as input  and produces a subset of the event's features to be used for indexing the event in the mop  during update  or for traversal  during retrieval . 
　　　index selection in a particular e-mop depends on the mop's norms. in general  to maintain discrlmlnlblllty between events  normal aspects of a situation should not be indexed  while weird and different aspects of a situation should. indexing by a norm would supply memory with unneeded redundancy  and violate economy of storage. differences between events  on the other hand  differentiate them from each other  providing discrimlnablllty. organising events according to differences allows events to be recognixed individually. if a unique difference from a norm is specified in a retrieval key  the event that corresponds to that specification can be retrieved. 
　　　another important property indices should have is predictive power. a feature which is predictive often co-occurs with some other event feature. the nationality of participants in a diplomatic meeting  for example  ls usually the same as one party to the oontract being discussed. thus  in a  diplomatic meetings  mop  the nationality of participants can help predict the meeting's topic  and la a good predictive feature for indexing. 
　　　predictions that a particular feature or set of features can make are used during retrieval for elaboration. during retrieval  specification of the value of a predictive property w i l l allow inferenoe of the properties it predicts. if the feature  participants are russian  oo-ooours with  topic is usually arms limitations   then knowing a meeting was with a russian w i l l allow lnferenoe of the meeting's t o p i c 
　　　of course  we oan*t t e l l for sure  the f i r s t time we see a particular feature  whether or not it w i l l later be predictive. predlctlveness of features  however  can be judged by previous experience. if a type of index  e.g.  nationality 
of participants  sides of a contract  has been useful previously for similar events  then there is a good ohance it will be useful for the current event. this implies that as new events are added to memory  the relative predictive power of different types of indices must be tracked. 
　　　the predictive power of a feature depends on the context in which h is found. thus  e-mop indices must make context-related predictions  i.e.  predictions about mop-specific features. these criteria suggest the following algorithm for index selection: 
1 


1 

1. 	cyrus i t s e l f 
　　　cyrus has two data bases - one each for former u.s. secretaries of state cyrus vanoe and edmund muskle. cyrus takes oonceptual representations of episodes as input. thus  representations of episodes must be b u i l t before sending them to cyrus. cyrus has two modes of receiving representations of stories. in one mode  the stories are analyzed and the representations encoded by the human reader before being integrated into cyrus' memory. in its second mode of operation  cyrus is connected to frump  to form a complete information retrieval system called cyfr  1. frump reads stories from the upi news wire  and sends conceptual summaries of stories about muskle and vance to cyrus. cyrus then adds the new events to i t s memory and answers questions about them. cyrus' muskle memory has been b u i l t up entirely from frump-processed stories. i t s vanoe memory is b u i l t partially of frump-processed stories and partially of stories encoded by hand. 
　　　the following is a story cyfr has processed about muskle. frump produoed the summary  and sent its oonceptual representation to cyrus. after adding the events to i t s memory  cyrus answered the questions: 
carter begins going from the united states to 
i t a l y and yugoslavia to talk. 	secretary of state edmund muskle w i l l go from the united states to asia this month to have talks with asean. 	muskle w i l l have talks with nato in ankara in june. 
　　　the vanoe and the muskle memories start out the same  but after adding events to the two data bases  their organizations differ in four ways:  1  the indices are different.  1  the types of indloes are different. while the vance e-mop has topic lndloes and larger episode indices  the muskle e-mop haa neither of those.  1  the norms of their corresponding e-mops are different    i . e .   different generalisations have been made .  1  the vanoe e-mop indexes mostly sub-mops  and the muskle e-mop indexes mostly individual events. 
　　　three factors oontribute to these differences. f i r s t   the experienoes the two men have had are different. this is the reason for differences between lndloes in corresponding e-mops. second  the data entered into the vanoe data base is much more detailed than that entered into the muskle memory. this faotor aooounts for the differences in the types of lndloes in the two memories. because the muskle memory is not usually aware of the topics of muskle's meetings  for example  it oannot index them by aspeots of their topios. 
the 	third 	faotor 	whioh 	aooounts 	for differences between the two memories is the degree of similarity between the events. the f i r s t ten events added to the vance e-mop  for example  were very similar to each other. eight of them were meetings about the camp david accords. on the other hand  except for three meetings with gromyko the meetings entered into the muskle data base had very different participants and locations. 
	this factor accounts for differences 	 1  	and 
 1  above. the more similarities between events in an e-mop  the more f i l l e d out the mop's generalized information can be. in addition  the more similar events in an e-mop are  the more sub-mops w i l l be indexed in the mop than individual events. the 
extent of new category creation  then  is a function of the degree of similarity between items added to an e-mop  and not on the number of items it organizes. 
　　　cyrus i t s e l f is no longer being developed as a computer system. many of the problems illuminated by work on cyrus are being investigated in the context of other research projects. the generality of cyrus* retrieval and organizational strategies is being examined in two new areas - a world affairs expert and a medical diagnosis program. we are investigating more sophisticated methods for index selection and new category creation  and memory reorganization based on retrieval. the behavior of reconstructive memory as a memory organization for expert domains is also being explored. 
	1. 	referenoes 
 dejong  g. f.  1 . prediction and substantiation: a new approach to natural language processing. cognitive science  vol. 1. pp. 1. 
 kolodner  j. l.  1a . organizing memory and keeping it organized. in proceedings of the 
first annual national conference on a r t i f i c i a l intelligence  stanford  ca. 
 1 kolodner  j. l.  1b . retrieval and organizational strategies in conceptual memory: a computer model. research report #1. dept. of computer science  yale university  new haven  ct. 
 lebowltz  m.  1  generalization and memory in an integrated understanding system. research report #1. dept. of computer science. yale university  new haven  ct. 
 norman  d. a. and bobrow  d. g.  1 . descriptions: a basis for memory acquisition and retrieval. report #1. center for human information processing  la jolla  california. 
 schank  r. c.  1 . language and memory. cognitive science. vol. 1  no. 1. 
 1 schank  r. c. and kolodner  j. l.  1 . retrieving information from an episodic memory 
research report #1. department of computer solenee  yale university  also in ijcai-1. 
 smith  e. e.  adams  n.  and sohorr  d.  1 . fact retrieval and the paradox of interference  cognitive psychology. vol 1  pp.1  
 williams  m. d.  1 . the prooess of retrieval from very long term memory. center for human information prooesslng memo chip-1  la jolla  california. 
1 
