character tracking 
and the understanding of narratives 
brian j. reiser 
cognitive science program 
yale university 
new haven  ct 1 

/. perspective in undemanding 
　　recent work on the understanding of natural language narratives has emphasized representations composed of goals  plans  and their outcomes. causal chains  1  hierarchical goal/outcome graphs    story grammar parse trees     and causally linked networks   have been proposed as models of the mental representation of a story. a problem that has received little attention however is the influence of perspective in understanding a narrative. perspective may operate on many levels. inputs are understood by evaluating them in terms of the system's knowledge  which is often based on subjectively interpreted personal experiences. thus  understanders having different belief systems may interpret the same story in different ways . 
　　perspective also affects understanding by serving to focus the processing. attention becomes focused on one key character during the understanding of a narrative. a plausible hypothesis is that we pay most attention to the goals and plans of the character we are focusing on  and are concerned with the goals and plans of other characters only to the extent that they conflict with or further the goals of the tracked character. although personal factors may certainly influence which character in a narrative one will identify with  the text itself typically is written to focus attention on one of the characters  and the understander usually adopts that perspective. point of view may be established in a narrative by  1  simple syntactic cues;  1  conveying more information about a character  e.g.  more episodes relating his or her experiences;  1  conveying more internal information  i.e.  thoughts and feelings  about a character. once the point of view has been established  more processing work is devoted to that character. more inferences should be made about the character's goals and affective reactions. the other characters are understood only to the extent that their motivations and actions will bear on the main character. the representation will then be built from the main character's perspective  so that recall or summarization will produce more details directly relevant to that character  and will express such details from his point of view. just as activation of a schema directs processing and causes a number of inferences to fire   so does focusing on a character cause more processing to fill out the conceptual picture of the story from that character's point of view. 
　　consider the following two introductions to a story. an event and goal oriented understander that processed these stories from a neutral perspective would presumably build the same representation for each story  inferring motivations and reactions for each character whenever possible. 
　　however  it seems likely that in fact the two representations would differ. by the third criteria suggested above  the representation of story 1 would be built from davids perspective  while in story 1  it would be built from ken's perspective. processing of the rest of the story should then proceed from the focused character's perspective. 
　　 1  david was still new in town  and felt very lonely. he was just starting to feel comfortable settling into his new high school. 
　　ken and david met in their geometry class. ken always had something to do and had a very active social life at school. susan was one of the girls that ken was seeing. david wanted to date susan and told ken. david asked ken to stop dating susan so he could have a chance with her. ken laughed and yelled at david  and refused his request. 
　　 1  david was still new in town  and didnl know many people. he was just starting to participate in some activities at his new high school. 
　　ken and david met in their geometry class. ken enjoyed having a very active social life at school. susan was one of the girls that ken was seeing. david said to ken that he would like to date susan. david asked ken to stop dating susan so he could have a chance with her. ken felt surprised and angry at david and refused his request. 
　　understanding proceeds as a focused tracking of the fate of a character's goals. when attention is focused on a character in a narrative  each new input is then evaluated from that character's perspective. such focused character tracking has processing advantages. schank  pointed out that if an understander is continually tracking all the goals and plans of all the characters in a narrative  then a combinatorial explosion of inferences would result. processing the story from one character's perspective is one way that the inferencing process might be constrained. less relevant inferences need never be made or integrated into the representation. 
1. some empirical demonstrations of perspective 
　　some recent experiments in the yale cognitive science laboratory provide preliminary support for this notion of understanding. proponents of story grammars    have argued that events more subordinate in the goal hierarchy of the story are less likely to be included in a summary or recall protocol. however  a view of understanding as focused goal tracking suggests that the importance of an event may be influenced not only by its position in a goal hierarchy  but by which of the characters actually achieves the goal. some support 
1 

for this prediction is found in data presented by lehnert  black  and reiser . they collected summaries on three slightly 
altered versions of this base story:1 
     mike and paul had been close friends ever since their high school days. but now mike wanted paul out of town for a few days so he could build a patio in pull's backyard as a surprise birthday present. he suggested to paul that he get away tor a weekend but paul said he wasnl interested. on another occasion mike casually spoke about the joys of fishing or camping trips. but paul told htm he enjoyed puttering around the house much more. paul was getting very settled in his old 
age 
finally. mike went to paul's boss and asked him to send 
paul on a business trip. but pauls boss had had a bad day and he wouldn't hear of it. mike thought a while about what to do next. then he had an idea. 
     mike went to a friend of his who handles the accounting records for pauls company. he explained the situation to the 
accountant and told him. if you tell pauls boss that there arc irregularities in paul's records and that you would like to examine them for a few days  then paul will be sent away on some pretense. the accountant replied  td be happy to pull the scam  but i expect a little favor in return. how about an ounce of grass   mike felt this was not unreasonable. 
     so mike called his connection joe and asked him for an emergency ounce. but joe answered   sure thing  as soon as you pay up your tab with me.  mike personally delivered a cash payment immediately. when joe got his money he handed mike an ounce. then mike paid a visit to the accountant and gave htm the ounce. as soon as the accountant got the grass  he picked up the phone and called paul's boss. and within an hour of that phone call. paul's boss was telling paul about an emergency situation in peoria that needed supervision. paul was on a bus for peoria that evening. 
     a strict hierarchical model would predict that the boss sending paul away is more central in the representation than the event of making the deal with the accountant 
wants to build patio 
==  wants paul out of town 
==  wants boss to send paul out of town 
==  wants accountant to trick boss 
==  needs grass from joe the dealer 
however  1% of the summaries mention the role of the accountant  while only 1% of the summaries mention the role of the boss. indeed  the majority of the summaries say that paul made arrangements with the accountant to get paul out of town  deleting explicit mention of the boss at all. this summary is typical of those collected: 
mike tried many ways to get paul out of town in order to build 
paul a patio on his house as a surprise birthday present. he finally managed rt by bribing pauls company's accountant to get paul away. 
     why should this be so  lehnert  black  and reiser account for this finding in terms of  plot units   a story representation composed of thematic patterns of goal interaction and goal resolution . the unit encompassing both the deal with the 
1
   the versions varied in the actors of the initial denied requests  and in the inclusion of the goal of building the patio. the differences between the versions are not relevant to the purposes of this paper. 
accountant and the boss sending paul away is  nested agencies . this unit represents the situation where x enlists y who enlists z as an agent in order to accomplish the goal g. the standard form of expression of this unit is  x arranged to have y get g done   thus accounting for the more frequent inclusion of the subordinate event. x  mike  makes a deal with y  the accountant   than the sunerordinant event  y  the accountant  utilizes the aid of 1  the boss . 
     the view i have been proposing would predict that typically in this type of plot relationship  the event achieving the subordinate goal would be encoded as more central in the representation  sine it is executed directly by x  the actor who began the chain  and whose goal g is achieved. the other character important the plot unit is y  the agent with whom x  the initiating actor  dealt directly  rather than z. who interacted only with y. 
specifically in this story  the focus has been established on 
mike  the actor who began the chain. mike is established as the main character in the early episodes  since they deal with his attempts to fulfill his goals. thus  when the accountant and the boss are brought into the story  we are interested in them only insofar as their actions bear on the fate of m i k e * goals. the nested agencies plot unit is therefore expressed from m i k e * point of view. thus  although the event of convincing the accountant to help is subordinate to the goal of having the boss send paul away. mike is an actor only in this sub-plan  and not in the top-level plan. consider the goals and events in the story from m i k e * point of view:  the percentage of summaries of the above version of the story that mention each proposition is shown in parentheses.  

     since we are tracking mike's goals  although the deal with the accountant works by the accountant tricking the boss  all that concerns the reader is that the deal will result in paul going out of town. the conversation between the accountant and the boss it seen as an intervening step  and hence the role of the boss is less important than that of the accountant. 
     another effect of perspective is evident in the nature of the expression of events in the summaries. for example  the deal with the accountant is a reciprocal arrangement - mike pays the accountant a bribe of marijuana  and the accountant does the favor of getting rid of paul. yet  all of the summaries that expressed this event included exactly what the accountant did for mike  while only 1% of them mentioned that mike bribed the accountant with marijuana. since processing has focused on mike  we consider what mike got out of the deal to be more important than what he had to put into the deal.  from mike's point of view  paying the bribe only enables getting paul out of town; from the accountant's point of view  this relationship is 

1 

reversed.  thus the summaries demonstrate a tendency to recount events from the point of view of the main character. 
     in a new series of experiments. i am currently investigating the degree of inferencing about each character in a narrative. each subject reads one of two versions of a story  in which two men compete for the attentions of a woman. the two versions of the story contain the identical main episode  but differ in which of the male characters was the subject of an initial episode. the initial episode was intended to establish one of the male characters as the main character  a recognition test on the main episode of the story includes three types of  new  items  sentences not explicitly mentioned in the story : affective items  sentences concerning an affective reaction of one of the characters ; goal items  sentences concerning the motivations of one of the characters for some action ; and untrue items  sentences expressing some plausable action for which there was no evidence in the story . preliminary results indicate that indeed subjects are making more inferences about the motivations and affective reactions of the main character than about the other male character. however  the untrue items about the two male characters do not differ reliably. this indicates that the affective and goal results are due to more inferences being made about the main character during understanding  and not to a tendency to falsely recognize statements about the main character. thus  these results provide preliminary support that inferencing is constrained by the focus of attention in character tracking. 
j. perspective on perspective 
     1 have argued that perspective influences the encoding of information - inferences about the main character are more likely to be made  and representations are built from the main character's perspective. black  turner  and bower  have demonstrated that once a syntactic point of view has been established in a sentence  a subsequent sentence is encoded from the same point of view  regardless of lexical expression. abclson's   i   results also suggest the influence of perspective on encoding. subjects were instructed to adopt a particular visual point of view while listening to a story  and were later better able to recall details more easily  viewed  from the given perspective. anderson and pichert  have also demonstrated the influence of perspective on retrieval of information from a story representation. subjects' recall of a story was increased when they were instructed to think about the story from a given perspective  regardless of the perspective from which the story was first read. 
     in summary  i have argued that models of text representation cannot ignore the perspective issue. inputs are not evaluated from a neutral or objective perspective. instead  understanding proceeds as a focused inferencing process. attention is focused on a particular character  and the system adopts his or her point of view in interpreting successive inputs. preliminary data suggest that once attention becomes focused on a character  more work is done to understand his or her motivations and reactions than those of the other characters. this focusing during understanding in fact serves to help constrain the inferencing process. as our models of text representation become more complex  utilizing more types of knowledge structures   1    1    1   the number of inferences that a particular input in context may motivate increases dramatically. focused character tracking provides part of the solution to this inference explosion problem. 
acknowledgments 
discussions with john black and robin segal were invaluable in formulating the ideas presented in this paper. ray gibbs  john black  scott robertson  and colleen seifert all provided valuable comments on an earlier draft of this paper. this research was supported by the sloan foundation. 
