 
this paper describes processes of transforming michi-annai-bun  l i t e r a l l y street-guide-sentence into a map on a display device: we f i r s t show how such transformation is performed  and then we discuss what it means in terms of understanding natural language expressions. 
                       introduction in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence and cognitive science there have been a number of studies concerned with maps and directions. notably  kuipers♀l1 presented a model of representation of large scale environments and used it in constructing routes with street descriptions. riesbeck observed that much of spatial reasoning was unnecessary when one reads a written set of directions. he claimed that  without detailed information on a l l the turns  distances  and locales  the set of directions was clear and sensible if it is satisfied certain conditions. he then wrote a program that judged the clarity and crucial i t y of the sentence in the text giving directions. 
　　　here we present another program that is concerned with michi-annal-bun  l i t e r a l l y streetguide-sentence. qjlt program computes a picture  map  from michi-annai-bun or texts giving directions. the effort is made with a similar ideas in mind that simmons described when he computed pictures from natural language for the clown's microworld. 
michi-annai-bun 
a michi-annaj -bun is a sequence of sentences 
 instructions  that t e l l s us how to get to a place from certain point. for example: 
to another. an  exist-sentence  is a sentence that shows us the existence of landmarks along the way to the destination. a  comment-sentence  is a sentence that gives us some other useful information on directions. 
　　　each sentence in michi-annai-bun's is divided into a verb and cases associated with i t . in 
particular  a move-sentence contains at most five cases and an exist-sentences two cases. the cases we came up with for the move-sentence are origin  goal way  direction  and distance. those for the exist-sentence are position and object. for instance  the sentence 
koushuu-kaidou-o migi-ni magaru.  turn right at koushuu-kaidou.  
is a move-sentence that has a move-verb magaru  turn  and two cases  way  koushuu-kaidou  and dlrection migi . the sentence 
koujou-ga aru.  there is a factory.  
is an exist-sentence that has an exist-verb aru  to be  and the case  object koujou . 
the sentence 
minogasu 	koto-wa 	arimasen. 	 you 	can 	not miss i t .   
is an example of the exist-sentences. 
map computation 
     map computation from michi-annai-bun's has three distinct processes: sentence analysis  internal code generation  and map drawing. first  
a michi-annai-bun is decomposed into a set of simple sentences each of which  in turn  is divided into a verb and it case relations. second  the semantic structure of each simple sentence is transformed into a matrix  or matrices  and the michi-annai-bun becomes a sequence of matrices. finally  with the information supplied by the matrices  a set of fortran routines that uses gpsl  graphic plotting subprogram library  is called to compute a map on a display device. 
sentence analysis. sentence analysis does two successive decompositions of michi-annai-bun: 
1. michi-annai-bun 	--  	simple 	sentences 
1. simple sentence 	--  	standard form  verb 
1 

and cases  
the purpose of the decompositions is to enumerate in standard forms a train of conceptual units that corresponds to actions and situations p e r t i nent to the michi-annai-bun. 
　　　the sentence analysis in michi-annai-bun is reduced to a pattern matching process  given the sets of move-verbs and exist-verbs in a dictionary and the fact that a simple sentence consists of a sequence of noun and adverb phrases  with case indicating particles at the end of each phrase  followed by a verb. however  the order of phrases in a sentence is quite flexible  except for the rule that the verb comes at the end   and sometimes actual cases used in it differ from those of the surface structure in the pattern 
matching process. 
　　　the patterns for noun phrases may be complicated by a number of nouns  adjectives  particles that do not signify the overt cases for michiannai-bun' s  inflected forms of verbs  and other constituents allowed to appear in a phrase. 
　　　comment-sentences are treated just like comment statements to compilers. when the verb used in a sentence is not for a move-verb or an exist-verb  the sentence is ignored as a comment sentence. this situation also occurs when the decompositions failed for some reasons. 
internal code generation. once the case frame is b u i l t for each sentence  information in each phrase is sought to extract the semantic structure of the sentence. that is to say  adjectives and other constituents of a phrase may contain further information about the sentence. in a phrase cokina gakkou  a big school   for instance  the adjective ookina provides information on the size of the building gakkou. 
　　　a l l the information in a sentence is put in a matrix structure that w i l l describe the semantic structure of a sentence. from the verb and the elements that constitute a phrase  we may get the size  type  and name of the landnarks or width  type  and name of the street concerned. from the preceding sentences or following ones  we may get more information about the origin  goal  position  etc. such information  which is crucial to draw a map  w i l l be put in the 
matrix. if necessary information is missing  then a default value may be supplied to the appropriate place in the matrix. when the noun signifies an object that may be given a special symbol on a map  then the information is extracted from the dictionary and inserted in the matrix. 
     the use of the you-are-here pointer is an important intermediary to generate matrices. 
 this is a structure with various variables that keep track of the current location and destination  direction  the side of street you are on  etc. in particular  two variables are kept for the direction since absolute directions  e.g.  north  and relative directions  e.g.  right  may be used interchangeably in michi-annai-bun's. 
map drawing. a map is computed by a fortran program that uses gpsl  a set of fortran subroutines for graphics. 
　　　the sequence of matrices generated in the previous section contains the information needed to draw a map. each matrix should now have s u f f i cient information about a motion or a landmark along the way to the next  intermediate  goal. 
　　　the fortran program contains  for instance  the subroutine walk which requires several argu-
ments and draws a straight road from the current location; the subroutine cross draws an intersection; and the subroutine buiud generates a special symbol through one of the arguments. 
　　　the verb or noun put in the matrix determines which subroutine is to be called. then necessary values for the arguments of the subroutine are sought in the matrix. if crucial information is missing and the default value is not in the 
matrix  the system generates an appropriate question  and the user is required to supply the 
necessary information. 
an example 
　　　consider the following michi-annai-bun for an illustration: 

when this is analyzed  seven simple sentences  with their case frames below on the right  are identified. 

the verb used in each simple sentence is changed to i t s uninflected form. the case indicating particles and unnecessary conjunctions  if any  are eliminated also. 
　　　the order of the cases is origin  goal  way  direction  and distance for the move-sentences. that of the exist-sentences is position and object. here  except for  1  and  1   a l l verbs are move-verbs. 
　　　each matrix to be generated represents a semantic primitive. a semantic primitive corresponds to one of the three scenes on the michiannai-bun: the existence of a street  the existence of a building  and the movement to be i n i tiated by us. thus  massugu susumu generates a matrix for a movement; kouban-ga aru generates a matrix for an existence of buildings. in this example  the number of matrices is the same as that of the simple sentences as each sentence 
entails a semantic primitive. 
　　　 1    1   and  1  use the subroutine walk with various arguments. eki  train station  
1 

as origin in  1  requires a special symbol and determines which subroutine be called.  1  i n vokes the subroutine tshape to draw a t-shape intersection   deru in  1  is a move-verb  but is considered to be an exist-verb in the context here.  however  the drawing was the result of a system's interaction with the user since the shape of the corner was not specified in the original sentence and no clue to determine it was obtainable.  1  changes not one's position but his direction. 
　　　in  1  the side of kouban was not specified but  on your l e f t   was assumed in the matrix. the reasoning was the result of the assumption that  unless specified otherwise  one remains on the same directional side that prevailed in the previous turn  i.e.  hidari  left  in this case  and that  if not specified  a landmark is located on the same side as one is on. an output from this example is: 

　　　figure 1 shows an outpu  for the michiannai-bun exemplified in the section 1 iichi-annaibun. this michi-annai-bun i t s e l f is rather d u l l   but the map created is about right for dentsuudai from the chofu station. here  the symbol 1 and x are the standard ones for banks and schools  respectively. 

final remarks 
　　　in the end  the structure of language used in michi-annai-bun's is nothing different from that in exressing any other subjects: one may put it any way he likes. realistically  however  the main components of a michi-annai-bun are  move-sentences  and  exist-sentences   and most of them are picturable. 
     the drawing maps from michi-annai-bun's is interesting in two reasons. pedagogically  it provides with the student a concise example of natural language processing. here t  understanding of natural language is clear anh operational  and the student gets a hands-on experiment in this f i e l d . theoretically  we learn much about the properties of natural language processing and the nature of natural language understanding. the map drawing reveals relations between 
natural language expressions and picture representations. a map represents relative distance and directions among objects well. michi-annaibun' s are poor at doing this. on the other hand  fuzzy concepts such as  second or third street  are not picturable. the same is true for the expressions like   t a l l buildinr    noisy street    a street with a good smpll of limber   etc. 
　　　in many cases  maps drawn from michi-annaibun's are far from the actual ones. one tends not to express certain local environments in michi-annai-bun; concepts used by him are too fuzzy for the picture drawing. in turn l e f t   for instance  we do not necessarily mean an angle 
of 1 degrees  which our program assumed. yet  such a michi-annai-bun is clearly understood when we read i t . when we specified a l l the det a i l s in michi-annai-bun's  our program was able to compute fine maps  but then we had hard time to comprehend the michi-annai-bun's. 
　　　the map drawing encounters problems common with natural language computation systems like the one presented by biermann and ballard. on one hand  noun phrases require much the same types of semantic analysis. on the other  our program could be made to draw accurate maps just like they tried to have a matrix calculation 
program using natural language. however  our intention at the moment was not to have a complete map-drawing program. instead we are interested more in an understanding of a good michi-annaibun and i t s relation to the street map. 
