 
　　　this paper introduces a formal method for integrating knowledge derived from a variety of sources for use in  perceptual reasoning. * the formalism is based on the  evidential proposltlonal calculus   a derivative of shafer's mathematical theory of evidence . it is more general than either a boolean or bayeslan approach  providing for boolean and bayeslan inferenclng when the appropriate information is available. in this formalism  the likelihood of a proposition a is represented as a subinterval   s a  p a    of the unit interval   1 . the evidential support for proposition a is represented by s a   while p a  represents i t s degree of plausibility; p a  can also be interpreted as the degree to which one f a i l s to doubt a  p a  being equal to one minus the evidential support for  a. this paper describes how evidential information  furnished by a knowledge source in the form of a probability  mass  distribution  can be converted to this interval representation; how  through a set of inference rules for computing intervals of dependent propositions  this information can be extrapolated from those propositions it directly bears upon  to those it indirectly bears upon; and how multiple bodies of evidential information can be pooled* a sample application of this approach  modeling the operation of a collection of sensors  a particular type of knowledge source   illustrates these techniques. 
	i 	introduction and overview 
　　　we are pursuing a program of research aimed at developing a computer-based capability for  perceptual reasoning   that w i l l make it possible to interpret important aspects of a situation from information obtained by a collection of disparate sensors. situational assessment implies the need to integrate sensory information 
　the work described here has been jointly supported by the defense advanced research projects agency of the department of defense  monitored by the air force avionics laboratory under contract 
no. f1-c-1  and the office of naval research under contract no. n1-c-1. with a body of relevant  expertise   or prior knowledge. this integration poses a number of d i f f i c u l t technical problems that must be examined. 
　　　among the problems focused upon in our work are the following: 
* how to model sensors and other knowledge sources  ks   so as to know which situations they can provide information about and how to interpret their responses. 
* how to effectively combine  sometimes contradictory  information from multiple knowledge sources to compensate for their individual deficiencies. 
* how to automatically devise a dataacqulsltlon/sensor-utllizatlon strategy to maximise overall system effectiveness. 
　　　in this paper we shall concentrate on the approach to sensor modeling and knowledge integration that is currently under investigation. these form the core of the overall system. 
a. 	previous work 
　　　earlier research   1   1  1  led to a number of important conclusions regarding the integration of perceptual information. first  because of the variety of knowledge types required and the particular uses of each  it became apparent that a proliferation of specialised representations was inevitable. this is a departure from standard approaches that attempt to develop a representation of sufficient scope to encompass a l l of the knowledge needed by a system. use of nonmonolithlc representations allows kss to perform efficient operations on widely diverse  locally appropriate data formats. however  the problem then becomes one of somehow connecting these kss in a flexible  effective manner. 
1 　　　we formulated several requirements of a reasoning paradigm for the combination and extrapolation of evidential information from disparate kss. whereas earlier work has focused upon a bayeslan-based probabilistic scheme  we feel that this is too restrictive. a likelihood represented by a point probability value is usually an overstatement of what is actually known  distorting the available precision. 
in particular  there is no adequate  non-ad hoc representation of ignorance within a bayeslan framework. 
　　　another problem with a bayeslan approach to the modeling of belief is the d i f f i c u l t y of ensuring and maintaining consistency in a collection of interrelated propositions. this d i f f i c u l t y also stems from the need to assign point probability values  even when the underlying models from which these values are derived are incapable of supplying such precise data. 
　　　there are many occasions when the inference technique of choice is probabilistic reasoning   e . g .   particularly when reasoning is done with data close to the signal level   and other occasions when a  boolean  logical formalism is preferred   e . g .   when trying to combine  higherlevel  knowledge . to avoid an ad hoc approach to  global  knowledge integration  the inference paradigm should flow smoothly from a probabilistic technique to a logical one  as the propositions in question become more nearly true or false. in addition  whenever the underlying model is complete and consistent enough for traditional methods to be effective  the technique should reduce to a bayeslan paradigm. 
b. 	
　　　the representation we have adopted to satisfy the preceding requirements for the integration of global knowledge is based on the work of shafer   1   . it expresses the belief in a proposition a by a sublnterval  s a  p a   of the unit interval  
 1 . the lower value  s a   represents the  support  for that proposition and sets a minimum value for i t s likelihood. the upper value  p a   denotes the  plausibility  of that proposition and establishes a maximum likelihood. support may be interpreted as the total positive effect a body of evidence has on a proposition  while plausibility represents the total extent to which a body of evidence f a l l s to refute a proposition. the degree of uncertainty about the actual probability value for a proposition corresponds to the width of i t s interval. as w i l l be shown  this representation with the appropriate inference rules satisfies the requirements established above. 
　　　in the remainder of this paper  we shall demonstrate dempster's rule of combination  a  for pooling evidential information from independent knowledge sources  present an inference mechanism for updating proposition intervals based on other dependent proposition intervals  and demonstrate their use in sensor modeling and integration. 
	ii 	knowledge representation and inference 
in what we call the  evidential propositional 
calculus   we represent a proposition using the following notation: 
a
 s a   p a    
where a is the proposition  s a  the support for the proposition  and p a  its plausibility. 	p a  is equivalent to i-s  ~ a   the degree to which one falls to doubt a. 	the interval  s a  p a l is called the  evidential interval.  	the uncertainty of a  u a   corresponds to p a -s a . 	if u a  is zero for a l l propositions  the system is bayeslan. 
　　　the following examples illuminate some important points; 

a  	dempster's rule of combination 
　　　dempster's rule is a method of integrating distinct bodies of evidence. this is most easily introduced through the familiar formalism whereby propositions are represented as subsets of a given set  here referred to as the  frame of discernment   denoted 1 . when a proposition corresponds to a subset of the frame of discernment  it is said to be  discerned.  the primary advantage of this formalism is that it translates the logical notions of conjunction  disjunction  implication  and negation into the more graphic  set-theoretic notions of intersection  union  inclusion  and complementation* dempster's rule combines evidential information expressed relative to those propositions discerned by o. 
	1. 	single belief functions 
           we assume that a knowledge source  ks1  distributes a unit of belief across a set of propositions for which it has direct evidence  in proportion to the weight of that evidence as it 
　　　
	bears on each. 	this is represented by a function: 
usually assigned a probability of .1. 	this is quite different from specifying that nothing is known regarding such propositions.    those propositions are referred to as the ks's  focal elements*  　for example  if no information is available concerning two i n i t i a l l y exclusive and exhaustive possibilities  in a bayeslan framework they are 
1 
　　　

1 
　　　
factor k. the greater the value of k  the greater the degree of conflict between the two kss. when k la one  the ksa are irreconcilably different and the orthogonal sum doea not exist. 
b. 	inference rules 
　　　in addition to a technique for pooling distinct bodies of evidence  rules are needed that allow evidential information to be tranalated from thoae propositions it bears upon directly to those it beara upon indirectly. 	these rulea are baaed on the following two principles of evidential support: 
* the proposition corresponding to the frame of discernment alwaya receives f u l l support. 
* any support committed to a proposition is thereby committed to any other proposition i t implies. 
　　　from the f i r s t principle we know that s 1  p 1  - 1. the second principle dictates that any support committed to a subset of the frame of discernment is thereby committed to i t s supersets. this follows because one proposition implies another if it la a subset of that proposition in the frame of discernment. of the total aupport committed to a given proposition a  some may be committed to one or more proper aubaeta of a  while the reat is committed exactly to a -and to no smaller subset  i . e .   m a . if it la assumed that a knowledge source expresses i t s e l f in terms of support and plausibility estimates for a selected set of propositions from the frame of discernment  a aet of inference rulea allows these estimates to be tranalated from proposition to proposition  thereby reducing uncertainty. a sampling of theae rulea follows. the statements above the line in each rule allow the statement below the line to be inferred. 


　　　as can be easily shown  when propositions are known to be true or false  that i s   when their corresponding belief intervals become either  1  or  1    these rules reduce to the corresponding rules of the propositional calculus. thus  when appropriate knowledge exists  this method w i l l enable eaay transition from a probabilistic inference computation to the standard propositional calculus. 
	i l l 	example: 	modeling a knowledge source 
　　　as our intention has been to treat sensors as specialized kss  in this section we shell describe an approach to modeling such a ks. we shall begin by discussing the usual parameters measured by a  hypothetical  sensor  i l l u s t r a t i n g how  for this simple example  these measurements are converted to hypotheses by the inference mechanism. 
a. 	sensor measurements 
　　　we assume thet collections of electromagnetic signal  emitters  deployed in various configurations comprise the situation of interest. measurements of characteristics of the signals emitted by these devices w i l l be used to formulate hypotheses about their identities. in the complete system  these hypotheses w i l l interact with those derived from other kss to create a more comprehensive picture of the situation. let us f i r s t concern ourselves with a single ks and then show how it may be composed with other kss. 
	1. 	emitter characteristics 
　　　　　　in this example  en emitter w i l l rediate e pulsed radar signal whose pertinent characteristics w i l l include the carrier frequency   r f   and the pulse width  pw   which are measured directly by the receiver. for the example we assume that the emitters of interest ere of types el  e1  e1  b1  or b1. the goal of the program is to identify a signal as having originated from one of those types. 
　　　
　　　　　　the information about the parameter values likely to be exhibited by an emitter is presented in the form of parameter distribution graphs-for example  as shown in figure 1. these curves indicate the probability that any given emitter  of the type indicated  w i l l have a specific parameter value; the total area under each curve is one. 
　　　　　　a typical approach to identifying an emitter is to look up the measured parameters in a table. in addition to d i f f i c u l t i e s traceable to the static nature of the table  e.g.  emitter characteristics are not expected to remain stable and constant in actual operation   the technique gives l i t t l e information regarding the relative likelihoods of ambiguous identifications. 

	1. 	sensor characteristics 
　　　　　　a sensor  receiver  w i l l specify a range of possible values for the measured emitter parameter  as determined by the resolution of the sensor's measurements. for example  the receiver may specify an emitter's frequency value as lying within a band of frequencies  say from 1 to 1 ghz. similarly  other emitter parameters w i l l also be specified as f a l l i n g within a range of values. 
　　　　　　our previous work  described how sensor models were modified in the event of changing environmental conditions. in the approach described here  such environmental factors w i l l instead determine the total mass a sensor may allocate to propositions other than 1. in effect  the uncertainty u of a receiver in the prevailing conditions is i t s minimal commitment to 1   i . e .   m o    u   leaving only  1 - u  of the mass to be freely distributed. 
b. 	modeling the operation of a sensor 
　　　the modeling process begins with the determination of a frame of discernment. if the task is to determine the true value of some variable  the frame of discernment is the set of a l l possible values for that variable. for the problem at hand  each element of the frame of discernment consists of an emitter type paired with a feature vector representing one possible electromagnetic signature that such an emitter might exhibit. thus  is a subset of a l l of the combinations of emitter types  et   radio frequencies  rf   and pulse widths  pw . 

the key requirement of the frame of discernment is that a l l the propositions of interest be in correspondence with its subsets. 	in the current context the following propositions are some of those that might be of interest: 

　　　once a frame of discernment has been determined  it can be represented as a dependency graph . in this formalism propositions are represented by nodes  their interrelationships by arcs. these interrelationships can be interpreted either as set-theoretic notions relative to the frame of discernment   e . g .   intersection  union  inclusion  and complementation   or as logical connectives  e.g.  conjunction  disjunction  implication  and negation . the appropriate subset of propositions and relationships  so represented  depends on the preferred vocabulary of discourse among the kss. those propositions to which the kss tend to assign mass need to be included  along with those relationships that best describe their interdependence. once such a dependency graph has been established  it provides an integrated framework for both the combination and extrapolation of evidential information. 
　　　in the current context there is a subgraph for each emitter feature. at the lowest level of these subgraphs is a set of propositions representing the smallest bands into which that continuous feature has been partitioned-this partitioning being necessary within a propositional framework. these primitive bands form the basis of a hierarchy in each subgraph  relating larger bands to more primitive ones. the emitter types are similarly represented  the higher elements in the hierarchy corresponding to disjunctions of emitter types. a l l this is tied together by one last subgraph that relates the base elements of the hierarchies to elements of the frame of discernment  the frame of discernment consisting of the possible combinations of base elements. figure 1 is a sketch of this dependency graph  with each node representing a proposition equal to the disjunction of those immediately below it  and the conjunction of those immediately above it. 
　　　this dependency graph contains a l l the information needed to determine the collective impact of several bodies of evidence on a l l the 
　　　

propositions of interest. given several distinct bodies of evidential information extracted from the environment by several knowledge sources  repeated applications of dempster's rule followed by repeated applications of the inference rules for support and plausibility propagation-all based on the information embodied in the dependency graph- results in a support and plausibility estimate for every proposition of interest . there are no restrictions regarding which propositions serve as premises or conclusions. information about radio frequency and pulse width can be used to determine the most likely types of emitters-or information about emitters and pulse width can be used to predict the expected radio frequency. inferenclng is unconstrained. 
c. 	simplification of the sensor model 
　　　in the preceding discussions  we showed how inferences could be drawn in a formal system that 
modeled a l l relevant elements of 1. it is frequently inconvenient to model these elements individually. for example  too many elements may be needed to represent the resolution of any particular sensor. an obvious simplification is to compute new propositions in 1 as they are needed  ror example  when a receiver reports a signal in a specific frequency band  propositions can then be created which assert that the signal originated from one element of a subset of possible emitter types. the exact hypotheses and their associated 
mass allocations are determined by comparing receiver measurements with tabulated information about the emitters. 
	1. i n i t i a l 	mass 	computations 
　　　　　　the f i r s t step is to convert sensory measurements into a probability mass distribution over propositions. 	in essence  the parameter measurement range is overlaid on the curves 
representing distributions of emitter parameters  as shown in figure 1. the area of the distribution curve is computed for each emitter  propositions are created only for those emitters whose parameter ranges overlap the sensor's report . a set of  basic mass numbers  is then computed by normalising the resultant areas to bring their t o t a l area to one. this process is exactly equivalent to computing the probability of each emitter  conditioned upon the measured parameter's f a l l i n g in the specified range  and assuming that only the tabulated emitter could radiate the received signal . 
           the uncertainty u of the receiver is accounted for through reducing each basic mass number by multiplying it by a factor equal to one minus u. this new set of mass numbers then represents the contribution of the receiver measurement to the support of the proposition. 
	1. 	example 
　　　　　　in this example we assume that there are five emitter types {el  . . .   e1}  whose rf and pw characteristics are shown graphically in figure 1. the receiver has reported a frequency measurement of 1 to 1 ghz and a pulse width range of  1 to .1 	assuming an uncertainty of .1 in the rf measurement and an uncertainty of .1 for pw  the resulting mass functions are 

　　　

with an uncertainty of .1. this leads to the following relevant hypotheses: 

leads to two primary hypotheses  elr 1  1 and e1r 1 	1 . 	e1 is slightly favored over el. 	when external evidence is brought to bear  the support for e1 becomes significantly greater than for a l l others  and  in fact  a l l others except e1 drop to very low levels of support . 	any other ks that provides a mass assignment over this set of propositions may also be combined. 
　　　　　　this simplification of the formal method provides the a b i l i t y to integrate information quickly from a variety of sources  even in those areas where the necessary propositions have not already been extracted from 1. the technique does not yet allow the propagation of evidence to a r b i t r a r i l y selected propositions from the network. for example  it is not possible to take the structure defined for this problem and use it to determine what radio frequency values should be expected on the basis of pulse width data-a process easily carried out by the f u l l representation. this is an area of current research. a related computational technique  restricted to evidence that either confirms or denies a single proposition  is also being investigated . 
	iv 	summary 
　　　we have briefly described an inference technique that appears to satisfy many of the requirements for reasoning in perceptual domains. in particular  the method provides the capability for  bayeslan  probabilistic reasoning when the appropriate underlying models are available  e.g.  at the lowest levels of the system    evidential  subjective reasoning when incomplete descriptions must be used   e . g .   at the  middle  levels of the system   and  boolean  logical reasoning when the truth values of propositions are true and false. 
this technique allows us to augment a static  incomplete model with current sensory information. 
　　　the approach provides a formal technique for updating the likelihoods of propositions in a consistent manner. in effect  by simultaneously performing computations over a collection of propositions  the method maintains global consistency without the problems frequently plaguing techniques that perform iterative updating by means of local rules. most importantly  besides offering an inference technique that can be used within a ks  as illustrated   the method provides a  language  for ksa to communicate with one another  as well as furnishing the means for linking disparate sources of information. 
　　　in our previous work on perceptual-reasoning systems  we evolved a number of effective generic 
 e.g.  terrain  weather  etc.  and domain-specific   e . g .   sensor  kss. our current research  focusing on the evidential proposltlonal calculus as the integrating medium  alms at developing a general framework for linking these kss together smoothly and flexibly. 
