 
	metaphor 	pervades natural language discourse. 
this paper describes a computational approach to the interpretation of metaphors. it is based on a natural language processing system that uses the discourse problems posed by a text to select the relevant inferences. the problem of interpreting metaphors can then be translated into the problem of selecting the relevant inferences to draw from the metaphorical expression. thus  a metaphor is frequently given a correct interpretation as a byproduct of the other things a natural language system has to do. two examples of metaphors are given - a spatial metaphor schema from computer science  and a novel metaphor - and it is shown how the interpretation problem for each can be translated into a selective lnferencing problem and solved by the ordinary operations of the system. this framework sheds light on the analogical processes that underlie metaphor and begins to explain the power of metaphor. 
	1. 	metaphor is pervasive 
　　　i. a. richards  in speaking of metaphor  said   literal language is rare outside the central parts of the sciences.   richards 1 . but it is rare even in the central parts of the sciences. consider for example the following text from computer science. it comes from an algortihm description in the f i r s t volume of knuth's art of computer programming  vol. 1  p. 1  and is at but one remove from the domain's most formal mode of expression. 
　　　 given a pointer po  this algorithm sets the mark field to 1 in node po  and in every other node which can be reached from node po  by a chain of al1nk and blink pointers in nodes with atom - mark 
= 1. the algorithm uses three pointer variables  t  q  and p  and modifies the links and control bits during its execution in such a way that a l l atom  alink  and blink fields are restored to their original settings after completion  although they may be changed temporarily.  
　　　in this text the algorithm  or the processor that executes i t   is apparently a purposive agent that can perform such actions as receiving pointers; setting  changing  and restoring fields; reaching nodes; using variables for some purpose; modifying links and bits; and executing and completing its task. 
　　　nodes are apparently locations that can be linked and strung into paths by pointers and visited by the processor-agent. 
　　　nodes also seem to be containers that can contain fields. 
　　　fields are also containers that can contain pointers  among other things. in addition  fields are entitles that can be placed at  or set to  locations on the number scale or in the structured 
　　　　　　　　　　　their very name  suggest objects that can point to a location for some agent's information. 
　　　in fact  there is very l i t t l e in the paragraph that does not rest on some spatial or agent 
metaphor. moreover  these are not simple isolated metaphors; they are examples of large-scale 
 metaphor schemata  or  root metaphors   lakoff and johnson 1  which we use to encode and organize our knowledge about the objects of computer science. they are so deeply ingrained that their metaphorical character generally escapes our notice. 
　　　the pervasiveness of metaphor was noted as early as the eighteenth century by giambattista vico  1  1 . in our century  this observation has been the basis for a rejection of aristotle's and quintillian's views that metaphor is mere ornament  and an elevation of metaphor to an  omnipresent principle of language   richards 1  and  the law of its l i f e    langer 1 . as we saw in our example  the spatial metaphor especially is pervasive. jespersen  1  remarked on this. for whorf  1  it was a key element in his view that language determines thought: the spatial metaphors provided by one's langauge determines how one w i l l normally conceptualize abstract domains. the most thoroughgoing recent treatment of metaphor in everyday language is found in lakoff and johnson  1 ; they identify the core metaphors that underlie our thinking about a vast array of domains  and argue that we can understand the domains only by means of these metaphors. the fundamental insight that informs a l l this work is this: metaphor is pervasive in everyday discourse and is essential in our conceptualizations of abstract domains. the aim of this paper is to present a computational treatment of metaphor that can accommodate this fundamental insight. 
	1. 	some frameworks for investigating metaphor 
	the 	earliest 	detailed 	proposal 	in 
computational linguistics for handling metaphor was that of russell  1 . her proposal concerns abstract uses of verbs of motion and involves l i f t i n g selectional constraints on the arguments of the verb while keeping fixed the topological properties of the motion  such as source  path and goal. thus  to handle  the ship plowed through the sea   we l i f t the restriction on  plow  that the medium be earth and keep the property that the motion is in a substantially straight line through some medium. 
　　　russel exemplifies an approach that finds its most complete development in levin  1   metaphor is treated as a species of semantic deviance; selectional constraints are l i f t e d until the expression can sail through the interpreter without d i f f i c u l t y and without effect. but the problem of interpreting  the ship plowed through the sea  is not to avoid rejecting the sentence because the sea is not earth  but to notice the similarity of the wedge-shaped plow and the wedgeshaped bow of a ship and the wake that each leaves  and perhaps more importantly  to take note of the ship's steady  inexorable progress. any approach to metaphor that does only the f i r s t of these is not a way of interpreting metaphors  only of ignoring them. under this view  the fundamental insight is simply bizarre and inexplicable. 
　　　a more productive approach to metaphor interpretation can be based on work in mainstream natural language processing. one of the principal thrusts of natural language processing research in the last decade has been to develop frameworks in which inferences can be drawn selectively. one reason that such systems are needed is that it is d i f f i c u l t   if not impossible  to axiomatize in a consistent manner any domain more complex than set theory. however another reason is that there are too many true inferences that can be drawn in a specific situation and most of them are irrelevant. a great deal of work in natural language processing can be viewed as addressing this problem  including hobbs 1  joshi and rosenscheln 1  grosz 1  schank and abelson 1  and mann  moore and levin 1 . 
　　　metaphor interpretation in such a framework becomes the problem of drawing certain inferences and refraining from drawing other inferences. consider a simple case. suppose it were not a cliche to call someone a hog. how would we go about interpreting the sentence 
 1  	john is a hog. 
let us suppose our i n i t i a l logical representation for this is hog j . 
there are a number of things we might infer from the fact that some entity is a hog  among them 
hog x  -  fat x  hog x  -  overcon1ume x y  food y  hog x  -  sloppy x  hog x  -  has-four-legs x  
the problem we are faced with in interpreting  1  is the problem we are always faced with in interpreting a text - determining which inferences it is appropriate to draw from what we've been told. depending on the situation  we may want to infer   f a t   j       or  overconsume j f   where  food f    or simply  overconeume j x   where x is some other quantity such as a road john is driving on. the inference that john has four legs is presumably rejected because of strong reasons to believe the contrary. one may or may not infer that john is sloppy  depending on context or other factors. 
　　　our approach then is to say that  john is a hog  conveys at least the information that  john is a hog   but that the various inferences that one could draw from the sentence  
porky is a hog  
are simply not available to us in the case of john. in particular  most of the inferences that correspond to the various features of the visual image evoked by the word  hog  are not appropriate. 
　　　if interpreting a metaphor is a matter of selecting the right inferences  then we must ask how the inferences are to be selected. there have been several interesting proposals. 
　　　one is the proposal of ortony  whose notion of  feature  is probably equivalent to the ai notion of inference. in a metaphor one is comparing an entity in a  new domain   richards  1  called this entity the  tenor   ortony the  topic   with an entity in an  old domain   the  vehicle  . ortony  1  has suggested a breakdown of the knowledge in the old and new domains into classificatory facts  other high-salience facts  and low-salience facts. classificatory facts are not transferred from the vehicle to the tenor. thus  from  john is a hog  we do not infer that john is a farm animal. what get transferred from the vehicle to the tenor are other high-salience facts whose correlates in the tenor are of low 
salience. 	it is a 	high-salience fact 	that 	hogs overconsume  a 	low-salience 	fact 	that 	john overconsumes. the 	effect of 	the metaphor 	is 	to bring to 	the john. fore 	this low-salience 	fact 	about another interesting 	proposal 	is 	that 	of winston  1 . he presents an algorithm in which properties are transferred from the vehicle to the tenor if they are extremes on some scale  are known to be important  or serve to distinguish the vehicle from other members of its class. thus  properties of hogs that were not shared by other farm animals would be transferred. 
　　　recently carbone1  1  has proposed a division of inferences into a helrarchy with inferences about goals  planning and causes at the top and monadic descriptive inferences and inferences about relevant objects at the bottom. he argues that those near the top of the hierarchy are carried over from the vehicle to the tenor more often than those near the bottom. gentner  1  has similarly shown that relations  i.e. dyadic predicates  are carried over more often than monadic predicates. 
　　　however  none of these approaches takes into account the text in which the metaphor is embedded. the approach taken in this paper is to subsume the metaphor interpretation problem under the more general problem of making sense of a discourse as a whole. in previous work  e.g. hobbs 1  i have investigated the idea that the inferences that it is relevant to draw are the inferences required to solve various discourse problems  like recognizing coherence  forcing congruence between predicates and their arguments  and anaphora and ambiguity resolution. to take a simple   l i t e r a l   example  
consider 
　　　
 1  	john picked up a book. 	1. 	a spatial metphor schema 
　　　
it la sometimes true that books have tables of contents  and sometimes it is relevant. but there is no reason  given  1  alone  that we would necessarily want to draw the inference that john'a book has a table of contents. however  if the next sentence in the text is 
he turned to the table of contents  
then we can be sure that the inference is both true and relevant.* 
to take a metaphorical example  consider 
mary eats like a bird  but john is a hog. 
in order to recognise the contrast coherence relation  see hobbs 1  indicated by  but   we must draw the inference that john overconsumes food. other possible inferences about hogs are not drawn  not so much because they would result in an inconsistency  but because no discourse problem requires them to be drawn. 
     more specifically  i am assuming a framework exemplified by the diana system  implemented at sri for the analysis of discourse. the system may be described briefly as follows. it accepts a text translated by a syntactic front-end into predicate calculus formulae  and draws those inferences necessary to solve the discourse problems posed by the text. the lnferenclng process is selective and driven by a collection of discourse operations which try to do such things as resolve pronoun and definite noun phraae 