 	bits 	of 	knowledge  organize them  	formalize 	them  	and 
                                                                           program them {a conscious erfoit along these lines was knowledge may be organized as a community of made in   where expeits gradually leplaced themselves by intfiacting modules each module is granted a complex programs instead of discussing how to write a speech stiucture  to simulate a particular expert in some small ptogiam  they / speech recognition  until each one could domain an extended analogy is drawn to a group of introspect sufficiently into his own activities to formalize cooperating human specialists based on this  an internal them for our task  one expects the psychologists to constraint is imposed on the modules then structure must dominate the eaily discussions  later yielding to programmers be standard over the entire community some advantages the project sponsor might be passive  submitting a single of a uniform formalism are thereby preserved. an specification order for the program  or active  paiticipating in experimental community was implemented for the task the work as a  somewhat priveleged  member of the team. domain of automatic programming it has managed to this individual is the one who wants the final product  synthesize a few inductive inference lisp programs  hence will be called the user nonformally. from specific restricted dialogues with a 
human user 	how could beings do this  theie would be some little proyiim containing information about concept formation 
	1. experts and beings 	 much 	mote than would be used in 	writing any single 
concept formation piogiam   anothei being who knows how 
　　consider an interdisciplinary enterprise  attempted by a to manape a group to write programs  and many lower community of human expeits who are specialists in - and ievel specialist's  for example info-obtainfr  test  modifyonly in .. then own fields what modes of interactions will data structure  until -loop  visual -pf.rci ption  avoidbe productive  the dominant paradigm might well settle contradiction  propose-pl ausiht.e-name like the human into questioning and an sinning each other instead of a specialists  the beings would contain far too much chairman  suppose the group adopts rules for gaining the infoimation  far too inefficiently lepresented. to be able to say floor  what a speaker may do  and how to resolve disputes  we ourselves constitute the desired piogtam'  they would when a topic is being considered  one or two experts might have to discuss  and perhaps cany out. the concept formation recognize it and speak up in the course of their exposition task they would write specialized versions of themselves  they might need to call on other specialists this might be by programs which could do exactly what the beings did to name  by specialty  or simply by posing a new sub-question carry out the task  no more not less  although they would and hoping someone rould recognize ins own relevance and hopefully take much less time  be more customized . this volunteer a suggestion such tiansfers would be more activity is relected to in the sequel as automatic programming 
common at the beginning  when the task is  by assumption  some beings  eg  test  may have several distinct  too geneial for any one member to compiehend as the stieamlined fractions of themselves in the final program. questions form on more specific issues  single individuals beings  eg  propose-plausible-name  which only aided should be able to supply complete solutions if the task is to other beings may not have any con elates in the final construct something   hen the activities of the experts should synthesized code not be strictly verbal. olten. one will recognize his relevance 
to the current situation and ask to tto something  clarify or an experimental system  pup1  was designed and modify or  raiely  create partially implemented pup1 synthesized a concept formation piogiam  similar to  . but the user. who is human  must 
　　what would it mean to simulate the above activity  come up with certain specific answers to some of the beings' imagine seveial little programs  each one modelling a ctitical queues a grammatical infeience ptogram and a different expert what should each program  called a being  simple property list maintenance routine were also generated. be capable of it must possess a coipus of specific facts and a few new beings had to be added to pup1 to synthesize strategies for its designated speciality it must interact via them 
questioning and answering other beings. each being should 
be able to recognize when it is lelevant it must set up and the next section illustrates how the experts might have alter structures  just as the human specialists do. cooperated on the task of writing the concept formation ptogram section   describes the program they produced. 
	next comes the being 	hypothesis 	complex 	but standard 
　　let us ietuin to our meeting of human expeits. to be anatomy later sections explain this  both theoretically and more concrete  suppose their task is to design and code a by examining the behavior of the actual pup1 pool of 1 large computer piogiam a concept formation system. 
                                                                           beings 	the appendix exhibits a typical being. experts who will be useful include scientific programmers  non programming 	psychologists  	system 	hackers  	and 
management personnel what happens in the ensuing 1.exerlsjnteractjng session  when an expert participates  he will either be aiding a collegae in sume difficulty of else transferring a the input/output behaviot of the desned concept tiny  customized bit of his expertise  facts about his field  into formation piogiam is specified in this section  and we a piogrammed function which can do something the final eavesdrop on a simulated group of specialists as they get to code reflects the member s' knowledge  m that sense one way work on wnting it as the presentation of the experts* the session might pioceed is for the specialists to actually do activities becomes moie specific  the te.tder's uiirenily vague the concept formation task as they become familiar with conception of beings will be made less amorphous  because what part of their own expertise is being called upon  and in beings are constrained to cany on appioxtmately the same what ways  they can begin to isolate it. when it is clear discussion as the expeits below do  
1 

　　externally  the concept formation task can be specified as if it can wait. consider the decision about the task followv pictures of structures  bui out of simple geometrical being classificatoiy  tompai auvc  of metncal what is the shapps  will he preser ne after anothei for each such first situation where that decision leally matters  
scene  the concept foimauon piogiam  tall it cf. must guess w h e n - n e x t : this involves a list of alternatives who its name the piesentrr will then tevral the conect name of knows about that  
the stmictuir. c.f must quickly learn to identify simple a l t e r n a t i v e s i know a few tuck'  here if all the structures  arch. tower   and must never make the alternative sequences of activities have the same initial same mistake twice in a row assume  as given  a process subsequence  then do that common subsequence before 
	which extracts a clesciiption of a visual scene 	making the decision 
utilize: in this case  all three begin by partitioning a 
	our group of expeits are given this specification for cf 	domain of elements 
assume that the usei  the financial sponsor  is available for defer: temporarily  replace the task cf by the task of lesolvmg important questions  via messenger  and he may in partitioning a domain  the usei is informed of this.  fact ask questions of the group whenever an expert speaks  now consider the decision about subject specific behavior almost all the others in the room heai him usually only a being tequned few can benefit from what he says  and fewer still care to psych this involves periodically inputting a description of react the conversation in the room might go something like the human subject the following  the suggestive names of the experts are of coder that would mean adjusting the algorithms based 
	course comcidental  	on a vector of parameters 
g e n l m a n a g e r : can anybody here figure out what to w h e n - n e x t this would probably affect the entire code do. what the usei's saying   waves the input/output defer i can't defer this decision someone resolve it specifications in the air  resolve ask the user about it 
pgm m a n a g e r i can he wanly a computer program to ask user phrase this as a yes/no question explain each be written if somebody will expl.un the task  con-cept- alternative to the user for ma tion  to me a little mote cleaily  i'll delegate it messenger that's my job  typcs on teletype  user says 
	propeily 	no  don't simulate different people 
psych permit me to assist you i know all about concept defer the next decision toimatum in fact  my master's thesis. eleven decisions ate ultimately proposed by psych  
pgm m a n a g e r 	wait  the user must be told that we'll be 	and all but one are deferred able to handle the job for him 	info user i have no objections now if someone wants the 
	messenger 	here. i can take that message go on with 	floor 
	your work 	p g m - m a n a g e r 	do any of the other three experts i 
	p g m - m a n a g e r 	we need 	a name for 	 his program. 	mentioned earlier want to speak now  
	somebody get one. please 	pgmmer 	yes i think that the top-level function cf can 
n a m e r how'about  concept   maybe just  cf  let's now be coded ask the user to decide coder give me the arguments and the body of the code. 
messenger  panting  1 just came back from there! p g m m e r there are no known arguments the body is a alright. i'm going user says to call it  cf  call on partition domain 
pgm m a n a g e r now then  i have four people in mind  coder okay i will precede that with a call to an one of whom must take over now in an important way initialize function  and follow it with a call to a 
each of them always wants to do something different. finalize function  which are both defined as nil for 
chooser give me then names and i'll choose the best now is partition-domain simple enough to be one for you 	composed light now and filled in here  
	pgm m a n a g f r 	they 	are 	info obta iner. info-	m a t h e m a t i c i a n noway any realuate. 
	user. pgmmer. and analyst 	coder uh  thanks there the function cf is defined as: 
	chooser 	you four expeits each must justify to me why 	 lambda     initialize   partition-domain   finalize  . 
	you should take contiol now 	a n a l y s t 	remind me to examine the initialization and 
       info o b t a iner we already have some unused finalization functions at the end of our task. if either information  so i guess 1 can wait function is still null  it will be deleted 
       info user let me have the floor! i know what warner i have just put that note into the code for cf. as to do with the usei's specification a comment of type  demon  
       pgmmer well  i suppose 1 could set up some pgmmer can someone advise me of what else to do to  empty  top-level function  er. finish defining this function  
       a n a l y s t marginal profits accruing from my pgm manager each function should have a proper working at this point in time do not warrant... name show the user the names you have picked  and let 
	chooser 	okay  info-user  you seem to be the only 	him choose other ones if he prefers 
	relevant expert 	messenger okay 	the user agrees to all 1 names 
info-user- first thing is for psych to tell us how to info-user somebody  please tell the group how to do actually do concept formation partitioning of a space of examples 
psych there are several decisions to be made  depending on what your independent variables and your a complete script  like the above  was constructed by experimental setup are for example  are we studying one hand in the sequel  this will br refeired to as the protecol. individual  or must oui program adapt to simulate many in all. 1 diffetent expeits were called for 1 speciftcly diffetpnt subjects  must stimulus items be just classified  dealing with inductive inference tasks  and 1 dealing with or classified and ordeied  or classified and ordered and progtamming  managing workers  and communicating with metnzed  are the scenes left m view indefinitely  or just the user near the end ol the protocol  the usei is asked the anient scene  or is even that one just hashed before which of the three types of concept foimation cf is supposed the subject for a limited time  may the subject make ro do he responds  cl assifl  atory only   and the written notes  can he learn from positive instances of the experts discovei that they are finished all the newly created concepts  fiom negative instances  is there to be any code is dumped out onto a fresh hie after hundreds of positive transfer effect...  pages  a concept formation piogtam meeting the user's 
defer: hold on here  we can't swamp the user with lots of specifications had been written the next section will unnecessary questions let's go through each one and see desctibe that program 
detail 
1 
	1.. the program the experts wrote 	1. anatomy .of .synergetic  cooperation 
　　conwdei the buth uf one small ea necessary in the writing of c.f  eg. that of classifying a model's features into three categaties  must. m u s l ' n u t   may   no single specialist at the mrrting rould have had this idea by himself how do intellects mesh  effectively comniuiikate  and unite then powersm' a tentative mechanism  which barely scratches the smfate of this mystery  will be hypothesized the beings in pup1 embody this concept  and are able to reproduce both the experts' discussion and the final cf program 
　　viewing the group of experts as a single entity  what makes it productive  the membeis must be very different in abilities  in order to handle such a complex task  yet similar in basic cognitive structure  in the anatomy of then minds  to 
peimit facilp communications to flow for example  each specialist knows how to direct a progiammer to do some of the things he can do. but the specific facts each expert has under this category must be quite unique similarly  each member may have a set of strategies for ipcognmng ins own relevance to a proposed question  but the centrnts of that knowledge vaires fiom individual to individual the hypothesis is that all the expens can be said to consist of categorized information  where the set of categories is fairly standaid. and indicates the tyfus of questions any expert can be expected to answer an expeit is consideird tyiuvalent to his answeis to several standaid questions each expert has the same mental  parts   it is only the values stored m these parts  then contents  which distinguish him as an individual 
　　aimed with tins dubious view nf intelligence  let us return to the design of beings each being shall have many parts  each posseting a name  a question it deals with  and a value  a protedure capable of answering that question  hencefoith.  part  will be used in tins technical sense when a being asks a question  it is leally just one part who is asking tn fact  it must be that the value subpait of some part can't answer am question without further assistance he may not know enough to call on specific other beings  so he lers anyone respond who feets relevant   but he should of ways specify what being part the question should be answered by by analogy with the experts  each eeing will have the same  universal'' set of types of parts  will answer the same kinds of queries   and this uniformity should permit painless intercommunication since the paradigm of the meeting is 
questioning and answering  the names of the parts should cover all the types of questions one expert wants to ask another each part of each being will have implicit access to this list it may ask only these types of questions each being 
　　suppose that the target program reads in the above should not have access to the list of all beings in the system scene fragment and lues to match it to the above a r c h requests should be phrased in terms of what is wanted  rarely model the must relations should all be present yes  is the name of the answerer specified in advance.  by the scene does contain  supports a c  and  supports analogy; the human speaker is not aware of precisely who is b c . next  the m u s t n o t relations must be absent from in the room  when he feels inadequate  he asks for help and the scene sure enough   touches a b  isn't there so the hopes someone responds  another point is that beings are model and scene are consistent  and the program announces not a recursive concept  like actors 1  are  a part of a that its guess is arch if the user venues this guess  then 
                                                                           being is a brief collection of knowledge  usually procedural   the m a y set of the arch model is augmented with the not another being  a collection of beings  also called a relations  blue c  and  touches c d   and the 
community  a pool  the system  or a group  is also not itself a 
objects set is augmented with  d   
being there are no stuntuttd clusters of beings 
　　if the usri dentes that the scene is an arch  cf sees if there are any letations in the arch moclrts may set which once again the concept of a pool of beings is that many do not occur in the scene if so. one of them  e.g.  entities coexist  each having a complex stiuctuie. but that   p a r a l l e l a b   will be itamfenrd  mm the may to the structure does not vary from being to being this idea has m u s t set if no such featuir eststed  the program would analogues in many fields transactional analysis in psychology  look for a feature prespni in the scene but not mentioned in anatomy in medicine  modular design in archiierhtute any set of the arch model  eg.  touches c d  . and inseit if into the m u s t n o t set in either case  the user how can we test out this idea  we must build a pool of would be asked what  he tine name was  and that model beings  a modular program which will internet with a human would have its may set augmented by any new features in user and genetate the cf program recasting the idea into the scene and by any fe.ituies nu the tiue-name model's opeiational terms  we arrive at this procedure for writing a m u s t or m u s t n o t sets which luntiadicted the scene. pool of beings 
1 


　　a set of 1 ubiquitous  questions were chosen  lepiesnitihg everything one expert might want to ask another at least. they natuially encompass those questions which were asked during the simulated meeting  hence should be sufficient for geneiatmg cf q this universal set of beinp  paits  is listed in appendix i the reader is urged to glance at this now  and refer to it whenever a being part is specifically mentioned 
　　each of the 1 beings in pup1 should have had a value for each pait  in reality  only 1%. of these 1 slots weie filled in  only 1% were actually neceuaiy to generate   i   a value for a pait is simply a lisp pmgiam which can answer that question  otten by asking questions of the same being. of other beings  and of the user a pait may also assrit some fact  create or modify some structure  including demons.  beings  and parts of beings  appendix i shows the values stored under each part for the typical being named  info-obiainep  
　　the set of parts breaks into three rough categories  1  those parts which are useful in deciding which being gets connoi   1  those which are used once the being gains contiol  and  1  those useful only to answer the user's questions and veep him of lented the next section describes categoiies i and 1  the section after that explicates the third categoiy of bemp pans 
1 j..cqnjrnl in the pup1 system 
　　at the humans* meeting  only one expeit spoke at a time; in the beings community  only one being has contiol at any given moment he uses his parts to do things  ask  create  modify   and yields control either voluntarily or through intemiption 
in slightly more procedural teims  the scenario is as follows one parl of a being senses its televance  often the iden or effects parts  which are united with all such pails to form a large production system  if more than one being wants control at any time a special bring. 
chooser  seizes contiol momentauly he asks each competing being to evaluate its when part  to see how senously it needs to go immediately if some beings are still tied for hrst place  he asks them to evaluate their c o m p l e x i t y parts  to see which is the simplest if any stiff ne for top. one is randomly chosen in any case  the winner is then passed contiul onrr in coutrl  a being arranges some of us parts in tome unet and evaluates them for example  the arcs pajt n i*:ht he hist  if it asks for some aiguments which no bring has mipplied. then the whole being might decide to fail some parts  when evaluated  might create a new being  might ask questions which require this whole process to repeat iccuisively. etc this  asking  really means hioadcasting a request to one or two parts of every being  for example  is theie a known fast way of gronking tovess  would be asked as a search for a being whose c o m p l e x i t y part indicated speed  and whose effects part contained a production with a template matching  gronking toves  a list of the tespondets would be returned  incidentally  gerund would recognize this  but latei give up when no one could tecognue  gronk loves   the questioner might pose some new questions directly to these beings  might turn control over to them directly  etc one way or another  the being eventually relinquishes control if it had no direct successor in mind  all the beings are asked if they want to take over there will always be some being who will take over; the general management types of beings are always able - but reluctant -- to do so 
　　how does each being decide which parts to evaluate  and in which order  once it gains contiol1 the answer might seem to be difficult or tedious for whoevet wntes beings  since it might vary from being to being in fact  it doesn't! the commitment to a univeisal set of being parts is inefficient in some ways  each being needed only a thud of all the parts  bur allows for some simplifications tight here what paits should be evaluated  and in what order  when a 
being gains control  this decision depends pnmanly on the types of parts present in the being  not on then values but every being has the same anatomy  so one single algorithm can assemble any being's parts into an executable lisp function moreover  this assemby can be done when the system is hist loaded  or when a new being is first created   and need only be redone for a being when the values of its parts change such changes aie lare expeits are not often open minded the precise algorithm is sketched in the box below the parts useful here include arcs  demons  
	m e t a code  	c omm ent s  	arc-check  	and 
reou1sites 

1 


1 keeping the user lnforiitrcl 
　　in the earlier conversation excetpts. the simulated human user had no trouble whatever understanding what the simulated experts asked him in the actual programmed pup1 system  the human who was siting at the teletype quite rarely undeistood what was wanted by the beings he frequently had to intenupt !hrn  and ask them questions about who was in tontrol  why  what he was trying to do  what had tecently tianspnrd. etc these ideally can be phiased as simple lernevals and fvals of active beings' part* the benig parts most often called for by the user are the simple one time  m inn it ion  templates these include 
w h a t   mow  whv  and affects foi theoretical reasons explained latei  the syuthesmd piogtam  cf. was writen as a pool of bes ns'lt  by pup1  but not during the piotocol actually  a foituitou*  bug  m pup1 created this mtnguiiig situation  although us question answering ability is infenoi to pupfi. the fact that it has any such power was tuipnsing to the authoi in other words  one can inteirupt the taiget piogiam as it is lunnmg and ask questions any being un the tnntml stack will provide fully instantiated amwms to any of us 1 allowable queries  its parts   all othei r*einj;s will provide only hypothetical answers as an example  roimdei this actual excerpt of a human using the cf piogiarn synthesized by pup1  some liberty has been taken with the english; e.g.  the user really types what*  not what atr you  frvw♀*  *     simply means  guess the name of the scene with these objects and relations  of types in ifoln i. the usei in boldface. 

　　here is the in we excerpt  but with the user interrupting occasionally.  ii:  signifies he has interrupted  and  ok.  signifies  co back to work now. cf.  
ii: what are you doing  
cf divide a domain tnto subdomains  using specialised version of partition-domain 
how  cf: 	by building up the partition gradually  
	by adding one 'scene  name* pan 	ok. 
cf: ready to accept hand new scene 
user:       a b   block a   wedge b   touches a b   
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　v: what are you doing  cf break obj ccts puce off input scene to examine 
what code i* ihr current reing goinp to execute  
cf 	the meta  cde is { adr argl  loafs to  a 	b . 	ok. 
cf not an 	arch 	u: 	why  
c f 	the arch must adation  supports a b  
	is contradu ted in the 	scene 	ok. 
cf not a town might be a row my guess is row what is it realty'' u: why are you asking  
cf: i must resolve it now. but can't  so i ask user ok what you wanted is: nothing u: what are you doing now  
cf: co though space oj concept names  and make user 

　　it would be aesthetically pleasing to restnet all entities in the system to be beings however  this would cause an infinite regiess  as each part of each being would have parts which had patts to stop this  one ran assert that at some finit  level  all construets are primitive actors  for example  set this level to zero  beinp set i! to one actors themselves a * pnmitive. but only fui fi of beings can be foi this leasnn  beings can not he viewed as a convergent recuiwve defimiinn  as can actors 
　　suppose ii weie decired that the only autniiomous entities possessing contiol abilities were beings in particular  we forbid any plain jumtions to exist in the case of an automatic piugiammmg task  the beings would have to write new beinps  not new i. isp timet mm the tai et program would thus itself be a community of brim;* in older to fill in all the parts  a vast amount of superfluous infoimation would be collected these supplementaly facts can be viewed as a standardized  oigani1ed body of ttr*umrntali m  a formatted system of comments tacked onto each bein♀ piodured 
　　which beings would write the new beings1 looking back at our inteidisciphnary experts  we see that each expert is responsible for distilling his own essential contribution  which is then encoded by a programme  perhaps each being should be able to dnect const miction of new  speftahied being*  which lelate to it if no being lelates to a task  then it can't be coded  if  rveial lespond  they should cooperate this ability is in teahty the specializations part of each bring  s.re appendix 1  the being which actually does the creation  coder  m the experimental system is almost ti ivial  getting very precise instiuctioiu from other beings 
since the pool must communicate with the user  some 
beings must translate quasi english phrases into calls on 
brings drawing again on out experts analogy  we icquire that each being leco nize his own televance so translation is merely the act of asking the whole pool  who can recognize this    collecting the respondei s  having them decide who should take contiol. and letting the winnei do the translation. most communication is done as if it. too  were such a translation activity 
　　one bias is the  ejection of debugging as a fundamental programming tool it is felt to be worth the extra effort to make the system'* internal model of the cuirrnt partial target proviam cor ret debugging demands detective work  examing one's earliei effoits lot flaws  foi details which have been o vet looked any tuelcss system should not ignote details  but tathei deter them  asseitmg a warning to this effect when it does so piociastinatiuu is quite valuable  in pupg  much effort is spent defeinng any unresolvable decision. undefmable uniesolvable decisions must cause a backtrack point to be reluctantly set up anothei prejudice is that most carelessness bugs can be eliminated by this deferral  feed-forward  and precise record-keeping humans 
1 
depend on then adaptability to compensate for limitations in then brain hardwaie. beitheir is no need for an automatic programming system it so. these busses ate not inherent in thr beings formulation  but only in the design of the pup1 system  and in the mind of the anitbor  
　　to clartfy what beings are and are not  they are contrasted with some other ideas fkamfs are sufficiently amoiphous to subsume brings in philosophy. frames are meanl to model peiception  and intentionally tely on implicit detault values. beings intentionally avoa linching decisions by default this is also the diheieiue between hacker and pup1 since pup1 wrnts stnutuird progiams. it should be distinguished from macro expansion macro proceduies expand mechanically expamksequence in1 in1  =  sequence expanti in   expanding    brings could use mfoimation gleaned duing expansion of in  to improve the way m1 was handled actors  unlike brings  have no fixed striutuir imposed  and do not bioadcast then messages  they specify who gets pach message  by name  to a buieauctaty  
　　beings subsume  inefficiently  many popular ai features  the demolish ation will be briief a demon could be teplaced by a bring whose arc check ptedicate was the tiiggerinp: piedicate. whose when pan was high enough to epstitr firqurnt attention  and whose met a code part was fhr body of the demon an assertion m an associative 
data n e t w o t n u m be a being with only an iden pait filled in  when it ir ov.ni/.es its lelevanre. a fully instantiated assrition n. irtujnecl a funition is equivalent to a being with only a mm a code. arcs  and eval arcs parts; one knows almost nothing about it beioie executing it the inefltciencies should be clear whenever a being throws  a question open to the flooi.  who tan    it takes an amount of lime piopoi tonal to the niimbfi of beings in the system. one would intioriuce this huge time factoi by teplacmg any of the above mechanisms by beings 
　　the numf'f  ol bring pans seems to indicate the balance between uniformity and stiuctlite in the community this was huulied mi as point  1  of seition -i a small universal set of being paits is netessai y to presei ve some of the advantages   | tuutoimtty  easy addition of knowledge to the system  easy inter-being communication  this demands that the numbei of pans o  each being be. say  under 1 but it is the complex ttrtiuiire of a being which makes complex behavmis leasable  including flexible   ommunitation as well as viable final products so each being should have many parts  say at least ten tins lange. 1   ||q|i *  1  is wide foi the domain of automatic ptogiamming in other domains  it may be nairow or disappear altogether this would indicate that brings could not br used eflrclively foi those tasks 
1. experimental results 
　　two nf the most significant tfwestions for automatic programming systems are what progiams ate synthesized  and what kinds ol things the user must tell the system 
1. cliar.ii ter nf the djalngiicjfejutt'n  'seijh  lpjl p1 
　　by lumping all the parts of the pup1 system together conceptually  the interaction is seen .is a iltalogae between a human user and an automatic programming system the level of detail maintained in the earliei polyloguc  discussions among the expeits  olnuued what the human actually saw and irspondrd below is the same exertpt .   was piesented in section   . but as the user sitting at a teletype actually saw it these weir the initial few line* of  n actual 1-page long dialogue in section  .  this rxiript was presented the way expeits  the same way the pup1 beings  discussed it 
pup 1 want any task 
user write a progiam winch does concept formation 
pup: i am about to wntr a progiam foi the task specialized kind of concrpt-f 1pmat1n 
pup give me a proper name for this piogiam 
 i suggest cf or concept  
	user 	cf 
pup must cf mimic diffeirnt human subjects1 
	user 	no 
pup i am temporarily replacing the task 'vpeoahred kind ot concept-formation  by the simpler task  specialized kind of partition-a-domain  
　　from the above  one gets the tiue impression that the dialogue was fairly tedious choosing  names and resolving design decision  unit the uspi's mam iule there were  in sum  about wo such responses involved m genrj.mng cf l!  ciucial responses were ako nrcrssjty  whrie the usei supplies needed information that was noi explicitly mpiested by the beings a few of these key lines .up write  1 program which docs concept foi motion. an  clement of the domain of stimuli  is a matte scene. the guessing process is one of searching  not computing. terminate the loop iff any model feature is incompatible with the scene's features 
　　t h r translation mechanism is simply the iden parts of all the beings each such part contains a few productions  which are united with those of the othei beings into one laige production system the left side of a production is a template which is matched against the given phrase the right side is a small piogram to be executed in case the phrase is recognized generally  that piogiam simply says to translate some subphrase of the phiase  and then  probably  pass contiol to the being which this is in the iden part of while not up to the  state of the ait  in natuial language processing  this is both adequate and laithful to the spuit of distiibtiting problems over all the beings | y making them parts  so it is each being's duty to know a lntlr about them 
　　during the coinse of the dialogue  pup1 originates the idea of a m u s t / m u s t n o t / m a y stiuctuting of each model's features here is how the user sees that portion of the synthesis notice that only the frist user comment is other than a simple choice 
pup how do we know when to teimmate this loop  
user terminate iff any featute in model-features js incompatible with scene.featuies 
pup pup wants user to type in name for specialized version of contradicts 
user call it imposs 
pup move cursor to imposs type of c o n t r a d i c t s i cati no longer defer this decision a contradiction arises from featuies who have probability-1 of occurring b: conn adiction arises from featuies who have probability*  of occurring c contiadiction arises from features who have probability -'-1 of occumng please type some of a.b.c. or type defei.  . ot details 
user a. p.   tui c are all relevant 
pup i tecommend that each model's trituirs be structured 
 along i dimension  into these  . pieces present  which will hold features whose oicuneuce should have probability- i. absent  whi'.h will hold featuies whose occuireike should have piubahilityxfv and either  which will hold features whose ocnuirtuc should have any other probability please iypr back yes. no  unsure. details  and/oi   new names 
user 	yes 	call 	them 	must be present  m u s t n o t be present. may-be present 
pup: too long nicknamed must  mustmit. may 
pup located    