 

this paper introduces a computer cystem for color picyure processing and its principal features. first the hardware aspectb are explained  including the basic characteristics of i/o devices. the interactive feature of our system is singled out  and it is developed to a system concept called  color picture analysis and display system  the color analysis method and its software are presented and discussed  since the correct recognition of color information is important in color picture processing. this paper slso contains some methods and applications of effective use of color information in picture processing. they include  1  domain identification by color information  1  color effect method  1  color separation  1  conversational retouching of color  1  pseudo-color displaying and their applications. 
　　1. introduction 

picture processing by computer has been of considerable interest in computer science and robotics research. most efforts in picture processing have been concerned with monochromatic pictures* but  as everyone realizes  actual scenes and pictures all contain color  and color information plays important roles in human perception and recognition of scenes and pictures. this suggests the usefulness of color information in picture processing by computer. in ito 1  we have discussed some basic problems and a conceptual framework for color picture processing by computer. we stated there the need of an experimental computer system for color picture processing and emphasized the importance of  computer-oriented chromatics . this paper contains an overall description of our computer system for color picture processing  the principal idea of color analysis  the use of color information to picture processing and some aspects of their applications  
　　　1. a computer system for color plxrfeorre processing a computer system for color picture processing should be equipped to facilitate computer acquisition of color pictures  computer analysis of color information  feature extraction by effective use of color information  structural analysis of color pictures and interactive processing complex color scenes and pictures. in developing our system we initially encountered the lack of efficient real-time input devices of color pictures. thus we started from constructing efficient realtime input devices which include a highspeed multi-head color film reader and a digital color tv scanner. in this section we introduce our computer system for color picture processing with several color picture input/output devices. 1 a computer system for color picture 
processing 
our computer system for color picture processing consists of a computer complex of melc1 and pdp-1 and several i/o devices. a set of interactive color software are available on pdp-1  and melc1 enables us to use a picture compiler  picture preprocessing routines  list processing language lisp/m  sl deduction theorem prover. 
figure 1 shows the main body of our computer system for color picture processing   which works as a computer complex under a control of network handler* 

1 



1 . 1 d i g i t a l color tv scanner the multi-head color f i l m reader can read filmed picture data  so that it is often inappropriate as an on-line picture input device. for such a s i t u a t i o n v/e have developed a d i g i t a l color tv scanner with the characteristics of figure 1 and table 1. 
table 1 shows the charactcristics of the gray-scale film writer  
1. an interactive color picture analysis and display system 

cessing. in this section we introduce an interactive feature of our system called  color picture analysis and display 
1 nov; we proceed to explain the applications of our computer system to interactive picture processing color analysis and the 

1. methods of color analysis and specification 
our computer system for color picture processing enables us to process color pictures in an interactive manner. some of elementary functions are already -mentioned in the preceding section. in this section we discuss more details of color analysis and specification  and the next section explains some aspects of effective use of color information in picture processing. before going onto computer processing ot color pictures  we need to analyse and recognise color information obtained from color picture devices like the multi-head color film reader and digital color tv scanner because the correct recognition of color is important in the effective use of color information to picture processing. a number of color analysis and specification methods are known in the classical theory of color science. these methods are also useful in our situation  but we need some new considerations to adopt them  since they are hunan-orlented.we aim at computer-oriented chromatics based on our computer system and picture devices  but they are not-perhaps  should not be-different conceptually from the classical one. 
1 basic concepts of color analysis and 

　　specification by -computer the computer analysis and specification of color information may vary in each application. but the following methods will be applicable as the standard procedures in 
various applications: color analysis 
1 color comparison procedure 
this is the color identification method of comparing with the standard color chips. this method corresponds to the color appearance system. 
1 chromaticity analysis procedure 
this is the method of analysing color by chromaticity diagrams. 
color specification 
	1 color quantities 	hue lightness chroma 
1 xyz specification 
1 triangular representation 
1 color band 
 1 color difference chart all of these methods are some modified versions or extensions of the classical methods in color science. some features of these methods will be explained below. however the readers should notice that we are not concerned with strict and precise analysis of color but we are interested in approximate and convenient methods which are useful in correct color recognition necessary for picture analysis and recognition. according to our experiences a single method is not sufficient for various applications  so that we listed a 
number of typical methods developed and used by us. 
the f i l t e r characteristics and light source of color film reader and color tv scanner are different from the standard ones in color science.but if we know the optical characteristics of the given filters and the light source  we can derive the standard stimulus value. this is also possible in an approximate sense  since those characteristics is known approximately in our situation. taking account of the theoretical backgrounds from color science  our color analysis software is developed both on pdp-1 and melcom-1. 1 color specification methods 

we explain our color specification methods implemented in color analysis software. they ere classified into the numerical specification and the diagram specification.  1  numerical specification in order to express the color information as numerical quantities we use the following quantities: 
a color quanties 
the hue lightness and saturation are three standard color quantities.these quantites will be computed by the regular triangle for color specification. 
this is shown in figure 1 below. 
b ziz specification in a rough approximation the optical density from picture devices may be used as a first approximation to xyz values* 

1 
the precise values corresponding to cis standard will be also computed  since v/e know the cie-xyz characteristics of the wratten filters. 
 ii dia';ram specification 
the following diagram specifications are proposed and implemented in our color analysis software. they include some non-standard ones. 
a standard triangle specification there are the retail ar triangle method and the right-angled triangle method as in figure 1. r 1.1   
e dynamic projection of color space the diagram specification is intended to see the projection of color distri-
bution in color space. tie use of high performance graphic display will allow us to see the projection of color space dynamically. 
1 elementary operations on color space 
 i  scalar operation 
example: y=ar +bg + cb 
 ii  color vector arithmetic 
every color will be represented as a vector in a color space  so thut we can construct a system of color arithmetic. 
1 

　　　　　1. use of color nformation in picture processing there are many possibilities for effective use of color information in picture processing. they range over from simple cases to complex and difficult cases- most researchers would have interest in rather difficult and complex problems such as recognition of color aerial photographs  recognition of color block worlds identification of human faces etc.their developments are interesting  but they will not meet direct applications in an industrial situation according to the present state of picture processing technology- here we a different application is the computer analysis of colored maps of land utility. also the detection of color irregularity in color printing and color painting can be done as a simple application of color separation. 
1 color effect method and its application 

the color effect method is an effective method devised by this author. this method was originally proposed to detect some defects of mask patterns by an effective application of color information to picture recognition. figure 1 is an example to explain this method. 

with direct applications. 1 color separation and its applications using our color analysis software we can separate and identify colors and this function is often needed in various applications of color picture processing. the color separation itself finds several direct applications. figure 1 shows an example in the automation of color textile printing. 

the pseudo-color display of pictures is successfully used in analysing remote aensing data and in designing structured 
patterns.the assignment of pseudo-color to each pixel and its evaluation are im-
figure 1 vector representation of color effect method 
effect method by color vector analysis in 
the color space. 
1 conversational retouching of color pictures 
the conversational retouching of color is useful in picture reproduction and digital 
film writing by computer  since it eliminates the wasteful process and feedback 
which require optical treatments. the f o l l owing functions are necessary to implement the conversational retouching system. portant in this case. there are many case studies in remote sensing. but no general 
procedure is known to find optimal pseudocolor assignments. also the complexity 
measures and some decree of picture beauty 
are necessary in color pattern design to evaluate picture quality.the degree of 
beauty bb in color science can be effect-
ively used from the standpoint of color harmony. this bb can be defined as 
where w is the degree of order and q is the degree of complexity.this quantity can be computed by moon-spencer formula in color science.this kind of measures 
w i l l be interstinff from a theoretical 
1 

standpoint. there are several possibilities to extend this idea  using information numbers and complexity measures in information theory and pattern recognition.the following are some of their examples: 
 1  color entropy based on color histgram 
 1  topological number in color pictures 
 1  heuristic picture complexity measure 
 1  computational complexity measures 
1 domain identification by color 
the domain identification is often important in scone ealysis. according to the suggestion of human perception the use of color information often helps to solve this problem i f the domains are identified 
by color. the domain identification of color block v/orlds are often difficult in 
gray scale treatment when the shadow problem is comprised in a /riven situation.the chromaticity analysis and the minimum distance clustering are useful for this pro-
blem. in figure 1 we show a simple domain identification  based on the chromaticity analysis and its effective application. 
