 
　　　this paper discusses the theoretical basis of the formalist used as a foundation for owl  a system for representing and processing conceptual knowledge. this foraallsa atteapts to capture the expressive power of natural language by adopting the underlying representational conventions and  conceptual models  of english. the foraallsa is built around specialization  which is perceived to be the key organizing principle of english at a 
　　　deep conceptual level. the use of specialization in combination with another low-level structural device  reference  leads to a slaple but powerful structure  the concept  which is ideal both for the representation of a broad spectrum of conceptual knowledge and for computation on existing machines equipped with large  high-speed  random-access aeaories. 
introduction 
　　　owl is a systea for representing and processing conceptual knowledge  intended for applications requiring interaction with huaans in natural language  at a human-like level of competence. development of owl has been proceeding for the past two years within the automatic programming group of project mac under the direction of wllliam a. martin. it is his successor to an earlier systea called mapl. 
　　　this paper discusses the theoretical basis of the owl formalism for conceptual knowledge  which serves as a foundation for the owl system. the purpose of this formalism is to allow conceptual   i . e .   non-imagistic  knowledge to be expressed in terms of concepts and connections between concepts; in this respect  it does not differ froa such existing formalisms as quilllan's seaantlc memory or schank's conceptual dependency networks. it is quite different  however  in respect to details of structure  notation  and computer impleaentation. among the advantages we expect to obtain froa the owl foraallsa are: 
　　　 1  despite its simplicity and uniformity  we expect it to be suitable for representing a broad spectrua of conceptual knowledge at all levels of abstraction and detail  in a  natural  way; 
　　　 1  it provides an organizational framework that should allow processing tasks required for comprehension of natural language to be carried out effectively and efficiently on a serial computer; 
　　　 1  its organizational fraaework is such that its performance should not deteriorate significantly as the size of its knowledge base and the scope of its applicability increase  given an adequate amount of high-speed  random-access memory; 
　　　 1  the notation for it will be easy for 
english speakers to learn and use; and 
　　　 1  its structures and notation are especially effective for dealing with very large knowledge bases. 
　　　there are several distinct aspects of the owl foraallsa which we bight examine. this paper focuses primarily on the structural aspect  but also looks briefly at the notatlonal  english  and operational  i.e. implementation  aspects. for further description of the foraallsa  see martin 
and hawkinson. 
　　　to have any reasonable chance of realizing our goals for owl in the near future  we have f e l t it wise to structure knowledge in owl in 
accordance with the principles of organization of the human cognitive systea  insofar as we understand them  even though the continual advance of our understanding mandates continual evolution of the owl formalism. since auch of the significant evidence we have of this organization 
derives froa our understanding of the structure of natural language  we have tried to use those l i n g u i s t i c insights to develop a foraallsa that would capture the expressive power of natural language without sacrificing computational efficiency. we felt we could succeed in this only by adhering as closely as possible to the representational conventions and conceptual models of one particular natural language  english  even 
for the representation of  deep-level  structures  
	i.e.  	structures at the level of schank's 
conceptual dependency networks or minsky's frames. an obvious advantage of a foraallsa based on the structure of english is that translation back and forth between it and english might be done with relative ease; this is important not only for the owl system as ultimately developed  but for the development process itself. 
　　　we do not yet know enough about the structure of english to have a definitive blueprint for our owl foraallsa. we have had  in fact  to decide among competing alternative solutions to a host of 
representational probieas by applying principles of econoaical systea design - being careful  however  not to compromise our primary guideline of choosing representations that are readily mappable into english and vice versa. the structural organization we have arrived at as a result of our design efforts seems so simple and 
natural  and the evidence for its pervasive use throughout natural language seems so intuitively 
convincing  that we feel it must hold profound implications for psychological models of human 
cognition. for example  it might be used as the basis for a strongly predictive model of word phrase association. 
　　　though the owl formalism has been implemented in li1p  owl does not in fact adopt or build upon 
1 

lisp's model of how data should be structured  namely  in terms of tree-like l i s t structures and property l i s t s of atonic symbols. rather  the owl formalism provides an alternative scheae for the low-level   sub-frame   structuring of knowledge  hence data  that is  1 believe  as fundanental in character as that provided by lisp. this formalism sight prove a suitable foundation not only for the owl systen  but also for other highlevel systeas like moore and newell's merlin or any of the recently proposed  frame  systeas. 
the theoretical basis for the owl foraalisn 
　　　in developing the owl fornalisn for conceptual knowledge  the f i r s t big issue that confronted us was how to classify and  index  the enormous number of concepts owl would need for huaan-like competence in natural language. we started with three fundanental principles: 
　　　 1  that essentially all conceptual knowledge should be represented in terns of a unifora  simple  building block   which we call a concept; 
　　　 1  that the set of all concepts should be arranged into a single conceptual taxonoay  concept tree  in such a way that individual concepts would  inherit  from superior concepts ＊ost of their properties  especially  betaproperties'* that indicate what to do with concepts in various interpretive contexts; 
　　　 1  that the vast bulk of the conceptual taxonoay should be deternined  derivatively   so that a few tens of thousands of individual classification decisions night suffice to determine a conceptual taxonoay containing 
millions of concepts. 
almost a corollary of the second principle is that the concept tree should have a low  relatively unlfora  fan-out   where alaost all concepts have fewer than  say  ten iaaedlate subconcepts   since it is unreasonable to expect a concept to inherit aost of its properties fron concepts significantly ＊ore general than i t . a low  relatively unlfora fan-out also offers important structural and computational advantages. 
　　　we adopted these fundamental principles primarily because we judged that a foraalism based upon then would simplify the task of building a large owl knowledge base just enough to bake that task feasible. however  we would not be surprised to find that these principles were also fundamental to the organization of human conceptual memory  which  after a l l   must acquire and maintain an even larger knowledge base. 
　　　underlying the owl formalism for conceptual knowledge  and hence the structure of a concept  are two basic structural devices: specialization and reference. properly utilized  these devices permit the formalism to satisfy our three fundamental principles  and they also give it great expressive power and characteristics that make it efficient to work with.  to eliminate a possible source of confusion  note that when we speak of the structure of a concept  we understand it to be located at some one fixed place within a particular copy of a particular knowledge base  though it may be referred to in any number of places.  
specialization 
　　　specialization is a means for identifying a concept uniquely by a pair of entities: the concept's genus  a superior concept in the concept tree  and its speciallzer  aost often also a 
　　　concept.* every concept in owl must  in fact  be identified by specialization  and thus a concept is often itself referred to as a specialization  of i t s genus . the significance  if any  of a concept's specializer cannot be determined according to a few simple  set rules; indeed  it may be arbitrary  though it typically depends on some generalization of the concept at or near the level of the genus. 
　　　the fact that every concept must have exactly one genus does not mean that a concept cannot be  a kind of  aore than one thing. 	actually  as we shall later see  a concept can have any nuaber of 
distinct characterizations. this aeans that a genus could be viewed as simply a characterization singled out to provide identification for and primary classification of a concept. the choice of a genus is nevertheless very inportant  since in practice  aost low-level interpretive decisions 
as to what to do with a given concept bust  for 
reasons of serial processing efficiency  depend on i t s genus alone. fortunately  as we will 
demonstrate below for english  a natural language expresses many concepts in terns of an appropriate genus and specializer  and aost of the rest can be determined through the use of simple  productive  language-specific rules. only a relatively snail nuaber of hard choices reaaln for the conceptual taxonomlst  but it is laportant that he bake them wisely  though on philosophical grounds  it seems unlikely that there is one true conceptual taxonoay . 
　　　specialization is directly evident in natural language; in fact  i believe it to be the aost important technique of signification  concept identification  within natural language. let us look at some english phrases that identify concepts by means of specialization. in our examples below  we will underscore the part of each phrase that identifies the genus. the rest of each phrase  minus simple connectives like  of    as    than   and sometimes  to    for   and   i n     identifies the specializer  only because we have deliberately excluded extraneous modifiers  such as leading articles  that apply to the phrase as a whole . of course  a genus or a specializer can itself be a specialization. hit the ball  hitting the ball 
get a book  get  a job  get to go  get lost  get  wet  get up look up the name  put off my decision 
* i t has been observed that the term specializer can be misunderstood by persons who are just becoming familiar with owl terminology. it should be understood to aean  that coaponent of a concept which makes it special  or  that coaponent of a concept which makes it a particular specialization of the genus   aot as  that which produces the specializations of a concept . 

1 


let us now generalize from some of these sample phrases in terns of parts of speech  ignoring for now the possibility of exceptional cases. verb direct object 
verb i n f i n i t i v e   verb adjective  verb particle  preposition  verb secondary clause 
noun nominal  nominal   o f nominal  genitive nominal adjective infinitive  noun adjective  as  adjective  as  nominal preposition nominal  stem suffix 
　　　what criteria have we used here to recognize an english phrase as a specialization  first  the phrase must be meaningful as a concept  the test for which is that the phrase as a whole must denote something that could be further described. secondly  the phrase must have a sub-phrase which one can say the whole phrase is  a kind of   though perhaps only in some very abstract sense  e.g.   in trouble  is a kind of  in  only in some abstract sense of the word  in  ; the maximal such sub-phrase  e.g.   on top  rather than  on  in the phrase  on top of the table   identifies the genus of the phrase. thirdly  the phrase must contain another sub-phrase which  when properly 
interpreted in context  combines with the genus to identify  independent of the context  the concept represented by the phrase as a whole; this other sub-phrase  	if it exists  is the speciallzer. 	a 
couple of examples should help to clarify this last criterion. the phrase  the red book   though it satisfies the f i r s t two criteria  does not satisfy the third  since neither  the  nor  red  nor  the red  combines with genus  book  to unambiguously identify  independent of context  the book being referred to. the phrase  my father  on the other hand  would be a specialization since it has a genus  identified by 
 father   and a speciallzer  the referent of  my   presumably determinable from context   which together identify the concept  though not necessarily its referent  uniquely without need of context. a useful diagnostic for english phrases that are specializations is that  in most cases  both the genus and speciallzer will carry stress  with the stress on the speciallzer at least as 
strong as that on the genus  when no word in the phrase is being stressed for the sake of emphasis . 
　　　in actuality  a large proportion of english grammatical constructions may be treated as particular forms of specialization  that is  different syntactic patterns that all do basically the same thing  namely  identify a concept by specifying its genus and speciallzer. analyzing english constructions as specializations  where possible  often obviates their analysis in terms of traditional grammatical categories  such as parts of speech. where it is possible to analyze an english phrase as a specialization that  matches  a  sufficiently specific  concept in the knowledge base  there is no real need to also match it to some more abstract grammar rule. 
　　　indeed  if we view the genus  speciallzer  and syntactic properties of each generic concept in an owl knowledge base as a grammar rule  we can envision a conceptual grammar which  for a large knowledge base  could easily include hundreds of thousands of such rules. in a conceptual grammar  idioms would be rules  not exceptions to rules. a conceptual grammar acknowledges and emphasizes the essentially idiomatic character  at every level  of natural language as used  whereas traditional grammars have tended more to emphasize the essential regularities that can be abstracted from 
instances of its use. from our point of view  in fact  the principal goal of a traditional grammarian is to approximate a large conceptual grammar by a grammar of relatively few rules expressed in some particular formalism  a task of 
immense d i f f i c u l t y . traditional grammars  even if they could be realized  would not be as satisfactory for owl as a more straightforward conceptual grammar. because most of what is needed for a conceptual grammar is already required to be in the knowledge base for purposes of conceptual modeling  it would almost certainly be less work to create a conceptual grammar for a large knowledge base than to program the mapping between owl conceptual structures and structures produced by a parser for some traditional grammar. 
　　　thus far  we have analysed as particular forms of specialization only those english words and phrases wherein both genus and speciallzer are manifest. however  for the sake of uniformity  we would like to treat monomorphemic words as specializations and also many specific phrases and constructions that fail to express either the genus or the speciallzer or both. thus  we typically treat the concept corresponding to a 
1 


monomorpheaic wo* d as some appropriate genus specialized by the written syabol for that word  e.g.  the concept spider as the concept insect specialized by  spider.  non-word aorpheaes  such as   - i n g   are treated siallarly. we call such concepts syabol aeanlngs.  concepts specialized by concepts  on the other hand  are said to be classified: in this case  the speclaiizer bay be referred to as a classifier.  an idlomatlc concept like  hot dog  is dealt with in a way that is soaewhat analogous to the treatment of syabol aeanlngs; in particular   hot dog  is treated as the concept sandwich specialized by the concept consisting of concept dog specialized by concept hot.  note that there is another teaning of  hot dog  that would require the concept skier in place of the concept sandwich.  more generally  we have observed a dlachronic tendency for concepts to becoae identified in english by their specializes  e.g.  capital letter  by  capital  and  new york city  by  new york   where both forms are in common use  and  general officer  by  general   where the f i r s t fora  the one revealing the genus  is now archaic. as martin points out  this tendency to identify a concept by its speclaiizer is just a special case of the widespread  aore general phenoaenon in english of a concept being identified  naaed  by some other  usually  closely related  concept. 
　　　we could continue to exhibit here successively aore elaborate foras of specialization  but that would take us beyond the scope of this paper and into martin's paper  which presents a far aore comprehenslve theory of english. as it is  our treataent above of  spider  and  hot dog  cannot be argued here to be anything aore than conventional; a deeper justification could not possibly be given without that aore coaprehenslve theory. 
　　　we have defined and discussed specialization as a beans for identifying concepts  but specialization bay be equally viewed as a beans for classifying concepts. both the genus and speclaiizer of a concept contribute to that concept's classification. the contribution of the genus is readily apparent- the gross structure of the concept tree can  in fact  be defined as the set of ail mappings from concepts to their genuses  or  alternatively  froa concepts to their specializations . this gross structure is then further refined by baking use of the specializers  a process known as derivative subclasslflcatlon. the rule for derivative subclasslflcatlon of concepts by their specializers bay be stated  
soaewhat iaprecisely  as follows: subclassify the specializations of a concept as their specializers 
are classified. 
　　　an illustration will serve to clarify the aeaning of derivative subclassification. figure 1 shows the gross structure of a tiny concept tree  or a tiny extract froa a large concept tree -the analysis applies in both cases . figure 1 shows that saae structure refined by derivative subclassification  i.e.  the fine structure of the tree. notice that new generic concepts have been introduced into the tree such that  for every pair of classified specializations that share a coaaon genus  say g specialized by s  and s1 there will exist a corresponding specialization of g by the aost specific coaaon superior of s1 and s1 except when that superior is the suaaua genus  somethlng . thus  for instance  concepts  get adjective  and  get substantive  are introduced  

1 

but  get entity  and  get natural-entity  are l e f t out  although one or both could later be introduced either directly or in consequence of other newly formed specializations of  get  . 
　　　to f a c i l i t a t e further discussion of the fine structure of a derivatively subclasslfled concept tree  we need to define a few additional terms. to begin with  we will define the term generauzer to be the immediate superior of a concept in a derivatively subclasslfled concept tree. thus  the general izer of  get book  in the concept tree of figure 1 would be  get primary-entlty . note that  unlike the genus  the generalizer of a concept may change as new concepts are introduced into the concept tree. the generalization path of 
a concept is the sequence of concepts encountered in moving from i t to the subbub genus by successively taking the generalizer at each step. again with reference to figure 1  the generalization path of  get wet  would consist of  get adjective    get predicate    get    -ing    substantive   and finally  something . the generalization path of a concept is the primary path along which properties are inherited; we would therefore expect  get wet   for instance  to inherit certain of the properties of  get adjective    get predicate   etc.  some properties are not inherited by inferior concepts because they are contradicted at lower levels or because they are specifically known not to apply beyond a certain depth . we will use the tem conceptual aodel to refer to a concept and a l l its subconcepts. thus  in the concept tree of figure 1  there is a conceptual aodel for  get   which consists of  get  and the subtree beneath i t   together with whatever night be attached thereto. finally  generic subconcepts in a conceptual model are said to be senses of the concept at the top of the nodel. hence   get adjective  and  get substance  could be described as senses of  get . 
　　　what is the significance of using a derivatively subclasslfled concept tree  first of a l l   if we were to have a conceptual taxonomy with tens of billions of concepts  which we would surely need to approach a hunan level of competence in natural language   we might expect derivative subclasslficatlon to account for at least 1% of the classification decisions required to build that taxonoay. secondly  if  when building our taxonomy  we contrive to put a limlt  say ten  on the number of symbol meaning specializations a concept may have  then that saae l i a l t can be shown to hold for the nuaber of immediate classified specializations any concept 
could possibly have. thus  we can easily arrange to get a concept tree whose fan-out at any given node is s t r i c t l y halted. thirdly  if we put into our concept tree a representative sample of the specializations of a particular concept  as they occur in ordinary use of the language   derivative subclasslflcatlon will provide us with a useful and i n t u i t i v e l y reasonable set of senses of that concept to attach inheritable properties to. thus  if our saaple of the specializations of  have  includes  say   have a t a i l      have four legs   and  have a top   where   t a l l      legs   and  top   are already classified as  parts   then derivative subclasslflcatlon will give us the sense  have as part   which  as the head of an important conceptual submodel of  have   will carry many inheritable properties.  the question of how we might automatically derive properties for  have as part  from its inferior concepts is interesting  but beyond the scope of this paper.  note that just because a concept like  have a t a i l   is a subconcept of  have as part   there is no need to explicitly spell out  have as part  when expressing  have a t a i l   in a formal notation  any more than there is a need to do so when expressing it in english. in fact  we might go so far as to say that a rule of derivative subclasslflcatlon is necessary in a very large  finely subdivided taxonomy to allow economical identification  naming  of concepts within i t . finally and in sua  derivative subclasslflcatlon furnishes the beans for satisfying the three fundamental principles proposed near the beginning of this paper. 
reference 
　　　reference  the second of the two basic structural devices of owl  is the beans by which one concept or sybbol aay refer to another. by the t e n reference  we are trying to suggest the general function of a connection that is syabolic  non-physical   unidirectional  precisely definable  and differentiated only as to function  not  say  by a label on the connection ; these iaportant properties of reference are not conveyed 
well by such t e n s as  pointer    association   or  associative link . the bost important computational property of references is that the references under a concept or symbol  to other concepts or syabols  aay be accessed t r i v i a l l y froa i t . in fact  a concept aay be thought of as being coaposed entirely of references  arranged in an orderly way.  a syabol has a spelling in addition to references . 
　　　we distinguish three categories of reference: the generalizer and speclallzer of a concept  indexing  and description. except for generalizer and speclallzer references  which are recognized by where they appear in a concept's structure  the category of a reference bay be determined solely by inspection of the referent  the concept referred to . of course  in an actual computer implementation  we might use a more elaborate structure for a concept than is strictly necessary  so that we can categorize a reference or retrieve a l l references of a particular category aore rapidly than by inspection of the referent. it is well to be aware  though  that such elaborations of structure are not theoretically activated or required. 
indexing in owl is a category of reference 
used to connect  1  any concept to its immedlate specializations   1  any concept to all concepts specialized by i t   or  1  any syabol to its syabol meanings. thus  with indexing  it is easy  cobputationally  to go frob the syabol  spider  to the concept spider  and froa there to specializations like red spider and black widow spider  and also to concepts classified  specialized  by spider  such as spider web  spider monkey  and spidery. an index reference can be recognized as such by the fact that the concept or symbol it is under will appear as either the generalizer or the speclallzer of the referent. thus  a reference to spider web under spider would be identified as an index reference by the fact that spider is the speclallzer of spider web. note that index references under a concept c are sometimes called  back pointers  
1 

because they  point back at  concepts whose generalizer or specializer  points at  c. 
　　　there is one unresolved problem with index references of type  1  above. whereas index references of types  1  and  1  are halted in number by derivative subclasslflcatlon and by the low level of morphemic ambigulty in english  respectively  there will exist in the knowledge base nany concepts having hundreds of index references of type  1   e.g.  the concept house. this goes against a principle we would like to be able to adhere to  naaely  that the number of references under any one concept should never significantly exceed   say  twenty. the likely solution to this problem is a second form of derivative subclasslflcatlon to subclasslfy all the concepts specialized by a given concept. however  we have not yet adopted such a solution  in part because it turns out to be unsatisfactory to use the obvious counterpart of the rule for derivative subclasslficatlon of the concept tree. 
　　　pescript ion is a broad category of reference that  by definition  includes every reference not used for indexing or for the generalizer or speclalizer of a concept. the tera description is nonetheless quite appropriate  since individual descriptive references  or descriptors  can alaost always be said to describe the concept they're under  the subject of the description . we will 
distinguish here  on functional grounds  two principal types of descriptive reference  naaely characterizations and modiflers  each with nuaerous subtypes. but we will side-step  for 
now  the d i f f i c u l t problea of providing effective c r i t e r i a  tests  for such distinctions  relying instead on illustrative examples and on the noraal english aeanings of the terms we have chosen for the types and subtypes. 
　　　a characterization is an alternative  partial description of a concept  the subject of the characterization . for example  a particular dog might be characterized as follows: a nuisance  abstract characterization   mary's pet and fido's father  relational characterizations   a good swimmaer  skill characterization   a chaser of cars  habitual role   and the dog who ran across our yard yesterday  event participant . 
　　　relational characterizations deserve special note. in owl  a relationship a a a is represented by a two-way characterization: a as a value characterization under r specialized by a  and r specialized by b as a relational characterization under a. thus  for instance   ellen is the mother of sam  would be represented by the value characterization  ellen  under  sam's mother  in conjunction with the relational characterization  sam's mother  under  ellen . seaantic case relationships such as  new york was the location of the deaonstration  and arlthmetic relationships such as  1 is greater than 1  would be handled in an analogous way. this composlte technique for representing relationships  which has been borrowed directly froa english  offers at least two important advantages over the traditional logical formulatlon widely used as the basic connective link in seaantlc networks. first  specialization of the relation by one of its arguments produces a conceptual model for the relation; such a conceptual aodel serves as an effective fraaework for organizing knowledge of specialized uses of the relation. for exaaple  
the conceptual aodel of  father  bight be expected to include the senses  father of a person    father of a country    father of a science   and  father of a bride   each appropriately described. second  whenever there are relationships that are identical except for their value arguments  the set of distinct value arguments will be automatically grouped as value characterizations under the shared relational characterization. thus  if mary has both a dog and a cat  they would both appear as value characterizations under  mary's pets . we might also point out here that owl does not represent reversible relationships canonically  e.g.   the elephant is bigger than the mouse  would be represented differently froa  the aouse is smaller than the elephant ; humans also seem not to canonicalize such relationships. 
　　　a aodlfler is any descriptor not deemed to be a characterization of its subject. typical aodiflers are:  black   property    actual   feature    the   determiner     a l l    quantifier   and  in the box   location . note that sometlaes the dividing line between modifier subtypes is not sharp  e.g.  between properties and features . 
　　　a descriptor that is often applied to a particular concept tends to become a speclalizer of that concept. for example   fat man  is specialized by a modifier   fat   and  father figure  by a characterization   father  . a 
concept specialized by a descriptor is usually more specialized in aeaning than if that 
descriptor was acting only as a descriptor; thus  not every black bird is a blackbird  nor is every round house a roundhouse. 
　　　an laportant transformation in owl  again a reflection of a similar transformaton in english  is the conceptualization of a description to 
produce a predication.  we use the tera predication here in the classical sense of a predicate applied to  i.e.  specialized by  some subject . a description  descriptor under some subject  is transformed into a predication as follows: f i r s t   the predicate is formed as a specialization of  being   the copula  by the 
descriptor; then  that predicate is specialized by the descriptor's subject to give the predication. the reason for conceptualizing  making a concept out of  a description is so that the description can i t s e l f be described  specialized  or otherwise used as a concept. in linguistic terminology  both the process of conceptualization and the resulting predication would be referred to as noainalization. an exaaple of a predication in english is the phrase  john's being happy   which we have already used above as an exaaple of speciallzation. 
the structure of the knowledge base 
　　　all knowledge in an owl-based system is held in a single  large  unified knowledge base of concepts and syabols  except for a rather saall though laportant amount embedded in lisp and machine language programs and their associated data structures. this knowledge base is not 
structurally partitioned by subject matter  by permanence  long-term vs.  interaediate-tera    by type of concept  seaantlc vs. episodic  individual vs. generic   or by level of abstraction  surface language vs. primitive action  for exaaple   although obviously such distinctions aust often be 
1 

inferrable by inspection of individual concepts. there is even no separate lexicon -- knowledge about english words and grammar is distributed throughout the knowledge base and is essential to its organization. 
　　　all of the following terms are virtual synonyms of knowledge base: world model  semantic network  knowledge net  a merlin term   conceptual data base  conceptual memory  conceptual grammar  conceptual taxonomy  and concept tree. the terms conceptual taxonomy and concept tree do not encompass symbols  but then symbols play only a minor role in the knowledge base. symbols correspond to english words and morphemes and contribute no more to the knowledge base than do the spellings of words to the content of a book. essentially the entire body of knowledge is represented in terms of concepts. 
　　　when owl structures are modeled in terms of l1p data structures  a concept is typically represented by a l i s t of its constituent references  where the first two list elements are the generallzer and speclalizer  respectively. a symbol is represented by the atomic symbol whose  pname  shares its spelling  and the 