a collective of algorithms 
	l.a. 	rastrigln 
i n s t i t u t e of electronics and computing technique  
academy of sciences  r.h. erenshtein 
riga medical i n s t i t u t e 
riga latvian ssr ussr 

　　　a concept of a collective of algorithm is proposed which solve problems from the described set of problems. in this case the efficiency of the collecti-
ve solution over the whole set appears to be higher than the best algorithm of the collective. examples of the work of the collective of algorithms are given when solving problems of pattern recognition root determination. 
　　　in the typical problems of the behaviour synthesis  of the choice for the optimal solution  of the selecting the best plan ect.  the difficulty as a rule arises in the choice of the best algorithm  in the definite sense  for the problem solution from the available set of algorithms. in such situation the invention of a new algorithm is not expedient and in any case it is not economical. 
　　　living beings can effectively solve this problem and in typical situation they behave by combining algorithms already known to them. let us formalise a problem. 
       consider the following rather widely spread situation. let some set  finite or infinite  of problems of one type {xi}  i=1 ... is given. these problems are coded by n parameters eaoh problem in the 
ted by the point 	and the 
whole set of problemsforms tt region q 
　　　let also a finite set of algorithms {a}= {a1 ...  al} for solving problems i♀q be givin. eacn of these algorithms a1  l*1 ... l  solves or does not solve the problem x*. the efficiency of solution is determinated by some given criterion qt which to the pair i. and a-. relates the q number: 	x 
		 1  
which characterizes the performance of the algorithm a-  when solving the problem 
　　　let us give examples of the problems of such kind. the pattern recognition problem  where i is a particular pattern recognition problem  {a} is a set of recognition algorithms  e.g.  bayes method  method of potential functions  method of perceptron etc.  q is a probability that recognition is correct.the root determination problem where i is a particular function the root of which is to be determined.  a} is a set of algorithms for determining the root  e.g   methods of tangents  of chords  of dichotomy etc. q is the number of iteration for convergence into ♀-point of a root.the problem of the search optimisation where x is a situation set in the course of optimisation  {a} is a set of the search algorithms  e.g.  gradient method random search method etc.  q is mean increment of a function to be optimized or the number of unsuccessful steps. 
　　　the choice of the optimal algorithm for solving the problem x i t thus  reduses to solving the extremum problem: 

　　　it is expedient for solving the set problem to consider the use of the methods of collective decision making  lt1 . usually we mean by thib or that form of the voting algorithm. to realise the collective solution we ought to solve the problem by using each of the available algorithms alfa1 ... al  i.e.to make enumeration   and then by means of some procedure to generalize the individual solutions in the collective. the main shortcoming of the voting algorithms is first of all the potential possibility of arising an arrow paradox p  fwhich is known in the collective solution theory  or nontransitlvity paradox. this paradox arises due to contradition of individual p