 
the idea of treating utterances as programs to be run in human brains or on a computer is jxirsued by advocating the use of the environment notion for natural language semantics. one structure of environments is devoted to keeping track of the real or f i c t i v e interlocutors and another to distinguishing somebody's linguistic behavior from i t s pretense and belief  while the t h i r d one represents the structure of topics in a discourse. the reguired f l e x i b i l i t y of environment manipulation is expected to be supplied by the bobrowwegbrelt primitives. 
introduction 
it is now obvious that the human a b i l i t y to use language is related closely to intelligence i t self. nevertheless  the complexity of natural language is s t i l l rather underestimated by l i n guistics  including in some measure also computational linguistics. that underestimation results usually in using relatively primitive tools for a formal description of language. wlnograd  claims r i g h t l y that the best test of a complex model of natural language is to implement it as a language understanding system. there is also a 
more radical approach insisting that natural language texts are just programs to be run in our brains   1   . some interesting analogies between language understanding and running a program have been shown  e. g. in   1   . considering a l l utterances as imperatives is not entirely a new idea; it can be found also in linguistics papers  e. g. in . but if we treat the utterances as programs  we can describe their semantics by means of notions much more sophisticated and exact than were ever used in linguistics. the purpose of the paper is to advocate the use of the multiple environments model of bobrow and wegbreit  for natural language semantics. the basic ideas of this approach w i l l be shown by discussing some well-known problems of reference and presupposition. in the early stage of this inquiry s development  the paper tends to a rather theoretical bias. the bobrow-wegbreit primitives do not intervene directly into i t s content  but the f l e x i b i l i t y of environment manipulation supplied by them is a necessary condition for the feasib i l i t y of the present approach  which is expected to give valuable guidelines for designing discourse understanding systems  including l i t e r a r y discourse l i k e children's stories treated by charniak   1   . 
notion of discourse 
the notion of discourse is a rather vague one; therefore  it is necessary to state what i mean by the term. i use it as a synonym for a coherent text and i recognize four possible aspects of coherency  which correspond i n t u i t i v e l y to d i f ferent types of acceptability-
　　f i r s t   there is contextual coherence  realized in a text by inter-eentence and inter-phrase links represented by specialized linguistic means which i c a l l pointers. they can be distinguished  more or less a r b i t r a r i l y   in every language. they entail f i r s t of a l l the pronouns   i n a large sense  including pro-adverbs e t c .   . the second important type of pointers consists of presuppositions which differ from the pronouns in two ways: they rarely occur on the surface of the text  and they point exclusively to propositions. there are also pointers peculiar to given languages; e. g .   for english it is reasonable to treat the past tense as a pointer  following the approach of mccawley  and isard  1 . now  if there is a pending pointer  without a value  in a text  the text is not contextually coherent. there is also situational coherence  1. e. the coherence of a text with the situation of i t s particular usage; 
 1   be careful  he might bite you. 
is perfectly acceptable if the addressee is near a dangerous animal. introducing a narrator can change such a text into an contextually coherent one  by substituting i t s indices  referring to the elements of the real world  back into pointers  referring to more or less abstract text elements . when the addressee has to apply his knowledge of the real world to interpret the text as a coherent one  i use the notion of relative coherence. this is the case in the text 
 1  ann's eldest son has l e f t warsaw for a scholarship study in the sorbonne. 
 1  france is an interesting country to study i n . 
where the knowledge that the sorbonne is a french university supplies the missing l i n k . in general we can c a l l a text coherent relative to a given domain of knowledge. 
   most texts which are incoherent according to the already mentioned rules can s t i l l be regarded as coherent ones if the addressee wishes to do so. i c a l l such a situation volltlonary coherence. 
the addressee's w i l l can be expressed in two ways. first  he can supply himself the values for pending pointers. in particular  the events required by the presuppositions are frequently accepted as true  as has been pointed out by e. g. bellert 
  1     wierzbicka  1  recently karttunen   1     and illustrated by examples: 
 1  i would like to introduce you to my wife. 

1 

 1  we regreat that children cannot accompany their parents to commencement exercises. 
where the presuppositions carry brand new information. secondly  the addressee can decide to consider pending pointers and indices as not relevant to the matter; this procedure seems to be applied only for some l i t e r a r y texts. 
pronouns 
we w i l l discuss now some problems of reference. let us start from the assumption that every person  human being or robot  who uses natural language perceives also some aspects of the current sltuatlon ln particular he recognizes the persons engaged in the discourse and usually realizes possible differences between his own perception of the situation and the perceptions of others. restating this in multiple environments terms  we assume that a special type of environments is used to represent the world as perceived and known by a person; a global environment represents the person under consideration and local environments entailed in it are images of i t s interlocutors. 
　　an utterance is received together with the information about i t s sender and i t s addressee; therefore  it can be run in such a way that the personal pronouns  i   *we*  *you* etc. translated into variables are evaluated respectively in the sender and the addressee environments  yielding their identification. in this way the evaluation of the sentence  1  said by fred to stanley: 
 1  1 like your book. 
supplies 	the 	value 	equivalent to the utterance 
 1  fred likes stanley's book. 
run in the proper environment. which environment is proper depends on the robot* s attitude to the discourse. if he believes fred and assumes stanley's knowledge to be basically identical with his own  he may run  1  in the environment of himself. but if he wants to keep track of a l l the possibilities  he has to allocate in fred' s environment which holds mainly the data about his behavior  a new environment for fred as described by fred and evaluate  1  in it to obtain fred's pretense  and then to evaluate  1  again in stanley's knowledge environment to obtain i t s probable effect on stanley's mind. the merit of the approach lies in the fact that 
it can be applied recursively in the case of direct and indirect speech. k. g .   in the text 
 1  frank said: 
 1  when i came back  john was already waiting for ma and asked: 
 1  'how are you**. 
 1  should be run both in the current addressee and sender environments  1  in the environment of the sender and the new environment of the frank as quoted by the sender   and  1  in the frank as quoted by the sender and john as quoted by frank as quoted by the sender. the interpretation of utterances with indirect speech  e. g .    1   fred said to stanley he liked his book. 
 and in general the utteraces with the 1rd person pronouns  is much more complicated. to account for it we w i l l introduce auxiliary phrase environments for running some utterances  with a special variable similar to the context of c1nmivw . the variable named topic has a tuple as a value and when accessed yields the f i r s t element of i t   but when accessed because of backtracking yields consecutive elements of the tuple  and after exhausting it takes the tuple of topic from i t s super-environment. during a 
 run of an utterance  topic is frequently modified by adding and permuting its elements. the elements of topic are pointers to environments of  real or f i c t l v e   persons and other data structures representing objects  and also pointers to other phrase environment with his own topics. the interpretation of a text with indirect speech and also single sentences with the 1rd person pronouns can be described now in the following way  
a. every access to a topic element resets topic in such a way that the accessed element becomes the f i r s t one in the tuple. 
b. pronouns in a main clause and proper names execute immediately the access to the topic variable. 
c. execution of the access required by pronouns in a subordinate clause can be suspended u n t i l the end of the main clause processing  if there is no suitable value for them in the local topic. d. the verbs  say*   describe* etc. create a clause environment with his own topic variable and put the pointer to it as the f i r s t element of topic in the environment of the verb. e. the subordinate clauses introduced by  say*  
 describe* etc. are evaluated in the environment taken from the topic of the main clause environment . 
let us see with examples how the rules given above work. 
 1  after 	john 	l e f t 	his apartemnt  he went to the pool h a l l   
 john sets topic to the pointer to the john environment; his is evaluated because there is already suitable value in topic; he evaluates also to john  
 1  after 	he 	l e f t 	his apartment  john went to the pool h a l l . 
 after introduces the subordinate clause  which is being evaluated  but it is suspended before executing access by the pronouns  because of the lack of suitable values for them in topic. john sets topic  after the end of the main clause processing the subordinate clause is resumed and the pronouns are properly bound to john. 
 1**  john went to the pool room after he l e f t his apartment. 
	no 	problem; 	john 	sets 	topic 	and the pronouns 
1 

access i t . 
 1  he went to the pool room after john l e f t his apartment. 
　he is evaluted immediately because it is contained in the main clause; therefore it is already bound when john sets topic. the strong feeling that the value of he should be d i f f e r ent from john can be explained in terms of computational efficiency: there is no reason to set topic to john if it is already the value. 
 1  what did john say about dick  
 1  he said that 
 1  he 	looked 	l i k e 	a 	drunken 	giraffe on ice skates. 
in  1  topic is set f i r s t to john  then 'say creates a phrase environment with i t s topic i n i tialised to dick  and puts the pointer to it at the top of i t s own topic. in  1   he  evaluates to john  then *safd* recovers from topic the clause environment and evaluates  1  in i t . therefore the *he* of  1  is bound to dick. 

have clear meaning in our model. they are just declarations  used to create appropriate environment  in general  data structures  i n i t i a l i z e d to the values supplied by the description; the pointer to the new environment is put into topic. therefore in the text 
 1  one 	young boy has flunked his matriculation exam. 
 1  he decided to give up further studies. 
the he* of  1   can receive the proper value of the young boy mentioned in  1 . such an interpretation of indefinite descriptions has in fact a l l properties of the ref operator intro-
duced for the purpose by bellert ; it agrees also with intuitions of linguists  e. g. wierzbicka  1. definite descriptions are interpreted as functions which when evaluated in a proper environment yield the required value. the interpretation supports the i n t u i t i o n of donnellan  who claims r i g h t l y that a definite descriptions does not in i t s e l f refer to anything but only i t s use points to a referent. that interpretation explains also why we can utter  1  her husband is kind to her. 
and be understood even if the man is not in fact the husband of the woman. the functions representing definite descriptions can be also just memorized; such a memorizing corresponds to the attributive use  the term of donnellan  of the definite description  as  e. g .   i n : 
 1  the smith murderer is insane  in the sense of 
 1  whoever 	has 	murdered 	smith  he is insane. 
to summarize our discusion of reference  l e t us run a sentence 
 1  a boy who saw her kissed a g i r l who knew him. 
f i r s t   an environment for boy* is created and the pointer to it is put into topic. next   who saw her  is evaluated except the  her  because of the lack of a proper value for it in topic; therefore  the clause is suspended. then the rest of the main clause is evaluated and an environment for   g i r l is made  and the topic is respectively changed. now the suspended clause can be resumed and evaluated in parallel with the clause who knew him ; both the pronouns w i l l be properly 
bound. 
presuppositions 
presuppositions are treated as patterns of event representations; depending on the volitionary attitude to the text  the pattern can be matched against the memory to retrieve an existing event or the apprioprlate event can be added to the memory. we express the difference between factual and non-factual sentences like 
 1  john regrets that it is raining. 
 1  john thinks that it is raining. 
assuming that the presupposition it is raining is evaluated in the environment of the narrator in the case of  1  and in the environment of john's belief in the case of  1 . it may seem strange to talk about presuppositions of nonfactual sentences but it is reasonable; although we do not expect such a presuppositions to be true  we s t i l l expect it to be coherent  as in  1   with somebody' s belief. the environment of somebody' s belief and the mentioned earlier environment of pretense interact with themselves  e. g. i n . 
 1  fred 	is 	lying 	when 	he 	says 	he 	likes 
stanley's book. 
which evaluates both to * fred likes stanley's book in fred's pretense and t o * f r e d does not like stanley's book in fred's belief. 
　　the idea of running an utterance proves usef u l also in the case of presuppositions. the static treatment by projection rules of the relation between the presupposition of a complex sentence as a whole and the presuppositions of i t s constituent clauses has not been successful. the recent  more dynamic  approach of karttunen  can be easily integrated into our model. e. g .   in the following sentences 
 1  if dean told the truth  nixon is guilty too.  1  if haldeman is guilty  nixon is guilty too. 
 1  if miss woods destroyed the missing tapes  nixon is guilty too. 
the 	antecedent 	clauses should be run before the 

1 
consequent clause to obtain right results. in  1  the presupposition of the consequent clause is satisfied by the antecedent and in  1   it can also be the case depending on the other knowledge present in the environment of the evaluation. 

1 
