 

described is a possible mechanism of b i nocular fusion in visual system based on continlous estimation of resulting  cortical image  doubling degree during vergenoe eye movements. the mechanism does not require any search of corresponding sites in pair retinal images. the result of computer simulation of this mechanism are given. a sequence of information processing stages in binocular vision preceding recognition is discussed. 
introduction 

     it is assumed that corresponding sites of pair retinal images have to be found in order to provide the binocular fusion   i   . this procedure seems to be rather complicated for real visual scenes  1 . on the other hand some results of the biological experiments show that binocular fusion and stereopsis are possible when corresponding details of pair images have dissimilar shape  1.1 . this suggest that the human binocular fusion mechanism is not based on corresponding sites search. 
     in this paper a possible binocular fusion mechanism using a continious estimation of doubling degree of image  which is formed in visual cortex by superposition of retinal projections  in the course of vergence is described. 
some information processing stages in oinocular vision preceding object recognition 

     data available allow to distinguish the following stages of complex spatial scene analysis  i.e. when a number of objects overlapping in the visual field are situated in front  middle and rear plan . 
1  coarse binooular fusion  plan extraction in depth; 
     presumably at first the extraction of the most distinct regions in pair retinal images of similar color or brightness is carried out. then horizontal disparity of these regions  by their centres or edges  is calculated. after this a divergence or convergence by corresponding angle is carried out. the parts of scene located far farther or nearer than plan extracted are ignored in the further analysis. 
1. extraction of  subjective contours  

　　after  plan extraction from the background   image is obtained which may contain several overlapping projections of objects located in the plan extracted   the boundaries among regions of different color  brightness and texture are drawn. 
1  accurate binocular fusion 

     in the course of further vergence the doubling degree of a part of image obtained is estimated using the extracted  subjective contours . when some marginal doubling degree is attained a command for the eye stop is produced. 
1. stereopsis and extraction of  object irom the baojcgrouna  
     using the fused part as  zero point  the disparities for the other image points are determined. disparity distribution is evaluated then and a decision on 
possible 1-dimansional object shape  or its parts  is made. i f the discontinuity of disparity occurs  e.g. when a number of rigid objects is closely located in the plan extracted  some compact  with respect to disparity  set of points  an object  is extracted other being ignored in the further analysis. the data which support a possibility of existence of these stages in binocular vision are as followsi 
- depth perception without  subjective contours   using disparities of distinctive regions in the stereograms  
	 1  1 i 	  
- existence of coarse  qualitative  and precise stereopsis  1 $ inhibitory interaction between information processing channels of crossed and uncrossed disparity  corresponding to different scene plans   1 | 
- reduction of  mach bands effect  resulting from the  staircase  arrangment of test bands  in depth   1 j 
- preceding of  subjective contours  extraction by the difference in color  luminance or texture to a stereopsis 
 1 1 ; 
- suppression of unfused parts of stereopairs in  binocular rivalry  phenomenon  when they differ in shape significantly   i  ; 

　all further considerations are concerned with the part of scene located in the region of central vision. 
 the 1-nd stage is related to monocular vision and can in principle start simultaneously with the i-st stage. 
1 

- using the  narrow slit  detectors  instead of the  edge  detectors  during determination of disparity in vision  1 ; 
- preceding of stereopsis to a recognition  1 . 
     in the following only the 1-rd stage of the process will be considered  namely  a mechanism of precise binocular fusion. assume that the i-st and the 1-nd stages have been accomplished. 
a possible mechanism or binocular fusion 
     when the vergence eye movements in the course of binocular fusion occur  cortical projections from right and left retina are shifted with respect to each other. assume that a set of  two parallel lines  detectors and  single line  detectors with various orientation and distance between lines in optimal stimulus is available in visual cortex. then the moment of fusion approaching the set of  double lines  detectors will respond with the distance between the lines contlniously decreasing. the response of some  marginal set  of the detectors could be a signal for the eye to stop. the marginal distance between the lines depend on eye movement fusion velocity and duration of earring out a stop-command. in the moment the eyes are fixed  the resulting cortical image appears to be fused. a small number of responding  marginal double lines  and a large number of single lines  detectors responding will also correspond to this moment. a permanent evaluation of cortical image doubling degree during the vergence leads to avoiding the  eye overshoot  in moment of fusion. 
　　a digital simulation of binocular fusion mechanism 
     the simulation was carried out on a digital computer. input images were stereopairs of 1  pig. la  which represented the right and left projections of front view of a cube  subtending an angle of 1  . initially the stereopalrs have been shifted  imitating the  eye fixation  being not in the cube plan. on each step computer shifted one of the stereopairs by one ceil and superimposed both stereopalrs which imitated the cortical projections shift during the vergence. then the number of double and single l i nes in resulting image was calculated. this operation was carried out by means of a set of local operators  1 in size  which extracted the segments of single 
 'it is  cortical image  obtained by imposing the retinal projections which bears in mind. 
and double lines of various orientations in resulting image  fig. lb . at each step the ratio of double lines available to single lines was calculated. the relative stereopalrs position in which this ratio was maximal was searched  fig. i c . prom this position the stereopalr was shifted by two cells and the resulting superimposed image was printed out  pig. id . 
     as pig. id shows  stereopalrs being projections of 1-dimensional object can not be completly fused in none of their relative positions. simulation results however showed that computer correctly finds the relative position which corresponds to the maximal fusion  in our case - to the front edge cube fusion   
conclusion 

     the binocular fusion mechanism under discussion does not require search of corresponding points in pair retinal images. however i t assumes that  subjective contours  are initially extracted by color  luminance and texture differencesfurther attempts should be directed toward the study of both subjective contours extraction mechanism  particularly by texture differences  and stereopsis mechanism  which is carried out after binocular fusion of a part of image . the suggested visual system ability to extract  object from the background  binocularly could be taken into consideration in robot visual system design. 
 'new data which support the hypothesis is obtained recently. superiority of double parallel lines detectors with angle distance between the lines about 1 was found in the visual cortex of a cat  1   thus indicating the existence of a certain  marginal detectors set  . 
