the textural analysis 
v.m. krol and l.i.tannenholz 
the institute of control sciences  hoskow  ussr 

　　　this paper contains an algorithm and a computer programm for a natural from the human point of view splitting into sections of a two -dimensional picture* contemplating a picture  a human being draws in his imagination borders  sorting out sections  which he supposes to be homogeneous for the time being  in spite of their posessing an internal structure some times such borders are drawn following some qualities of an object which he expects to find in the picture  for example  when completing a partly detected image. in other cases the borders are drawn by analysing the characteristics of the picture itself. the sections  being separated in the latter case are usually known by the name of textures. an example of a picture  containing three textures  is shown on pig.i. 

say not taxing into consideration the internal structure of separated area.but the possibility of disregarding the inter-
nal structure is to be considered only as the aim or the result of textural analysis  but not as a procedure of i t . the illusion of disregarding internal structure in the process of perception derives probably from the fact that the amount of information about the internal structure necessary for splitting the picture into sections is much lesser than the whole amount of in formation contained in the picture. 
　　　the most important problem in this case is the establishing of bondaries  in shich the characteristics of similar fragments can change  e.g the establishing of the system of thre aholds. 
　　　for solving this problem  in the present paper the phenomenon of  sepa-

the main procedure of the appro-

ration into groups  is used. the effecency of using this phenomenon in solving the problems of recognition was analysed in m.m.bongard's book  i  and the phenomenon itself was applied by m.m.maksimov for a learning programm of recognizing pictures  1 . the fact that the human being does really use the phenomenon of  separation into groups  was shown in psychological experiments  1   for establishing the threshold values  histogramms of elementary fragment's distribution according to the values of certain characteristics were drawn. among the characteristics only those  the histogramms of which have a distinct separation of columns into groups were chosen. examples of separable and non - separable histogramms are shown on fig. 1 

ach applied in the present paper implies the measutement of a certain characteristic on each elemantery fragment in which the basic picture was initially broken and then conbining the fragments posessing similar characteristics into one area. the necessity of analysing each single fragment separately in that case  seems to contradict the intuitive conception of textures and the main aim of the textural analysis  that is to 

thus the threshold values separating each groupare fixed. 
　　　we presume that there does not exist a way of measurement of elementary fragment's characteristic or distinguishing the fragments themselves equally suitable for sorting out all kinds of textures. but a criteria of suitability of a certain characteristic or a certain 
1 

way of measurement does exist. so it is necessary to try a l l the ways of splitting into frag merits and measurement of characteristics  naturally according to the order in which their complication is increasing. 
       prom this follows that the textur a l analysis is a protracted process  which takes place simultaneously with che proces of recognition  independently  or in connection with i t . 
       the textures  which for their separation demand a little amount of calculation are discerned earlier  whereas more complicated-later. for example  in the separating textural areas with different brightness only a minimal i n i t i a l information is required. so this procedure certainlly can precede the process of recognition as a whole   i t is possible that such an analysis is conducted in the level of ganglion cells of retine periphery  which have large receptive fields. one can presume that after averaging by such fields  a pattern with a small number of extreme can appear  which may be used for the f i n a l separation . on the other hand  for discerning two areas which have the same medium brightness  the same statistics of the first and the second order but which consist of different forms: 
e.g. the f i r s t of triangular forms the second of square forms  many stages of recognition are necessary  namely ident i f i c a t i o n of triangular and square forms* analysis of their respective position e.t.c. 
the general structure of algorithm 
　　　fig. 1 represents in the most general form the succession of operations used in solving the textural analysis problems. 

continuous areas  posessing an almost identical brightness or colour. the allowed fluctuatuins of brightness or colour inside a single field depend on the number of used gradations and are considered as constants of algorithm  determining its discerning capacity. in case when only two gradations of brightness are used  and this carried out by the programme based on the proposed al-
gorithm  one may confine in discerning only connected areas. 
　　　some other ways of initial separation which imply more complicated proceding of picture may prove to be necessary too. particularly  the program can fulfill the separating of lines between the knots. 
　　　phe elementary fragments obtained as a result of analysis are numbered in a certain order. the numeration is used for connecting the values of characteristic with the fragments for which they are obtained  but the final separation of areas does not depend on the numeration. 
　　　the second stage of the analysis is the measurement of fragments! to each fragment is applied the same measure op#y rator  the same measurement procedure  . from the logic of the approach follows that there are no measurement equally suitable for all cases. in all cases we use the same criteri of suitability: the criteria of separation into groups. so a successive examination of operators is necessary  which is conducted in the order of increasing complication of operators. actually only simple operators were used in the program: measurement of the area  of the abscess and ordinate of the centre of gravity  of the length of greater and smaller half-axis  and of the angle of horizontal inclination of greater axis. as the number of operators used was rather small  so all the opera-

1 

tors were used and the applicability of every one was examined. 
　　　che ways of getting more complicated characteristics can be obtained  for 
example  from v.v.maksimov* s program 
 1 . 
　　　as a result of using one operator to the multitude of fragments one of se-
veral multitudes of numbers  one-to-one connected with the multitude of operator are formed. the multitude of characteristics are arranged according to the increase of fragment's numbers for recording on the computer's memory. thus a line of characteristics is constituted. 
x  some operators can be unsuitable for 
certain fragments such fragments receive as the value of characteristics the number ioco which is greater than any measured value of characteristic. all such fragments are sorted out in a separate area. 

　　　　　every line of a characteristics matrix is treated by the operator of 
''separating into groups  this operator designs a histogramm of fragments distribution according to the values of the examined characteristics and decides whether it can be s p l i t t inco a small number of compact groups. for thiaim a following algorithm is used. first of a l l a system of threshold is formulated by f i x i n g them in the points where the histogramm takes the zero value  or has a local minimum . phis procedure e p l i t t s the histogramm into a number of groups of tne zero level  livery group then is estimated by two parameters: namely the volume  tne relative number of comprised fragments  and compactness. the compactness is estimated by comparxiufc  the group's width  the standard deviation  with the distance between the centers of adjoining  groups* the smallest and the least compact group is fused with one of the adjoining groups by crossing out the corresponding threshold.the operation is repeated u n t i l l the smallest of the remained groups will surpass a certain value   i n the program 1 of the amount of fragments   and the least campact one will be sufficiently compact  its standard deviation w i l l be less than half of the distance towards i t s nearest neigh-
bour . the c r i t e r i a of size and compactness are the constants of the algorithm. if as a result more than one group remain  the characteristic is estimated as such which ie suitable for s p l i t t i n g i n to groups  and the obtained system of thresholds is used for further proceding and sorting out the fragments. in other cases the characteristic is rejected. 
　　　　　the sorting of fragments is conducted by means of compariing the values of characterictics of the examined fragment with the threshold fixing the groups. as the result of sorting the multitude of fragments is devided into sever a l submultitudes  the number of each is equal to the number of groups. only if the multitude of sorted out fragments is solid e.g not containing the fragment from other groups  it constitudes a textural area. the examination by compactness c r i t e r i a was not conducted by us  but i t could be done without and difficulty. 
       if as a result of separating procedure more one separating characterist i c is found  it becomes possible to form several variants of splitting. in that case  beside initial devisinns their local functions are possible. 
       the second source of additional divisions is the s p l i t t i n g of the separated area. for this purpose the sorted out multitude of fragments is brought again to the entry of the program  the characteristics in that case are not evaluated again  but are taken from the previous material . 
       the possibility of obtaining different kinds of partitions seems to be a great advantage of the model  as it permits to chose in the process of the analysis the most adeguete partition for each given problem. 
       the discribed model was worked out as a program f o r the icl-1 computer. the main part of the program was written i n fortran. the input rastr of the model is 1 units. the time of proceeding of one picture including the forming of a l l variants of partition is about 1 minutes  but it grealy depends on the qualities of the picture  especially by the amount of fragments . most of the time is used for the procedure of s p l i t ting the picture into i n i t i a l fragments. 
       fig.1 shows an example of computer separation. 

       it is obvious that the computer draws natural divisions from the human point of view. it is uncertain yet as to which degree the proposed algorithm is an universal one  and how much it is close to the manner of proceeding of picture by the human vision. this can only be proved by further experiments with 
the program. 
summary 

       a model of human proceeding of v i sion data for the tasks of s p l i t t i n g the picture into areas of the same textures 

1 
is proposed  
　　　the model is based on the foliowine principles: 
i.the textucal areas are formed by joining small  in a sense homogeneous frag* ments of the picture. 
1. the characteristics used for compariing the fragments are selected seoarately for each problem  each picture;  1* in order to examine the adequacy of the characteristics and to chose the thresholds the criteria of '*separating into groups** is used. 
     an algorithm was elaborated and a computer program was written in foftprln. 
further experiments must show: 
1. in what extent the proposed model reflects the process of the human vision  
1. in what extent the proposed algorithm is applicable to real situations and real problems  

1 
