 
     the paper discusses necessity of structuring a search tree. a theorem is stated that the  procedure is the only search reduction procedure for non-structured minimay problems. for a class of problems structure in some way a non-trivial search reduction method is described. 
introduction 
     in most problems of artificial intellegence an exhaustive search is an important  we think  main  method of choosing a solution among certain alternatives. the central problem  which arrises here is the problem of search reduction without 
prejudice to the quality of solution. a search reduction is called absolute if the search graph is certainely lessened  and it is called heuristic if reduction of the search graph depends on the good luck.  we do not consider here search reduction techniques which may lead to the loss of solution  although they are sometimes also called heuristic . the subject of the theory of exhaustive search  considered as part of the artificial intelligence theory  should be  naturally  heuristic search reductions. in this connection the following problems arrise: the problem of formalisation  the problem of inventing a search reduction method   heuristic by itself  the problem of analysis of a reduction method. a analysis consists apparently of the following 
parts: an applicability domain  uniqueness results  under such and such conditions no other method exists   results on optimal effect  examples of the absence 
of effect  results on  rentability  of a method whether the time spent to answer question:  to reduce or not  is saved by essential reduction of the size of searched set . in the present talk we ohose a simple  but important  case of exhaustive search - namely minimax problems and  method as a heuristic search reduction method  to make a part of such an analysis. we show that if a corresponding method is used for a too wide class of problems  then it is the only search reduction method for this class  more precisely it majorates all other methods . a class is too wide if  roughly speaking  the structure of problems of the class is subject only to trivial restrictions. example: there is no search reduction method applicable to a l l cooperative games  a degenerate case  where a l l vertices in the game tree are maximal . 
     as philosophical implication of this result we conclude that to construct a non-trivial search reduction methods one needs to use a structure of a problem  a method of search reduction discussed in the second part of the talk confirms our conclusion. it uses a sort of symmetries of some problems. this agrees with the p. klein's general principle according to which mathematics studies symmetries of the world.  however unlike the situation in geometry  in our case those symmetries 
do not form a group . 
     it is important that this method is compatible with the algorithm and supplies essentially different  additional possibilities for search reduction. this method distinguishes our class of problems from earlier classes of problems with restrictions  traveling salesman etc . 

1 


1 

lowing schema: let m be a set  possibly endowed with a structure of partially ordered set or some other suitable structure. suppose that a map  structure map  is given. requiring of f 
and f a  good  behaviour with respect to and structure on m  we shall get a 
non-trivial restrictions on  . a travelling salesman problem is an example. we came now to a detailed description of an example of conditions on and of 
ways of its application to search reduc-
     these conditions have naturally arrisen in analysis of exhaustion of variants in a chess programm is a move from 
initial position of edge to its final 
position  considered on the empty board and containing a indication of which 
piece was captured; m is the set of all moves on an empty board with capture indications. 
¡¡¡¡theorem 1 shows  as we have mentioned in the introduction that new methods of search reduction should be sought for 
families  distinguished by nontrivial relations. 
     as an model which  in a reasonable approach  includes all non-trivial restrictions known to us we propose the fol-
1 



noted that different edges are rejected 
independently. 
