 

     one of the most interesting questions in the study of human problem solving is the nature of the interaction between a problem's intrinsic structure and a problem solver's strategies or behaviors. the present paper suggests the use of techniques developed in research in mechanical problem solving to assist in formulating and illuminating this question. the authors also seek to develop a relationship between artificial intelligence methods and 'structuralist 1 theories of cognition by relating groups of symmetry transformations and 'conservation' operations. 
section i: introduction 

     one of the most interesting questions in the psychology of problem solving is the nature of the interaction between a problem's intrinsic struc-

ture and the strategies or behaviors employed in 

attempting to solve the problem. several studies have recently appeared addressing this subject: 1  the learning of mathematical structures such as the klein group or the cyclic group of order four  branca & kllpatrick  1  1  the study of analogy and transfer in related problem solving situations. reed  ernst  & banerji  1  egan & greno in  1   
1  the development of mechanical theorem provers both in equation solving  bundy   and in ele-
mentary geometry  gelernter  and goldstein  1. this research  although from diverse points of view  shares a common interest: understanding the effects of problem structure - for instance  a problem's possible subproblem and symmetry decompositions - on efficient problem solving. 
     this paper suggests techniques that may further aid in formulating and illuminating this question. more ambitiously  the authors seek to develop a relationship between artificial intelligence methods and piagetian or 'structuralist' theories of cognition. 
nilsson  1  has defined the state space rep-

resentation of a problem as the set of distinguish-

able problem configurations or situations together with the permitted moves or steps from one problem 
situation to another. thus the state space of a problem consists of an initial state  together with all the states that may be reached from the initial state by successive legal moves in the problem. one or more of these successor states are classified as goal states. the state space of a problem  represented as a non-directed graph  will be 
unique only if the problem's description clearly 

delinlates its initial and goal state s  and its set of legal moves egan & greno  1. finally  the concept of the state space of a problem can be generalized to the analogous structure for an n-player game  i.e.  the game tree or graph. 
george p. luger  research fellow  
department of artificial intelligence  university of edinburgh  scotland. 
banerji   banerji a ernst c1 and other 
researchers have offered mathematical descriptions to characterize state spaces. this 'state space algebra* allows such concepts as problem comparison  decomposition  and extension to be well defined and also allows problem solving studies in the areas of problem analogy  transfer  and generalization to be extremely precise. 
     in early artificial intelligence research both gelernter's geometry theorem prover  1 with its use of the symmetries within the syntax of a problem's description  as well as newell  shaw and simon's general problem solver  1  with its utilisation of a problem's possible subproblem 
decompositions  affirm the need for as complete as 
possible exploitation of a problem's structure for effective problem solving. again  in plan formation sacerdotl  1 uses abstrips to focus on the important features of a problem's structure 
and to ignore the unnecessary detail that leads 
strips to combinatorial problems. 
     newell and simon's later work  1 permits in principle a very detailed interpretation of an individual's problem solving 'protocol' as steps in information processing. however  as the 'problem space' for this research varies from subject to subject for each individual problem it also lends to their model a definite post hoc 

character. since no final commitment concerning the structure of the 'problem space' is made until after the problem solving is observed  the potential for predicting the effects of a problem's structure on a subject's problem solving behavior seems to be lacking. 
     in the next section two ideas are introduced. first  we assert a fundamental correspondence between conservation operations and symmetry transformations. in the sense of piaget  a conservation operation is the ability of a problem solver to respond that two different states of the environment are equivalent when they are functionally the same  that is when they both possess the 
same value for some perceptual or cognitive vari-
able. for example  1 is said to be equivalent to 1 modulo 1  since both have the same remainder 

on division by 1. in general  a symmetry transformation is a mapping which carries one problem state into another in such a way as to leave unchanged important observable features. in the everyday sense of the word symmetry these features are geometric  for example  the transformation which changes a particular configuration of objects into its 'mirror image' may leave the appearance 
of the configuration unchanged. we are interested  however  in a more general notion of symmetry  for example  symmetry within a problem's description and underlying problem structure  as well as in the more readily apparent geometric symmetries. 

1 

     the second idea pursued in this section is that in problem solving  a subgoal and aubproblem decomposition of a problem may govern a problem solver's behavior even when he or she is not consciously seeking to arrive at that particular subgoal  and despite the fact that the infrastructure of subproblem's within the main problem 
may not on the surface be apparent. furthermore  given a aubproblem decomposition  one kind of symmetry whose effect may be explored is the presence in the problem of aubproblems of identical  isomorphic  structure. 
     in the third section additional concepts concerning a problem's state space are rigorously defined  and several hypotheses offered concerning effects of problem structure on subject's paths through the state space  such as a predominance of 
goal and subgoal directed paths  and an increased likelihood of congruent paths through isomorphic aubproblems. 
     in the fourth section  the tower of hanoi problem  nilsson   and the tea ceremony problem  hayes & simon in t1l  are used to illustrate the main ideas developed. finally  some suggestions for further experimental investigation are pro-
posed. 
section i i :  a  conservation operations and 

symmetry transformations 
 b  subproblem decompositions 
 a  in tic-tac-toe a player  say x  is said to 'fork' his opponent when he places his x  in such a position on the board that 1  there are as a result two possible 'winning moves* for x  and 1  o is able  in the next move  to block only one of these 
'winning moves'. there are several different  forking' positions possible on the tic-tac-toe board and these relationships are conserved or invariant over all rotations and reflections of the game board. thus i t can be said that there is a conservation or functional equivalence among the different 'forking' situations. it is also possible to construct symmetry transformations of one 'forking' situation onto any other. the authors would like to establish a logical equivalence be-

tween conservation operations and groups of sym-
metry transformations for characterizing this and other problem solving situations  goidin & luger  1} luger  . 
     the group is the paradigm in mathematics of the methodology which has been termed 'structuralist'  piaget  . this methodology has been applied to fields of study as diverse as anthropology  linguistics  and psychology  as well as to mathematics . according to piaget a structure in the most general sense is a system or set within which certain relations or operations have been defined  embodying the concepts of wholeness  transformation  and self-regulation. for example a system of kinship constitutes a structure in anthropology as does a group in mathematics. in plagetlan developmental psychology  the conservation operations - conservation of number  volume  quantity  etc. - are transformations which repre-
sent the cognitive structures assumed to underlie 

certain patterns of behavior. acquisition of these conservation operations by children defines sequential stages in thier cognitive development. 
     in view of the parallel fundamental roles played by group structures in mathematics and cognitive structures in developmental psychology  it is natural to try to look at the acquisition of plagetlan conservation operations as equivalent to the acquisition of a group of symmetry transformations . 
     for an observable  such as number  quantity  etc.  to be conserved means in fact that when a 

given state is somekow transformed into an altered state  the value of the observable is unchanged from its initial value. of course  for the second state to be regarded as different from the first state at a l l   there must be at least one other observable which does change in value under the transformation  and which is not conserved by the transformation. a symmetry transformation may be defined  then  as a one-to-one mapping from the set of states onto itself which leaves invariant the specified relationships among the states. any collection of such symmetry transformations generates a symmetry group. 
     let us say that a certain symmetry group g conserves a given set of observablea when for each state s  is the system  a l l states which may be obtained from ¡ê by applying symmetry transformations 
from g have exactly the same values of the specified observables. the maximal symmetry group 
possessing this property for a given set of observables is the group containing every symmetry trans-

formation which preserves the values of the specified observables. 
     to say that a subject 'conserves number'  for example  means that no matter how a given state of the environment is transformed into an altered state by simply moving the objects within the en-
vironment around  the value of the observable 'number' - according to the subject's report - remains unchanged. thus  a group of one-to-one surjective mappings from a region of r1 onto itself  
maps the set of states onto itself in such a way that a state specified by n  points continues to be specified by n points after it is transformed  and so has the same value of the observable ' number' . 
i t is not difficult to see that this set of mappings fits the definition of a symmetry group conserving that observable. thus  the ability to conserve number may be seen to be logically equivalent to 

the acquisition of the structure of a symmetry group  that is  the ability to undo  invert  any rearrangement transformation and to catenate any two such transformations. 
     it may be hypothesized that stages in the acquisition of such a symmetry group structure actually correspond to the acquisition of particular subgroups of this symmetry group. for example  a child might at some time respond consistently that the number of objects is unchanged 
when a configuration is merely translated a cer-
tain distance in space  without its having been spread out or otherwise rearranged. if this were to occur we would say that the subgroup of k containing a l l translations had been acquired as a 

symmetry structure. verification of this hypo-
thesis would further demonstrate the usefulness of the conservation operation/symmetry group corres-

1 

pondence. 
     in arguing for the reformulation of conservation operations in terms of symmetry groups  it seems natural to cite examples of systems in which the symmetries are familiar  but the identification of conserved quantities may be cumbersome. many examples drawn from problem solving turn out to be easier to describe in terms of symmetry groups than in terms of quantities conserved by the transformations in those groups. for example  in tic-tactoe  there are nine distinguishable states which can be reached by the first move of the first player. however  modulo the rotation or reflection 

symmetry  only three distinguishable states exist. in constructing the state space representation for tic-tac-toe  one could choose to represent a l l the distinguishable states of the system  and so obtain a very large state space; or one could use the much smaller state space obtained by regarding those states conjugate by symmetry as equivalent. this latex choice corresponds to reduction of the state space representation modulo its symmetry 

transformations. 
     in studying human problem solving  we must take into account the possibility that the subject's behavior does not initially reflect all the symmetry which is actually present. therefore  to map the subject's behavior faithfully  we should begin with the expanded state space representation  i.e.  the state space containing a l l possible legal states of the problem. this expanded state space  and its formal properties  will be constant across all subjects solving this problem and thus make possible more than a post 

hoc analysis  p.1 . 

     tic-tac-toe also provides an example of a game in which the rotation and reflection symmetry is easily recognized  but the corresponding conserved quantities are cumbersome to define. one such quantity might be the number of xs in corner squares  a number unchanged by the rotation or reflection operations. number scrabble   a game isomorphic to tic-tac-toe  may be described 
as follows. the integers 1  1  1  ....  1 are written on a pad  and the two opposing players take turns selecting single numbers. neither player may select a number already taken. the goal is to obtain any three numbers which add up to exactly fifteen. the isomorphism between this game and tic-tac-toe can be illustrated by placing the integers 1 to 1 in the tic-tac-toe grid in such a way that each row  column  and diagonal add 
1 1 e 1 1 l 1 1 1 to 1. a player trying to learn number scrabble would not have available the geometric symmetry presented by the tic-tac-toe grid. 
vi
t  tt p or familiarity 	  	  	# 
with the 'magic square'  a player would have to seek rules such as  'if the first player chooses ¡ê  then the second player has to pick an even number to avoid losing'. unbeknownst to the player  the relevant 'observables' are just those which are conserved by the tic-tactoe symmetry - 'even numbers selected'  'odd numbers excluding 1/  and so on. 
     tic-tac-toe and number scrabble illustrate  a  that symmetries may be more convenient than the quantities conserved by those symmetries for formulating the notion of equivalence among states   b  that symmetries and conserved quantities are  however  logically interchangeable  and  c  that the rules of a game may be reformulated in such a fashion as to make identification of the conserved quantities easier or more convenient than the characterization of the symmetries. 
     finally  the formal correspondence between a 
     group of symmetry transformations and the observable quantities conserved by these symmetry transformations suggests that acquisition of symmetries 
may be as fundamental to cognitive development as is the acquisition of conservation operations. we have also seen how the presence of symmetry may be represented in the state space of a problem or game. 
 b  a second feature of a problem which is amenable to study utilizing the state space is a problem's infrastructure of subproblems. it has been commonly held that an effective problem solving technique is to establish subproblems or subgoals 
whose solution or attainment might assist in the conquest of the main problem. polya  suggests such an approach in discussing his problem solving 
'heuristics'  i t forms the basis of newell  shaw  & simon's general problem solver   and suggests to nilsson c1  p 1  one way to reduce the state space. but to establish rigorously the role of such identification of subgoals in human problem solving behaviour remains difficult and psychologists are divided even over the assumption of 'goal-directedness'  kimble  sec. 1 . characterization of subproblems as subspaces of the problem's state space should assist in investigating the behavioral consequences of a subproblem decomposition by the problem solver. one may further discuss  independently  the group of sym-
metry transformations of a subproblem t or explore the effects of the presence in a problem of different subproblems having identical  isomorphic  structure. 
     the above considerations suggest the utility of mapping the problem solver's steps as paths 

through the state space representation of the problem. baaed on the formal properties of the specific problem's state space  such as its symmetry and decomposition into subproblems  hypotheses can be formulated which predict the effect of this structure on the paths generated by the problem solver. then the door is open to the development and empirical test of general algorithmic or mechanical procedures that might replicate the properties of the paths generated by human problem solvers. the decision to represent problem solving behavior as paths through the state space of the problem is further motivated by the desire to make precise the data which needs to be 'explained' by a theory of human problem solving. 
1      in practice it may not always be easy to represent behavior in this fashion  since the uniquness of a problem's state space representation relies on the preciseness of the problem's statement. further  a problem solver's production of paths depends on his or her ability to discriminate among the perceptual or cognitive variables which characterize the states and legal moves of the problem. the best experimental situation then  is a problem whose states correspond to different discrete situations of an actual physical device  
such as tic-tac-toe  n-plle nim  or the tower of hanoi and tea ceremony problems to be discussed in section four. other available means for recording a subject*s behavior as a succession of states entered may include recordings of oral comments  written notes  or even gestures and eye movements  bartictt tl1  newell & simon c1   and young c1 . 
section i i i :  a  definitions and 

 b  general hypotheses 
 a  before proceeding with further discussion  definitions are given for the concepts central to the present approach. these definitions are based on and expanded from those given by nilsson . the state space of a problem is the set of 

distinguishable situations or states of the problem  together with the permitted transitions or 
moves from one state to another. the problem must specify an initial state and one or more goal 

states  and so the state space may be visualized 

as a directed graph  figure 1 . 
a eubspace of the state space is a subset of 

the states  together with the permitted transitions 
which obtain between these states in the subset. a subproblem is a subspace of the state space with its own initial and subgoal state s . for a sub-

problem it is required that if the initial state is not the initial state of the problem  it can be entered from a state outside the subspace; and if a subgoal state is not a goal of the main problem  it can be used to exit from the subspace - i.e.  to enter a state of the problem outside of the subproblem. there are often many ways to decompose a particular problem into subproblems  which correspond to different choices of subspaces within the state space. 
     two problems  or subproblems  are said to be isomorphic if and only if there is a bijective 

mapping from the state space of the first onto the state space of the second and: 1  the initial state of the first problem is mapped onto the 
initial state of the second  1  the set of goal states of the first problem is mapped surjectively onto the goal states of the second  and 1  a transition from one state to another is permitted in one problem if and only if the corresponding transition is permitted in the other. 
       an automorphism of a problem is an isomorphism of the problem onto itself and is called a symmetry transformation or symmetry automorphism. 

the set of a l l the automorphisms of a problem forms a group under the binary operation of composition or the successive application of two automorphisms. 
this group is called the symmetry group or auto-

morphism group of the problem. 

     the states of a problem may be distinguished by virtue of having different discrete values for a set of variables called observables. these 

observables  characterizing the problem states  may refer to color  position  or number  etc. an observable is said to be conserved by a group of 

symmetry transformations  if and only if for any state  the value of that observable is unchanged by any element of the group of transformations. 
     let s be a state of a problem  and consider the set of a l l states which can be obtained by applying automorphisms or symmetry transformations from a group g to s. this set of states is called the orbit of s under the automorphism group g. two states are said to be conjugate modulo the 

symmetry group g if they are in the same orbit under g. 
     the orbits within the state space form mutually disjoint equivalence classes of states. a new 

and simpler state space may now be constructed canonically by considering each equivalence class as a state in its own right  or alternatively  by selecting one representative state from each orbit. the state space thus obtained is said to have been reduced with respect to its symmetry group g  or reduced modulo g. g may be the full automorphism group of the original state space  or any subgroup thereof. 
a path in the state space of a problem is a 

sequence of states s   s   ... s such that for 
1 	n 
i - 1  1  	 n-l the pair s  s 	represents a 

permitted transition of the problem. 	a solution 

path for a problem is a path in which e. is the 

initial state and s is a goal state  with s. ...  n 	1 
s . neither initial nor goal states of the problem. two paths within respective isomorphic problems are said to be congruent  modulo the isomor-

phism  if one path is the image of the other under the isomorphism. 
     we have seen above that one way to reduce the size of the state space is with respect to a group of symmetry automorphisms of the problem. a second means of state space reduction is with respect to the subproblem structure. the state space may be described  albeit nonuniquely  as a union of mutually disjoint subspaces  such that for any ordered pair of subspaces  a transition 
exists from a state in the first to a state in the second. an entire subspace may thus be regarded as a single state in the reduced state space  and 

a transition is permitted from one subspace to another whenever a transition does in fact exist from a state in the one to a state in the other. each subspace  now a state in the reduced state space  becomes also a subproblem of the original problem whenever a particular entry state is designated as  initial*  and any or all of its exit states are designated as 'goals'. we then say that the state space has been reduced modulo i t s 

subproblem decomposition. 

     finally  one may address the concept of a non-random or a goal-directed path within a problem 

or subproblem. roughly speaking  a non-random path would differ locally - perhaps in the number of 'turns* or 'loops' - from random paths generated through a problem's state space representation. a 
1 goal-directed path is a solution path which does not 'double back' on itself within the state space  moving consistently * towards' rather than 'away from' the goal state. criteria for defining 'loops'  or 'doubling back'  or 'distance from the goal state'  etc.  are for the present to be established in the context of each specific problem under consideration. while these criteria may differ across problems of different structure  they will remain constant across populations of subjects solving a particular problem. 
 b  in problem solving it may be assumed that the solver acts sequentially upon problem situations  states  to generate successor states  a process which can be described  as discussed above  by means of paths through a state space representation of the problem. it is nowhere suggested that the problem solver 'perceives1 the state space as an entity during problem solving. the syoraetry properties which have been discussed are formal properties of the state space  which may 

 as in tic-tac-toe  or may not  as in number scrabble  correspond to geometrical or perceptual properties of the problem readily apparent to the problem solver. 
¡¡¡¡¡¡the approach to this stage of research has been to formulate hypotheses respecting the paths generated by problem solvers in the state space of a problem. such hypotheses 1  are motivated by the formal properties of the state space under discussion  and 1  represent the anticipated effects of the problem structure in shaping problem solving behavior. the following hypotheses of a more-or-less general nature are suggested. 
hypothesis 1 

      a  in solving a problem  or subproblem  the subject generates non-random  goal-directed paths in the state space representation of the problem  or subproblem   and  b  when sub-goal states are attained  the path exits from the respective subproblems . 
hypothesis 	1 

     identifiable 'episodes' occur during problem solving corresponding to the solution of various subproblems. that is  path segments occur during certain episodes which do not constitute the  direct  solution of a problem  but which do constitute the solution of the isomorphic subproblems of the problem. 
hypotheeis 1 

     the problem solver's paths through isomorphic subproblems tend to be congruent. 
hypothesis 1 

     given a symmetry group g of automorphisms of the state space of a problem  there tend to occur successive path segments congruent modulo g in the 

state space. 
     it may be that the validity of hypotheses 1 and 1 depends on the particular way that the state space of the problem is decomposed into subproblems since such a decomposition is often not unique. hypothesis 1  symmetry acquisition  is suggestive of the 'insight' phenomenon which changes the gestalt of the problem solver  wertheimer  1o   and often plays an important role in the eventual problem solution. 
     these hypotheses are not to be regarded as a definitive list  but rather as preliminary and 
indicative of the kind of analysis possible of the fairly general constraints on the properties which 
mechanical models must display to simulate human problem solving. 
section iv: two problem solving studies and suggestions for further research 
     let us seek to make the foregoing ideas more concrete by considering two problems that have been used for empirical investigation  luger c1    . the tower of hanoi problem has been extensively discussed in the literature c1  and its state space considered by nilsoon . it is a natural problem to consider both because its 
well defined state space has a rich subproblem structure and because its state space possesses somewhat more symmetry than is immediately apparent in the problem environment. 
     in the tower of hanoi problem four concentric rings  labelled 1 1 respectively  are placed in order of size  the largest on the bottom  on the first of three pegs labelled a  b  c ; the apparatus is pictured in figure 1. the object of the problem is to transfer a l l the rings from peg a to peg c in the minimum number of moves. only one ring may be moved at a time  and no larger ring may be placed over a smaller one on any peg. 

figure 1 	 1 to r  the 1-ring tower of hanoi a 

tea ceremony problems in their 'start* states. 
a b c 1 1 show the isomorphism relationship. 
effects of problem structure on the problem solver's transitions. behavior. if valid  these hypotheses would offer 
1      the tea ceremony  see figure 1  is an isomorph of the tower of hanoi. three people - a host and an elder and younger guest - participate in the ceremony. there are four tasks they perform - listed in ascending order of importance: feeding the fire  serving cakes  serving tea  and reading poetry. the host performs a l l the tasks at the start of the ceremony  and the tasks are transferred back and forth among the participants until the eldest guest performs a l l the tasks  at which time the ceremony is completed. there are two constraints on the one-at-a-time transfer of tasks: 1  only the least important task a person is performing may be taken from him  and 1  no person may accept a task unless it is less important than any task he is performing at the time. the object of the tea ceremony game is to transfer a l l the four tasks from the host to the elder guest in the fewest number of moves. as with the tower of hanoi  the subject attempts the game repeatedly  starting over again whenever he or she wishes until the rings are moved  or tasks transferred  in the fewest possible number of 
     in the isomorphic relationship between the tea ceremony and the tower of hanoi the people host  youth  and elder - correspond respectively with pegs a  b  and c. the four tasks - feeding the fire  serving cakes  serving tea  and reading poetry - correspond respectively with rings 1  1  1  and 1. i t can be checked that the initial state  goal state  and legal moves of the two games correspond. 
     figure 1 is the complete state space representation of the tower of hanoi/tea ceremony problem. bach circle stands for a possible position or state of the games. the four letters labelling a state refer to the respective pegs  people  on which the four rings  tasks  are located. for example  state ccbc means that ring 1  fire   ring 1  cakes   and ring 1  poetry  are in their proper order on peg c  performed by the elder . ring 1  tea  is on peg b  performed by the youth . a legal move by the problem solver always effects a transition between states represented by neighboring circles in figure 1. the solution path containing the minimum number of moves consists of the fifteen steps from aaaa to cccc down the right side of the state space diagram. 
figure 1 the state space representation of the tower of hanoi/tea ceremony problem. legal moves effect transitions between adjacent states. examples of subspaces are given. 
     the tower of hanoi/tea ceremony has a natural decomposition into nested subproblems. for example  to solve the 1-ring tower of hanoi problem  i t is necessary at some point to move the largest ring from its original position on peg a to peg c  but before this can be done the three smaller rfngs must be assembled in their proper order on peg b. the problem of moving the three rings from one peg to another may be termed a 1-ring subproblem  and constitutes a subset of the state space of the 1-ring problem. the 1-ring state space contains three isomorphic 1-ring subspaces  for which the physical problem solving situations are different by reason of the position of ring 1. 
each subspace becomes a subproblem when one of its entry states is designated as the initial state  and its exit states are designated as goal states. similarly  each 1-ring subspace contains three isomorphic 1-ring subspaces for a total of nine in the 1-ring state space; and each 1-ring subspace may be further decomposed into three 1-ring subspaces  comprising only three states apiece. note the examples in figure 1 or 1-  1-  and 1ring subspaces. 
     each n-ring subproblem  as well as the main problem  admits of a symmetry automorphism mapping a goal state of the n-ring problem onto the conjugate goal state which corresponds to transferring the n rings to the other open peg. were the three pegs of the tower of hanoi board to be arranged at the corners of an equilateral triangle  as are the people in the tea ceremony   the symmetry automorphism would represent the geometric operation of reflection about the altitudes of an equilateral triangle. 
     criteria are established tl1for 'non-randomness' and 'goal-directedness' of subject's paths through the tower of hanoi/tea ceremony state space. the number of 'turns * and 'loops' of a subject's path is compared with the 'turns1 and 'loops' of a random path of the same length generated in the tower of hanoi/tea ceremony state space. a 'metric* is defined also  a function of the number of states the subject's current state is distant from the goal state. if this function is non-increasing over the subject's path  the path is said to be 'goal-directed'. this same metric is established to measure goal dlrectedness within subproblems. when subgoal states are attained the path that exits from the subgoal is examined to see if it also exits from the subproblem. the first trial of figure 1 decomposes the state space modulo its 1-ring subproblems - each 1-ring subproblem is solved in the minimum number of steps  while the 1-ring subproblem is not. this represents a 1-ring 'episode' in the problem's solution. this same trial shows two congruent paths through isomorphic 1-ring subproblems. 
     the problem solving data of 1 adult subjects solving the tower of hanoi and 1 adult subjects solving the tea ceremony problems are reported in  1 & c1. except for hypothesis 1  the production of congruent paths through isomorphic subproblems   all the hypotheses are supported by the data. especially strong  near 1%  is the support of the special role played by subgoal states within the problem  hypothesis lb . 1% of all the subjects have at least one problem solving 'episode' with 1% showing two or more of the three theoretically possible 'episodes'  hypothesis 1 . 1% of all subjects in the studies interrupted a path and immediately produced a path segment that was the symmetric conjugate of the interrupted path  hypothesis 1 . this new path was often the minimum step solution path. 

1 


figure 1 the behavior of a subject solving the 

1-ring tower of hanoi problem. 
     figure 1 pictures the actual paths through the state space generated by one adult subject solving the tower of hanoi problem. this subject's behavior happened to conform to a l l four proposed hypotheses. the paths are both goaland subgoal-dlrected  and exit from the subproblem whenever a subgoal state is entered. the first two trials contain 1 instances  in 1 attempts  of minimum solution of the 1-ring subproblem  while the 1-ring subproblem has not yet been solved by the shortest path * a 1-ring 'episode'. trial 1 illustrates two congruent non-minimum paths through 1-rlng subproblem*. finally  trial 1 is interrupted and trial 1  the shortest solution path  follows as the image of trial 1 under the symmetry automorphism that exchanges pegs b and c. 

     figure 1 pictures the paths of an adult subject solving the tea ceremony problem. the paths within each problem are goal-directed  and whenever a subproblem's goal state is entered it is left by the unique path that also leaves the subproblem space. from the beginning the problem is reduced modulo its 1-task subproblems  since 

during the problem solving 1 of 1 of the 1-task subproblems are solved in the minimum number of steps. after the first 1-task subproblem  there is an 'episode' in which 1 of 1 of a l l further 1task subproblems are solved in the minimum number 
of steps but the entire problem  1-task  is not  reducing the problem by its 1-task subproblems. the first and second trials begin with congruent paths  non-minimum  through 1-task subproblems. the third trial is interrupted  and its symmetric conjugate - which solves the problem - is produced in the fourth trial. 
     in summary  the present paper suggests one natural way to make the strategy/structure distinction. we let the structure of a problem 

refer to the formal properties of its state space representation  such as its symmetry automorphisms and possible subproblem decompositions. he consider the subject's possible cognitive structures 

to include the conservation operations  symmetry and subproblem decompositions that the subject can apply to the problem situation. an example of this in the tower of hanoi is the ability of a subject to solve a l l 1-ring subproblems  no matter where they are in the context of the problem  in the minimum number of steps. these structures determine the states that the subject treats as distinct and those treated as equivalent. these may change during problem solving  leading to an effective reduction of the state space. a subject's behavior may be faithfully mapped as long as the state space representation that is utilised by the researcher is sufficiently detailed  in that it does not treat states as equivalent which the subject treats as distinct. 
we let the term strategy refer to particular 

rules or procedures for taking steps within the state space. different individuals may employ different strategies in solving the same problem  and the same individual may employ different strategies in solving different but isomorphic problems. the present paper does not explain strategies per se  but hypothesizes that even in 

the context of different strategies  certain patterns of behavior tend to occur as a consequence of the structure of the problem. 
     there are several obvious  very broad directions for further experimental research including 
broadening the domains both of problems and subject populations considered. another area of investigation is 'transfer' effects in the behavior of a subject solving different problems having related structure. the second author has in fact a study in progress considering transfer across isomorphic 
problem situations 1 j egan and greno  1 and reed  ernst  and banarji c1 have examined transfer effects in problems of homomorphic structure. 
