levels 1  decision making and 
certain problems op artificial 
intellect 
b.n.zavalishina  b.p.lomov  v.f.rubachin  institute of psychology academy of sciences of the dssr1 vavilov street  1a  moscow  ussr 
     pecularities of decision mpicing processes on eeneo-perceptual and speechthinking levels are described. the productive oharactes of these processes are demonstrated. 
     one of the traditional ways of artificial intellect constructing is an analysis of real decision making processes of man and subsequent formal description of them. heuristic programming  however  representing to many scientists mind an acme in realising this approach has not approved hopes  pinned on it neither practical* nor theoretical ones  see for example  1 . 
     prom the psychological point of view the initial position of heuristic modeling pf thinking  in particular the program of common decision maker problem by newell  simon  show  contradicts to the principal characteristics of mental processes: a to their reflective character  they are the reflection of objective world  but not an operating by simbols ; b to active character of this reflection  mental reflection is not a passive reproduction of outer world objects  it is not a reproductional choice  sorting of already acquired knowledge  it is cogaition  i.e. it is an active productive  bailing* from objects new and new content by means of including them into new systems of relations / l / . 
     on the present stage the research of man cognitive processes having been significantly realized in connection with de-

cision making  dm  problem. 
     in this paper it is supposed to analyse the peculiarities of decision making on a perceptive - identificative level  signal detecting  visual perception and identification  uncoding of aerophotographs and so on  and on speech-thinking level  operative tasks solving  in which the main purpose is to construct a mode of action * 
     there are many classifications of decision making situations. to characterize tasks being solved on different levels we use one of these classifications* 
     v.v.drudehinin and d.s.kontorov /1/ consider three types of decision making situations  systems   informative  operative  organizational  
informative decisions are to answer 

question1what is trully * and consist in situation diagnosis  'situation distinguishing1 according to the authors' terminology . 
pperative decisions are to answer 

question 'how to act' and consist in working out a mode of control* 
organizational decisions are to ans-

wer question 'what for a system or an organization it must be ' and consist in structure determining and in functions distributing in * supposed organization. 
     mentioned above classification permits to consider dm on perceptive-identificative level  perception and identification tasks  as informative decisions 

and working out a mode of acting by operative tasks solving as operative deci-

     there are two basic stages in dm processes: infoimative preparation of decision  stage of 'predicision' accord-

ing to p.k.anochin  - search and distinguishing information about situation  building its image; and procedure of dm itself - construction or actualization cf hypotheses about an object; working out a principal and a program of action. 
psychological peculiarities of 
decision making on perceptive  
     the process of solving a perceptiveidentificative task and especially its stage of informative preparation of decision is closely connected with search 

operations  with searching stimuli with 

searching indications of objects  being completed by forming object image. 
     one of the authors researched foiling perceptive image in the process of perception certain sets of figures representing arbitrary combination of straight and curve lines. phabe character of this process was demonstrated in this research. 
     in the first phase of perceptive image formation a position of figure in visual field relative to basic coordinates of space  general sizes and propor-

tions of the figure and basic colour are 

reflected. 
　　　　in the second phase reflection of the most sharp overall of figure counturs and its basic  the biggest  details 

takes place; specification of the figure colour characteristics in going on here. 
     in the third phase differentiation of figure small details and specification of its colour characteristics take place. 
     in the forth phase forming adequate image is being completed and its correcting is being carried out. 
     so a substancial psychological characteristics of a perceptive image forming and search operations  providing i t   is an intensive analitical-synthetical activity with distinguishing different indications of object in different phases of process* 
     analogours data were recieved by one of the authors by researching perception and identification of complex single and group objects  noisy images . objects alphabet consisted of 1 stimuli with 1 gradations of resolution  from 1 to 1 

1 

min/mm   
　　　two levels of information processing were demonstrated: 'topological* and  cathagorical'. on the former level  up to 1 min/mm  there were distinguished two underlevels: a grouping not clear 'blurrs' relative to their sizes;b grouping not clear images according to 'topology1; c inner-group differentiation.one the latter level  above 1 min/mm there were distinguished underlevels of grouping and differentiation of objects configurations as semantic 'formations' in conformity with their classes  underclasses  and types  i.e. it is being carried out section concretization. 
     researches of group compositions have shown that by significant distortion of an image by noises the losses of its elements could be compensated in cases of usage of outer obstacle steady indicators and also by increasing idea activity  imagination  and thinking activity. dispute the fact that this process is being carried out already beyond the limits of image resolution the aim of identification could be reached. 
     it has been demonstrated in experiments that the process of perception has an extensive search character and includes to more or less extent indicative components  taken from previous experience  it seems to counter only on separate sections. 
　　　the process of simple objects identification has completely different character. this process is curtailed and has no clearly distinguished stages  it is based on different ways of observing and on different operative units of perception. it is typical for identification a sharp shortening indications distinguishing process by preserving a definite set of familiarising components. in outer plan minimization comes to direct 'output' into symmetry axis or to figure centre  to excluding several regions from analysis  to more regulated observation of remained regions. in inner plan minimization comes to usage of different combinations of indications owing to distinguishing them  enlarging and posterior semantic coding. identification actions are realized in different time regimes. 
　　　in table 1 is shown a quantitative comparative characteristic of processes of perceptive studying and identifying on the level of basic multitude  definitions of object type according to the main parameters of eye movement during perception tasks solving . 
table 1. 
　comparative characteristic of perceptive studying and identifying processes  average data  
cka- duration quan- distribution of rac-  sec.  tity trajectory parate- 	m  of 	meters  %  
rie- of ot fic- trans- re- return tic task fie- sa- lati- ver-inovepro- solv- sa- tion onal se ments cess ing tion po- move- moveints ments ments 
percep-
etu! 1* ＜'1 1   1 1 
identifi-es- 1 q1 1 tion 1 1 1 1 dyi♀♀ 
     the search of given objects against 'motley' background as it takes place in the tasks of decording is more complecated. the strategy of objects search in decording processes has different character  depending on given task  content of decording objects  stage of searching and efficiency of operator. particularly on the stage of complex objects analysis and simple objects search there were revealed three types of searcht chaotic  choising or search itself and search by semantic analysis. for chaotic system-

1 

less search is typical dependence on its dynamics  on physical strength of stimuli perceived  there are absence of plan in work and low degree of communication here. for choising search is typical definite sequence in decording: a  movement according to planned search directions on the base of using inner samples and comparative analysis of perceived objects  parallel identification of objects   b  classification of perceived multitude upon relative submultitude on base of using outer samples  in aerophotograph itself  and comparative analysis  successive identification of objects . search by semantic analysis is based on course and effect associations correlation interconnections among situation elements. for this search is typical creating prelimenary system of hypotheses about content of studied situation. it is going an intensive analysis through synthesis. in the result of additional analysis certain hypotheses are thrown away* several hypotheses are confirmed and different ones are corrected. the decisions in complex perceptive-identificative tasks are connected not only with rechoising hypotheses  but building them  as well. 
     the dm stage on perceptive-identificative level  as we have already mentioned  includes operations of building and choising hypotheses and collating them with formed image of object. 
     for clearning general dynamics of process of hypothesis building there were carried out experiments on identification of noisy photoimages of geometrical figures with i1 resolution gradations  from 1 till 1 min/mm  in different time regimes  from 1 till 1 sec . 
     depending on task and physical conditions of experiment the choice of hypothesis can be realised on different levels. the knowledge of information a 
1 
priori provedes possibility of output to final level omitting a number of intermediate ones. in case of difficulty in hypothesis choising on the level of basic multitude there could be transition to less concrete levels. experimental researches testify that different perceptive and semantic indications including integral ones are used on every informative level. 
     the psychological analysis of the dm stage by digits recognition  inscription according to mcworth  and of the russian alphabets letters  with exposition time about 1 me  allowed to reveal the connection of this stage with level of perceptual image formingness and level of standard generalisation. as experiments showed  the whole number of standards'  from which singling out is 
realized  becomes actual by perception of each digit. in addition to this  the number of actualized 'standards'  the length of a series  is different for different digits. the indications by which the collation is taken are also changing 
     it turned out that by repeated expositions of the same digits subjects applied to other standards while recognizing them. it can be supposed that by multiple identification of an object it is collated every time with different 'standard*  'alphabet'  systems depending on what phase of image forming the collation is being carried out. one can say that those indications which man can uses by identification are sliding and 

depend on dynamics of image forming. doing it subjects collate every time the perceptual image only with a small quantity of 'standards' changing those indications according to which the collation is taken. 
     one can suppose that 'standards' search shortening is also conditioned by the fact that each of them is a generalized image of objects category. 'stan* 
dard' generalization accounts also for possibility of identification of objects which have not been met in previous experience but have features common with those objects which have been met. 
     thus dm processes on a perceptual identificative level - especially when dm is being done under difficult conditions - are characterized by the following peculiarities: 
     1. these processes as on the stage of information search and perceptual image forming  so on the proper dm stage have productive character expressing in: 

a  constant joining an object of 
perception or identification in new systems of connections by means of analytica-eynthetical activity  indications alphabet changing  alphabet's 'sliding' character    
b  changing a generalisation level 
of objects1 indications  transition from perceptive indications to semantic ones  enlargement of operative perception units . 
     1* dm procedure on this level is oarried out to a considerable extent not owing to actualization and sorting out  but owing to hypotheses constructing.we think that the latter circumstance is very important  as the situation of singling out sorting out hypothese is considered in the most works on dm problem 
 ref.1  as typical for a dm process. 
     1. a dm stage is substantially determined by a preclding standard of gaining lnfoxmatlon  by a character of perceptive image. in other words the image takes part in the process of actualization and singling out hypotheses not only as an objeot of collation  but also as an substantially thing; its features provide selectivity of hypotheses actualization. 

a - c 	abd a - e 	acf 
figure 1 
gavohologioal features of dm on a m fl*ch-th1nking level 
     one of the most important aspects of dm problem is that dm tasks solving first of all for action aims. 

     or saying it in other words  dm is dm on action  on a definite mode of acti-

on in a gi en situation. 
in the psychological analysis of in-

tatttfluw flgciflfrpff processes allows us to draw a conclusion auout substantial relations existing between different cognitive results of a dm process  between 'sliding' images and formed hypotheses or actualized ones   the operative deci-

sion analysis  i.e. decision* about an 

action mode in a situation  has to answer the question whether the same substantial relations exist between cognitive and iperational components of dm. in other words  we must obtain an answer to a question whether an operational scheme is conditioned by cognitive activity or operational object's transformations are   symbolic'  formal activity.  we would remind you that just in the latter sense this question is considering in heuristic programming . 
     one of the authors has developed experimental tasks in which an action 
mode construction is the most important aim of subjects. in general the task consisted in disposing on a surface six objects designated by letters 'a'  'b' 'c'  'd'  'e'  'f on the basis of knowledge about the mutual disposition of these objects  for example  a....b  a....d  see figure 1 . this disposition was given by a logical condition of the task  and a 'cue' to the usage of this condition was given in an instruction. figure 1 shows the result of solving one of tasks  i.e. required configuration of six objects . 
　　for analysis purpose we considered actual action modes of subjects as unity of a reflective component  the action principle  and of an operative one  ope-

1 

rational scheme  action program . 
we shall understand by the action pectively. these levels have analogous 
hierarchic structure in which the reflec-
principle  ap  a factual  not always con- tion character of task conditions is fix-

scious  or verbalized  reflection of pro- ed and first of all  the degree of singl-
perties of both a base and others ob.iecte ing out essential properties of the trans-
of transformation  really participating in activity regulation   that object is formation object. the third level is the hieghest  the most general  it is cha-

called 'base'  from which the subject begins his decision  i.e. which he fixes first of all . 
　　　　by the operational copponent  oc we understand such a real operation system. with help of which a situation transformation for goal achievement 1b being carried out. 
racterized by singling out two objects having three constraints . 
     analysis has showed that interrelation of levels of ap and oc is characterized by the following peculiarities: 
in our case transformation situation  ed with frequency characteristics  the      an operational scheme is falling behind from the appropriate level of ap.besides that  thib falling behind is relat-

consists of objects 'a1  'b1   c1  'd1  
 e1  *ff together with their relations 
 disposition with respect to each other . 
     but these objects are not homogeneous in regard to an amount of relatione  i.e. in regard to the quantity of fceigihbourst  or objects with which they are standing side by side . the objects stan-
ding in the middle pointb of the configuration  see figure i  the objects fbf and c1  have three relations  i.e. they are standing side by side simultaniously with three objects. the other four objects 'a*  'd1  fef    f l are disposed at the extremes of the configuration and axe standing side by side only with the two objects. this nonhomogeneity of objects in logical task conditions is fixed by the quantity of conditions per object: the objects having two relations are represented by three conditions  three couples . it is sufficient for task solving to single out and fix two objects having three relations  all six objects will be incircled and fixed in the configuration . thus the presence of objects with three relations is an essential property of the transformation object. 
     we succeeded in singling out three levelb of ap and three levels of oc resrize of ap level occurs fabter than the rize of oc level  and time characteristics. in particular the construction of an operat jnal scheme of the highest le-
vel occurs later than achievement of this ap level. 
     thus there have been revealed in our experiments on operational task solving  the following characteristics: 
i. essential dependence of an action 
program content  an operational scheme  on action principle  the reflective component   
     1. tendency in the course of task solving to relization of these components at the graving level of generalization. 
     1. regular falling behind of oc froa 
 p in time; besides that  its overcoming is possible only in the process of special activity on oc construction at the level of achieved ap  or in other words oc is not an automatically consequence of ap . it can be suggested that the noted incoincidence of ap and oc levels is a sufficiently typical characteristic of 
various types of man activity. evidently this fact of relative independence of e stage of operational action schema construction was a base for its absolutization and known oposition of cognitive activity of man in the theory of heuristic 

1 

programming* 
     1. shown by us a fact of a special construction of an operational schema proves that an operative task solving doesn't necesserialls mean down a situation of selecting an action mode from 

possible ones. the last is only a peculiar case of dm about action at the level of speech-thinking processes. 
1* the processes of informational preparation of dlcision essentially determine the procedure of dm on all levels of dm. on a perceptual-recognizing level it is expressed in peculiarities of information search and the level of formingness of a perceptual image that provide selectivity of actualization and construction of those or these hypotheses. 1y forming action mode  on a speech-thinking level  this is expressed in corresponding generalization level of an action program to the generalization level of the action principle although the foostone falls behind the latter. 
1. the process of dm at the both stages  preparation and dm itbelf  is producti-

ve 'bailing* a new content from an ob-

ject by means of including i t in new and new systems of relations. it results in ve characteristics inherent in all levels of man dm can become one of the effective approaches to artificial intellect problem solving. 


changing the generalization level of singled out propertiee of an object  showing up more substantial properties of an object  changing its indications alphabety enlargement of operative units of perception . 
1* the dm procedure consists as a rule not in a mechanical sorting out but in selective actualization or hypotheses construction  on a perceptual-recognizing level   or in a special construction of an action mode  on a speech-thinking level * 
1* psychological peculiarities of dm being showed up in experiments allow to suggest that simulation of mentioned abo-
1 
