 	the time needed for answering questions 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　that require deduction at the  common we describe a  question-answer  informa- sense  level. tion system implemented on computer besm-1 

in the time-shared system. the  questionanswer  system is capable of deducing facts that have not been explicitly given to it by using a large data base and interpreting some of data as rules of inference. the system employs a special procedure which allows not to use contradictory information even if it is contained in the data base. 
1. introduction 
　　　　　the   1jesti1n-answer  system developed at the institute of applied mathematics of the ussr academy of sciences i s capable of accepting various information and  by using such information  it can answer questions posed to i t . new information received by the system broadens the stock of its  knowledge  and  hence  widens the scope of questions the system can answer. the  question-answer  system is multipurpose  since the field of its application is not fixed beforehand  being determined by the contents of the information introduced into the system. when answering questions  the system carries out logical analysis of the information available to i t ; in the course of such analysis the system deduces new facts that are not explicitly given to i t . thus  the system not only searches the asked-for data among the particular facts known to i t   but also carries out deductive inference interpreit should be noted that in case of a large data base there arises a problem associated with that information introduced into the system may prove to be contradictory. the  questiobf-answer  system employe a special procedure which  on the one hand  makes it possible to remove during the input a considerable portion of the information which comes in contradiction with the  knowledgeof the system and  on the other hand  allows the system  when answering questions  not to use contradictory information even if it is contained in the data base. 
　　　the creation of a multipurpose information system employing deductive inference involves the following main problems: 
　　　1 .choice of a language for presenting information and posing questions. 
1.realization of logical inference  
i.e. the choice of methods which would a l low carrying out effective logical analysis of the information known to the system with a view to obtaining requested data. 
1.organization of the data base. 1. 
e. the choice of methods of presentation and arrangement of information in machine memory  that would ensure rapid information retrieval. 
1.language fob communication with the 

ting some of the received information as in our choice of a communication rules of inference. language we were guided by two principles  
 sqa  o f f .black  1 ;  deducom  o f j.slagle  1 ;  qa1  of c.green  1 ;  rof  of r. levien and .maron  1 ; etc. evidently  the main factors which determine the possibility of practical application of a de-
ductive information system are the volume of the data base the system can effectively use and the high-speed of the programs that realize logical inference. in this connection  when developing the  question-information should be close to a natural language  with language of predicate calculus or property lists serving as the basis. evidently  the use of property lists 
for presenting information is sufficiently convenient for man-system communication  since such a presentation can be regarded 
as a simplest model of a natural language. on the other hand  presentation of input information with the aid of property lists                                              the first being mari mum simplicity of the language adopted for communication with when developing the present system  the system and the second  its sufficient we have taken into account the experience flexibility for the system to demonstrate gained in the creation of other deductive good  understanding  in most diverse appliinformation systems such as  advice taker  cations. usually attempts are made that of j.mccarthy  1 :  sir  of b.raphael  1 ; the language for external presentation of 
answer  system  we tried that i t should allows easy creation of a model that will combine the possibility of accepting a lar- provide faster question answering than ge bulk of factual data with an ability of with the use of the theorem-proving proan effective carrying out of the logical cedure. analysis of these data  so as to minimize 
1 

　　　the basic language structure of the  question-answer  system for forming statements and questions is a triple  .attribute  object   value     a   o      for short . such a notation means that an attribute  a  of an object with the name  o  has the value  v    for instance  the fact that the colour of a car is blue can be expressed by the following triple: colour car blue. an essential feature of such presentation of information is that in the description of properties of an object by means of attribute-value pairs we use  words  whose meaning is defined  generally speaking  within the framework of a natural language. properties are ascribed to an object which is defined by an individual name. an individual name can also be used as a value of a certain attribute  and therefore descriptive 
structures of any degree of complexity can be created. though words of a natural language can be used as individual names of objects  these words must be maximum unique in the sense that passing over from one object to another should always cause a change of the name. in this connection the use of special standard names of objects is allowed  these standard nagenerate new elementary propositions. the rules of inference have the form: if a1 and a1 and...and am then b1 and b1 and... and bn  where ai. and bj 1 i m  1 j n  are elementary propositions extended by attaching variables x1 x1 x1... as additional atoms. 
mes being words of the form c1 c1 c1....   quiring enumeration of answers the system on request of the user the system deli- delivers a sequence of records in the vers a current free standard name and al- question format with the values substituso inhibits the use of the name whose ted for the variables. if no appropriate 
number exceeds the current value. values can be found for the variables entering into the question  the answer to such a question will be  unknown . besides triples proper  the language also permits the use of negations. 
i.e. structures of the form false  triple . 	it should be pointed out that when      elementary questions that can be posed for the system to answer have the form  a   o   v    and faifib  a  o or   the system can also be asked a composite question consisting of several elementary questions  e.g. colour car blue and size car large  . possible answers of the system to these questions are  tea    no  and  unknown . moreover  the system can be asked questions which require enumeration of answers. triples in such questions contain variables of the form k1 k1 k1 -   when answering questions that require enumeration of answers  the system selects appropriate values of the variables and thus forms a set of answers. naturally  a question requiring enumeration of answers may be composite  and in this case the values selected for the same variables entering in different triples are matched as the answer to a question re-

thus  in the description of particular information  employed as statements are triples  negations  and also composite statements having the form p1 and p1  where p1 is a triple or a negation and p1 is a triple or a negation or a composite statement   
　　　for the system to be able to execute deductive inference proceeding from particular facts known to i t   it is necessary to specify rules of inference. in the present system the rules of inferexice have the form of conditional statements! if  condition  then  consequence    triples describing the condition and the consequence besides words contain variables of the form x1 x1 x1 . *   for example: if smaller x1 and equal x1 x1 tbm smaller x1 x1. 
　　　hence  the  knowledge  of the system can be defined as a set of facts provable within the framework of the following formal theory. 
　　　1. atoms: words  i.e. strings of letters and/or numerals. 
　　　1. elementary propositions:  axo  
 v  or false  axo  v   where  a     o     v  are atoms . 
　　　1. axioms: a set of particular elementary propositions known to the system. 
　　　1. rules of inference: methods of combining elementary propositions  that a certain particular statement is communicated to the system  this statement is not entered at once into the data base  but the system itself preliminarily substitutes it by a question. if the answer to such question is  tes  or  no   the system does not accept this fact and answers  respectively  either: known  or  statement contradicts to fact known to system . the system also checks the incoming new rules of inference for novelty and consistency with the  knowledge  it has at the moment. to this end. the system first of all checks the deducibility of the consequent of a given rule from the conditions determined by its antecedent  using the already known rules of inference. the system also checks whether any particular facts contradictory to the rule of inference being checked are deductible. thus  the deductive possibilities of the system are used for data input check 
     besides statements and questions  means of communication with the system are furnished by prescriptions . the use of prescriptions makes it possible to obtain additional information  change the state of the data base  etc. particularly  the user can require that the system should present the proof of the answer it gave to the preceding question. he can also require that the system should  forget  a certain particular sta-

1 

tement or rule of inference. 
1.organization of the system 
       all words entering into every incoming message are encoded by using a spe-
the system that is capable of solving far more complicated  problems. 
         in the operation of the  sjjestiohanswer  system the answers of the machine are printed with indentions. 

cial dictionary. therefore the internal 
presentation of triples has a simple fixed structure  so that such structures can be effectively searched for and compared. 
　　　when answering questions  the system carries out deductive inference by comparing questions with the consequents of the rules of inference and processes subquestions obtained from corresponding antecedents in the same manner as the questions. first the very tree of inference is constructed  with due accovint of cycles that may originate  and measures are taken that elimination of such cycles should not cause loss of answers. then the constructed tree is used by the search 
procedure of  depth-first  type to obtain answers. preliminary constructing of the inference tree offers a possibility to ignore non-resultant branches in proof presentation. 
　　　as has been noted above  when deducing answers  the system does not employ contradictory information. this is ensured by storing the current situation after the obtaining of answers to each sub question and by making an attempt to obtain answers to the negation of a given sub question. if answers to the negation of the subquestion are obtained  contradictory answers are excluded from the list of answers to the subquestion proper. the revealed contradictions are stored and can be delivered on request of the user who  together with the answer to the question  then receives a message about the presence of contradictions in the data base. 
　　　one of the main factors determining the system effeciency is the organization of information files. the  cjjestion-answer  system employs various information structu-
res  namely  lists  trees  mixed tables  ordered files. similarly to the case of the  rdf  system  the data base in our system consists of three files  each of them being ordered with respect to one of the triple positions. this allows rapid readout of the necessary data. to minimize data recording time  the memory is made two-staged. the incoming information is first accumulated in a special  relatively small  buffer and  after the buffer is filled  this information is merged with each of the three files. 
1- example 
       the example given below is a record of a dialogue actually conducted with the  question-answer  system with the aid of a time-sharing terminal on the computer besm-1. naturally  this simple example which is purely illustrative in character demonstrates only some potentialities of 
1 
1 conclusions 
　　　the  1jesti1n-answkr  system is written in the autocode of the computer hesm-1. the program contains about 1 instructions. by now the system has been tested in solving a number of problems  particularly such simple but in a certain sense  reference  problems as  monkey and bananas    mikado  etc. . the system answers questions quite rapidly. thus  for example  the solution of the  monkey and bananas  problem takes about 1 second of the processor time. during the tests the data base of the system could contain more than 1 statements. principally the volume of the data base is determined 
by the capacity of the disc memory and can be substantially increased. our nearest plans for the development of the system include a certain extension of the language to communicate with i t   as well as the uee of special heuristics with a view to further improving i t s work. 
　　　we believe that systems of the  question-answer  type may prove useful not only for solving information retrieval problems  but may also constitute an important component in a number of other systems being developed within the framework of the  artificial intelligence  project  such as systems for understanding natural language  analysis of scenes  plan ning of actions  etc. 
rerences 
1. j.mccarthy  programs with common sense  symp. mechanisation of thought processes  teddington  nat.phye. lab.  1. 
1. b.raphael  a computer program which 
 understands   proc. afips  fall joint computer conference  vol.1. 1. 
1. f.black  a deductive question-answering system  semantic information processing  mit press  cambridge. mass.  1. 
1. j.r.slagle  experiments with a deductive question-answering program  communications of the acm  vol. 1  no. 1  1. 
1. c.green  theorem-proving by resolution as a basis for question-answering systems  machine intelligence  vol. 1  edinburg univ. press  1. 
1. r.e.levien  m.e.maron  a computer system for inference execution and 
data retrieval  communications of the acm  vol. 1  no 1  1. 
1 
