 

     an intelligent program which accepts natural language queries can allow a non-technical user to easily obtain information from a large non-uniform data base. this paper discusses the design of a program which will tolerate a wide variety of requests including ones with pronouns and referential phrases. the system embodies a certain amount of common sense  so that for example  i t 
 knows when i t does or does not understand a particular request and it can bypass actual data base 
search in answering unreasonable requests. the system is conceptually simple and could be easily adapted to other data bases. 
1. introduction 

     the prime obstacle for non-technical people who wish to use computers is the need to learn a special language for communicating with the machine. we feel that the time is ripe for natural language systems which can be used by persons who are not trained in any special computer language. 
such a system must embody a degree of  common sense   must have a relatively large and complete 
vocabulary for the subject matter to be treated  must accept a wide range of grammatical constructions  and of course must be capable of providing the information and computations requested by the 
user. 
     in order to design such an ambitious system  it is imperative that the universe of discourse be limited in some way. this paper describes work done on a natural language question-answering system for a data base containing detailed records of u.s. naval aircraft maintenance and flight information over a period of time. while the subject matter of this system is therefore quite constrained  we feel that the issues we are confronting are 
nonetheless general. in particular  we will describe the representation of common sense information and procedures  problems of pronoun reference and storage of partial results  the ability to an-
swer vague or poorly defined questions  the ability of the system to recognize when requests are 
meaningless or too poorly formulated to answer  as well as linguistic issues. 
1. the data base 

     we have obtained a data base from the navy consisting of detailed records of aircraft maintenancy and flight information extending over a 
*this work is supported by the office of 
naval research under contract nooo1-a-1-
1. auxiliary support was received from the joint services electronics program  u.s. army  
u.s. navy  and u.s. air force under contract daab-1-c-1. 
period of time each time a plane is serviced  a 
record is made including such information as the time and duration of the maintenance  who performed i t   what action was taken  which parts were used or cannibalized  the manufacturers of these parts  and whether or not the service was scheduled or unscheduled. records on the number of flights and the number of hours in the air are also kept for each plane. there are roughly thirty different record formats which occur in the data base  each containing between ten and twenty separate fields  where each field encodes information 

like the date of the action  type of aircraft  serial number of the aircraft  type of malfunction  component serviced  the work station performing maintenance and so on. 
     we are not addressing the problem of restructuring the data base; our system is interfaced to the record formats as they exist  although it 
would not be difficult to adapt the system to a new data base format 1. basic system operation 

1 prestored request forms. 

     the system understands requests by matching the requests with prestored request patterns. during this process  standard terms are substituted for synonymous words or phrases  simple misspellings are corrected and appropriate items are inserted for pronouns and referential phrases. if the matching is successful  a unique prestored re-

quest form will be specified  consisting of three 

structures: 
1. an english sentence skeleton which expresses the meanings of the request if fragments of the original request sentence are inserted this will be called the request meaning  skeleton. 

1. a search function which can operate on the data base and return the appropriate answer s . this will be called the search function skeleton. 

1. an english sentence skeleton which can be used to answer the request when filled in with retrieved data. tills will be called the answer skeleton. 

given a request sentence which exactly match-
es a prestored request form  the computer will type  is it correct to assume that you want to 
know  instantiated request meaning skeleton    if the user does not object  the instantiated search function skeleton will be executed.  for a description of the data base search functions  see 
 l .  
     if no exact match is possible  the program will record the request sentence for the benefit of the programmers  and try to use various techniques to make a partial or fuzzy match with some pattern. if it succeeds in this partial match  

1 

the program types the message  do you want to know  instantiated request meaning skeleton    if the user says yes  then the system will proceed as before; if the user says no  the system will attempt to make weaker matches to patterns. eventually  if the user does not think that any of the proposed internal meanings for his request are reasonable  the system will type a default request to rephrase the question. in no event will the system ever answer a question unless the user has agreed that the internal form returned for his approval expresses the question he wishes to have answered. 
1 processing simple requests. 

     the program operates in one pass; it does not have a separate parsing phase. as words are encountered left-to-right  the program traces through a prestored request network  a structure somewhat 

reminiscent of an augmented transition network.1 instead of nodes labeled  noun    adjective   etc.  the prestored request network has nodes which correspond either to specific words or to phrase types; 

some examples of phrase types are *time-period 
which matches phrases like  during april 1    between april 1 and april 1    in 1   etc.  and *number-planes which matches phrases like  any phantoms    more than three phantoms    a phantom or a skyhawk   etc. attempts are made to cor-
rect spelling to facilitate matches at each node. each time a node is matched successfully  a phrase 

type variable is given as a value the matched 

phrase from the request sentence  transformed into a canonical representation. for example   during 
april 1  is transformed into  time-period april 
1 april 1.  
     eventually  either there is no match in the network for some word in the request sentence  or all the words in the request are processed. in the former case  various kinds of  fuzzy matching  will be tried to guess at the meaning of the request  in a manner similar to that in parry1.  fuzzy matching involves dropping one or more words from the request to force a match . if all the words have been processed  a check will be made to see if the last node processed is associated with a unique 
prestored request form  see section 1 . if so  this prestored request form is assumed to be the appropriate one for the given request and processing continues as described in section 1. if more than one prestored request form remains as a descendent of the last processed node  an attempt is made  using the context registers  to decide which 

prestored request form is intended. 
1 context registers and pronoun reference. 

     once a user has signalled his agreement that the instantiated answer skeleton represents the intended meaning of his request  the program fills certain global program areas called context regis-

ters with information that may aid in anawerlng 

subsequent questions. there are context registers corresponding to each of the phrase types which can occur as nodes in the prestored request network  as well as registers for the answer to each request and for all the  hits  encountered in generating the answer  unless the number of hits exceeds a set limit. if information required for instantiating a prestored request form is missing  the program will fill in the missing items from the current context register values for the missing variables. so  for example  if the phrase  during april  is encountered with no year specified  the current year in the context registers is assumed to be intended. 
     the context registers are also used to handle pronoun reference. if a pronoun or referential phrase  e.g.  the plane   is encountered  it is matched against the appropriate phrase types in the prestored request network  e.g. *specificplanes . the daughters of all nodes which cannot be eliminated are then explored  until a unique phrase type can be chosen to represent the referent.  often  especially late in a sentence  there 
will only be one possible continuation in the network  and thus only one possible phrase type to which the referential phrase or pronoun must refer.   the current context register value for this phrase type will then be bound to this phrase type 
variable. 
     certain other phrases have the effect of limiting the scope of the overall data base search. 
for example   of these  followed by a request specifies that the search should be carried out on the data in the context register containing the hits from the last request. certain phrases which can occur in sentences are not included in the prestored request network. such phrases include time phrases  like  on april 1   or  between april i and april 1   as well as phrases denoting work 
centers  bases to which aircraft are assigned  des-
criptions of malfunctions  ways in which malfunctions were discovered  and others. 
     these phrases can occur in different places within a sentence  and are handled wherever they occur by the same mechanisms. such phrases generally act as qualifiers for events  i.e. they require that events satisfy extra criteria such as occurence at a particular location or in a particular manner. 
1 an example. 

     figure 1 shows a simplified portion of the prestored request network. note that both the active and passive forms of requests are stored directly  instead of storing just one form  e.g. the active  and a set of transformations. 
suppose that the request 
 1  please tell me if phantom number a1 had any engine maintenance during april 
1. 
is given to the program. this request will match the nodes leading to prestored request form 1  will set context variables *specific-planes to   plane-type f1  tail-number a1    *maintenance-actions to   type-equipment engine  typemaintenance any   and *tlme-period to  time-period april 1 april 1 . 
     the request meaning skeleton will then be instantiated  and the message 
 1  is it correct to assume that you want to know if the f1 with tall number a1 had any engine maintenance between april 1 and april 1  typed out to the user. if the user types  yes  then the program will execute the instantiated search function skeleton and fill in the spaces 

1 

for example 
　　　there are technical difficulties in enumerating a l l the sentence patterns that can occur. we have solicited and collected sample questions from a number of persons as a start. of course  i t i s likely that when this system i s made avail-
able to actual users  a large number of new sentence patterns will have to be added to the pre-
 1  did it have any unscheduled landing gear quest forms  see section 1  to total between 
maintenance  
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　1 and 1. this will match the same prestored request form as did sentence  1   but in this case   i t   will match 
a learning scheme could be devised to add 
*specific-planes  and the contents of the current new items to the network. if a user eventually 
context register for *speclfic-planes w i l l be ashit a pattern by rephrasing a request  and agreed 
sumed to apply for this sentence also. this systhat his earlier requests had had the same meaning 
tem does check for number agreement  so that as the one that ultimately succeeded  then pat-
 1  did they have any unscheduled landing  terns matching his earlier requests could be added 
gear maintenance  
in suitable form to the network pointing to the 
would fail to match the contents of context regissame search  answer and meaning skeletons as the 
ter *speclfic-planes which is singular  and would h i t pattern. one would have to be quite cautious  
trigger the error message  i do not know what though about the potential loss of precision; such 'they' refers to.  note that in a discourse   1  a scheme might be most useful for the designers of 
may have a valid meaning  referring back to an the system for deliberately adding new patterns 
earlier line of questioning; for now  the program that had the same meaning as patterns previously 
will not look further back than the current conencoded. for further discussion  see colby et a l .   
tents of context registers. new context information merely supercedes the old. thus  once a line 
of questioning is dropped  the context for that 	an effort has been made to combine search 
1 

function skeletons. for example  1    1    1  and  1  below all point to the same search function skeleton  though the request meaning skeletons and answer skeletons for each are different. 
 1  did any phantoms have bird strike damage during april  
 1  how many phantoms had bird strike damage during april  
 1  did ten or more phantoms have bird strike damage during april  
 1  list all the phantoms which had bird strike damage during april. 
1 common sense. 

     we would like to trap certain types of  unreasonable  requests without actually performing a data base search for answers. for example the requests 
 1  did any phantom have more than 1 engine maintenances during august 1  or 
 1  did any skyhawk crash more than 1 times last month  
are suspicious  just as 
 1  did you eat more than 1 chickens for dinner last night  
would be. whenever a request form includes a comparison with a number  a check can be added to the request form  using simple tables giving an order of magnitude estimate for items like the number of man-hours for various types of maintenance  average frequency of failure rates  and information about the fact that certain events  e.g. crashes  typi-
cally happen only once to a particular airplane. 
     in addition  we would eventually like to include an auxiliary semantic network to allow the system to answer questions like 
 1  does an f1 have propellers  
 1  what components are given periodic maintenance on a skyhawk  
     it is a long range goal of this research to have the system answer vaguely formulated questions like: 
 1  are there any common factors in the maintenance histories of the two phantoms 
         which crashed last month  in order to answer such questions  the system must have an understanding of what  common factors  are: similar events or event sequences  servicing by the same shops  the missing of periodic services  failures of the same subsystems  etc. 
1 historical perspective. 

     i have called this an engineering approach because i t falls outside the boundaries of traditional linguistics. there is no dictionary entry for many of the words  understood  by the system; in general  words are defined implicitly within each pattern in which they occur in the prestored network. transformations need not be used; for example both active and passive forms of requests are prestored. some non-grammatical sentences are accepted as meaningful. for example  the system does not require subject-verb number agreement. this is not because such a mechanism is difficult to program but because we would like the program to be tolerant of common grammatical errors. a number of aspects of the system are  however  in the ai tradition. 
     some parsing ability does exist within the matching programs for phrase types. phrase types are in general either prepositional phrases or noun phrases  and are analyzed in a manner directly drawn from winograd's noun phrase analysis.1 the rank-shift clause handling mechanisms are also drawn from winograd's work. 
     the way in which the meanings of requests  i.e. prestored request forms  are stored is similar to the way meanings are stored in woods' lunar program.1 overall woods' program is the most similar precursor in intent and operation  though the 
data base we are using and the variety of ques-
tions which can be asked in our system is much 
greater. 
     the prestored request network can be viewed as a combination of many case-frames. in general  however  the phrase types are much more specific than are cases  e.g. agentlve  instrumental  dative  factlve  etc.  although some are similar  e.g. locative . in fact the phrase types are specific enough so that paths through the prestored request network resemble pieces of a semantic network.' *  for example  the fact expressed by the network in figure 1 would be  specific airplanes can have maintenance performed on them.  while i t is of course risky to make negative inferences  e.g. since  pilots can have maintenance performed on them  does not match any prestored form  this sentence does not make sense  if a sentence does match a prestored form  the 

system can be quite confident that the request is 
meaningful. 
1 relationship to a general language under-

     it should be obvious that this system does not attempt to model the internal mechanisms of human language understanding; it is an attempt to solve the problem of making a large body of data accessible via natural language  using no more mechanisms than are absolutely necessary. the environment of the program is quite remote from that of a general language understanding system. questions are ail either in the past tense or present tense  and present tense is used only to refer either to the dialogue or to things which are always true. the number of objects  events and relations in the program's universe of discourse can be easily enumerated. the role of the program with respect to a user is always that of a data retriever. 
     nonetheless  there are certain common issues which a general understanding system must face. one particularly pertinent issue concerns the appropriate unit of knowledge. should wordb be defined explicitly  as in dictionary  definitions   or implicitly  as in this system  should  world knowledge  and linguistic knowledge be stored separately or should they be merged as in this system  i believe that a general language understanding system can benefit from some of the ideas in this paper. 
     in order to present the type of knowledge contained in the prestored request network  something akin to this network must be constructed. 
certainly  such facts as  airplanes require main-

1 

tenance  do not emerge from concatenating isolated 
word definitions of  airplane    require  and  main-
tenance   unless these facts are somehow made part 
of these or related definitions.  i.e. machines require maintenance  and an airplane is a machine . 
     similarly  one cannot write a program in which data base search functions can be incrementally  1  
 1  woods  w. a.  kaplan  r. m.  nash-webber  r.   the lunar science natural language information systems final report   bbn report no. 1  bolt  beranek and newman  inc.  cambridge  mass.  1. 
fillmore  c.  the case for case  in bach and harms  eds.  universals in linguistic 
	constructed   as in wlnograd's shrdlu1  and in 	theory. holt  rinehart and winston  1. 

which at the same time meaningless requests can be trapped without writing a program much larger and slower than ours.  1  qulllian  r.  the teachable language comprehender: a simulation program and theory of language   conn. acm 1  1  pp. 1-
     whether or not one should transform all input sentences into a canonical form to save on world 
knowledge storage space  or whether all surface forms should be matched directly is much more de-
batable  but the storing of surface forms does allow non-grammatical input sentences to be tolerated easily. 
1 advantages for data base question answering 

     there are some distinct advantages to the type of system described in this paper. 
1. idioms can be handled very neatly and easily. 
1. the system can operate very rapidly and need not have backtracking ability. 
1. the prestored request network allows pronoun reference to be handled in a way that seems intuitively clear and which is simple to implement. 
1. perhaps most importantly  unlike the cases of most other language systems  implement-
ing a system like ours is a simple and straightforward process   although the 
writing may indeed be time consuming and 
each application to a new data base does require a substantial amount of rewriting.  
