 

     the paper examines the simulation of the basic mechanisms of the chess endgame problem solution by man. the experimental results of a psychological investigation into the mechanics of structurisation generalization  and goal formation of a situation have been presented and a semi otic system of formation of generalised imitation models have been discussed which forme the basis for human decisionmaking. 
     the analysis of the literature on the simulation of chess game have led to a conclusion that various chess programs were considered by their originators as a theory or model of real activity of human chess-player. in this connection to clarify the nature of the difficulties in simulating chess game is to clarify to 
what extent chess programs are actually in compliance with a chess player's real activity they are to simulate. 
     the majority of program designers who simulated the activity of a chess player considered this activity as passing through a labyrinth having a certain initial stage  area graph vertex  and the labytinth point which is to be reached. 
     if the activity is understood as above  it is of prime importance to find the ways of reducing the volume of the chess labyrinth. a special problem presents itself - the problem of redicing the tasks of the tree of chess game. 
     this limitation of chess programming is especially clear when one approaches describe the process of establishing relations  the process of comprehending a position  which precedes and determines the formation of a variant. it can be concluded that the use of a language describing the process of establishing relations will enable one to get over some difficulties of chess programming and to lay down the ways of computerising endgame problems. 
     it is apparent that the use of new languages describing activity  the languages which are capable of describing the process of establishing relations  should bring about serious changes in the total structure of the theory which forms the basis for chess programming. 
     thus  one of the basic notions in chess programming is calculation depth.in cybernetics by depth is generally meant the number of moves of any chessman controlled by the program. as indicated by the evidence obtained  the depth of analysing a position by man is determined by the presence of a system in the formation of a position in the course of establishing relations between the pieces. in other words  central to a traditional understanding of a depth in cybernetics is a graph whose vertices are successively altered situations while the depth of analysis in human activity is determined by a graph whose vertices are formed by the pieces of a particular position and the edges by the relations between these pieces. 
the final stage of the game - the endgame. endgame problems  the consequence derives      hence  from the correlation between the principles of existing chess programming and real activity in the solution of 

an optimum endgame suggests  to a greater extent than the other game stages a calculation for many moves ahead. it is this circumstance that makes ineffective  in respect to endgame  the majority of 
existing programs designed for compute-
rising a chess game. limited possibilities of the depth of analysis and the fact that the planning in these programs does 
not exceed several moves ahead has led to 
a conclusion that the problems of chess endgame cannot be solved with existing 
means of programming. 
     a correlation between the principles of programming and the results of analysts of human activity shows that the basic 
difficulty of the programming lies in that the available means of mathematical that the development of a chess program which is capable of successfully solving 
endgame problems is related to the construction of a language which would enable us to describe the process of establishing relations and forming generalised notions. it is only languages of this kind that can produce perceptible results in such a large space as is a chess endgame. 
     the new method of programming should permit of forming the solution variant not only for a definite predetermined number of moves. the number of moves in the variant should change with the structure and properties of each new position. 

the analysis of experimental results 
description of activity fail to adequately showed that of all existing methods for 
1 

describing mental activity  the situation control of big systems developed by d.a. fospelov and yu.i.klykov  u.s.s.r.  is in the closest agreement with endgame solution process* an attempt was now made to employ this method for simulating human activity when solving chess endgame problems. 
     the practical use of situation control in chess is connected with the development of a system of semiotical models through the use of which a generalised model of chess game solution can be formed. 
　　　　by the language of situation macrodescription in a chess endgame problem is meant a semiotical system comprising an aggregate of three basic sets i i is a set of base notions; e is a set of base relations; and g is a set of formation rules for derivative notions and rela tions. base notions include a set of natural language units  words expression  sentences.etc.; used for the decription  designation  of the chess endgame problem objects for which it is not necessary to disclose the contents in order to solve the problem. these notions 
　　　　the bet of base notions has a hierarchic structure  there are notions of zero order and those of higher orders  derivatives . according to  1  the notion of the ith order  i=1 n  is the characteristic of the class of a problem element. base notions have the greatest volume. reduction of the notion volumes occurs when the notion is included into the rules of moving the chessmen are realized within the software system in the block  determination of potential relations . the block  determination of potential relations  is used to determine the relations arising in the process of considering the position in terms of i t s dynamics. 
　　　　for the model  this block is  to some extent  an analog of a  mental look  which is inherent in man analysing a problematic situation. due to its performance  the position under analysis appears as a set of ordered triplets where  and 	are the elements 
of situational position'and is a 
beam of potential relations determined for these elements. 
　　　　base relations include a set of matural language units denoting static and situational links established between situational objects when solving the problem. they are binary relations such as etc  which mean: is an element of class; is on has a name   etc. 
     base static relations feature permanent links between the elements of the problem  the links being independent of the situation in which these elements are* 
     in contrast to static relations  situational relations link the elements 
not permanently but only in a particular situation* 
　　　　thus  if the white king at a given moment is on the e1 field and the black king is on the e1 field  the specified information is entered in the descriptive lists for the given pieces and the relations of properties make is possible to describe each of the objects  chesaaen  in terms ofzx - codes. 


     when simulating chess endgame  the base scope of knowledge is formed according to this rule.      by this means any piece being on any square at a given moment can be described in terms   codes. another class. the rule of identical transformation of notions is x symmetric substitution: . 
the set g is given as a population 
-  white king  	of generating procedures denoted as gene-
-  black king  	rative grammars which are employed for 
formalizing structurization mecnanlms of 
     a correct definition of a notion enable one to expand it into elementary 
components. for example  the expansion of the notion  white king  i s : situations* 
     four types of generative grammars are used in a semiotic system: correlation  
categorial  transformation and commanding grammars which are correspondingly -  white black- generalization and extrapolation of the field bishop   ete 
intended for: 
1 ennumerating the multitude of micros!tuations of a chess endgame; 
1 forming a set of generalized situation structures in the course of the solution of a chess endgame problem; 
1 

1 preeetting the process of functioning of a problem solution model on the given time intervals; 
1 ennumerating the set of solutions generated by the model. 
　　let us now describe the above grammar in an abridged and interpreted form for a chess endgame which was offered in a psychological experiment to two groups of people with markedly different level of chess qualification. both psychological and more detailed results of the computer experiment will be discussed in the paper. 
　　all interrelations between the objects  pieces  are analysed in the blocks  analyser  and  determination of potential relations  by observing the list of objects involved in 1 ti  and their descriptive lists. 
　　an array of elementary syntagmata and' -chains is then constructed which forms the basis for the further decisionmaking model. at the output of the  analyser  block is formed an array of syntagma tic chains describing the pieces of different classes in terms of the presence of common features in a l l descriptions. 
　　possible relations between different classes of chessmen are determined in the block  determination of potential relations . 
　　if we assume now that each piece of any situation may be potentially linked with other pieces by a set of relations  the correlation rules can be considered as singling out essential relations between pieces. 
　　all data formed into arrays of syntagmatic chains enter the  correlator  
block. 
　　the program employs the array of correlation grammar rules  the lert parts of each rule comprising limitations of the features while the right part is a commanding syntagma  i.e. the direction as to what relation  derivative  connects the pieces under study i f the above limitations are implemented. 
　　the critical condition for the formation of derivative notions is the verity of predicates by the aid of which a variety of relations between the situational elements are established. 
　　by analysing the information fed to the computer  we can find the class of situations comprising the initial situation. the vertices of the classifier specify the maximum general part according to which correlation grammar rules are derived. the route of each piece is determined by the  determination of potential relation  block and is included into the left part of the correlation grammar. 
1 　　　　there is a maximum of 1 correlation grammar rules for every endgame with a definite number of pieces  in this case 1 pieces  irrespective of whether black and white move first  a maximum of six relations can be established between every two pieces by these rules. 
are: 
be o n   . . t o have the right to move  etc. 
　　　at any moment of time before moving a piece  1 to 1 correlation grammar rules are sufficient to define the situation  construct the micro structures and display them as syntagmatic chains. with 1 correlation grammar rules  the number of syntagmatic chains was 1  the chains taking the forms 

　　　the predicates of applicability of correlation rules in forming situational structures are formed in the course of education with the help of notion generalisation rules. the use of a paeudophysical situation-describing language representing actual relations between the pieces anables the situations to be classified on the basis of their structural 
generality. 
　　　the term  structural generality  as used in forming a generalized model of a chess endgame is defined as a determination of identical relations between the pieces in different changing specific conditions. thus  the given position cab 
be assigned to a particular class and one or another approach can be employed to describe it. 
　　　to illustrate  if two totally different positions of the same pieces such as 
i.white nf1 	1.white na1 
black b e1 b c1 k h1 black b b1 b d1  
k e1 
are considered  a generalized notion 

is established between the pieces which is independent of both the position of pieces and dimensions of the chessboard  number of fields in the chessboard . the most important condition here is the recognition of indent leal relations in a set of different positions. 
　　　the psychological esperijuental results have corroborated an important fact that the higher the qualification of a chess-player  the faster he can discover these relation and find the optimum solution variant. 
　　　when formed  the generalized notion structure enters the  decision-making  block which  in turn  verifies that the structure is introduced into the left part of decision-making rules. in this condition is satisfied  a decision is 
made in the right of the rules. 
　　　　the following rule can be applied for the above examples that is  knight attacks black king and 
black black-field bishop in three halfmoves . 
　　　there are about 1 rules of this kind in the language of the generalization of situations. 
　　　at an initial stage of education  these rules proved to be essential since they included  among other things  such important chess notions as  fork    pin   etc. a model of the extrapolation of situations is formed from the models of description and generalization of situ ations. 
　　　the solution of the problem with the aid of the extrapolation model is effected as follows: a situation is held on the input of the extrapolation model ;situation class is determined; an action is selected which is consistent with the class and transformation of situations is accomplished. the above procedure is repeated for a new situation  etc. 
　　　an extrapolation tree is constructed in a general case. the best branch is selected on the basis of the specified criterion. one of the basic criteria in constructing the decision-making model is the detection of the routes of activization and safety of one's own chessmen in the course of extrapolation and also the routes of minimizing the mobility of the opposite number' s chessmen. this process is effected in the block  optimization of commanding decisions . the condition for a halt is the assigument of the extrapolation result to a specified class. 
　　　it can be seen that the endgame problems under study are constructed by a 
model based on a semiotic language which contains the means to simulate the process for the formation  generalization and extrapolation of the situations. 
     it is hoped that the correlations between psychological experiments and the evidence being currently obtained by a 
     minsk-1 electronic computer will permit the proposed method to be successfully realized in working chess problems. 

1 

