simulation of fumctions of composer and musicologist on electronvic computer r.kh.zaripor 
i n s t i t u t e of general and pedagogical psychology  academy of pedagogical sciences  
ussr  moscow 
     
a method of simulation on an electronic computer la described  in which a set of formalised rallies of parameters is flsad in correspondence to a certain research  object. the following computer programs are constructed for the composition of song melodies  harmonization of melodies analysis of harmonizations  this programme aots as an examiner  and composition of musical reflations. the latter realises a component of heuristic activity - transposition of the invariant form  structure  to different contents. these programs oonfixm the hypotheses concerning certain laws used by mam in oreatire work untuitiraly. to make an objeotive eraluation of machine music and compare it with composer music a special experiment has been conducted by a 
method which eliminates the influence of the psychological set  bias  of the experts. examples of computer melodies are giren in a musical notation. 
     1. in the study of certain psychological object the following problem arises s to what extent the knowledge of or information on the object  produced consciously  e.g. obtained in a psychological experiment  is relevant to the understanding of this object. in other words  is this knowledge sufficient to imitate the objeot  
     it is not always that in hie heuristic aetirity man uses only consciouslyaroduced parameters. when dealing with fflcult problems he introduces subconsciously additional factors that he can-
not be aware of. although they often play an essential role. 
     xlectronic-conputer simulation is a reliable method of rerifying hypotheses concerning laws goreznlng research object. simulation is reproduction or imitation of certain aspects of the objeot under study ' that is those aspects that interest the researcher. in computer simulation the machine program includes regularities obtained in analysis of experimental data. the computer  naturally does not use anything abore that  anything that is subconscious. 
     simulation is carried out in three stagest 
     1  on analysis of the object the laws of its structure are found out. besides  the laws and principles of the structure and development of the object 
may be formulated on the basis of hypothetical conceptions of this objects. 
     1  synthesis is reproduction or imitation of the object on an electronic computer with the help of a program which 
includes the laws discovered on during analysis. 
     1  estimation of the machine results consists in determining the extent of adequacy of the model to the study object  that is the extent of similarity 
between machine end hcaun actions or results. this is the only criterion of a  
perfection of our algorithm  b  correctness of the adopted principles of simulation  and c  extent of knowledge of the study objeot. at this stage our ideas on the laws of the object are rerified. 
     thus in electronic-computer simulation it is objectirely confltmed aether the machine  the program  to be more exaot  posseeses sufficient knowledge to imitate object on the study. 
     stimulation should be distinguished from synthesizing  which is not intended to attain similarity with an object. 
     experiments in simulating some functions of composer and musicologist on n	n
 ural-1 and begm-1 computers were oondnoted in three stages correspondingly  further they are commenly described  tor more detailed information on the research methods and results the reader is referred to the author's monograph  1  and articles  1 . 
     1. let us examine a method of simulation of musical composition based on algorithm!aatiom of the laws and rules of composition* simulation is based on a 
probability process subject to definite regularities. 
     the method of organization of the algorithm is based on the principle of hierarchy of rarioua musical concepts. 
sereral conceptions must be introduced 
1      any musical composition is characterised  both syntactically and seswntically  by a certain set of parameters p1  p1 ...  fk...  embodying laws and means of composition. the parameters may indicates range of melody  measure  distribution of frequencies of interrais  nunber of degrees in an ootare  etc every pk 
     it w i l l be established in analysing a number of coapoaitione of some type that not a l l the parameters are equally charactarlatle of the whole type. if a 
parameter assumes only one  eaaentlal  value we shall refer to it aa an easaat l a l parameter  of which theremay be several in every type of composition. if a parameter assumes different values in different compositions of one type it is lneseemtial and we shall c a l l it an inessential parameter  an eseenvial parameter tor dancing music i s   f o r iaetaaee  the aeasure. which la la waits 1 and is charleston 1 an exaaple of aa inessent i a l paraaeter for waits la  amber of unstressed motea . an essential parameter for a russian folk song is  sequenoe   aovsment of the aelodic figure up or down by a few degrees with retainaent of the seme rhythm and interval relatione   with the value of  abaeaoe of sequence . thus the essential values of parameters are the indispensable characteristics of the compoaltloaa of a given type. 

be an ordered set of varioua parameters. the simulation of a to type of ooapositloa is baaed on the assumption: any ty-
pe of ooapoaltloa is characterised by a definite set of valuea of parametara 

where pkec ia a definite value of paramater pk salaotad from a multitude of permissible values. inessential parameters are designated in zero values. thus tha qualitative characteristics of the composition  tc typa  is aat up in correspondence to a formal-quantitative characteristic  set of values of mc parameters . 
　　　to simulate compositions of a d e f i nite to typa certain umbers - encoded values of parameters - are fed into tha corresponding cells of tha computer's 
memory. in this way tha computer la asaignad a certsin l i s t of rules and maana of composition by which tha composition roduced must be governed. the fixed coaa automatically  set-up  or form tha 
program. out of a l l tha programmed values of each parameter only one  assigmed  value is selected  if tha value of a parameter was not given  than during tha setting up of tha program it la aalaotad from an aggragata of programmed values at random  that ia by maana of tha ganerator of random number*. it follows that not a l l of tha programmad law* are used in synthesizing tha given composition but only a part of them. this part is designated mc sat  which determine* tha tc type of tha composition. the programs developed by this principle i l l u s t r a t e the process of quantity  set of talma* of parameter*  transforming into quality  typa of m u l o   . 
　　　tha me sat - list of tha laws and means of oomposltiom uwd by tha computer  that la tha structure of tha composition is printed along with tha machine composition. this makes it possible to conduct various psychological experiments in perception of music. it also allow* f o r solution in principle tha major problem of mu*icology - to f i n d the relation between tha structure of the music and i t * influence on the emotional state of the liatemar. let us designate this thod m-method  for short. 
　　　tha m-method of simulation is s of replacing tha direct analysis of tha stucy object  with unkmown characteristics  with a formalised analysis of the synthesized object  the laws and structure of which are known   that is to lise the method of analysis by means of synthesis. a special progrsm may be useed to add new values to the programmed valuea of parameter*  that la to extend the 
multitude of the preaet laws and meama of composition. this enables ua to synthesise compositions of new types - new synthetical structure end musloal styles  different from those analysed. 
　　　s 1. tha principles of the m-method ware used in setting up tha following machine pro grama. 
　　　1. oompoaitlon of melodies is simulated in the form of a musical period in key major or minor. the sounds of the melody smewer the rules of i t s four aspects: rhythmic  melodic  harmonic and structural. these rules establish the variou* durations  interval-pitch r e l a t i o n *   stable and unstable sounds of the scale  repetition* of melodic and rhythmic figures as well a* the segmentation of the melody into i t s separate const ructs - phrase*  motifs. the selection of the form of composition  a period of 1 or 1 bare  ia motivated by a desire tc make a more detailed study of tha r u les of the melody which is a finished 
musical piece of minimum extent  1 . 
　　　1. a composition in song rhythm is programmed - a sequence of durations corresponding to a definite poetic metres a sequence of straamd and unstressed sylables of a poem. a combination of t h l * 
progrsm with a program f o r composition 
1 
of a melody provides the possibility of simulation of sons melodies to a siren text in verse  or a song  see  1  . 
     1. the program of harmonization of a given melody in quadrivoiced chorda  trlads and seventhcbords in basic form and their conversions  imitates the solution of school problems. the programme covers study material of the one and a half semesters of music college- such problems are solved in music college by means of the rules of harmonisation outlined in text books on harmony. however  the absence of precise definitions and constructive procedures makes the process of harmonisation largely intuitive. bat in programming formal clarity must be introduced in the logioal interrelation of the varloue elements and means of harmonisation. besides  the solution of the problem of harmonization is not unique  there is the problem of finding an optimal  by certain criteria  solution. 
     the structure of the algorytbm makes it possible to simulate different types of harmonization  for instance  different in the extent of comlexity  because a provision is made to a programme by arrangement of a set of values of mo parameters  corresponding to the set of rules and means of harmonisation  see  1  . 
     1. the program for analysis of solutions of students' problams in harmonization and for detection of errors acts aa examiner and is a prototype of a reaching system. by  errors  are meant forbidden or undesirable sequences of chords or voices e.g. chord  nonsensical from the point of view of the program. when an error has bean detected its specifics and location in the composition are indicated the possibility of assigning a set of values of mc parameters  that is a list of rules the violation of which in the initial solution is considered an error  provides for analysis of solutions of problems of varying degrees of complexity of harmonisation. in other words  the programme produces various requirement to students after one month of study or on completion of the whole term of study  see  1  . 
     1. the machine composes one-voice variations on s given musical theme. on the basis of musical material this program realizes one component of heuristic activity  in this oase  transposlbillty  a fundamental property of structure. transposition or transfer of invariant forma is to be observed in transformation of any nature. in this is embodied the integrity of structure which cannot be broken up into elements. 
     very often whan listening to a tune and its variation we detect the connection between them intuitively. this is so because the variation retains all the unchanged elements or the invariants of transformation. bat in variation they are masked by the changed rhythm  meter  key and the melodic line itself. these masking elements often make the tune unrecognisable. the m-nethod of simulation identifies the invariants and the masking element a. as veil as the mechanism of transposition of inrarlanta in the variation of the meloay  see  1  . 
     computer variation by the m-method makes it possible to reconstruct the meonanism by which the given composition was created  to follow step by step the whole process of transformation of the given theme into the given variation  and to demonstrate the intermediary results of the consequitlve stages of transformation and deformation of the melody  eee  1  . figure 1 presents the melodies composed under this programme by besm-1 computer of the computation centre. ussr academy of sciences. i t will be noticed that melody no. 1 completely coincides  except for the first note in the last bar  with the popular  molodyortknaya  song  from the film  volga-volga   by the soviet conposer danaevakl. the synthesis of this melody by the computer confirmed our assumptions concerning the nature of its oonneotions with the original theme  the ways of transformation of this theme into the melody of the  molodyoahaaya   as well aa concerning the mechanism of creation of melodies of this syntaetioal structure  the melody of a popular song   lor it is only by tnis process that a machine melody coinciding with the given well-known melody could hare been produced. 
     s 1. the proximity  or similarity  of the machine result and the study object is the criterion of perfection of the algorythm and the degree of knowledge of this object. what is important is not the absolute quality of the machine results  of musie  for one  but a maximum degree of coincidence of these results with the object in the respects being studied during the process of simulation. the problem or evaluation of the machine results and of their comparison to the object simulated is a very complex one  especially in the case of works of art. evaluation here is influenced by many factors  ncluding public opinion  readiness to contradict  and particularly psychological aet or mas. that is a prejudice against the work being evaluated. 
     the author has devised a method of sociological examination of evaluations 
1 made by listeners of machine music. the problem of evaluation of machine compositions and their comparison with composer musie can only be dealt with on the basis of a questionnaire. this problem is tied in with listeners' psychology  that is their inability to evaluate the compositions objectively if they know beforehand 
that melody no. 1 is machine-produced  and melody no. 1 was composed by man. j just as it ie impossible to appraise obj e c t i v e l y a popular melody. psychologicall y i t i s quite natural. therefore t o b e able to make an objective comparison the listeners must not know what they are evaluating at the given moment  machine* or man-produced music. 
     a special experiment is needed to make a sociologically objective evaluat i o n of the computer's compositions and compare them w i t h the objects of simulat i o n . the purpose of the experiment is to eliminate the psychological set  bias  of the experts  to confuse them so that they w i l l not know what they are dealing w i t h   whether it is a work of the computer or man. besides  that experiment is also to obtain an objective evaluation of machine compositions as compared to composer's works  that is to indicate t h e i r quality. 
     melodies of well-known soviet composers published in selected song books and melodies composed by  ural-1  computer under the above programme were selected f o r the experiment. the melodies were played in an a r b i t r a r y order  unknown to the listemters who were to evaluate them by a f i v e - p o i n t scale and write the number of points in the blanks of the form. the experiment was conducted in different socio-musical groups w i t h approximately the same l e v e l of musioal education. they were students of the moscow power i n s t i t u t e   students of the gneslns music teachers training i n s t i t u t e   participants in the symposium  problems of a r t i s t i c perception*'  the s i t t i n g of the symposium was concerned w i t h music perception . senior-grade school p u p i l s   mathematicians  participants in the m e t h o d l o g i c a l seminar of the steklov i n s t i t u t e of mathematics of the ussr academy of sciences and the computation centre of the academy  employees of c u l t u r a l establishments and others - more than goo people in a l l . a s i m i l a r experiment was also conducted on the basis of a programme broadcast by the home service of radio moscow on august 1  1. 
just as in any sociological study object i v e conclusions were made on the basis of averages of subjective evaluations of the participants in the mass experiments. the processing of experimental data y i e l ded different characteristics  see   1     . the adopted method was found correct as i t made i t possible t o eliminate the psychological bias we have mentioned. it was established in a series of experiments that the machine compositions scored more 
points  by various c r i t e r i a   than composer music. the f o l l o w i n g table shows how melodies were evaluated by one c r i t e r i o n by the musically well-educated group of students pf the gnesins institutes 

1 
the table gives the number of 1-; 
1-  1-  1-  1-polnt evaluations of the machine and composer melodies: am. and ac are average evaluations of the melodies. 
     the results of this experiments prove the following facts in computer simulation of some types of music  such as composing melodies of popular songs  the results obtained by the machine are not only comparable to human works but are even superior to them in quality. this is indicative of the fact that the mechanism of creation of such forms of music has been studies to a very high degree  and proves the correctness of the chosen principles of simulation. 
     it is important to bear in mind that the melodies of professional composers used in the experiment are the result of human professional activity which is called creative. 
