ed from such important characteristic of the activity as its realization by not only parallel but also qua-
litatively heterogeneous processes. interaction of concious and unconcious components in the structure of human intellectual activity may serve here as an example. furthermore this position is sometimes reduced to only quantitative characteristics  that is to indication that brain possesses a considerably greater quantity of solving elements related by 
1 
a huge number of interconnections. 
　　　sometimes papers mention such peculiarities of human activity as  selection of essential data    retrieval of essential information   yet do so without any refernces to the fact that human information  essentiality  is determined by relation of the infonnation to the individual's needs which may change in the course of one concrete problem solving. there is also an opinion expressed according to which the obvious fact that an organism has needs is although not denied but considered as something outer in relation to behaviour organization. as for psychology   mental energy   spearman  is sometimes pronounced to be a  general factor  of mental endowments and  mental activity    need in activity  is considered as i t s main component  1 . these components and factors are interpreted here not as something outer in relation to the activity  but as a most essential constituent of human i n tellectual activity. as it has been shown by experimental investigations the need is connected not only with final goal statement  but also with problemsolving  with organization of the search per se. 
　　　three programs of artificial intelligence developments may be pointed out as pithy. the first one states that the increase of memory volume and of interrelations between i t s elements would lead to the development of machine creative potentials. this opinion is open to criticism for cases are known when the increase of human memory volume and of interrelations between i t s elements did not at all lead to the increase of hie creativity  1 . therefore this condition may not be approched as the most important one. 
　　　the second program declares the highest importance of finding out knowledge and concept systems used by a hu-
man in solving a certain class of problems with their further introduction into machine  transference of  semantic information  . in this context knowledge is understood as an ability to answer questions. if a system answers a question  it obtains knowledge. this is the so called empirical definition of knowledge. the method of finding out knowledge needed by man in solving a certain class of problems  which is usually used by artificial intelligence specialists consists in self-observation in the process of learning by themselves. 
     to evaluate this program it is necessary to take into account the fact that for very long psychology differs formal and comprehended  meaningful  knowledge. 
     in the bound of artificial intelligence knowledge gets formalistic interpretation and thus bears only superficial resemblance to genuine human knowledge. 
     the method used by artificial intelligence specialists in finding out human knowledge  observation of learning by themselves processes  used in the course of problem-solving is strongly limitted. the thing is that in any human action there take place concious and unconcious components including generalizations. 
     the third program of artificial intelligence development accentuates the simulation of human  heuristics  yet in doing so it ignores the above mentioned differences between machine and human heuristic methods. 
     therefore we may point out a very essential peculiarity of artificial intelligence as a scientific trend: its strategic goal - approximation to human intelligence - is bet by either neglecting or restricted use of psychological data about human intelligence. 
     on the basis of psychological analysis applied to comparison of human and artificial intelligence we may state that the three described programs of artificial intelligence development suggest modification  alteration  of the characteristics which in human intelligence should be qualified as  outer quality    increase of memory volume  of interconnections between its elements; increase of formal knowledge volume; increase of formal methods of search reduction  . if strategic goal of artificial intelligence as a scientific trend - recreation of human intellectual activity methods - does not become senseless in this absolutely real situation  then we should speak about 
new  that is the fourth program of artificial intelligence development. the point of it is to attempt to simulate needs  emotional regulation of search  goalformation  selective reflection of the situation. 
     the frequently declared thesis that at present there is no theoretical limit of intelligence degree that can be ever achieved by a machine should be essentially amended: if the fourth program of artificial intelligence development is in question the point at present issue should be not presence or absence of l i -
mit b i.. tue implementation of the progrrun  but the very possibility to start its realization  i.e. embodiment of inner essential characteristics of human intel* ligence in the work of a computer. 
      emancipation  of works of artificial intelligence from psychology of intelligence revealed in the course of our comparative analysis does not restrict progress in the field of hard- and software developments  yet it sets a rather significant limit in possible interpretations of gained practical results in their relation to human intelligence. 
1      the question of human and artificial intelligence interrelation is discussed by many authors in the context of philosophical problems. there are direct attempts to relate identification of human and artificial intelligence to materialism. in this light the analysis of what materialism namely is advocated by enthusiasts in the field of artificial intelligence gains principal importance. 
     it is well known that there exist different forms of materialism  as well as of idealism . the pre-marx materialism is usually characterized by the attribute  mechanistic   metaphysical  and  vulgar : words with meanings only partly intersected. to characterize some forms of materialism the concept of  natural-scientific materialism  is used. the term  mechanistic  has two meanings 
- specific and a more general ones. the first is related to the form of materialism connected with classic mechanics  the latter - to any method of  reducing  complex phenomenon to its more simple constituents. representation of man and his intellect as  just a machine  serves the basis for the particular form of natural-scientific materialism which is being developed in bounds of artificial intelligence as a scientific trend. this materialism is mechanistic in the above mentioned broader meaning of the word  yet on the other hand it is a new form of mechanism for not the laws of mechanics  but the laws of  information handling  are taken here as central. in other words it is the particular form of mechanism that is being changed but not its main principle. 
     one of the central theses of dialectical materialism is the qualitative peculiarity of different movement forms of the matter; antireductionalism is characteristic of it. the alternative  cither machine or soul should be resolutely rejected for it contradicts the essence of dialectics. neither  machine  nor  soul  but psychic as a qualitatively peculiar phenomenon originated at a oertain stage of matter development and bearing new characteristics in relation to the matter which has not yet passed this stage of development. concrete psychological investigations demonstrating qualitative peculiarity of human intellect in comparison with the functioning of existing and practicably projected computers prove and enrich dialectical materialism. 
     the term  artificial intelligence  applied to computer functioning is no more than a metaphor analogous to word combinations  artificial hand  and  artificial eye  applied to mechanical manipulators and t.v. cameras realizing the function of tracing. the difference between natural and artificial hand  as well as between natural and artificial eye is selfeviuwnfc and does not raise keen discussions  yet the* difference between artificial and human intelligence is not obvious for many scientists and sometimes is deliberately minimized. therefore we should take into account the danger of  literalism in understanding the metaphor . 
     instead of mechanical borrowing of concepts and methods from artificial intelligence psychology should concentrate on a more intense development of its own problems arising in connection with origination and use of artificial intelligence. these problems include analysis of artificial intelligence use influence on human intellect  analysis of psychological after-effects of computerization  1 . talks about intellect augmenterb are not usually supplied with real analysis of psychological after-effects of these  augmenters1  use in human activi-
ty-
     approaching artificial intelligence as a tool of human activity it is necessary to bear in mind that it gives  aug-
1 mentation  only in potential and that the opposite potential - that is of  weakening  - does not automatically fall away; what is more  i t comes into reality under poor organization of computers1 use. furthermore the tool itself may be different  type of the machine  type of the program  type of the communication vdth the machine  which lead to qualitatively different variants of  augmentation .we should also take into account that human intellect may/be rather different and hence wisdom and stupidity  intellect of a scientist and intellect of an astrologer would be augmented. artificial intelligence  augments  not all components of human intellect  but only the  machinelike  ones  making first of all their  allies  out of them. therefore we should speak not about just an intellect augmentatin but rather about its structure transformation  1 . intellect augmentation should be approached in a broader context of mental development. the computer frequently appears to be not just a tool of some abstract intellect  but a tool of real personalities striving for self-assertion using means of high prestige range. activity motives of personality may be both socially valid and egoistic. 
     effectiveness increase of artificial intelligence use by means of considering peculiarities of human creative activity makes up a separate scientific problem. wot only cybertetics but also psychology makes up the theoretical basis of mental labour automatization. effective use of psychological science in solution of actual problems of technological progress is to be associated not with its  technologization  and  engine erizat ion  but on the contrary with its  psychologization . the problem of 
 coordination  of man and machine characteristics is often met in technological literature. we would like to stress the scantiness of the way the problem is put 
and also the illegality of identifying this problem with the problem of optimization of human activity conditions. optimization  of activity conditions is often achieved by  discoordination  of man and machine characteristics - for example by setting conditions of free work rythm or of free access to the machine. extention of human creative potentials is one of psychological indicators of artificial intelligence use effectiveness. the thesis of human thinking peculiarity in comparison with computer information handling is the methodological principle of the automatic systems' projecting theory  1 . 
     and  finally  perspective is the problem of artificial intelligence use in the investigation of the human one  computerization of psychological experiment d  . 
     we think that between the science of psychology and artificial intelligence as a scientific trend should be set new relatione. artificial intelligence should to a greater degree take into account data of psychological science in evaluation of its practical achievements  in the works of computer development perspective programs  in increasing effectiveness of computer use. an actual problem of psychology is critical assimilation on the ground of dialectical materialism of the processes connected with the development new naturalscientific materialism form represented by artificial intelligence theorists and thus the further development of concept apparatus allowing to reflect the specificity of pfeqrckic activity regularities* 
