 

     a network control system of transport automatic integral robot  taip  motion in the real environment is suggested. input data and general structure of the network are described. a program is reported of further efforts to investigate and refine the network control systems. 
introduction 

     the problem of artificial intelligence creation for robots is characterized by several specific features. a robot has to exist in the natural environment. it receives information from its own sensing elements mostly during an active 
work. there is no one here to take care for information to be complete  sufficient to solve a problem accurately   consistent  and convenient in its form of representation   the framework of build-up of current efforts on the robot artificial intelligence  see  e.g.   seems to us  therefore  too narrow. the most of suggested procedures does not admit of inconsistent data employment and creates great difficulties in real-time work. it entails necessity of limiting the input data volume by all 
means. 
     repeated attempts were undertaken to overcome arising difficulties by network devices. obtained results are unsatisfactory as a whole. no sound methods of synthesis of the network devices for solving specific problems were obtained 
hitherto. nevertheless we are endeavouring once more to rehabilitate the network methods of artificial intelligence construction. there are several reasons: 
     1. network devices possess a large number of advantages in bulk information processing. 
     1. approach that is being elaboratea oy us differs from those verified earlier 
and will  possibly  yield other results. 
     1. achievements of the modern engineering allow to estimate anew various methods for device synthesis. 
     theoretic efforts to study prospects and capabilities of the approach developed have already been carried out at our department for a long time. computer models were created simultaneously to verify theoretic notions. a large number of effective digital models developed by a.m. kasatkin  l.m. kasatkina  s.a. talaev  v.d. fomenko  and d.n. galenko testify to the rightfulness of the chosen approach. 
     development is currently under way of a simulator of the network system for transport robot control in the natural environment- an outline of this system and discussion of further efforts direction will be given in what follows. 
problem of transport robot 

     the department of biocybemetics engaged in 1 in designing a simulator of a moving independent system - a transport robot - capable of purposeful move-
ment and performance of some actions with objects in a natural environment of the yard type. the problem of robot is close to that described in l. sutro's  w. kilmer's work    however  our principal goal is to test a vehicle onboard control system having the form of a neuronlike network with sri . 
     the preliminary check of capabilities of a network of physical elements  consisting of 1 nodes and approximately 1 connections  was executed on the simulator modeling a movement system in a hypothetical environment shown on a map. capability is realized in this system to travel from one point of an area to another with due account of all positive and negative attributes characterizing the given hypothetical environment as well as of constraints on time and energy consumption. hesults of the system experimental investigations  have shown the feasibility and expediency of robot control system construction on the base of networks with sri. 
     creation of transport robot presupposes solution of a number of problems on which the system capability hinges largely. we restrict ourselves to a brief enumeration of these problems. 
     1. moving part must provide for movements of the robot where roads are impassable. 
     1. system must  know  objectives it is aimed at. such objectives may consist in: 
a  determining points on an area where the robot must arrive in; 
b  certain actions that the robot must execute  manipulation with objects  data collection  campling  etc ; 
c  operating in modes with a gi-ven energy and time consumption. 
     1. system must be able to orient on an area  to locate itself with respect to one or another coordinate system . 
     
1 
     
     1. robot must be equipped with a set of sensory organs  sensing elements  supplying it with information on the environment as well as on its own  inner  states. the  eye -type system  rangefinder  various distant and contact sensing elements  energy consumption sensors  etc.  should be included among them first of all. 
     1. robot needs efficient devices enabling it to perform one or other actions with objects in the environment. these are various manipulators and primarily - the  hand -type system. 
     1. robot must be able to communicate with a human being therefore a system of natural speech discrimination is expedient. 
1. robot must know how to construct its  inner  model of the outer world and plan its behaviour. 
     1. robot must be a system that is able to adopt and learn. 
mechanics and system of sensing 
elements 
     the robot simulator developed by us is constructively a three-wheel undercarriage where sensory organs  the control unit  and other devices are installed 

 see fig.1 . the under carriage dimensions: 1x1 mm. a l l three are driving wheels and each has an independent drive from 1 w d.c. motors. the front wheel is the turning one. power is supplied by two accumulator batteries each of 1v voltage and 1ahr capacity. 

     a neuron-like network with semantics and ski realized physically is a basis of the control system. a detailed characteristic of such networks  which got the name m-networks  is given in   1 j-
     the m-network is formally a set of nodes and unidirectional connections linking the nodes. each node is made to correspond with some meaningful notion. each connection is put in correspondence with some relation between notions. the nodes can be in the state of excitement. the excitement is an analog quantity. the excitement can pass along the connections from one node to another. the connections are functionally divided into reinforcing and inhibitory ones. the existence in the m-network of a specific system for reinforcement and inhibition  sri   which sets the positive node excitement feedback and thereby provides for the domination of one or sevexal nodes over a l l others at each time instant is of essence. in the m-network data input/output corresponds to the excitement of its nodes  input and output  respectively . 
     
1 
     
     the robot control system is now calculated to effect a purposeful movement 
with provision for its own security  travel around obstacles  avoidance of dangerous places  keening internal parameters in assigned limits  and minimization of the energy and time consumption- the whole network  whose node number equals 1  is divided into 1 spheres. semanticsand purpose of the discriminated spheres are as follows  see fig. 1 . 
ftstimation sphere and situation re-
cognition isphere. these spheres are input ones. similar to sensory systems of the human brain  the analysis of information received by sensing elements is performed here on the basis of which the environment  problem conditions and own states are estimated integrally. 
　　　　the character of behaviour in the current situation is chosen in the decision sphere. here the decision can be made determining a general direction of movement or a choice of come complex movement maneuver or even execution of some elementary action. organization of the movement behaviour proper is carried out by three spheres being output ones for the network  i.e. 


     all network nodes are d.c. amplifiers having special characteristics. similarly in every sphere its own sri acts. connections between nodes are composed of resistive elements in a matrix-like device. 1 channels are used for data input from sensing elements into the network control system. 
     to plan its behaviour  the choice of a rout to an aim  the robot is supplied with a special locality map where the optimal route to the aim will be determined. in the given version the map is compiled beforeiuand. it is supposed that in future the robot will compile the map itself and 
modify it as required. 
experiments planned. 

     the robot's moving part  control system of the lower level  effector system; and individual sensing elements were checked and tested in the fall of 1- setting up of the rest of devices  of the system as a whole  and experiments with it compose the next stage of developments scheduled to the end of 1. as stated above  the ability of a purposeful movement on a real ground of the yard type was only required of the system here. 
     during the planned tests it is supposed to find out what capabilities the developed devices  the network control device mainly  have for solving various navigation problems  azimuth travel  travel to an assigned point in the locality  etc. . they must eventually answer the following principal questions: 
     1. is it possible to organize a neuron-like network with sri to control a transport robot in a respective environ-
ment efficiently  
     1. what is a rough amount of equipment necessary to solve this problem  
     1. what parts of the problem as a 
     whole it is reasonable to solve by network devices and to what extent computer application in control is desirable  
     1. what changes must be introduced into the philosophy of construction and technical realization of the network with shi proper  
further research and development 

     the program of further research supposes an extension of the transport robot 
     
1 
capabilities- the work is now under way 	one. consideration will be mainly given to 
and is performed in several directions* problems associated with perception and understanding of commands in the context 
　　　　learning- during the research we in- of problems solved by the transport robot. tend to develop methods and facilities for 
the network devices learning. main attention is directed to creation of sufficiently cheap and simple as to production technology electrochemical elements as learning connections in the networks with ski. problems are solved of the elements matrix organization and of their commuta-
                                             1 tion when they are more than 1 units in 
number. 
     ensemble organization of network. this direction or our research is associated with a more economic use of the net-
work nodes. to this end it is intended to assign semantics not to individual nodes but to their combinations - ensembles. each node of such network will take part in organization of many ensembles what      construction of iyer model and planning* to act successfully in an environment the robot has to know how to construct 
a model of the latter and how to plan its own behaviour. precise discrimination is necessary of the  imaginary  and  real  not to make premature solutions when planning. plans have to be developed  hierarchic  multivariant. the robot has to evaluate feasibility of the plans concurrently with their elaboration. we intend to study these mechanisms on the learning 
network having the ensemble organization. combination of the network with a computer will be probably of use here. 
     all enumerated directions imply the use of a. network device with 1 nodes 1promises a great saving of nodes in a 	and 1 learning connections for model-number of cases. moreover  the operational ing the bench version under development. 
reliability should increase in such net-work. the ensemble organization of the network with sri designed to solve specific problems gives  however  birth to new 
problems requiring supplementary investigations. 
     setting up and optimization of network devices. feasibility is investigated of the setting up of network individual parts  spheres  and auxiliary units by 
optimization algorithms imitating the evolution processes. these algorithms impose 
a number of special requirements on hardware necessary for their realization. conclusion 

     on the basis of our experience of work with network control devices we 
assume that they are fit for an efficient use in solving a wide range of robot engineering problems. however  one cannot assert preliminary that the network devices will prove competitive. the problem should be obviously solved when the net-
work methods prove actually preferable  when their combination with other methods is advantageous  and where their application is expedient. our efforts should re-creation of such a hardware seems possible. sult in a solution of this range of proboptoelectronics is promising in this res- lems. pect. 
     visual perception. at our department k.g. agababyan has carried out an investigation earlier that demonstrated the possibility to discriminate a large number of informative features in an image by the 
network devices . employment of specialized networks with shi is intended in further research to solve the problem of 
discrimination of objects on a common background with their prerecognition. technical realization of such devices entails necessity of creating large-scale 
nonlearning networks. hardware is developed for synthesizing such networks. 
　　manipulation. here the research is aimed at bolving problems associated with realization of manipulator control programs in the network devices. the basic requirement consists in the network capabil i t y to form standard motional acts   habits   and coordinate them in changing 
working conditions. 
     speech contact. investigations are directed here to the search of means for creating network devices capable of speech discrimination and of contact with a human being in a language close to the natural 
1 
