 
with the proliferation of heterogeneous devices 
 desktop computers  personal digital assistants  phones   multimedia documents must be played under various constraints  small screens  low bandwidth . taking these constraints into account with current document models is impossible. hence  generic source documents must be transformed into documents compatible with the target contexts. currently  the design of transformations is left to programmers. we propose here a semantic framework  which accounts for multimedia document adaptation in very general terms. a model of a multimedia document is a potential execution of this document and a context defines a particular class of models. the adaptation should then retain the source document models that belong to the class defined by the context if such models exist. otherwise  the adaptation should produce a document whose models belong to this class and are  close  to those of the source documents. we focus on the temporal dimension of multimedia documents and show how adaptation can take advantage of temporal reasoning techniques. several metrics are given for assessing the proximity of models. 
1 introduction 
the multiplication of execution contexts for multimedia documents requires the adaptation of document specifications to the particularities of the contexts. adaptation is not very precisely defined and it is currently specified through programming. we propose a semantic approach to multimedia documents  뫫1 . it does not deal with the semantics of document content  but with that of their composition. the approach allows the definition of adaptation in very general semantic terms independent from the multimedia objects  뫫1 . we then investigate the temporal dimension of multimedia documents specified qualitatively  뫫1  and propose metrics for finding the  best  adaptations. we discuss then the limitations of current multimedia specifications that prohibit a better adaptation  뫫1 . 
모we first introduce the characteristics of multimedia documents  뫫1  and adaptation  뫫1 . 
1 	multimedia documents 
a multimedia document is a digital document composed of objects of different nature: text  sound  image  animation  etc. these objects and their compositions are called multimedia objects. multimedia documents are traditionally analysed following four dimensions  layaida  1 : 
  logical  organisation into chapters  shots  etc.   
  spatial  graphic layout   
  hypermedia  relations between documents and docu-ment fragments   
  temporal  temporal ordering of the multimedia objects . 
모these dimensions are not totally independent and require a combined processing. 
모this paper primarily focuses on the adaptation of multimedia documents along their temporal dimension. in a temporal multimedia document  the presentation of the multimedia ob-
jects is scheduled over time. such a document is presented in figure 1. time is displayed on the horizontal axis. the example presented is the introduction of a slideshow made of different panels composed of graphic objects that can be presented simultaneously. the first panel displays the title  authors and outline of the speech; each of these objects are represented by a segment whose begin and end points correspond to the beginning and ending of their presentation on screen. 
title 
outline 
	authors 	b 	d 
	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 	1 t s  
figure 1: temporal dimension of a multimedia document. 
모the title object starts at second 1 and ends at second 1  while the author object starts at second 1 and ends at second 1. between seconds 1 and 1 the outline object is presented  etc. such a description is exact and quantitative since it defines exactly the beginning and ending instants of each multimedia object. this information is sufficient for playing the document: to one exact quantitative representation corresponds only one possible execution of the document  within a fixed temporal reference . 

al and the internet 	1 

모specifying a multimedia document in an exact manner is like writing a paper directly in postscript instead of using latex. multimedia documents are not often specified in an exact way because it is more convenient for the author to leave the interpretation of the specification to the machine as soon as the will of the author is clearly expressed. the author can concentrate on the creative part of is or her work instead of characterising the exact position of each object. 
모non-exact specifications can be achieved by expressing the qualitative relations between multimedia objects. there are several languages for specifying multimedia documents with different ways of expressing the temporal dimension: smil 
 w1c  1  expresses the positioning of multimedia objects with parallel and sequence operators on intervals; magic i dalai et al  1  and madeus  layaida  1  use a restriction of the allen algebra of temporal intervals. 
모the document of figure 1 can be expressed qualitatively. for instance  the authors object starts after and finishes with the title object; the authors object meets the outline object. from such a specification  the multimedia presentation system  or the player  computes a plan  called  scenario   that can be executed. this function is called temporal formatting. 
1 	adapting multimedia documents 
a server delivers a multimedia document to be played by a client. clients and servers can be different machines with different capabilities. different contexts of multimedia presentations introduce different constraints on the presentation itself. for instance  bandwidth limitations between the client 
and the server can result in preventing the client from playing two bandwidth-demanding videos at the same time. display limitations can produce similar constraints. other constraints may also be introduced by user preferences  content protection or terminal capabilities. the constraints imposed by a 
client are called a profile. 
모profiles can be expressed in terms of a restriction of the language used for specifying target documents or in terms of additional constraints imposed on the objects. for instance  if the device features only a screen with limited capabilities  it can be impossible to display two images simultaneously on the same screen. 
모for satisfying these constraints  multimedia documents must be adapted before being played. from the profile and the source document  the adaptation must provide a document satisfying the constraints expressed in the profile. qualitative specifications arc central to this process as they enable more efficient adaptation by providing more flexibility. this adaptation is usually performed by a program transforming the document ivillard  1; lemlouma and layaida  1 . 
모for the purpose of characterising the adaptation process  we introduce a semantics of multimedia documents and illustrate it on the temporal dimension  뫫1 . the semantic definition of adaptation  뫫1  leads to distinguish refining adaptation  in which the models of the adapted document are mod-
els of the source documents  from transgressive adaptation  in which the models are as close as possible to those of the source document . section 1 illustrates the notion of closeness for the temporal dimension. the limits of our approach are then presented  뫫1 . 
1 	al and the internet 

al and the internet 	1 

모in such a case  the adaptation should not authorise models that were not models of the source specification. 
  unfortunately  no guarantee is given that the languages used for expressing the specifications and the adaptation constraints allow the expression of a specification satisfying these requirements. 
모moreover  one constraint that should be achieved by a semantic approach is that the result of adaptation must not depend on the syntactic form of the specification. 
모taking the semantic approach to multimedia document adaptation allows the characterisation of adaptation in a very general way depending only on model theoretic considerations. in particular  these definitions are totally independent from the language used for expressing documents and profiles as well as the multimedia object and constraint types. 
모this characterisation clearly emphasises the constraints that a refining adaptation must meet and that can be overlooked when programming the transformation. 
모transgressive adaptation is more difficult to characterise and this is considered in the next section. 
1 	transgressive adaptation in the temporal dimension 
the goal of transgressive adaptation is to find a specification t s  as close as possible to the source specification s. semantically  this amounts to find the specifications whose models are the closest possible to those of the source specification. figure 1 shows the set of models satisfying mso l . a dis-
모applying a semantic approach to transgressive adaptation can be compared to the use of the semantic approach for knowledge base revision  dalai  1 . this will be the first step taken here. but we will show that the simple distance used for comparing models is not sufficient for adapting multimedia documents. measures depending on the kind of multimedia objects are required. 
모the usual way to compute the distance between sets of models is function of a distance d between two models and a method of aggregation f. 
definition 1  distance between sets of models . 
모the second element is the distance d that is considered hereafter1. 
1 	distance on the qualitative models 
the first distance that comes to mind consists of counting the relations between two objects that differ between models. it is comparable to the hamming distance  i.e.  the cardinal of the symmetric difference between two sets  counting the propositional atoms that do not have the same truth-value in propositional logic  dalai  1 . because qualitative models correspond to resolved relation graphs  the distance is easily computed by counting the labels which differ between each pair of objects. the distance is defined on graphs  and more precisely on their labelling functions . 
definition 1  distance between resolved relation graphs . 
example 1. concerning s1  the four models are all at the same distance from the model of the source specification because they all differ by two relations  the one between a and b and its converse . 
모in order to find more precise results that discriminate between the four models of the example  the relations between intervals can be transcribed into relations between their begin and end points and the same sort of distance can be used. 

1 	al and the internet 

모then the distance between models can be expressed by summing up the conceptual distances between the relationships used in both models. 
definition 1  conceptual distance between models . 
example 1. concerning s1  the models satisfying the adaptation constraint mso l  are at different conceptual distances from the source specification: before is at a distance of 1  meet is at a distance of 1  met by is at a distance of 1 and after is at a distance of 1. so the closest solution to serializing the overlap relation is meet. this corresponds to the intuition. 
	1 	limitations 
extending the presented work to the spatial dimension does not look very difficult. the logical dimension is even easier because it provides a very structured organisation of the document that  we conjecture  can yield direct adaptation. so the proposed approach is able to cope with adaptation in each dimension of the document. 
모real difficulties arise when hypermedia and temporal and spatial dimensions are considered together. as a matter of fact  the presence of hypermedia links which  when triggered by the users  jump to other parts of the presentation  introduce non-determinism in the interpretation of documents  dalai el al  1; fargier el al  1 . this non determinism does not easily fit with the conceptual neighbourhood approach which favours continuity. 
모a further analysis shows that the temporal information contained in specifications is not sufficient for a good adaptation. for instance  considering two panels composed of two pictures each  ab and then cd  like in figure 1  and the mso l  constraint  the closest models linearizing the presentation are abcd and abdc with a conceptual distance of 
1. however  if both panels aim at comparing two objects 1  right  and 1  left  on the basis of two features  one by panel   preserving the parallelism  which suggests the comparison  imposes the choice of abcd. the absence of information about the comparison is missing from the specification resulting in lower quality adaptation. some authors  rutledge el al  1  have proposed to use rhetorical structures  mann and thompson  1 in order to choose a better presentation at the formatting stage. this could be useful for the adaptation stage as well. 
al and the internet 	1 

1 related work 
the most related work is that of  dalai et al  1   which describes the generation of multimedia presentations through the negotiation of the temporal constraints. like the work presented here  the temporal specifications are expressed by allen relations. the approach differs because we consider an existing specification to be adapted where the authors generate schedules and preferences among them on the fly. so there is no alteration of already existing constraints based on the semantic characterisation  but a satisfiability check and negotiation of constraints when inconsistency is detected. 
모the transgressive adaptation can be compared with the revision in knowledge bases  gardenfors  1 : the addition of a new  adaptation  constraint leads to inconsistency. it is necessary to find a new specification satisfying this constraint and not too different from the source specification. one difference is that adaptation constraints are not always formulas of the specification language. having several constraints raises problems similar to incremental revision: since the constraints are not provided in a sequence but in a set  it is important that the adaptation does not depend on some order of presentation constraints. although transgressive adaptation is neither revision  it does not correspond to some change in our knowledge  nor update  it cannot be compared to the acquisition of a new information   more generic techniques developed for revision could be used in the context of multimedia adaptation. 
1 conclusion 
this paper applied a semantic approach to multimedia documents and their adaptation. this allows for a precise definition of what is expected from the adaptation of these documents and the comparison of the results given by handmade transformation with what was expected. it proposes a model-based distinction between compliant documents  refining adaptation and transgressive adaptation. this framework has been applied to the temporal dimension of the documents providing measures for sharply discriminating the possible transgressive adaptations. 
모as discussed above  there remains more work to be carried out for covering all the aspects of multimedia documents and for deepening the specification of documents and adaptation constraint so that the adaptation produces quality results. 
