 
we revisit the problem of revising probabilistic beliefs using uncertain evidence  and report results on four major issues relating to this problem: how to specify uncertain evidence  how to revise a distribution  should  and do  iterated belief revisions commute  and how to provide guarantees on the amount of belief change induced by a revision  our discussion is focused on two main methods for probabilistic revision: jeffrey's rule of probability kinematics and pearl's method of virtual evidence  where we analyze and unify these methods from the perspective of the questions posed above. 
1 introduction 
we consider in this paper the problem of revising beliefs given uncertain evidence  where beliefs are represented using a probability distribution. there are two main methods for revising probabilistic beliefs in this case. the first method is known as jeffrey's rule and is based on the principle of probability kinematics  which can be viewed as a principle for minimizing belief change  jeffrey  1 . the second method is called virtual evidence and is proposed by pearl in the context of belief networks-even though it can be easily generalized to arbitrary probability distributions-and is based on reducing uncertain evidence into certain evidence on some virtual event  pearl  1 . we analyze both of these methods in this paper with respect to the following four questions: 
1. how should one specify uncertain evidence  
1. how should one revise a probability distribution  
1. should  and do  iterated belief revisions commute  
1. what guarantees can be offered on the amount of belief change induced by a particular revision  
our main findings can be summarized as follows. first  we show that jeffrey's rule and pearl's method both revise beliefs using the principle of probability kinematics. jeffrey's rule explicitly commits to this principle  while pearl's method is based on a different principle. yet  we show that pearl's method implies the principle of probability kinematics  leading to the same revision method as that of jeffrey's. the difference between jeffrey's rule and pearl's method is in the way uncertain evidence is specified. jeffrey requires uncertain evidence to be specified in terms of the effect it has on beliefs once accepted  which is a function of both evidence strength and beliefs held before the evidence is obtained. pearl  on the other hand  requires uncertain evidence to be specified in terms of its strength only. despite this difference  we show that one can easily translate between the two methods of specifying evidence and provide the method for carrying out this translation. 
　the multiplicity of methods for specifying evidence also raises an important question: how should informal statements about evidence be captured formally using available methods  for example  what should the following statement translate to:  seeing these clouds  i believe there is an 1% chance that it will rain   we will discuss this problem of interpreting informal evidential statements later  where we emphasize its subtlety. 
　as to the question of iterated belief revision: it is well known that jeffrey's rule does not commute; hence  the order in which evidence is incorporated matters  diaconis & zabell  1 . this has long been perceived as a problem  until clarified recently by the work of wagner who observed that jeffrey's method of specifying evidence is dependent on what is believed before the evidence is obtained and  hence  should not be commutative to start with  wagner  1 . wagner proposed a method for specifying evidence  based on the notion of bayes factor  and argued that this method specifies only the strength of evidence  and is independent of the beliefs held when attaining evidence. wagner argued that when evidence is specified in that particular way  iterated revisions should commute. he even showed that combining this method for specifying evidence with the principle of probability kinematics leads to a revision rule that commutes. we actually show that pearl's method of virtual evidence is specifying evidence according to bayes factor  exactly as proposed by wagner and  hence  corresponds exactly to the proposal he calls for. therefore  the results we discuss in this paper unify the two main methods for probabilistic belief revision proposed by jeffrey and pearl  and show that differences between them amount to a difference in the protocol for specifying uncertain evidence. 
　our last set of results relate to the problem of providing guarantees on the amount of belief change induced by a revision. we have recently proposed a distance measure for 

belief revision and update 	1 

1 	belief revision and update 

belief revision and update 	1 

1 	belief revision and update 


the first interpretation translates directly into a formal piece of evidence  jeffrey's style  and can be characterized as an  all things considered  interpretation since it is a statement about the agent's final beliefs  which are a function of both his prior beliefs and the evidence  pearl  1 . on the other hand  the second interpretation translates directly into a formal piece of evidence  pearl's style  and can be characterized as a  nothing else considered  interpretation since it is a statement about the evidence only  pearl  1 . 
　the two interpretations can lead to contradictory conclusions about the evidence. for example  if we use the  nothing else considered  approach to interpret our statement  we will conclude that the evidence is against david being the killer. however  if we use the  all things considered  interpretation  it is not clear whether the evidence is for or against  unless we know the original probability that david is the killer. if  for example  david is one of four suspects who are equally likely to be the killer  we will originally have: pr a  = 1. therefore  this evidence has actually increased the probability that david is the killer! because of this  pearl argues for the  nothing else considered  interpretation  as it provides a summary of the evidence and the evidence alone  and discusses how people tend to use betting odds to quantify their beliefs even when they are based on the evidence only  pearl  1 . 
　example 1 provides another opportunity to illustrate the subtlety involved in interpreting evidential statements. the evidential statement in this case is  mr. holmes concludes that there is an 1% chance that mrs. gibbons did hear the alarm going off.  interpreting this statement using the 
 all things considered  approach gives us the conclusion that pr a  : pr'  a  = 1 : 1   where a denotes the event that the alarm has gone off. this interpretation assumes that the 1 : 1 ratio applies to the posterior beliefs in a and a  after mr. holmes has accommodated the evidence provided by mrs. 
gibson. however  in example 1  this statement was given a 
 nothing else considered  interpretation  as by pearl  1  page 1   where the 1 : 1 ratio is taken as a quantification of the evidence strength. that is  the statement is interpreted as pr n | a  : pr n | a  = 1 : 1  where n stands for the evidence. in fact  the two interpretations will lead to two different probability distributions and  hence  give us different answers to further probabilistic queries. for example  if we use the  all things considered  approach in interpreting this evidential statement  the probability of having a burglary will be pr'{b  = 1 x 1 - 1   which is much larger than the probability we get using the  nothing else considered  approach in example 1  which is 1 x 1. 
　from the discussions above  the formal interpretation of evidential statements appears to be a non-trivial task  which can be sensitive to context and communication protocols. regardless of how this is accomplished though  we need to stress that the process of mapping an informal evidential statement into a revised probability distribution involves three distinct elements: 
1. one must adopt a formal method for specifying evidence. 
1. one must interpret the informal evidential statement  by translating it into a formal piece of evidence. 
1. one must apply a revision  by mapping the original probability distribution and formal piece of evidence into a new distribution. 
our main point here is that jeffrey's rule and pearl's method employs the same belief revision principle  i.e. probability kinematics. moreover  although they adopt different  formal methods for specifying evidence  one can translate between the two methods of specification. finally  one may take the view that jeffrey's rule and pearl's method constitute commitments to how informal evidential statements should be interpreted  making the first and second elements the same  but wc do not take this view here. instead  we regard the issue of interpretation as a third  orthogonal dimension which is best addressed independently. 
1 	commutativity of iterated revisions 
we now discuss the problem of commutativity of iterated revisions  that is  whether the order in which we incorporate uncertain evidence matters.1 
　it is well known that iterated revisions by jeffrey's rule are not commutative  diaconis & zabell  1 . as a simple example  assume that we are given a piece of uncertain evidence which suggests that the probability of event o is .1  followed by another piece of uncertain evidence which suggests that the probability of r* is .1. after incorporating both pieces in that order  we will believe that the probability of a is .1. however  if the reversed order of revision is employed  we will believe that the probability of a is .1. in general  even if we are given pieces of uncertain evidence on different events  iterated revisions by jeffrey's rule are not commutative. 
　this was viewed as a problematic aspect of jeffrey's rule for a long time  until clarified recently by wagner . first  wagner observed and stressed that the evidence specification method adopted by jeffrey is suitable for the  all things considered  interpretation of evidential statements. moreover  he argued convincingly that when evidential statements carry this interpretation  they must not be commutative to start with. so the lack of commutativity is not a problem of the revision method  but a property of the method used to specify evidence. in fact  wagner suggested a third method for specifying evidence based on bayes factors  good  1; 1; jeffrey  1   which leads to commutativity. specifically  if pr and pr' are two probability distributions  and 
　　1 there is a key distinction between iterated revisions using certain evidence versus uncertain evidence. in the former case  pieces of evidence may be logically inconsistent  which adds another dimension of complexity to the problem  darwiche & pearl  1   leading to different properties and treatments. 

belief revision and update 	1 


1 	belief revision and update 

　theorem 1 allows us to compute the distance measure for revisions based on jeffrey's rule and virtual evidence. 
　the significance of corollaries l and 1 is that we can compute the distance measure easily in both cases. for jeffrey's rule  we can compute the distance measure by knowing only 
　we close this section by showing that the principle of probability kinematics is optimal in a very precise sense: it commits to a probability distribution that minimizes our distance measure. 
1 	conclusion 
in this paper  we analyzed two main methods for revising probability distributions given uncertain evidence: jeffrey's rule and pearl's method of virtual evidence. we showed that the two methods use the same belief revision principle  i.e. probability kinematics  with their difference being only in the manner in which they specify uncertain evidence  and showed how to translate between the two methods for specifying evidence. we also discussed the much debated problem of interpreting evidential statements. moreover  we showed that the method of virtual evidence can be reformulated in terms of bayes factors  which implies a number of results  including the commutativity of revisions based on this method. finally  we showed that revisions based on probability kinematics are optimal in a very specific way  and pointed to a distance measure for bounding belief change triggered by any revision based on probability kinematics. our bounds included jeffrey's rule and pearl's method as special cases. 
acknowledgments 
this work has been partially supported by nsf grant iis1  muri grant n1-1  and diml grant 
belief revision and update 
1. we also wish to thank carl wagner  judea pearl  and the late richard jeffrey  for their valuable comments and discussions. 
