 
degrees of information and of contradiction are investigated within a uniform propositional framework  based on test actions. we consider that the degree of information of a propositional formula is based on the cost of actions needed to identify the truth values of each atomic proposition  while the degree of contradiction of a formula is based on the cost of actions needed to make the formula classically consistent. our definitions are to a large extent independent of the underlying propositional logic; this flexibility is of prime importance since there is no unique  fully accepted logic for reasoning under inconsistency. 
1 introduction 
information and contradiction are two fundamental aspects of knowledge processing. quantifying them is an important issue when reasoning about beliefs  or preferences  stemming from one or different sources. here are some contexts where quantifying information and contradiction is relevant: 
  diagnosis and testing. in model-based diagnosis  some initial assumptions that each component works correctly are made; these assumptions may conflict with actual observations. measuring the conflict of the resulting base may be a good hint about how hard it will be to identify the faulty components. 
  preference elicitation. in the interactive process of elicitating the preference profile of an individual  user  about a set of possible alternatives  it is not unfrequent that contradictory preferences arise. in this situation  it is useful to quantify and localize the contradictions as well as the information about the user's preferences  so as to be in position to choose the next questions to ask. 
  belief merging. in this framework  degrees of information and contradiction can be the basis on which one can decide whether to take or not into account the data conveyed by an agent. if the degree of contradiction of the data given by an agent is high  it may be relevant to reject the information  since there is a significant evidence that the source is not reliable; however  this must be balanced by the quantity of information furnished by the agent  especially when she also gives some important and uncontroversial pieces of information.   group decision making. contradictions arise frequently when trying to reach a compromise among several agents who have possibly conflictual preferences about a common decision  like voting  resource sharing  public goods buying . in this context  not only it is relevant to compute a global degree of conflict  among the set of agents  but also degrees of conflicts associated with small groups of agents  coalitions  so as to localize as precisely as possible where the conflicts are. 
¡¡now  what do  degree of information  and  degree of contradiction  mean  there is no consensus about it. the main features shared by existing definitions  and there are not numerous  cf. section 1  is that  1  such degrees are numerical values  and  1  they vary depending on the representation language. thus  one may consider a as fully informative in the case where a is the single atomic proposition of the language but surely not fully informative when the vocabulary also contains b  provided that a and b are independent propositions . 
¡¡in this paper  our point of view is that it is inadequate to quantify the information/contradiction conveyed by some data without considering at the same time a set of available actions and a goal to be reached. accordingly  our degrees of information and contradiction are defined in an  active  way. acting so as to reduce inconsistency or to gain information often relies on performing knowledge-gathering actions  also called tests . we consider that the degree of information of an information base is based on the number  or the cost  of actions needed to identify the truth value of each atomic proposition  the lower the cost the more informative the base ; and that the degree of contradiction of an information base is based on the number  or the cost  of actions needed to render the base classically consistent. thus  both degrees are dependent on the language but also on the given set of tests and the way plans costs are computed. 
¡¡the rest of this paper is organized as follows. after some formal preliminaries in section 1  we present our framework in section 1. in order to show the generality of our framework  we instantiate it to three different propositional logics: classical logic  section 1   the paraconsistent logic lpm  section 1  and a syntax-based approach to inconsistency handling  section 1 . related work is given in section 1  and some conclusions in section 1. 
1 formal preliminaries and notations 
we consider a propositional language lps based on a finite set of propositional symbols ps and a set of connectives that may vary depending on the logic used. well-formed formulas 

1 	belief revision and update 

belief revision and update 	1 


1 	belief revision and update 


belief revision and update 	1 

1 	belief revision and update 

