 
we consider the problem of updating nonmonotonic knowledge bases represented by epistemic logic programs where disjunctive information and notions of knowledge and beliefs can be explicitly expressed. we propose a formulation for epistemic logic program updates based on a principle called minimal change and maximal coherence. the central feature of our approach is that during an update procedure  contradictory information is removed on a basis of minimal change under the semantics of epistemic logic programs and then coherent information is maximally retained in the update result. by using our approach  we can characterize an update result in both semantic and syntactic forms. we show that our approach handles update sequences and satisfies the consistency requirement. we also investigate important semantic properties of our update approach such as reduction  persistence and preservation. 
1 introduction 
logic programming has been proved to be one of the most promising logic based formulations for problem solving  knowledge representation and reasoning  and reasoning about actions and plans. recent research on logic program updates further shows that logic programming also provides a feasible framework for modeling agents' activities in dynamic environments  alferes and et al  1; eiter and et al  1; sakama and inoue  1; zhang and foo  1 . 
　while all current approaches for logic program updates focus on the problem of updating extended logic programs or their variations  updating epistemic logic programs  however  has yet to be explored in the research. by combining knowledge and belief operators into logic rules  epistemic logic programming  gelfond  1  is a powerful representation formalism in logic programming paradigm. it can deal with more difficult problems in reasoning with disjunctive information while traditional disjunctive extended logic programs fail to handle. furthermore  epistemic logic programs seem more feasible for knowledge reasoning than many other autoepistemic logics  gelfond  1  and has been used as a formal basis for modeling knowledge in action theories  e.g.  lobo et al  1 . when we use an epistemic logic program to represent an agent's knowledge base  it is a nontrivial question how the agent's knowledge base  an epistemic logic program  can be updated when new information is received. 
　in this paper  we propose an approach for epistemic logic program updates. contrary to other logic programs  notions of knowledge and beliefs in epistemic logic programs have strong semantic connections to the standard kripke structures of modal logics. on the other hand  epistemic logic programs are also sensitive with various syntactic forms. hence  we believe that a pure model-based or syntax-based approach will not be appropriate to handle epistemic logic program updates. instead  we require our update formulation to meet three major criteria:  1  an update should be performed on a basis of minimal change semantics to remove contradictory information;  1  based on the minimal change semantics  the update result should have a clear syntactic representation and contain maximal consistent information from previous progrants ; and  1  the underlying update procedure should be consistent  that is  updating a consistent program by another consistent program  or a sequence of consistent programs  should generate a consistent result. our main idea to accomplish these criteria is so called minimal change and maximal coherence which presents both semantic and syntactic features in an update procedure. 
　the paper is organized as follows. section 1 presents a brief overview on epistemic logic programs. section 1 develops a formulation for epistemic logic program updates  while section 1 extends this formulation to handle update sequences. section 1 investigates important semantic properties for our update approach. finally  section 1 concludes the paper with discussions on related work and future research. 
1 epistemic logic programs: an overview 
in this section  we present a general overview on epistemic logic programs. gelfond extended the syntax and semantics of disjunctive logic programs to allow the correct representation of incomplete information  knowledge  in the presence of multiple extensions. consider the following disjunctive program about the policy of offering scholarships in some university  gelfond  1 : 
v: r1: eligible x   - highgpa x   r1: eligible x   - minority x ifairgpa x   


belief revision and update 	1 



belief revision and update 	1 




1 	concluding remarks 
in this paper  we proposed a formulation for epistemic logic program updates. our update approach was developed based on the principle of minimal change and maximal coherence. by using our approach  not only a minimal change semantics is embedded into the underlying update procedure  but also a maximal syntactic coherence is achieved after the update. we also investigated important semantic properties of our update approach. this work can be viewed as a further development on knowledge update  baral and zhang  1 . although all current approaches of logic program updates have their own features  it is not clear yet whether they are suitable to handle epistemic logic program updates. for instance  in  zhang  1  we demonstrated that a straightforward extension of alferes et al's approach  alferes and el a/  1j or eiter et ai.'s approach  liter and ct al  1  to epistemic logic program updates may generate incorrect solutions  while the proposed generic framework in  eiter and et a/  1  seems not applicable to our case either. on the other hand  a syntaxbased approach  e.g.  sakama and inoue  1   cannot characterize the semantics of epistemic logic program updates  and some approaches  e.g.  eiter and ct al  1  do not obey the consistency requirement that is believed to be one of the essential requirements for any revision and update systems  katsuno and mendelzon  1 . 
　several issues remain open for our future research. first  in our update approach  we did not consider the issue of preference over different resulting programs. in practice  it is possible that one resulting program is more preferred than the other in terms of the domain semantics. this problem involves conflict resolution which is a difficult issue in logic program updates  zhang and foo  1 . second  as world view semantics can be viewed as a generalization of answer set semantics  our update approach is also applicable for extended logic program updates. therefore  it is important to characterize similarities and differences between our approach and other logic program update approaches from a semantic viewpoint. finally  since epistemic logic programs have been used as a main component in knowledge based action theories  e.g.  lobo et a/.  1   we expect that these theories may be significantly enhanced for representing interactions between actions and knowledge by applying our update approach. 
