 
this paper proposes a unique map learning method for mobile robots based on the co-visibility information of objects i.e.  the information on whether two objects are visible at the same time or not from the current position. this method first estimates empirical distances among the objects using a simple heuristics -  a pair of objects observed at the same time more frequently is likely to be located more closely together . then it computes all the coordinates of the objects by multidimensional scaling  mds  technique. in the latter part of this paper  it is shown that the proposed method is able to learn qualitatively very accurate maps though it uses only such primitive information  and that it is robust against some kinds of object recognition errors. 
1 introduction 
map learning problem of autonomous mobile robots has been a central issue in the field of artificial intelligence as well as robotics  because it contains several important aspects of intelligence such as recognition of environment and acquisition of internal representations. in fact  a variety of map building methods have been developed for a wide range of robots  tasks and environments so far. these methods are traditionally classified  kortenkamp et a/.  1; murphy  1  in terms of the way of map representation into metric map building methods moravec and elfes  1; uhlmann et al  1   topological methods mataric  1; 
zimmer  1; shatkay and kaelbling  1   and hybrids of them thrun et al.  1 . 
　on the other hand  when we turn our attention to a new trend of robot navigation called qualitative navigation levitt and lawton  1; schlieder  1   we can see there is another way of qualitative map representation that is different from both the metric and topological representations. a most important point of the maps used in this qualitative navigation is that they are not required to be accurate in a metric sense as long as they correctly preserve the qualitative spatial relationships  such as circular ordering  of the objects or landmarks in the actual environment. 
　a challenging problem in this paradigm is to construct autonomously such qualitative maps from qualitative observation information robots obtain. a representative approach to this qualitative map learning problem is  sogo et al  1   in which qualitative information of  how object positions are classified to two sets with respect to arbitrary straight lines  is used to construct a map by propagating  three point  constraints. 
　in this paper  we also propose a map learning method for mobile robots based on qualitative observation information. it uses the information of  co-visibility  or whether two objects are visible or not at the same time from robot's positions  which is much more primitive than the information used in 
 sogo et al  1  and the ordering information schlieder  1 . 
　in this method  co-visibility of two objects is translated into an empirical distance based on a simple heuristics  closely located objects are likely to be seen simultaneously more often than distant objects and vice versa  or  temporal and spatial proximities are approximately equivalent . then  positions of all objects are calculated by well-known multidimensional scaling  mds  technique. 
　a noteworthy feature of this method from a practical viewpoint is that it does not require robots localize their own positions while mapping. moreover  it is shown that it can learn qualitatively accurate maps without higher level infonmation such as ordering  and is robust against observation errors. we also discuss the validity of the heuristics above from several viewpoints. 
1 problem definition 
1 assumptions on environment and robot 
we consider a map building task by a mobile robot  in which the robot estimates the positions of objects in the environment by repeated explorations and observations  figure 1 . more specifically  we make the following assumptions about the environment and robot. 
environment 
the environment is a closed area containing a finite number of objects. each object is assigned a unique id. in addition  it is assumed that all objects are about the same size. 

cognitive robotics 	1 


environment 
figure 1: assumed map building task of a mobile robot  exploration  observation and map estimation  

observation 
the robot obtains a panoramic camera image at each observation point  and extracts a list of recognized or visible objects by some image processing and recognition technique. these lists of visible objects are accumulated over time and used to build a map later. 
exploration 
the robot explores the environment with some randomness  avoiding collisions with objects. 
1 	evaluation criterion for qualitative maps 
though a constructed map is represented in the form of numeric coordinates of the objects on 1-d plane as ordinary metric maps  its goodness is measured by the correctness of the qualitative spatial relationships rather than by the metric accuracy. 
　to evaluate the qualitative correctness of the obtained maps  we employ the notion of triangle 
orientation schlieder  1; sogo et al.  1  or counterclockwise order of three points. in short  triangle orientation of three points in 1-d plane is defined as + when the order yields a counter-clockwise turn  and - otherwise  figure 1 . 
　when there are n objects in the environment  the number of all possible triangles formed by them becomes  so we define the orientation error  of a constructed map as the percentage of triangles with wrong orientations  com-

we use this  as an evaluation criterion of constructed maps in the later simulation study. 
1 	co-visibility and distance between objects 
as previously mentioned  we use a heuristics  a pair of objects observed simultaneously more frequently is likely to be located more closely together  to estimate the distance between them. though it is hard to prove the validity of this heuristics strictly in general cases  we consider it is approximately appropriate for the following reason. 
　first  we assume that an object becomes difficult to identify as the distance from the robot increases  because the image size of the object becomes smaller and the chance of occlusion increases. 
　given this assumption  the total area size of the region where the robot can observe two objects simultaneously decreases monotonically according to the distance between the objects. for example  consider the case the probability that an object can be observed from the robot at a distance of r is 
　　　　　　 figure 1 . if two object a and b are located at and respectively  the probability that both objects are visible from an arbitrary robot position x  x y  becomes 

then  the'expectcd size of area where both objects are visible simultaneously is 

in the simplest case that the robot is located at any place in the environment with equal probability  the probability that the two objects are co-visible is expected be proportional to scovis{l   which is a monotonic decreasing function of/. 
　in section 1  we will discuss this  co-visibility and distance  heuristics in a more general form:  temporal and spatial proximities are approximately equivalent . 
1 proposed method 
1 	outline of covimap 
based on the assumptions above  we propose covimap - a map learning method based on the co-visibility of objects. in this method  the mobile robot obtains approximate positions of objects based on the co-visibility frequencies of them  which are updated repeatedly by explorations and observations. the outline of covimap is described as below: 
1. the robot repeats the following behavior steps and updates the number of observations of each object  nt   and the number of simultaneous observations of every pair of objects 
 a  the robot moves to the next observation position  avoiding collisions with the objects. 

1 	cognitive robotics 


figure 1: relationship between co-visibility and distance of two objects in a simplified environment 

figure 1: relationship between squared distance  and covisibility frequency fij of objects in the simulation environment 

 b  it obtains a list of visible objects lo from the panoramic image captured at the current position  and updates ni and nly  as bellow: 

1. after a specified number of steps  co-visibility frequencies is computed for each pair of objects based on then empirical distance of each pair is computed from 
1. the robot obtains the estimated positions of all objects  by applying multi-dimensional scaling  mds  to the distance matrix d whose  i  j  element is 
　in the remaining of this section  we explain the second and third parts in the above procedure. 
1 computation of co-visibility frequency and empirical distance 
co-visibility frequency 	between two objects is defined as follows: 
fi j stands for the conditional probability that two objects are visible at the same time  given that at least one of them is visible. it takes a value between 1 and 1. this definition of is also known as jaccard's coefficient. 
　with the definition of co-visibility frequency  the heuristics introduced in 1 can be rewritten as  distance between two objects  monotonically decreases as  increases . figure 1  scattered points  illustrates the actual relationship between the real  squared  distance and co-visibility frequency in the simulation environment in section 1. the result indicates that the heuristics is approximately valid. 
　therefore  we introduce a notion of empirical  squared  distance  between an arbitrary pair of objects  which is 
defined by some monotonic decreasing non-negative function 
 i.e.  
we also define an empirical distance matrix d whose  i  j  element equals to  d is a symmetric matrix  and its diagonal components  equal to zero. 
　a possible solution to the problem of deciding a suitable combination of function and parameter values for  is to select the one which minimizes the stress value of the mds results described later. furthermore  if no appropriate empirical distance functions are provided  non-metric mds  or ordinal mds  can be used instead. 
   another problem is that  cannot be computed properly for the pairs whose co-visibility frequencies are zero  because  becomes some constant value. in this case  covimap uti-
lizes the triangular inequality constraint  tic  to correct the value of 
1 map construction based on 
multi-dimensional scaling  mds  
multi-dimensional scaling  mds  young and householder  1  is a multivariate data analysis technique used to visualize a potentially high-dimensional data structure by mapping it into a relatively low dimensional space cox and cox  1 . the purpose of mds is to find an optimal configuration of objects in a low-dimensional space  when dissimilarities or distances among them are given. 
while there are several kinds of mds methods cox and 
cox  1   covimap employs classical 	scaling young 	and 
householder  1  method that is a kind of metric mds to reproduce a map of objects in 1-d plane from the set of empirical distances. in brief  it obtains a set of 1-d coordinates of n objects xt  i = 1      ＊  n  by applying young-householder transformation and spectral decomposition to the empirical distance matrix d. 
   a non-trivial problem of using mds in covimap is that there is a fifty percent chance of obtaining the mirror image of the expected map. however  if any correct triangle orientation of three objects is given  covimap can detect the mirror 

map and get the right map by turning it over. 
cognitive robotics 	1 


figure 1: empirical distance functions  used in the simulation 
1 a simulation study 
we conducted a simulation study to examine the effectiveness of our method with cyberbotics1 webots simulator 
 ver.1 . 
1 	settings 
environment and objects 
the environment is a square field of 1 m  x 1 mj containing 1 - 1 objects. each object is cylinder-shaped  height: 1 mm   diameter: 1 mm    and is given a unique id number like obo obj  
observation and object recognition 
the robot has a camera with a resolution of 1 x 1 pixels  and obtains a panoramic image by rotating and capturing several images at each observation position. we make a simplified assumption that the robot can recognize an object if its image is wider than 1 pixels. 
exploration strategy 
at each observation position  the robot chooses its next moving direction randomly within the range of 
and proceeds  in the direction. in addition  the robot has 1 proximity sensors to detect nearby obstacles  objects and walls  around it  and avoids collisions with them. 
empirical distance function 
we chose a logarithmic function as the empirical distance this simulation  we set them as: 
because the stress values of mds were relatively small with this combination compared with others. figure 1 shows the shape of this empirical distance function. in addition  triangular inequality constraint  tic  mentioned in 1 was used to correct the empirical distances for the object pairs whose co-visibility frequencies were zero. 
1 	experiment 1 : varying number of objects 
first  we examined the basic map building capabilities of 
covimap with varying number of objects in the environment 

numbers of steps 
figure 1:  experiment 1  change of average map errors comparison among various numbers of objects 

table 1: change of average map errors  %  with 1 different numbers of objects 
from 1 to 1. in each case  the robot repeated the observation and exploration steps for 1 times  and built a map eachtime the number of steps reached one of specified numbers  1 1 ... 1 . for each case  we prepared 1 layouts of objects which arc randomly generated and averaged the orientation errors. 
　figure 1 and table 1 show how the average orientation error changes according to the number of steps for each number of objects. as can be seen from this  converges to a narrow range  approximately between 1 %  and 1 %   after several hundreds of steps  when the number of objects varies from 1 to 1. this means that covimap is not affected drastically by the increase in the number of objects. 
　figure 1 illustrates an example of real configuration which contains 1 objects  while figure 1 illustrates a map constructed by covimap after 1 steps. in this case  out of total 1 triangles  the number of triangles whose orientations are inconsistent between the real map and the constructed map is 
1  interestingly  if we consider only the triangles whose largest angles are smaller than 1 deg  in the real map  the number of such triangles is 1   the number of inconsistent triangles falls to 1 
this means our method is able to acquire very accurate qualitative layouts of the objects  unless the objects are almost on a line. dotted lines in the figures represent delaunay graphs of the configurations. a comparison of them also tells that the constructed map is qualitatively very accurate. 

1 	cognitive robotics 


figure 1:  experiment 1  an example of object configuration with 1 objects  dotted lines are edges of delaunay graph 

figure 1:  experiment 1  constructed map after 1 steps  for all triangles  
1 experiment 1 : robustness against object recognition errors 
in the previous experiment  it was assumed that there are no errors in the object recognition process. in the real environment  however  it is almost inevitable to fail in recognizing objects occasionally  due to various uncertainties. therefore  we examined how the recognition errors affect the quality of maps constructed by covimap. 
　more specifically  we considered two kinds of recognition errors - non-recognition and mis-recognition. these errors were artificially generated as follows: 
non-recognition : randomly chosen elements in lo are removed 
mis-recognition : randomly chosen elements in l1 are replaced with other object ids. 
　in this experiment  we fixed the number of objects to 1 and conducted 1 trials for each of 1 different object configurations. 
result with non-recognition error 
figure 1 shows the average orientation errors of the constructed maps when the percentage of non-recognition error is set to 1  no errors   1  1  1 %  respectively. in an early stage of learning  i.e  with fewer steps  the map error  becomes larger according to the magnitude of the non-recognition error. however  the difference becomes 

figure 1:  experiment 1  change of average map errors comparison among various non-recognition rates 

figure 1:  experiment 1  change of average map errors comparison of various mis-recognition rates 
smaller and almost negligible as the number of steps increases. 
result with mis-recognition error 
next  figure 1 shows the results when mis-recognition error is set to 1  1  1  1 %  respectively. not surprisingly  the influence of this kind of error on the map error errori is relatively larger than the non-recognition error. 
　in both cases  however  we can conclude covimap is robust against those recognition errors  in that the map error steadily decreases according to the increase of the number of steps. 
1 	related works 
as mentioned before  the central idea of our map building method is a simple heuristics -  a pair of objects observed simultaneously more frequently is likely to be located more closely   which is used to estimate the distances and qualitative configuration of objects from the co-visibility information of them. in this section  we discuss the meaning of this heuristics from other viewpoints  especially  considering several related works in other fields. 

cognitive robotics 	1 

　first  as co-visibility of objects can be regarded as cooccurrence of events that objects are visible  a lot of studies on learning of behavior and models based on the cooccurrence information have been made. the most basic principle related to this issue is hebb's rule which postulates that if two events co-occur often  the connection of them should be strengthened. many recently developed rein-
forcement learning methods such as q-learning watkins and dayan  1  are also considered to be based on the cooccurrence or temporal proximity between behavior and reward events. interestingly  there is another similarity between reinforcement learning and our covimap. that is to say  the former learns a complicated behavior system from discrete events of rewards  while the latter learns a qualitatively accurate map from discrete events of co-visibility among objects. 
　the heuristics above can also be regarded as a special case of more general one -  temporal and spatial proximities are approximately equivalent in many environments . in the research of human spatial memory  it has been reported that humans often rely on the temporal proximity rather than the spatial proximity to memorize spatial structures of environments curiel and radvansky  1 . this might suggest that the principles and results of covimap presented in this paper are helpful to understand some aspects of human spatial memory and cognitive mapping process  although we doubt that an mds-like algorithm exists in human brain. 
1 conclusion 
in this paper  we proposed a unique map building method for mobile robots named covimap which is based on the covisibility information of objects in the environment. it can learn qualitatively accurate maps from such primitive information using a simple heuristics  temporal and spatial proximities are approximately equivalent  and multidimensional scaling  mds  technique. it was also shown by the simulation results that covimap is applicable to large environments containing dozens of objects  and robust against observation errors such as non-recognition and mis-recognition. 
　a most important theoretical issue to be studied is to validate and generalize the heuristics on the equivalence of tem-
poral and spatial proximities. especially  we need to investigate how our method will be affected if the camera image is not panoramic but more restricted  or the object recognition rate is not isotropic but dependent on the direction. on the other hand  future works from a practical point of view will include experiment with real robots  integration of covimap with qualitative navigation levitt and lawton  1   and extension or replaccment  faloutsos and lin  1  of mds. 
