 
we propose a new framework to study properties of consistency in a constraint network from the perspective of properties of set intersection. our framework comes with a proof schema which gives a generic way of lifting a set intersection property to one on consistency. various well known results can be derived with this framework. more importantly  we use the framework to obtain a number of new results. we identify a new class of tree convex constraints where local consistency ensures global consistency. another result is that in a network of arbitrary constraints  local consistency implies global consistency whenever there arc certain m-tight constraints. the most interesting result is that when the constraint on every pair of variables is properly m-tight in an arbitrary network  global consistency can be achieved by enforcing relational m=1 -consistency. these results significantly improve our understanding of convex and tight constraints. this demonstrates that our framework is a promising and powerful tool for studying consistency. 
1 introduction 
a fundamental problem in constraint networks is to study properties of consistency in some networks with particular constraints or structure. there have been two main approaches to this problem. 
　the first is to utilise topological structure of the network. for example  where the network forms a tree structure  arc consistency is sufficient to make the network globally consistent  freuder  1 . 
　another approach is to make use of semantic properties of the constraints. for monotone constraints  path consistency implies global consistency  montanari  1 . dechter  shows that a certain level of consistency in a network whose domains are of limited size ensures global consistency. van beek and dechter  generalize monotone constraints to a larger class of row convex constraints. later  they  study the consistency inside a network with tight and loose constraints. 
　in this paper  we present a new framework1 which unifies well known results mainly along the second approach  including  van beek and dechter  1; 1  . the power of this framework is that it allows the study of the relationship between local and global consistency from the perspective of set intersection. 
　for example  one property of set intersection is that if every pair  1  of tree convex sets intersect  the whole collection of these sets also intersect. the main point is that local information on intersection of every pair of sets gives global information on intersection of all sets. intuitively  this can be related to getting global consistency from local consistency. our framework enables us to lift the result on tree convex sets to the following result on consistency. for a binary network of tree convex constraints   1  -consistency  path consistency  implies global consistency. 
　properties of the intersection of tree convex sets  small sets  large sets are presented in section 1. section 1 develops the framework which consists of a lifting lemma together with a proof schema which gives a generic way of using the lifting lemma to get consistency results from properties of set intersection. one benefit of the framework lies in that it provides a modular way to greatly simplify the understanding and proof of results on consistency. this benefit is considerable as often the proof of many existing results is complex and  hard-wired . 
　we demonstrate the power of the framework by showing three new consistency results as well as a number of well known results. the first is a generalization of global consistency of row convex constraints to a network of tree convex constraints which is presented in section 1. the second is a new result on global consistency on weakly tight networks in section 1. these networks only require certain constraints to be m-tight rather than all constraints as shown in  van beck and dechter  1 . the final result is presented in section 1. this is most interesting because we can make certain networks globally consistent by enforcing relational consistency  but this may not be achievable in previous work  for example  van beek and dechter  1  . 
   'our work can be related to the first approach in those cases where the network topology leads to some set intersection property. 

constraints 	1 

1 	constraints 


constraints 	1 

where eij is the extension set of a to xk with respect to cs    
and cs            ' st we all relevant constraints. 
　the insight behind this lemma is to see consistency from the perspective of set intersection. 
　example. consider again the previous example. we would like to check whether the network is 1-consistent. consider the instantiation a of y again. this is a trivial consistent instantiation since the network doesn't have a constraint among the variables in y. to extend it to x  we need to check the first three constraints. the extension is feasible because the intersection of e1  e1  and e1 is not empty. we show the network is 1-consistent  by exhausting all consistent instantiations of any three variables. conversely  if we know the network is 1-consistent  we can immediately say that the intersection of the three extension sets of a to x is not empty. u 
　the usefulness of this lemma is that it allows consistency information to be obtained from the intersection of extension sets  and vice versa. using this view of consistency as set intersection  some results on set intersection properties  including all those in section 1  can be lifted to get various consistency results for a constraint network through the following 
proof schema. 
proof schema 
1.  consistency to set  from a certain level of consistency in the constraint network  we derive information on the intersection of the extension sets according to lemma 1. 
1.  set to set  from the local intersection information of sets  information may be obtained on intersection of more sets. 
1.  set to consistency  from the new information on intersection of extension sets  higher level of consistency is obtained according to lemma 1. 
1.  formulate conclusion on the consistency of the con-straint network . ＆ 
given the proof schema  lemma 1 is also called the lifting lemma. 
　in the following sections  we demonstrate how the set intersection properties and the proof schema are used to obtain new and also well known results on consistency of a network. 
1 application i: global consistency of tree convex constraints 
the notion of extension set plays the role of a bridge between the restrictions to set s  and properties of special constraints. the sets in lemma 1 are restricted to be tree convex. if all extension sets of a constraint is tree convex  we call this constraint tree convex. 
definition 1 a constraint network is tree convex if and only if all constraints are tree convex under a common tree on the union of all domains. 
　convex sets naturally give rise to convex constraints which is a special case of tree convex constraints. 
definition 1 a constraint cs is row convex with respect to x if and only if the sets in 

are convex. it is row convex if under a total ordering on the union of involved domains  it is row convex wrt every a constraint network is row convex iff all constraints are row convex under a common total ordering on the union of all domains. 
　the consistency results on these networks can be derived from the property of set intersection using the proof schema. we obtain the main result of this section. 
theorem 1  tree convexity  let r be a network of constraints with arity at most r and 1   be strongly 1 r - 1  + 1 consistent. if r is tree convex then it is globally consistent. 
　proof. the network is strongly 1 r - 1  + 1 consistent by assumption. we prove by induction that the network is k consistent for any 
　consider any instantiation a of any k - 1 variables and any new variable x. let the number of relevant constraints be /. for each relevant constraint there is one extension set of a to x. so we have / extension sets. if the intersection of all / sets is not empty  we have a value for x such that the extended instantiation satisfies all relevant constraints. 
　 consistency to set  consider any two of the / extension sets: e1 and e1. the two corresponding constraints involve at most 1 r - 1  + 1 variables since the arity of a constraint is at most r and each of the two constraints has x as a variable. according to the consistency lemma  that 1z is 1 r - 1  + 1consistent implies that the intersection of e1 and e1 is not empty. 
　 set to set  since all relevant constraints are tree convex under the given tree  the extension sets of a to a: are tree convex. henceforth  the fact that every two of the extension sets intersect shows that the intersection of all / extension sets is not empty  in terms of the tree convex sets intersection lemma. 
　 set to consistency  from the consistency lemma  we have that r is k-consistent. d 
since a row convex constraint is tree convex  we have the 

following result. 
corollary 1  row convexity   van beck and dechter  1  let r be a network of constraints with arity at most r and r be strongly 1 r - 1  +1 consistent. if there exists an ordering of the domains d1         dn of r such that r is row convex  r is globally consistent. 
this can also be proved directly by lifting corollary 1. 
1 	constraints 

1 application ii: global consistency on weakly tight networks 
in this section  we study networks with some tight constraints. the m-tight property of a constraint is related to the cardinality of the extension set in the following way. 
　the small set intersection lemma gives the following theorem. 
theorem 1  weak tightness  if a constraint network r with constraints of arity at most r is strongly   m.-f 1  r - 1  +1  consistent and weakly m-tight at level   m + l     r - l   + l   it is globally consistent. 
the proof is similar to the theorem on tree convexity. 
　immediately we have the following result which is a main result in  van beck and dechter  1 . 
corollary 1  tightness   van beek and dechter  1  if a constraint network r with constraints that are m-tight and of arity at most r is strongly   m + l  r - 1  +   -consistent  then it is globally consistent. 
this result can of course be directly lifted from corollary 1. 
corollary 1 requires every constraint to be m-tight. the weak tightness theorem on the other hand does not require all constraints to be m-tight. the following example illustrates this difference. 
　example. for a weakly m-tight network  we are interested in its topological structure. thus we have omitted the domains of variables here. consider a network with five variables labelled {1 1 1}. in this network  for any pair of variables and for any three variables  there is a constraint. assume the network is already strongly 1-consistent. 
　since the network is already strongly 1-consistent  we can simply ignore the instantiations with less than 1 variables. this is why we introduce the level at which the network is weakly m-tight. the interesting level here is 1. table 1 shows the relevant constraints for each possible extension of four instantiated variables to the other one. in the first row  1 -  1 stands for extending the instantiation of variables {1 1} to variable 1. entries in its second column denote a constraint. for example  1 denotes c 1. if the constraints on {1 1} and {1 1}  suffixed by * in the table  are ratight  the network is weakly m-tight at level 1. alternatively  if the constraints {1}  {1} and {1}  suffixed by +  are 1i-tight  the network will also be weakly m-tight. however  the tightness corollary requires all binary and ternary constraints to be m-tight. the weak m-tightness theorem needs significantly less constraints to be 1-tight. further results are in section 1. d 
constraints 
table 1: relevant constraints in extending the instantiation of four variables to the other one 
1 application iii: constraint looseness 
　the large set intersection lemma is lifted to the following result on constraint looseness. 
1 application iv: making weakly tight networks globally consistent 
in this section  relational consistency will be used to make a constraint network globally consistent. 
　all the results on small set intersection and tree convex set intersection in section 1 can be rephrased by using relational consistency. for example  a new version of weak tightness is shown below. its proof can be easily obtained following the proof schema. 
1 

　consider the weak m-tightncss theorem 1 in section 1 based on local k-consistency. a weakly m-tight network in general may not have the level of consistency required by the theorem. to obtain global consistency  one may try to enforce this level of consistency. however  this may result in new constraints with higher arity in the network. the new constraints may in turn require a higher level of consistency to ensure global consistency. therefore it is difficult to predict an exact level of consistency to enforce on the network to make it globally consistent. 
　using relational consistency  it is possible to obtain global consistency by enforcing local consistency on the network. in order to achieve our main result we need a stronger version of m-tightness -proper m-tightness. 

　a constraint is m-tight if it is properly m-tight. the converse may not be true. 
　a weakly properly m-tight network is defined by replacing  m-tight  with  properly m-tight  in definition 1  section 1 . 
　we have the following observation on the weak mtightness and weak proper m-tightness of a network. 
proposition 1 a constraint network is weakly m-tight and weakly properly m-tight respectively if the constraint between every two variables in the network is m-tight and properly m-tight respectively. 
　it is easy to verify that improper m-tightness of the binary constraints is preserved during the procedure to enforce certain level of consistency in the network. so we have the main result of this section. 
theorem 1  weak proper-tightness  given a constraint network whose constraint on every two variables is properly rn-
tight. it is globally consistent after it is made relationally m + 1-consistent. 
　this theorem follows immediately from the discussion above and theorem 1. the implication of this theorem is that as long as we have certain properly m-tight constraints on certain combinations of variables  the network can be made globally consistent by enforcing relational m+1-consistency. 
1 summary 
we demonstrate how to infer properties of consistency on a network purely by making use of set intersection properties. in addition to the results shown here  some other results can also be obtained by the lifting lemma. for example  the work of david  can be obtained by lifting the singleton set corollary 1. the work of faltings and sam-haroud  is on convex constraint networks in continuous domains and the idea there is to lift helly's theorem on intersection of convex sets in euclidean spaces. 
　we show a number of new consistency results which we believe are significant progress to convexity and tightness of constraints since van beek and dechter's work  1; 1 . we identify a class of tree convex constraints which is a superset of row convex constraints  van beek and dechter  1 . in a network of tree convex constraints  global consistency is ensured by a certain level of local consistency. 
　we show that in a network of arbitrary constraints  local consistency implies global consistency whenever there are rntight constraints on certain variables  e.g. theorem 1 . however  when the network does not have the required local consistency  global consistency may not be simply obtained by enforcing such level of local consistency. a surprising result is that as long as the constraint between every pair of variables is properly m-tight in an arbitrary network  global consistency can be achieved by enforcing a certain level of relational consistency   theorem 1 . in previous work  e.g.  van beek and dechter  1    all constraints arc required to be m-tight which may be violated by newly introduced constraints in the process of enforcing the intended relational consistency. 
　a promising line of work is to find more properties under which a network is weakly properly m-tight. another obvious direction is to find other classes of sets with intersection properties which will likely give useful consistency results. 
