 
many different rules for decision making have been introduced in the literature. we show that a notion of generalized expected utility proposed in a companion paper  chu and halpern  1  is a universal decision rule  in the sense that it can represent essentially all other decision rules. 
1 introduction 
a great deal of effort has been devoted to studying decision making. a standard formalization decribes the choices a decision maker  dm  faces as acts  where an act is a function from states to consequences. many decision rules  that is  rules for choosing among acts  based on the tastes and beliefs of the dm  have been proposed in the literature. some are meant to describe how  rational  agents should make decisions  while others aim at modeling how real agents actually make decisions. perhaps the best-known approach is that of maximizing expected utility  eu . normative arguments due to savage  suggest that rational agents should behave as if their tastes are represented by a real-valued utility function on the consequences  their beliefs about the likelihood of events  i.e.  sets of states  are represented by a probability measure  and they are maximizing the expected utility of acts with respect to this utility and probability. 
despite these normative arguments  it is well known that 
eu often does not describe how people actually behave when they make decisions  resnik  1 ; thus eu is of limited utility if we want to model  and perhaps predict  how people will behave. as a result  many alternatives to eu have been proposed in the literature  see  for example   gul  1; gilboa and schmeidler  1; giang and shenoy  1; 
quiggin  1; schmeidler  1; yaari  1  . some of these rules involve representations of beliefs by means other than a  single  probability measure; in some cases  beliefs and tastes are combined in ways other than the standard way which produces expected utility; yet other cases  such as maximin and minimax regret  resnik  1   do not require a representation of beliefs at all. 
   *work supported in part by nsf under grants iis-1 and ctc-1 and by the dod multidisciplinary university research initiative  muri  program administered by onr under grant n1-1. 
　in a companion paper  chu and halpern  1   we propose a general framework in which to study and compare decision rules. the idea is to define a generalized notion of expected utility  geu   where a dm's beliefs are represented by plausibility measures  friedman and halpern  1  and the dm's tastes are represented by general  i.e.  not necessarily real-valued  utility functions. we show there that every preference relation on acts has a geu representation. here we show that geu is universal in a much stronger sense: we show that essentially all decision rules have geu representations. the notion of representing one decision rule using another seems to be novel. intuitively  decision rules are functions from tastes  and beliefs  to preference relations  so a representation of a decision rule is a representation of a function  not a preference relation. 
roughly speaking  given two decision rules r1 and r1  an 
r1 representation of 'r1 is a function t that maps inputs of 
r1 to inputs of r1 that contain the same representation of 
tastes  and beliefs  such that . thus  t models  in a precise sense  a user of r1 as a user of r1  since r preserves tastes  and beliefs . we show that a large collection of decision rules have geu representations and characterize the collection. essentially  a decision rule has a geu representation iff it is uniform in a precise sense. it turns out that there are well-known decision rules  such as maximizing choquet expected utility  ceu   schmeidler  1   which essentially assumes that the dm is representing beliefs using a dempster-shafer belief function bel  and then maximizing ceu with respect to bel   that have no geu representations. 
this is because r is not allowed to modify the representation of the tastes  and beliefs . we then define a notion of ordinal representation  in which r is allowed to modify the representation of the tastes  and beliefs   and is required to preserve only the ordinal aspect of the tastes  and beliefs . we show that almost all decision rules  including ceu  have ordinal geu representations. 
decision theory 	1 　there seems to be no prior work in the literature that considers how one decision rule can represent another. perhaps the closest results to our own are those of lehmann . he proposes a  unified general theory of decision  that contains both quantitative and qualitative decision theories. he considers a particular decision rule he calls expected qualitative utility maximization  which allows utilities to be nonstandard real numbers; he defines a certain preorder on the nonstandard reals and makes decisions based on maximizing expected utility  with respect to that preorder . that his framework has eu as a special case is immediate  since for the standard reals  his preorder reduces to the standard order on the reals. he argues informally that maximin is a special case of his approach  so that his approach can capture aspects of more qualitative decision making as well. it is easy to see that lehmann's approach is a special case of geu; his rule is clearly not universal in our sense. 
1 preliminaries 
to make this paper self-contained  much of the material in the first three subsections of this section is taken  almost verbatim  from  chu and llalpern  1 . 
1 	plausibility  utility  and expectation domains 
since one of the goals of this paper is to provide a general framework for all of decision theory  we want to represent the tastes and beliefs of the dms in as general a framework as possible. to this end  we use plausibility measures to represent the beliefs of the dms and  generalized  utility functions to represent their tastes. 

　　sometimes we use x to denote cartesian product; the context will always make it clear whether this is the case. 
e1 and e1 say that 1 is associative and commutative. ♀1 says that t is the left-identity of  r  and e1 ensures that the expectation domain respects the relation on utility values. 
the standard expectation domain  which we denote e  is 
 r   1   r  +  x   where the ordering on each domain is the standard order on the reals. 
1 decision situations and decision problems 
a decision situation describes the objective part of the circumstance that the dm faces  i.e.  the part that is independent of the tastes and beliefs of the dm . formally  a decision situation is a tuple a - {a  1  c   where 
  s is the set of states of the world    c is the set of consequences  and 
  a is a set of acts  i.e.  a set of functions from s to c . 
an act a is simple iff its range is finite. that is  a is simple if it has only finitely many consequences. many works in the literature focus on simple acts  e.g.   fishburn  1  . we assume in this paper that a contains only simple acts; this means that we can define  generalized  expectation using finite sums  so we do not have to introduce infinite series or integration for arbitrary expectation domains. note that all acts are guaranteed to be simple if either s or c is finite  although we do not assume that here. 
　a decision problem is essentially a decision situation together with information about the tastes  and beliefs  of the dm; that is  a decision problem is a decision situation together with the subjective part of the circumstance that faces the dm. formally  a nonplausibilistic decision problem is a tuple  a  u  u   where 
  a =  a 1  c  is a decision situation  
  u is a utility domain  and 
  u : c -  u is a utility function. 
a plausibilistic decision problem is a tuple  a  e  u  pi   where 
  a -  a  1  c  is a decision situation  
  e=  u   p  v   r    r   is an expectation domain  
  u : c -  u is a utility function  and 
  pi : 1s: -  p is a plausibility measure. 
we could have let a plausibilistic decision problem be simply a nonplausibilistic decision problem together with a plausibility domain and a plausibility measure  without including the other components of expectation domains. however  this turns out to complicate the presentation  see below . 
　we say that v is standard iff its utility domain is r  and  if d is plausibilistic  its plausibility measure is a probability measure and its expectation domain is e . 
1 expected utility 
let v be a decision problem with s as the set of states  u as the utility domain  and u as the utility function. each act a of v induces a utility random variable ua : s -  u as follows: ua s  = u a s  . if in addition v is plausibilistic with p as the plausibility domain and pi as the plausibility measure  
decision theory 
1 	decision rules 
intuitively  a decision rule tells the dm what to do when facing a decision problem in order to get a preference relation on acts-e.g.  compare the expected utility of acts. just as we have nonplausibilistic decision problems and plausibilistic decision problems  we have nonplausibilistic decision rules and plausibilistic decision rules. as the name suggests   non plausibilistic decision rules are defined on  non plausibilistic decision problems. 
　we do not require decision rules to be defined on all decision problems. for example   standard  eu is defined only on standard plausibilistic decision problems. more formally  a  non plausibilistic decision rule r is a function whose domain  denoted dom r.   is a subcollection of the collection of 
 non plausibilistic decision problems  and whose range  denoted ran  r   is a collection of preference relations on acts. if doin r  and a1 and a1 are acts in v  then we write 
here are a few examples of decision rules: 
　  geu is a plausibilistic decision rule whose domain con-sists of all plausibilistic decision problems. given a decision p
have 	for all acts   of a. note that geu would not be a decision rule according to this definition if plausibilistic decision problems contained only a utility function and a plausibility measure  and did not include the other components of expectation domains. 
　  of course  standard eu is a decision rule  whose domain consists of all standard plausibilistic decision problems . 
　  maximin is a nonplausibilistic decision rule that orders acts according to their worst-case consequence. it is a conservative rule; the  best  act according to maximin is the one with the best worst-case consequence. intuitively  maximin views nature as an adversary that always pick a state that realizes the worst-case consequence  no matter what act the dm chooses. the domain of  standard  maximin consists of nonplausibilistic decision problems with real-valued util-
decision theory 
　  minimax regret  reg  is based on a different philoso-phy. it tries to hedge a dm's bets  by doing reasonably well no matter what the actual state is. it is also a nonplausibilistic rule. as a first step to defining it  given a nonplausibilistic decision problem for each state 
let that is  is the least upper bound of the utilities in state s. the regret of a in state .s  denoted note that no act can do better than a by more than r a  s  in state s. let for example  suppose that and the dm picks a. sup-
pose that the dm then learns that the true state is so and is offered a chance to change her mind. no matter what act she picks  the utility of the new act cannot be more than 1 higher then . reg orders acts by their regret and thus takes the  best  act to be the one that minimizes  intuitively  this rule tries to minimize the regret that a dm would feel if she discovered what the situation actually was: the  i wish 1 had done a1 instead of a1  feeling. thus  
iff  like maximin  nature is viewed as an adversary that would pick a state that maximizes regret  no matter what act the dm chooses. it is well known that  in general  maximin  reg  and eu give different recommendations  resnik  1 . 
　  the maxmin expected utility rule  mmeu   gilboa and schmeidler  1  assumes that a dm's beliefs are represented by a set v of probability measures. act a1 is preferred to a1 if the worst-case expected utility of a1  taken over all the probability measures in v  is at least as large as the worst-case expected utility of a1. thus mmeu is  in a sense  a hybrid of eu and maximin. to view mmeu as a function on decision problems  we must first show how to represent a set of probability measures as a single plausibility measure. we do this using an approach due to halpern . let the plausibility domain  that is  all functions from v to  1   ordered pointwise; in other words  
thus  in this 
domain  is the constant function 1 and t is the constant function 1. for each let be the function that evaluates each probability measure in v at a ; that is  
 it 
is easy to verify that pip is a plausibility measure. we view pip as a representation of the set v of probability measures; clearly v can be recovered from  the domain of mmeu consists of all plausibilistic decision problems of the form where v is mmeu d  a1 
. note that this 
　   dempster-shafer  belief functions  dempster  1  are a representation of uncertainty that generalize probability. that is  every probability measure is a belief function  but the converse is not necessarily true.1 given a belief function bel  it is well-known that there exists a set pbcl of probability measures such that for all . bel ar  = 
 dempster  1 . a notion of expected 
due to lack of space  we assume that the reader is familiar with 
1 


decision theory 

intuitively  we can think of utility random variables and utility lotteries as descriptions of what an act a does in terms of the tastes  and beliefs  of the dm. if 1v is uniform  we can view 1v as relating the acts indirectly by relating their descriptions. 
　as the following theorem shows  all uniform decision rules have geu representations. 
theorem 1: for all decision rules r 1z has a geu representation iff r  is uniform and r respects utility. 
proof: the   i f direction is somewhat similar in spirit to the proof of theorem 1  given below; due to the lack of space  we omit this direction. 
　the key reason that geu cannot represent nonuniform decision rules is because they do not respect the indistinguishability relations imposed by the utility function  and the plausibility measure . recall that we require that r{d  ~  d because we want a user of one decision rules to appear as if she were using another  without pretending that she has different tastes  and beliefs . so we want r to preserve the tastes  and beliefs  of its input. 
　there is a long-standing debate in the decision-theory literature as to whether preferences should be regarded as ordinal or cardinal. if they are ordinal  then all that matters is their order. if they are cardinal  then it should be meaningful to 

talk about the differences between preferences  that is  how much more a dm prefers one consequence to another. similarly  if representations of likelihood are taken to be ordinal  
then all that matters is whether one event is more likely than another. as we show below  if we require only that r{v  and v describe the same ordinal tastes  and beliefs   then we can in fact express almost all decision rules  including ceu  in terms of geu. 
decision theory 	1 

theorem 1: a decision rule r has an ordinal geu representation iff r weakly respects utility. 
proof: there are two cases  plausibilistic and nonplausibilistic. they are almost identical; we just do the plausibilistic case here.  also  the  only if  direction is quite similar to the one in the oroof of theorem 1. so we omit it here.'  

　theorem 1 shows that geu can emulate essentially all decision rules. thus  there is a sense in which geu can be viewed as a universal decision rule.  we remark that although we have focused here on alternatives that are acts  in the sense of savage  that is  functions from states to consequences  it is not hard to show-and we do in the full paper-that the same results hold if alternatives are taken to be horse lotteries  in the sense of anscombe and aumann .  
