 
motivated by medical terminology applications  we investigate the decidability of the well known expressive dl  shiq  extended with role inclusion axioms  rias  of the form ro s  p. we show that this extension is undecidable even when rias are restricted to the forms r o s r or s o r r k but that decidability can be regained by further restricting rias to be acyclic. we present a tableau algorithm for this dl and report on its implementation  which behaves well in practise and provides important additional functionality in a medical terminology application. 
1 motivation 
the description logic  dl  shiq  horrocks et a/.  1; horrocks and sattler  1b  is an expressive knowledge representation formalism that extends acc  schmidt-schaub and smolka  1   a notational variant of the multi modal logic k  schild  1   with qualifying number restrictions  inverse roles  role inclusion axioms  rias  r  1  and transitive roles. the development of shi q was motivated by several applications  one of which was the representation of knowledge about complex physically structured domains found  e.g.  in chemical engineering  sattler  1  and medical terminology  rector and horrocks  1 . 
　although shiq allows many important properties of such domains to be captured  e.g.  transitive and inverse roles   one extremely useful feature that it cannot express is the  propagation  of one property along another property  padgham and lambrix  1; rector  1; spackman  1 . e.g.  it may be useful to express the fact that certain locative properties are transfered across certain partonomic properties so that a trauma or lesion located in a part of a body structure is recognised as being located in the body structure as a whole. this enables highly desirable inferences such as a fracture of the neck of the femur being inferred to be a kind of fracture of the femur  or an ulcer located in the gastric mucosa being inferred to be a kind of stomach ulcer. 
　the importance of these kinds of inference  particularly in medical terminology applications  is illustrated by the fact that the grail dl  rector et al.  1   which was specifically designed for use with medical terminology  is able to represent these kinds of propagation  although it is quite weak in other respects . moreover  in another medical terminology application using the comparatively inexpressive dl acl  a rather complex  work around'' is performed in order to represent similar propagations  schulz and hahn  1 .1 similar expressiveness was also provided in the cycl language by the t r a n s f ersthro statement  lenat and guha  1 . 
　it is quite straightforward to extend shiq so that this kind of propagation can be expressed: simply allow for role inclusion axioms of the form  which then enforces all models i to interpret the composition of r1 with si as a sub-relation of p1. e.g.  the above examples translate into haslocationo isdivisionof  haslocation  
which implies that 
  
is subsumed by/a specialization of 

unfortunately  this extension leads to the undecidability of the interesting inference problems; see  wessel  1  for an undecidability proof and i baldoni  1;baldoni et al.  1; demri  1   for the closely related family of grammar logics. on closer inspection of the problem  we observe that only rias of the form ros  s or sor s are required in order to express propagation. surprisingly  it turns out that shiq extended with this restricted form of rias is still undecidable. decidability can be regained  however  by further restricting the set of rias to be acyclic  in a non-standard way . this additional restriction does not seem too severe: the above examples are still covered  acyclic sets of rias should suffice for many applications  and cycles in rias may even be an indicator of modelling flaws  rector  1 . we call this decidable logic 'riq. 
　here  we present the above undecidability result and prove the decidability of shiq with acyclic rias via a tableaubased decision procedure for concept satisfiability. the algorithm works by transforming concepts of the form where r is a role  into concepts of the form where a is a non-deterministic finite automaton  nfa . these automata 
   'in this approach  so-called sep-triplets are used both to compensate for the absence of transitive roles in acc  and to express the propagation of properties across a distinguished  part-of role. 

description logics 	1 

arc derived from a set of rias tz by first unfolding tz into a set of implications exp 1v  between regular expressions and roles  and then transforming the regular expressions into automata. the algorithm is of the same complexity as the one for shiq-in the size of exp r  and the length of the input concept-but  unfortunately  exp r.  is exponential in r. we present a syntactic restriction that avoids this blow-up; investigating whether this blow-up can be avoided in general will be part of future work. finally  in order to evaluate the practicability of this algorithm  we have extended the dl system fact  horrocks  1  to deal with acyclic rias. we discuss how the properties of nfas are exploited in the implementation  and we present some preliminary results showing that the performance of the extended system is comparable with that of the original  and that it is able to compute inferences of the kind mentioned above w.r.t. the well known galen medical terminology knowledge base  rector and horrocks  1; horrocks  1 . 
   for full proofs  the interested reader is referred to  horrocks and sattler  1a . 
1 preliminaries 
in this section  we introduce the dl s'h+iq. this includes the definition of syntax  semantics  and inference problems. 
definition 1 let c and r be sets of concept and role names. 
the set of roles is  for roles r1  each of which can be inverse   a role inclusion axiom  ria  is an expression of the form 
r1- a generalised role box 	is a set of rias. 
　an interpretationassociates  with each role name r  a binary relation . inverse roles are interpreted as usual  i.e.  

an interpretation 1 is a model of a g-rbox tz if it satisfies each inclusion assertion in tz  i.e.  if 

where o stands for the composition of binary relations. 
   transitive role names were not introduced since is equivalent to saying that r is a transitive role. 
　to avoid considering roles such as r   we define a function inv on roles as follows: lnv r  = r~ if r is a role name  and lnv r  = s if r = s - . 
obviously  then each model of tz also satisfies 
	inv s   inv s  o lnv r  	inv s  and 
thus  in the following  we assume that a 
g-rbox always contains both  directions  of a ria. 
　for a g-rbox r  we define the relation to be the transitive-reflexive closure of over tz. 
definition 1 a role s is simple if it does not have implied sub-roles  i.e.  if implies does not hold. 
	the set of 	-concepts is the smallest set such that 
 i  every concept name is a concept  and   ii  if c  d are concepts  r is a role  possibly inverse   s is a simple role  possibly inverse   and n is a nonnegative integer  then are also 
concepts. 
　an interpretation   called the domain of l  and a valuation i which maps every concept to a subset of   and every role to a subset of such that  for all concepts c  d  roles r  s  and non-negative integers n  the following equations are satisfied  where #m denotes the cardinality of a set m: 

　a concept c is called satisfiable w.r.t. a g-rbox r. iff there is a model j of 1v with a concept d subsumes a concept c w.r.t. tz  written i f f   holds for each model x of  r.. for an interpretation i  an element  is called an instance of a concept c iff 
remarks: number restrictions  are 
restricted to simple roles  intuitively these are  possibly inverse  roles that are not implied by others  since shiq without this restriction is undecidable  horrocks et ai  1 . for dls that are closed under negation  subsumption and  un satisfiability can be mutually reduced: is unsatisfiable  and c is unsatisfiable iff some concept name a. it is straightforward to extend these reductions to g-rboxes and tboxes. in contrast  the reduction of inference problems w.r.t. a tbox to pure concept inference problems  possibly w.r.t. a g-rbox   deserves special care: s'hiq is expressive enough to internalise tboxes  i.e.  to reduce reasoning w.r.t. tboxes to reasoning without tboxes  schild  1; horrocks et a/.  1 . thus  in the following  we restrict our attention to the satisfiability of sh+iq-concepts. 
1 	relationship w i t h other formalisms 
grammar logics are a class of propositional multi modal logics where the accessibility relations are  axiomatised  through a grammar  farinas del cerro and penttonen  1 . more precisely  for modal parameters  the production r u l e c a n b e viewed a s a notational variant for the ria . analogously to 
the dl case  the semantics of a grammar logic takes into account only those frames/relational structures that  satisfy the grammar . 
   now grammars are traditionally organised in  refinements of  the chomsky hierarchy  which induces a hierarchy of grammar logics  e.g.  context free grammar logics are those propositional multi modal logics where the accessibility relations can be axiomatised through a context free grammar. unsurprisingly  the expressiveness of the grammars influences the expressiveness of the corresponding grammar logics. it was shown that satisfiability of regular grammar logics is exptime-complete  demri  1   whereas this problem is undecidable for context free grammar logics  baldoni  1; baldoni et al.  1 . the latter result is closely related to the undecidability proof in  wessel  1 . 

1 	description logics 

role value maps  rvms   brachman and schmolze  1; 
schmidt-schauss  1  are closely related to the rias investigated here. rvms arc concepts of the form roles  whose interpreta-
tion 	is defined as follows: 
where  r1 ... rm  i{x  denotes the set of those that are reachable from x via thus the ria r o 
s t is equivalent to saying that each individual must be an instance of rs  t. the undecidability proof of kl-one  schmidt-schauss  1  also involves rvms   and thus cannot be adapted easily to our logic. 
1 sh+iq 	is undecidable 
due to the syntactic restriction on rias  we were not able to adapt the undecidability proof for acc with context-free or linear grammars in  baldoni  1; baldoni et al  1; demri  1   the one for acc with role boxes  wessel  
1   or the one for kl-one  schmidt-schauss  1  to prove undecidability of sh+iq. in the following  we sketch the reduction of the undecidable domino problem  berger  1  to sh+iq satisfiability. 
definition 1 a domino system v -  d  h v  consists of a non-empty set of domino types d - {d  . . .  dn}  and of sets of horizontally and vertically matching pairs 
and the problem is to determine if  for a given v  there exists a tiling t : such that for all in  	and 
　for a domino system d  we define a sh+ iq-concept cd and a g-rbox rd such that v has a tiling iff cd is satisfiable w.r.t. rd. due to space limitation  we only present' 
denotes addition and subtraction modulo four. 
　existential and number restrictions on roles h and v  for the horizontal and vertical neighbours  are used to ensure that a point has at most one vertical and at most one horizontal 
1
thanks to christof loding at rwth aachen! 
description logics 
figure l: the staircase structure and the effects of rd. 
successor  and that these successors satisfy the horizontal and vertical matching conditions induced by h and v; this  as well as ensuring that each point is associated with exactly one domino type  is standard in domino reductions. 
　the next step is rather special: we do not enforce a grid structure  but a structure with  staircases   which is illustrated in figure l. to this purpose  we introduce four subroles v1  ...  v1 of v and four sub-roles of h  and ensure that we only have  staircases . an i-staircase is an alternating chain of vi and hi edges  without any other vj or hj-successors. at each point on the r-axis  two staircases start that need not meet again  one /-staircase starting with vi and one i ＊; 1-staircase starting with . a symmetric 
behaviour is enforced for the nodes on the y-axis. 
　it only remains to ensure that  if two elements 1  b' represent the same point in the grid  then they are associated with the same domino type: b and b'  represent the same point  if there is an n and an instance a on the x-ov the y-axis such that both b and b' are reachable by following a staircase starting at a for n steps  i.e.  if there is a v1h -path  resp. of length n from a to b  and a path  of length n from a to b'. 
   to this purpose  we add super roles xt of hl and yl of vt  for which we use dashed arrows in figure 1   and the last group of rias in rd. these role inclusion axioms enforce appropriate  additional role successorships between elements  and we use the additional roles xi and yi since we only want to have at most one vi or hi-successor. for each 1 staircases starting at the same element on one of the axes  these rias ensure that each pair of elements representing the same point is related by y . to see this  consider the consequences of the rias for elements representing the four points 
 1  ...   1   and  apply  the ria 	. next  
 apply    and finally   which yields the yo-link between the two elements representing  1 . then  starting with   we can continue with the points  1  ...   1  and work up the role inclusion axioms and up the staircase. 
　the above observations imply that the concept cd is satisfiable w.r.t. to and 1p iff v has a solution. 
1 

theorem 1 satisfiability of sh+xq-concepts w.r.t. generalized rboxes is undecidable. 
1 riq is decidable 
in this section  we show that shiq with acyclic generalised rboxes  riq  is decidable. we present a tableau-based algorithm that decides satisfiability of riq-concepts  and therefore also subsumption in 1zxq and  using internalisation  both inferences w.r.t. tboxes. the tableau algorithm implemented in the fact system  horrocks  1  was extended to the one presented here  and the empirical results are reported in section 1. 
definition 1 let r be a g-rbox  containing always both directions of a ria; see above . a role r directly affects a role and either 	or 
         let  affects   be the transitive closure of  directly affects . an acyclic generalised rbox  a-rbox  is a g-rbox where  affects  has no cycles. 1zxq is the restriction of sh+iq to a-rboxes. 
　please note that  in a-rboxes  we car no longer say that a role r is symmetric using  since this would yield an  affects  cycle of length 1. 
syntactic transformations before specifying this algorithm  we transform the rbox to make the presentation of the algorithm easier-basically  we unfold the role hierarchy to make all implications explicit. 
　firstly  for each  possibly inverse  role r we define two regular expressions as follows: 

secondly  we iteratively replace roles in pr with unions of regular expressions of roles  working our way up the affecting relation. we start with roles  almost  minimal w.r.t. the affecting relation  i.e.  we start with roles r such that all roles 1 which affect r are not affected. we proceed with roles directly affected by roles that are either already treated or not affected by other roles  and do the following: 
　due to the acyclicity of r the recursion in this transformation terminates after at most n steps for n the number of role inclusion axioms in r. please note that  by construction  for each  possibly inverse  role r occurring in r  exp r  
contains exactly one inclusion for example  for the rias r 

the above transformation yield a set exp r  containing unfortunately  the size of exp r  can be exponential in the size of r. a further syntactic restriction which avoids this exponential blow-up is described in section 1. 
　the regular role terms on the left hand side of exp r  are read with the standard semantics for regular role expressions   i.e.  using union  composition  and transitive closure of binary relations  see  e.g.   schild  1  . we use l p  to denote the language described by a regular expression p. 
lemma 1 an interpretation x is a model of an acyclic generalised rbox 'r iff i is a model of exp r . 
the tableau algorithm tries to construct  for an input 
riq-concept d and an a-rbox r  a tableau  an abstraction of a model  for d w.r.t. 1z. we can prove that this algorithm constructs a tableau for d and 1z iff d is satisfiable w.r.t. r  and thus decides satisfiability of riq concepts w.r.t. an a-rbox. but for the use of nfas introduced below  this algorithm is quite similar to the one for shiq  horrocks et al.  1; horrocks and sattler  1b . 
　if r occurs in r  then r exp r   and we can build a non-deterministic finite automaton  nfa  ar with 
 due to the use of non-deterministic aucan be of size linear in . otherwise  ar is a 
 two-state  automaton with 
　for a an nfa and q a state in a  aq denotes the nfa obtained from a by making q the  only  initial state of a  and we use  to denote that a has a transition labelled with s from q to q'. 
　as usual  each concept can be easily transformed into an equivalent one in negation normal form  nnf  i.e.  negation occurs in front of concept names only   and we use for the nnf of a concept c. for a concept c  clos c  is the smallest set that contains c and that is closed under sub-concepts and - then fclos c  r  is the superset of clos c r  that contains for each s occurring in 1v or c with q a state in 
a completion tree t for a riq concept d and an a-
rbox r is a tree where each node x is labelled with a set and each edge  x  y  from a node x to its 
successor y is labelled with a non-empty set of  possibly inverse  roles occurring in d and r. finally  completion trees come with an explicit inequality relation on nodes which is implicitly assumed to be symmetric. 
　if r l  x y   for a node x and its successor y and then y is called an s-successor of x and x is called an inv s -predecessor of y. if y is an 1-successor or an lnv s predecessor of x  then y is called an s-neighbour of x. finally  ancestor is the transitive closure of predecessor. 
　for a role 1  a concept c and a node x in t we define is an 1-neighbour of x and 
　a node is blocked iff it is either directly or indirectly blocked. a node x is directly blocked iff none of its ancestors are blocked  and it has ancestors x' y and y' such that  1  y is not the root node;  1  x is a successor of x' and y 

	is a successor of y' and  1  	  
                 . a node y is indirectly blocked if one of its ancestors is blocked. 
1 	description logics in order to evaluate the practicability of the above algorithm  we have extended the dl system fact  horrocks  1  to deal with riq  and we have carried out a preliminary empirical evaluation. 
　from a practical point of view  one potential problem with the riq algorithm is that the number of different automata  and hence the number of different concepts  could 

figure 1: the expansion rules for 'riq. 
　for a node is said to contain a clash if  for some concept name or if there is some concept and x has n + 1 s-neighbours 
and 
n. a completion tree is clash-free if none of its nodes contains a clash  and it is complete if no rule from figure 1 can be applied to it. 
　for a riq-concept d  the algorithm starts with the completion tree consisting of a single root node x with l  x  = {d} and   empty. it applies the expansion rules in figure 1  stopping when a clash occurs  and answers  d is satisfiable w.r.t. tv1 iff the completion rules can be applied in such a way that they yield a complete and clash-free completion tree  and  d is unsatisfiable w.r.t. r  otherwise. 
　most of the rules have been used before for fragments of riq-only the three are new: they are elegant gen-
eralisations of standard rules for value restrictions taking into account automata. 
　as usual  we can prove termination  soundness  and completeness of the tableau algorithm to show that it indeed de-
description logics 
be very large. moreover  many of these automata could be equivalent  i.e.  accept the same languages . this could adversely effect blocking  and thus lead to a serious degradation in performance  horrocks and sattler  1b . 
　the fact implementation addresses these possible problems by transforming all of the initial nfas into minimal deterministic finite automata  dfas  using the at&t fsm library tm   mohri et al.  1 . one dfa is constructed for each role  the states in each automaton are uniquely numbered  and the implementation uses concepts of the form  where a is the number of a state in one of the automata. because the automata are deterministic  for each concept of the form  in the label of a node x  the can add at most one concept to the label of a given neighbouring node y per role in the label of the edge  x  y . moreover  because the automata are minimal  leads to the presence of in some successor node as a result of repeated applications of the is equivalent 
to 	are numbers  such comparisons are very easy  and minimisation of automata avoids unnecessary blocking delays. 
　the implementation is still at the  beta  stage  but it has been possible to carry out some preliminary tests using the 
1 
well known galen medical terminology kb i rector and horrocks  1; horrocks  1 . this kb contains 1 named concepts and 1 roles  1 of which are transitive. the roles are arranged in a relatively complex hierarchy with a maximum depth of 1. classifying this kb using facts shiq reasoner takes 1s on an 1 mhz pentium iii equipped linux pc. classifying the same kb using the new 'riq  reasoner took a total of 1s  but this includes 1s to compute the minimal dfas for the role box  it should be noted that this is an unusually large and complex role box  and that computing the dfas is a preprocessing step that will not need to be repeated when the remainder of the kb is extended  modified  or queried . this result is encouraging as it shows that  in the case of the galen kb at least  using automata in  concepts does not  in itself  lead to an unacceptable degradation in performance. 
　the kb was then extended with several rias that express the propagation of location across various partonomic roles. 
these included 
haslocationo i s s o l i d d i v i s i o n o f haslocation  haslocationo islayerof haslocation. 
classifying the extended kb took 1s  an increase of only 1%  1% if we exclude the dfa computation time . subsumption queries w.r.t. this kb revealed that  e.g.  

was implicitly a kind of 

 neckof femur is a solid division of femur   and 

 gastricmucosa is a layer of stomach . none of these subsumption relationships held w.r.t. the original kb. the times taken to compute these relationships w.r.t. the classified kb could not be measured accurately as they were of the same order as a system clock tick  1ms . 
