 
refinement operators for theories avoid the problems related to the myopia of many relational learning algorithms based on the operators that refine single clauses. however  the non-existence of ideal refinement operators has been proven for the standard clausal search spaces based on 1-subsumption or logical implication  which scales up to the spaces of theories. by adopting different generalization models constrained by the assumption of object identity  we extend the theoretical results on the existence of ideal refinement operators for spaces of clauses to the case of spaces of theories. 
1 motivation 
in the investigation of the algorithms for relational learning  regarding induction as a refinement process allows to decouple search from heuristics. therefore  the choice of the generalization model for a search space plays a key role since it affects both its algebraic structure and the definition of refinement operators for that space. 
¡¡logical implication and 1-subsumption are the relationships that are commonly employed for inducing generalization models in relational learning  the latter turning out to be more tractable with respect to the former . yet  they are not fully satisfactory because of the complexity issues that the resulting search spaces present  although subspaces have been found where the generalization model is more manageable. indeed  the effectiveness and efficiency of learning as a refinement process strongly depends on the properties of the search space and  as a consequence  of the operators. in some cases the important property to be required to operators is flexibility  badea  1   meaning that they should be capable of focussing dynamically on certain zones of the search space that may be more promising. conversely  the property of ideality  nienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1  has been recognized as particularly important for the efficiency of incremental algorithms in search spaces with dense solutions. it is also possible to derive non-redundant operators from ideal ones  the former being more suitable for spaces with rare solutions  badea and stanciu  1 . 
¡¡most algorithms for relational learning  such as those employed in foil  quinlan  1  and progol  muggleton  1   adopt iterative covering strategies  separateand-conquer  fiirnkranz  1   based on the refinement of clauses. alternative methods are based on divide-andconquer strategies  bostrom and asker  1 . although these refinements may turn out to be optimal with respect to a single clause  the result of assembling them in a theory is not guaranteed to be globally effective  since the interdependence of the clauses with respect to covering may lead to better theories made up of locally non-optimal clauses. only some systems  e.g. mpl  dc raedt et ai  1  or hyper  bratko  1   cope with the problem of learning whole theories rather than constructing them clause by clause. 
¡¡this urges more complex refinement operators to be adopted in algorithms obeying to a different strategy that is able to take into account the possible interactions between the single clausal refinements. hence  the new problem is defining operators that refine whole theories rather than single clauses  midelfart  1; badea  1 . aleph is a system where ideas on theory-level induction has been rudimentarily implemented  srinivasan  1 . of course  heuristics are required to cope with the combinatorial complexity of the problem. the resulting extended setting would also take into account background knowledge that may be available  and then it is also comparable to generalized and relative subsumption  plotkin  1; buntine  1  or implication  nienhuyscheng and de wolf  1 . 
¡¡weakening implication by assuming object identity  an extension of the unique names assumption  reiter  1   as a semantic bias has led to the definition of 1subsumption and ol-implication  esposito et al  1b   clausal relationships which induce more manageable search spaces. the existence of ideal refinement operators in these generalization models is possible  esposito et ai  1a   while this does not hold in clausal spaces ordered by 1-subsumption or implication inienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1 . the objective of this work is to extend the results obtained for spaces of clauses and prove the existence of ideal refinement operators for spaces of theories in those generalization models. 
¡¡this paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we recall semantics and proof-theory adopted in the framework. section 1 deals with refinement operators and their properties. then  in section 1  the operators for the search space considered are defined and proven to be ideal. section 1 summarizes the paper outlining possible developments. 

1 generalization models and object identity 
the representation language adopted in the proposed framework concerns logic theories  whose space is denoted 1c  made up of clauses  space c . the background notions about clausal representations in inductive logic programming can be found in  nienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1 . 
¡¡the framework relies essentially on the following bias proposed in  esposito et a/.  1b : 
assumption  object identity  in a clause  terms denoted with different symbols must he distinct  i.e. they represent dif-
ferent entities of the domain. 
the intuition is the following: in spaces based on generalization models induced by   -subsumption  or implication   considered the two clauses c = q x   - p x x  and d = q{x   - p x x  p{x y  p y z  p z x   they turn out to be equivalent  in fact c is the reduced clause of d : this is not so natural as it may appear  since more elements of the domain can be accounted for in d than in c  indeed in this framework c is more general than d . the expressive 
power is not diminished by this bias  since it is still possible to convey the same meaning of a clause  although employing more clauses  e.g. when object identity is assumed  q x   - p x  y  is equivalent to the pair of clauses  a thcoiy  { q x  -p{x x     q{x  -p{x y  } . 
¡¡now it has to be specified how this bias affects the semantics and proof theory of a clausal representation. 
1 	proof theory and semantics 
starting from substitutions  we recall the specification of the proof theory under object identity. since a substitution can be regarded as a mapping from the variables to the terms of a language  we require these functions to satisfy additional properties to avoid the identification of terms: 
definition 1 given a set of terms t  omitted when obvious   a substitution a is an oi-substitution w.r.t. t iff 

based on oi-substitutions  it is possible to define related notions such as ground and renaming ol-substitutions  their composition and also unification: 
definition 1 given a finite set of clauses s  we say that i s a n o l - u n i f i c r a n d is an oi-substitution w.r.t. terms i. 
an ol-unifier for s is a most general ol-unifier/or s iff for each ol-unifier o of s there exists an oi-substitution r such that . this is denoted with 
¡¡the following notions represent resolution and derivation when exclusively ol-unifiers are used. 
definition 1 given the clauses c and d that are supposed standardized apart  a clause r is an oi-resolvent of c and d iff there exist    and   such that unifiable through the and is the set of the oi-resolvents ofc and d. 
an oi-derivation is obtained by successively chaining 1resolutions. 

¡¡with respect to the model theory under object identity  more specific models are needed: 
definition 1 given a non-empty domain v  a preinterpretation j of the language c assigns each constant to a different element of d and each n-ary function symbol f to a mapping from vn to v. 
an ol-interpretation i based on j is a set of ground instances of atoms with arguments mapped in d through j. 
given a ground oi-substitution mapping vars c  to v  an instance   of an atom a is true in i iff. otherwise it is false in i. a negative literal is true in 1 iff a  is not. otherwise it is false in i. 
i is an ol-model for the clause c iff for all ground oisubstitutions there exists at least a literal in that is true in i  otherwise the clause is false in i. 
hence  the form of implication that is compliant with this semantics has been defined  esposito et ai  1b  which  in turn  induces a quasi-order on spaces of clauses and theories. 
definition 1 let c  d be two clauses. c implies d under object identity  and then c is more general than d w.r.t. oiimplication  iff all ol-models for c are also oi-modcls for d. this relationship is denoted with 
analogously a theory t implies c under object identity  denoted with  models for t are also oi-models 
for c. finally  a theory t is more general than a theory t' 
w. r. t. ol-implication 
¡¡oi-implication is a constrained form of logical implication biased by the object identity assumption  as shown in the following example: 

¡¡the proof-procedure was proven sound in  esposito et at.  1b   thus bridging the gap from the proof-theory to the model-theoretic definition of ol-implication. 
1 
a simpler syntactic relationship  that is -subsumption biased by the object identity assumption  has been defined based the notion of oi-substitution. 
definition 1 given two clauses c and d  d iff there exists an oi-substitution a w.r.t. terms c  such that in this case  c is more general than d w.r.t. -subsumption  denoted if also then they are equivalent w. r.t. .denoted 
analogously  given the theories t  t'  t is more general than v w.r.t. denoted     
¡¡this quasi-order is weaker than oi-implication as proven by the following result  esposito et al.  1b : 
theorem 1 given a theory t and a non-tautological 
clause  such that 
this result bridges the gap from model-theory to prooftheory. it also suggests the way to decompose oi-implication that is exploited for defining complete refinement operators. 
¡¡similarly to standard implication  it is nearly straightforward to demonstrate some consequences of theorem 1 originally due to gottlob . given a clause c  let c1+ and c~ denote  respectively  the sets of its positive and negative literals. then  it holds: 
-subsumes 
¡¡since oi-substitutions map different literals of the subsuming clause onto different literals of the subsumed clause  equivalent clauses under -subsumption have the same number of literals. thus  a space ordered by  is made up of non-redundant clauses. indeed  it holds: 
proposition 1 let c and d be two clauses. 	if c 
subsumes d then   moreover  iff they are alphabetic variants. 
¡¡as a consequence of the propositions above  it is possible to prove the following results giving lower bounds for the depth and cardinality of clauses in the generalization model based on oi-implication  fanizzi and ferilli  1 . 
definition 1 the depth of a term t is 1 when 1 is a variable or a constant. if then dcpth t  - 
. the depth of a clause c  denoted 
depth c   is the maximum depth among its terms. 
proposition 1 given the clauses c and d  	then it holds that depth 
1 theory refinement and object identity 
a learning problem can be cast as a search problem  mitchell  1  where theory refinement is triggered when new evidence made available is to be assimilated. the canonical inductive paradigm requires the fulfillment of the properties of completeness and consistency for the synthesized theory with respect to a set of input examples. when an inconsistent  respectively  incomplete  hypothesis is detected  a specialization  resp.  generalization  of the hypothesis is required in order to restore this property of the theory. in the former case the refinement operators must search the space looking for more specific theories  downward refinements ; in the latter  more general theories  upward refinements  arc required. 
¡¡the formal definition of the refinement operators for generic search spaces  is based on the algebraic notion of a quasi-ordered set s that is a set endowed with an ordering relationship  that is reflexive and transitive. 
definition 1 given a quasi-ordered set   a refinement operator is a mapping from s to 1s such that: 

 downward refinement operator  

 upward refinement operator  
¡¡a notion of closure upon refinement operators is required when proving the completeness of the operators. 

ultimately  refinement operators should construct chains of of elements of 1 
such that going from the starting elements to target ones. 
1 	properties of the refinement operators 
as mentioned above  the properties of the refinement operators depend on the algebraic structure of the search space. a refinement operator traverses a refinement graph in the search space  that is a directed graph containing an edge from t to t' in s in case the operator r is such that 
¡¡a major source of inefficiency may come from refinements that turn out to be equivalent to the starting ones. depending on the search algorithm adopted  computing refinements that are equivalent to some element that has been already discarded may introduce a lot of useless computation. as to the effectiveness of the search  a refinement operator should be able to find a path between any two comparable elements of the search space  or their equivalent representatives . it is desirable that at least one path in the graph can lead to target elements. this means that a complete refinement operator can derive any comparable clement in a finite number of steps. the following properties formally define these concepts: 
definition 1 in a quasi-ordered set 	  	a refinement operator r is locally finite iff is finite and computable. 
a downward  resp. upward  refinement operator p  resp. is proper iff' 	implies 
¡¡let us observe that local finiteness and completeness ensure the existence of a computable refinement chain to a target element  and properness ensure a more efficient refinement process  by avoiding the search of equivalent clauses. then  the combination of these properties confers more effectiveness and efficiency to an operator: 
definition 1 in a quasi-ordered set  a refinement operator is ideal iff it is locally finite  proper and complete. 
¡¡as mentioned in the introduction  other important properties of refinement operators have been defined  yet they go beyond the scope of this paper which focusses on ideality. 
1 	minimal refinements of clauses 
the existence of maximal specializations and minimal generalizations of clauses was proven for both the   -subsumption and the 1-implication generalization model  fanizzi and ferilli  1 . these results arc briefly recalled here for being used in the construction of ideal refinement operators presented in the following section. 
¡¡as a consequence of theorem 1  some limitations are provable as concerns depth and cardinality for a clause that implies  subsumes  another clause under object identity. this yields a bound to the proliferation of possible generalizations: 
proposition 1 let c and d be two clauses. the set of generalizations ofc and d w.r.t. 1-implication is finite. 
the proof is straightforward since the depths and cardinalities of the generalizations are limited as a consequence of proposition 1. now  given two clauses c and d  let g be the set of generalizations of w.r.t. oi-implication. observe that   proposition 1 yields that g is finite. thus  since the test of ol-implication between clauses is decidable  fanizzi and ferilli  1   it is theoretically possible to determine the minimal elements of g by comparing the clauses in g and eliminating those that are overly general. 
¡¡for computing theories that are proper generalizations of the starting ones  an operator for inverting ol-resolutions is needed which is similar to the v-operator for the inversion of resolution  muggleton  1 : 
definition 1 given a theory t  the operator for the inversion of the ol-resolution is defined: 

note that there is a lot of indeterminacy in this definition. yet it suffices for our theoretical purposes. in fact  the specification of an actual operator to be implemented in a learning system should consider also other information  such as examples  background knowledge  etc.   to define the underlying heuristic component. 
¡¡with respect to maximal specializations  the major difficulty comes from the fact that under standard implication  c u d is a clause that preserves the models of either clause  hence turning out to be a maximal specialization. in this setting  as expected  more clauses are needed than a single one; indeed the following operator has been defined: 
definition 1 let c1 and c1 be two clauses such that c  
and c1 are standardized apart and k a set of new constants such t a new set o f clauses i s proposition 1 let c  d and e be clauses such that c and 
d are standardized apart. if 	then vf € 
this result implies that 	contains maximal special-
izations of the two clauses w.r.t. ol-implication. for the proof of ideality given in the next section  it is important to point out that this set of specializations is finite. moreover  the definition of u1 and also proposition 1 can be extended to the case of multiple clauses  fanizzi and ferilli  1 . 
1 ideal operators for theories 
nonexistence conditions for ideal refinement operators for generic spaces are given in  nienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1 . a close relationship has been recognized between ideality and the covers of elements in   a downward cover of c being a d such that and 
 resp. 	and 	for the upward case . 
a necessary condition for the ideality of refinement operators is that they return supersets of the sets of covers. 
theorem 1 in the quasi-ordered space1  an ideal refinement operator does not exist. 
¡¡the non-existence of ideal refinement operators for spaces of clauses ordered by implication can be proven as a consequence of this result  nienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1   since 1-subsumption is weaker than logical implication. besides  this can be extended  proving the non-existence of refinement operators for search spaces of theories endowed with the ordering relationship induced by 1-subsumption 
 midelfart  1  and the one induced by logical implication  nienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1 . conversely  within the framework we present  it is possible to exploit the definition of the refinement operators for clausal spaces for demonstrating the existence of ideal operators on spaces of theories. 
1 	ideal operators for 1isubsumption 
with respect to the spaces of clauses in the generalization model induced by  rsubsumption  we exploit the ideality of the operators for clausal spaces  esposito et al  1a . 
definition 1 in the quasi-ordered space given a be a non redundant theory equivalent to t the downward refinement operator pot  is defined as follows: 
the refinement 

poi  locally finite  obvious. 
 proper  by the properness of poi for clauses  
the theories can be 
supposed to be non redundant  otherwise the reduced equivalent theory can be computed by removing clauses by means of the second item of the operator. 
	by definition 	i g 
starting from t1 = t  the first component of the operator is iterated  obtaining for each a refinement by choosing sj as the subset of made up of 
the clauses that are not in the target theory t' while being strictly more general than clauses in t1  that is 
for some k   
tk vnay be larger than t'. thus the second component of poi for theories can be employed for deleting the exceeding clauses from tk yielding t'. finally we have that 
: analogously. 
1 ideal operators for o.l-implication 
these operators above will be embedded in the definition of the refinement operators for spaces of theories in the stronger order induced by ol-implication. besides  notions and results given in section 1 are also exploited. in particular  these operators should be able to compute specializations and generalizations that are able to reach those clauses involved in oi-resolution steps  and their inverse . 
definition 1 in the quasi-ordered space   the downward refinement operator fa is defined as follows  given any 
  
where fa  denotes the downward refinement operator 
for theories wrt 
the upward refinement operator s. is defined as follows: 
i 
where soi' denotes the upward refinement operator for theories wrt 
¡¡the ideality of these operators is stated by the following result  figure 1 depicts the related refinement graph : 

figure 1: the refinement graph 
theorem 1 in the search space   the refinement operators are ideal. 
proof: 
poi    locally finite  by definition of the various operators and the finiteness of the theories. 
 proper  by the properness of the refinement operators employed in the various items. 
 complete  suppose  with n - 
 since redundancy can be eliminated by removing redundant clauses  and tautologies  through the last item of the operator  we will consider the theories as non redundant. 

observe that  by using the first item of the refinement operator  it is possible to produce the theory ts containing the maximal specializations of the clauses in employed in the ol-derivation the of di 's  by the extension of lemma 1 to the case of multiple clauses where each maximal specialization is more general wrt ol-implication than an ol-resolvent ~ 
observe that now  it is possible to iterate  at most n times for the dt that are properly by some f  the second item of the operator  in order to compute the theory 	thus we can write: 
by construction 	  then we can exploit the ideal operator for theories wrt 1oi subsumption  third item of the operator for theories wrt oi~implication  writing: 
finally  by chaining these steps  it is possible to conclude that: t' 
 in the same hypotheses the previous proof it is possible to invert the  using the last item of the definition of s1 for theories wrt oiimplication: 
then  a number of ol-resolutions are to be inverted byusing the first item of  this number is finite due to proposition 1 and then can be done tentatively in afi-

nite number of steps. 
finally  by chaining these steps  it is possible to conclude that: 
¡¡differently from the standard generalization models  in this framework the number of oi-resolution steps is bounded because  during oi-implication or steps  the sizes of the clauses increase  decrease  monotonically  as a consequence of propositions 1 and 1. 
1 conclusions 
in this work the existence of ideal refinement operators was proved in the search space of theories ordered by generalization models based on object identity. coupled with some heuristics  this allows for the definition of efficient refinement algorithms that avoid the myopia of the traditional relational learning approaches. 
¡¡we focussed on the effectiveness of the refinement operators  that is related to their static properties. in general this is not sufficient for defining a learning algorithm: efficiency plays a key role when dealing with first order logics. the successive step is to investigate the dynamic properties of these operators when they are to be guided by means of heuristics based on the available examples and/or other criteria. 
¡¡we have also mentioned that in spaces with rare solutions it is more suitable to have an operator that is non redundant  because almost all of the paths that could be constructed would not lead to a target theory. it should be investigated how to define non redundant operators in this framework. 
¡¡the object identity framework is currently implemented in the system 1nthelex  esposito et ai  1   with a totally incremental strategy based on clause-level induction. we plan to investigate how to upgrade the system to theory-level  exploiting the theoretical operators presented in this paper together with suitable evaluation functions to mitigate the combinatorial complexity of the problem. 
