 
this paper studies the dynamics of agent mediated combinatorial trading at the macroscopic level. the combinatorial marketplace consists of a retailer who wishes to sell bundles of items  and a large number of agents with different purchasing goals. these agents dynamically form coalitions to exploit the benefits of grouping based on their complementary needs. a novel physics based dynamic equation is proposed to capture the essence of the movements of agents among different sized coalitions. simulation experiments are performed to study the global behavior of the agents and the effectiveness of the agent mediated combinatorial trading. 
1 introduction 
the pervasive connectivity of the internet and the powerful architecture of world wide web are changing many market conventions. tremendous opportunities for conducting business on the internet are emerging. intelligent agents will play a crucial role in electronic commerce where dynamic and heterogeneous interactions between thousands of organizations and millions of individuals are involved. so far  we have already witnessed the involvements of e-commerce agents in traditional business settings. furthermore  this involvement is re-shaping the way in which business is conducted in areas such as comparison shopping  dynamic pricing  negotiation  auction  and brokerages  to name a few. the automation brought by e-commercc agents will dramatically reduce certain types of frictional costs and time incurred in the exchange of commodities. 
   in e-commerce  the virtual distance separating producers  wholesalers  distributors  retailers  and consumers has collapsed to near zero. all of the parties involved are faced with rich choices  and it is natural for them to utilize situations to their best advantage. as the population of e-commerce agents increases  automated negotiations among them on behalf of their parties will be prevalent. one of the areas in which agent negotiations will be heavily involved is combinatorial markets  where combinations of goods and services are being traded and efficiently allocated. for example  a trading agent can be constructed to perform real-time procurement of bundles of complementary goods and services on multiple simultaneous internet auctions and exchanges. alternatively  a travel service agent can be constructed to provide combinations of hotel and flight arrangements to potential customers. recently  research on combinatorial auctions has attracted considerable attention  fujishima et al 1; leyton-brown et al 1; klcmperer 1; sandholm 1; 
lehmann 1; rassenti 1; rothkopf 1; yokoo et al 1  due to the sheer interconnectedness of the internet. one way to analyze combinatorial auctions is to use search algorithms such as branch and bound. this approach can produce optimal solutions  however  it is exponential in the worst-case. an alternative approach  which uses approximation algorithms  is typically polynomial but the quality of the solutions cannot be guaranteed. 
   this paper addresses the issue in a combinatorial market where the retailer prefers to sell bundles of goods. a large number of buyer's agents dynamically form coalitions to exploit the benefits of grouping based on their complementary needs. the transaction is done at the coalition level such that the price for each buyer's agent is cheaper than if buying independently. coalition formation has been addressed by researchers from both the game theory community and the multi-agent community. game theory emphasizes the issues of n-person games formation under different settings and the distribution of the benefits among players  kraus et al 1 . it concentrates on the stability and fairness issues for given coalitions. multi-agent research emphasizes the special properties of a multi-agent environment and considers the effects of communication costs and limited computation time on the coalition formation process  sandholm 1a; sandholm 1b . 
multiagent systems 	1 　we use a physics-based approach to study the dynamic behavior of agents in the combinatorial market where coalitions are involved. there are efforts to study large-scale multi-agent systems using a physics-based approach  shehory et. al; lerman et. al. 1 . for example  lerman and shehory  lerman et. al. 1  propose a physics-motivated mechanism for coalition formation in non-combinatorial markets. the problem addressed in our work is different because we study the issue where the retailer prefers to sell complementary goods. in contrast  the formulation of lerman and shehory deals with the case where the retailer only has one category of goods. thus  the agents in our study are heterogeneous because they may be interested in different goods. agents in their study are homogeneous in the sense that they are all interested in one category of goods. 
　the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. the next section proposes a combinatorial market model and a physics-motivated dynamic equation for structured coalition formation. section 1 presents simulation experiments to study the global behavior of the system. section 1 briefly concludes the paper. 
1 combinatorial market model 
   figure 1 shows the marketplace to be discussed in this paper. suppose that the retailer has two types of items to sell: item of type a and item of type b . suppose that there are two categories of agents for buyers in the marketplace. an agent of category a is only interested in buying one item of type a . an agent of category b is only interested in buying one item of type b . each agent represents one buyer and receives instructions from the buyer on what item to buy. before an agent enters the marketplace  it needs to register and obtain authorizations from the retailer. then it can interact with other agents in the marketplace and perform purchase related activities. in the rest of this paper  we assume that in the marketplace there arc in total ma of a type agents and mb of b type agents registered. 

figure 1: the combinatorial market place discussed in this paper. the small circles represent agents. the character contained in a circle represents the item in which the agent is interested. 
　there are many ways the retailer may sell its items. it might simply sell an item to a buyer's agent when the agent requests the item. however  retailer can save resources if it can sell items in bundles composed of the two types of items. the retailer can give a cheaper price for each item in the complementary bundle and at the same time still obtain a higher utility value. in order for agents benefit from bundles  they need to form coalitions. we assume that the agents and the marketplace are fully connected. however  agents do not have a global knowledge of the whole situation  and their decisions are based solely on local conditions. 
　now we discuss the dynamics of the changes of coalitions in the marketplace. a single agent might join a coalition in order to obtain a discounted price. since the agent cannot have a global view of the whole marketplace at a given time instant  the coalition chosen might not be the best one for the agent at that time. an agent may also leave a coalition to look for better opportunities. we assume that the retailer is able to monitor the coalitions of the whole marketplace and to decide when to perform the combinatorial transactions. our goal is to study the dynamics of the coalition formations in the marketplace and the effectiveness of the marketplace. 
　we first define the price for a given item associated with a given coalition. we consider a coalition formed by na of type a agent and nb of type b agent. if all of the agents in this coalition voted to perform the coalition transaction  i.e.  to buy their items in a bundle   then we use  to denote the price the seller prefers to set for an item of type a and  to denote the price the seller prefers to set for an item of type b. suppose that the retailer set the prices as follows: 
are the base prices for item a and 
item b respectively. the real price for an item is determined hy the size of the coalition. are the price reduction rates due to 
grouping for item of type a and for item of type b respectively. in a coalition  as the number of items of a given type increases  the price per item of that type decreases. 
1 	multiagent systems    the variable r1 gives the preferred ratio of the two types of items in a bundle for the retailer. the term gives the price penalty rate for item of type a if the ratio of the items in the coalition does not match the retailer's preferred ratio. similarly  the term  gives the price penalty rate for item of type b . this kind of combinatorial preference is fairly common in traditional commerce as well as in e-commerce. for example  a furniture retailer may prefer to sell a sofa and the accompanying coffee table as a set  rather than sell each piece separately. in this case  the price for a complete bundle  one coffee table and a sofa  may be cheaper than the sum of the prices for the components. the ratio of the number of coffee tables to the number of sofas is important  since the retailer might prefer the ratio to be 1 if there is equal number of table-sofa pairs in the storage. in any case  buyers who are interested in separate pieces can form coalitions to save money. this kind of coalition forming process might be time consuming in traditional commerce  because location and time constraints make it difficult to find complementary buyers. however  it will be totally different in an agent-mediated e-commerce combinatorial marketplace. the sheer interconnectedness of the world wide web will enable the e-commerce agents to work at any time from anywhere in cyberspace. furthermore  agents can negotiate instantly provided that the requirements of the task can be clearly specified  and the interaction protocols can be clearly defined among agents and between agents and the corresponding enterprise system  as is assumed in this paper . 
in order to study the dynamics  we use  to 
represent the number of coalitions composed by n a of type 
a agents and nb of type b agents at time  different types of coalitions can be represented by a lattice as shown in figure 1. where represent the value of 

figi1re 1. the coalition lattice in a marketplace that contains 1 a type agents and 1 b type agents. 
   the number of different types of coalitions will change while the system approaches equilibrium. our goal is to study the value of  and other associated indicators of the effectiveness ot the combinatorial markets as time evolves. 
   we assume that for a given coalition  at most one agent can join or leave at a time. thus  the only translation in the coalition lattice is between neighbors as illustrated by the following: 
when a category a agent joins a coalition of type 
  this coalition becomes a coalition of type 
             . when a category a agent leaves a coalition of type this coalition becomes a coalition of type 
similar analysis can be applied to type b 
agent. 
figure 1. coalition transitions 
　figure 1 shows the transitions that could happen with respect to coalition type when it is within the lattice. please note that when is at the boundary of the lattice  some of the transitions in figure 1 will not happen. the dynamics of the transition can be characterized by the following equation  for all the  pairs  except  1  and  1  : 

here  kt and kt are rate constants  which depend on the price change for each transition. in the above equation  the total number of agents of the market is conserved during the dynamic process. the single agent pool serves as the source sink of the system. please note that 
　the term 	gives the rate for a type a agent joins a coalition of category 
　the term gives the rate when a category coalition becomes a category coalition. in other words  it gives the rate for a type a agent leaves a coalition. 
   the term   gives the rate for a 
   type a agent joins a category coalition. in 
other words  it gives the rate for a category coalition becomes a category coalition. 
　the term gives the rate for a type a agent leaves a category coalition. in other words  it gives the rate for a category coalition becomes a category coalition. 
　other terms in the above equation arc related to type b 
　agent and can be similarly explained. 
　when the value of is outside the boundary of the lattice  the corresponding term in the above equation will equal to 1 . in other words  in the above equation  we set 	  or 
　now  we need to study the rate constants involved in the dynamic equation. 
　one simple model would be to let all of the escape rates be the same  i.e.  the rate at which an agent leaves a coalition  a.k.a.  the opportunist's rates : 

　we assume that the rate an agent joins a coalition is closely related to the changes in price for this coalition. let the change in price serves as energy in boltzman distribu-

tion. 
k  is a constant that is related to the transition of a coali-
tion from  . thus  this constant is only related to type a agent. 
multiagent systems 	1 


the price change is: 

thus  we can set the transition rate as: 

here  k1 is the base rate in the above equations. 
similarly  we can set other rates: 


　to analysis the dynamics of the above system  we can study  under different values of parameters  the evolution of i and other indicators of the marketplace as a 
function of and at the equilibrium state. based on the calculated derivatives  we can update a coalition using the following formula  for all the  pairs  except  1  and  1   : 
during the update process  the time step adaptively selected such that it is small enough and the updated results for any coalitions should not be less than 1 . 
and 
1 simulation results 
we have conducted various experiments to test the marketplace. at first  we set all the values of equals 
to 1  except that 	and 	= 
in our experiments  we set 	  and 
please note that 	and 	have no influence on the derivatives. 
in the first set of experiments  we study the evolution of the coalitions in the market as a function of time. table 1 shows the parameter values that are used. 

table 1 
figure 1  a    b    c   and  d  show the evolutions of coalitions as a function of the iterations. notice that at beginning  most of the agents are in coalitions that contain small number of type a and type b agents. then  as a result of dynamic movements of agents  the number of coalitions with small size decreases and the number of coalitions with large size increases until equilibrium is reached. further note that the distribution of a type agents and b type agents is not symmetric. the reason for this is that the ratio r1 = 1  rather than r1 = 1 . thus coalitions with twice as many a agents as b agents receive the least price penalty. although intuitively most of the agents should stay in large coalitions at equilibrium  figure 1 shows that this is not the case. this result is different from that of  lerman et al.  1  in which most agents join the largest coalitions. one reason for this difference is that the price settings in combinatorial markets are quite different from those in non-combinatorial markets. our situation is much more complex  and the coalition size is only one of the factors that influence the movements of agents. the escape rate is a parameter that has a bigger effect on the size distribution of coalitions. the greater the escape rale  the more the agents escape from the larger coalitions. compare figures 1 a   1 b   and 1 d   we can notice that the number of the small sized coalitions is bigger when the escape rate is larger. 

	 a  iteration = 1 	 b  iteration - 1 

1 	multiagent systems 

　similarly  the entropy for type b agent within different coalition sizes can be calculated as: 
 c  iteration  1 	 d  equilibrium state. 
figure 1. coalitions change as a function of iterations. 

 a  number of a agents  b  number of b agents 
figure 1. number of agents in different coalitions at equilibriums state. parameters are same as in table 1  except that 
k 	  =1  ap  =1. 

figure 1. the influence of the escape rale. all the parameters are the same as in table 1  except the escape rates. 
t
set the initial prices as 
moment. 
　to calculate the entropy with respect to the number of coalitions of various sizes  we first calculate the probability that a given sized coalition within the population of all the coalitions: 

the entropy with respect to coalition sizes is given by: 
	 a  coalitions 	 b  type b agents 
figure 1. the entropies for  a  coalitions and  b  the number of b type agents in coalitions. 
　the average price per type a item and the average price per type b item are principal indicators of the effectiveness of the proposed combinatorial marketplace. these average prices can be calculated with the following formulae respectively. 

figure 1 and figure 1 show the evolution of the average prices of a type a item and that of a type b item. we can notice that the average prices keep decreasing until the system reaches the equilibrium. this demonstrates the advantages of using agents in combinatorial markets. 
figure 1. the average price for a type a agent 


	figure 1. the average price for a type b agent. 
multiagent systems 	1 

1. conclusions 	