 
in this paper we introduce and study a logic of desires. the semantics of our logic is defined by means of two ordering relations representing preference and normality as in boutilier's logic qdt. however  the desires are interpreted in a different way:  in context a  i desire b  is interpreted as  the best among the most normal worlds are preferred to the most normal worlds . we study the formal properties of these desires  illustrate their expressive power on several classes of examples and position them with respect to previous work in qualitative decision theory. 
1 introduction 
autonomous agents reason frequently about preferences  desires and goals. for example  cohen and levesque  explore principles governing the rational balance among an agent's beliefs  goals  actions and intentions  rao and georgeff 1   show how different types of rational agents can be modeled by imposing certain conditions on the persistence of an agent's beliefs  desires or intentions  the bdi model  and work in qualitative decision theory  pearl  
1; boutilier  1; bacchus and grove  1; doyle and thomason  1; thomason  1  illustrates how planning agents are provided with goals - defined as desires together with commitments - and charged with the task of discovering and performing a sequence of actions to achieve these goals. 
　in logical formalizations of preferences  desires and goals serve as a computationally useful partial specification or heuristic approximation of the relative preference over the possible results of a plan  doyle  1 . in this paper  we focus on desires although our observations may be relevant for goals as well. there are three different interpretations of sentences like  i desire b  or  in context a  i desire b . 
　first  desires may be formalized using only utility or preference. however  this leads to the problem that even if a utility function or a preference relation over worlds is fixed  there is no unique way to extend it to formulas or  equivalently  sets of worlds. this distinction between utilities and probabilities is the main reason why formalizing desires is more problematic than formalizing beliefs. moreover  it does not seem to correspond to the meaning of desire in natural language. for instance  suppose that i exceptionally get sunburned when the weather is hot and sunny. then  expressing  i desire a hot and sunny weather  intuitively means that the most normal or typical worlds satisfying hot sunny are preferred to the most normal worlds verifying  hot a sunny   but it does not mean that i like exceptional effects of hot  sunny such as sunburn. 
　secondly  desires may express a combination of utility and probability in a classical decision-theoretic context  assuming a probability distribution over worlds.  in context a  1 desire b  can then be interpreted as a raise of expected utility: my expected utility given is higher than my expected utility given . a further development in terms of gain of expected utility is proposed in  brafman and friedman  1  . however  it is well-known that autonomous agents do not always have appropriate probabilistic information on the possible worlds. the probabilistic approach asks for costly  specific information and in practice often leads to an arbitrary choice of probability values. 
　thirdly  desires may implicitly refer to the relative plausibility or normality of worlds. when an agent states  i desire b   i.e.   i desire b to be satisfied   the agent often focuses on typical  normal worlds. the standard choice made in qualitative decision theory  see  doyle and thomason  1   is that uncertainty is described by a  total  pre-order expressing  e.g.  plausibility  normality  or typicality. the main justification is that ordinal uncertainty is less committing  cognitively speaking  than numerical uncertainty. 
　the research question of this paper is how we can formalize desires to provide a realistic interaction between preference and normality  and such that realistic examples like examples 1  1  and 1 can be formalized. e.g.  in the latter an airline company desires for an overbooked plane that an individual passenger shows up  but at the same time it desires that not all passengers show up. we start with boutilier's notion of so-called ideal goals   1   but then we define conditional desires that refer to both preference and normality  and that turn out to be more satisfactory. 
　the layout of this paper is as follows. section 1 recalls the basics of boutilier's semantics and discusses the choices upon which it is based; we then explain how to extend it to represent desires in a more appropriate way. the details of this modified interpretation of desires are given in section 1. we study several examples and in particular  we illustrate how our semantics interprets sets of desires that are usually considered contradictory. 

multiagent systems 	1 

1 boutilier's qualitative decision theory logic 
a first class of solutions to combine preference and normality makes use of a trade-off between qualitative utilities and probabilities as in  pearl  1   but this is not well-suited to situations with non-extreme utilities. a second approach is given in  boutilier  1   which makes use of two ordering relations  one for preference and one for normality  representing the ordinal counterparts of utility and probability. however  here we see - informally speaking - a lack of interaction between preference and normality. 
1 	definitions 
boutilier  interprets a desire in terms of ideal worlds: if 
a then ideally b  denoted by  is a conditional desire expressing on the semantic level that among all  1-worlds  the most preferred ones also satisfy b. quoting boutilier   from a practical point of view   means that if the agent  only  knows a  and the truth value of a is fixed  beyond its control   then the agent ought to ensure b  ...  the statement can be roughly interpreted as if a  do j1.  
　this definition enables the formalization of conditional desires in the conditional logic which is based on his logic co. roughly  the semantics of is the following: a qdtmodel is where w is a set of possible worlds  val a valuation function and and are two total pre-orders over w  i.e.  transitive connected relations  where a relation is connected iff for all 
 they are also called total weak orders. ~ is a preference order and a normality order:  resp. means that w is at least as preferred  resp. as 
normal  as w'. the conditional connectives have the following truth conditions. the two modalities do not mix preference and normality; in particular  conditional desires do not use the normality relation at all. 
if and only if either 
or there exists a such that and for all with presses the conditional preference  if a then ideally b . 
	except that 	is replaced 
by 	expresses the conditional default  if a then normally b . 
in the rest of the paper we write for and for where t denotes a tautology. 
　boutilier also introduces ideal goals that combine preference and normality. however  they use only the upper cluster of the normality relation  nothing else. on the semantic level  if we assume that there are no infinite ascending chains  then the truth conditions for ideal goals are as follows  is true if the best of the most normal a worlds satisfy b. 
if and only if 

therefore  boutilier's interpretation of conditional desires relies on two strong assumptions  which we discuss in more detail below. the first assumption is the optimistic interpretation of desires due to the ideality assumption. the second assumption is the weak interaction between preference and normality due to the focus on on the most normal worlds in a context. 
	1 	assumptions 
ideality 
the ideality semantics consists in comparing sets of worlds by looking only at the most preferred worlds of these sets. it corresponds to an optimistic point of view in the sense that less preferred worlds are ignored in this process. what would be possible choices for comparing sets of worlds  if we do not want to bring in probabilistic information or assumptions such as equiprobability  then we are left with the following four basic alternatives  and variations or combinations thereof. let a and b be two formulas. for the sake of simplicity we only consider the non-degenerate case where 
mod and 	modi 	are both non-empty. 
mm  ideality semantics : if and only if the best a a i -worlds are preferred to the best worlds. 
	if and only if the worst 	worlds are 
preferred to the worst worlds. if and only if the worst worlds are 
preferred to the best worlds. if and only if the best worlds are 
	preferred to the worst 	worlds. 
we have that implies both and and all of them imply . note that 
only mm and mm are consistent with the semantics of conditional logics; for mm  just take the reverse preference relation. the mm variant is extremely weak and therefore tells us next to nothing. it may be useful only when it is extended with a non-monotonic reasoning mechanism. the mm variant is extremely strong and hard to satisfy; it certainly does not reflect the usual intuitive understanding of desires. it may be useful only when paired with normality  e.g.  by focusing on the most normal worlds. 
　the mm variant has an underlying pessimistic semantics. it makes sense if  i desire b in context a  is interpreted as  in context a  given that i expect the worst outcomes to occur  i am happy to see b true . however  this semantics also does not fit well the intuitions behind the specification of desires. consider the following example of two desires. 
　example 1  game  assume that an agent plays a game  where two coins are tossed; he wins if both coins are heads  h  and loses otherwise. his preference ordering can be: 

the normality ordering is the one where all worlds are equally normal. but  surprisingly  neither  h   nor 
 h'1  are satisfied. 
the example supports that boutilier's ideality semantics best suits the commonsense intuitions concerning desired outcomes of actions  and we therefore do not want to give it up. 
　at a first glance  it may seem paradoxical to favor an optimistic interpretation of desires while most papers in qualitative decision theory argue in favor of a pessimistic  maxmin  criterion for action selection  brafman and tennenholtz  1; dubois et al.  1 . the paradox is however only in appearence. when specifying   for instance  an agent expresses that she has a preference for b  which is not at all the same as saying that she intends to take a decision making b true. this is illustrated by the following classical example. 

1 	multiagent systems 

example 1  boutilier  j 1  let ds = where u and r stand for umbrella and raining. 
presses that the agent prefers not carrying an umbrella. this does not imply that if the agent has the choice between the actions take-umbrella and leave-umbrella  whose obvious outcomes are u and she will choose leave-umbrella. 
the example illustrates that the interpretation of desires and the action selection criterion are independent issues and we can consistently interpret desires in boutilier's ideality semantics while using a pessimistic criterion for action choice. this issue is discussed further in section 1. 
weak interaction between normality and preference 
this assumption is more problematic than the previous one. boutilier's interpretation of ideal goals makes a very rough use of the normality relation  since it consists in focusing first  and once for all  on the most normal worlds  independently of the desires expressed  and then in interpreting desires by the ideality semantics. 
　this has unfortunate consequences. ideal goals are different from desires because we have the counterintuitive property that if normally p then p is an ideal goal. moreover  boutilier's semantics makes intuitively coherent sets of desires inconsistent  such as the dog and fence example of defeasible deontic logic  van der torre and tan  1 . 
example 1  dog and fence  

1. john does not want a fence around his cottage; 
1. if john owns a dog  then he wants a fence; 
1. john wants to own a dog. 
example 1 is inconsistent  and would still be inconsistent if we would replace the 1 modality by ig. 
　here is another example which is inconsistent in boutilier's semantics. suppose that i am going to my travel agent just one day before christmas vacation  when normally all flights are fully booked. 
example 1  airplane ticket  

/. / desire to have an airplane ticket to rome; 
1. i desire to have an airplane ticket to amsterdam; 
1. 1 do not desire to have both an airplane ticket to rome and an airplane ticket to amsterdam; 
1. normally  i will neither get an airplane ticket to rome nor to amsterdam. 
example 1 is inconsistent  and would still be so if we replaced the i modality by ig. however  this set of desires has an intuitive interpretation: when 1 think of having a ticket to rome  1 think of the most normal world where 1 have a ticket to rome  in which 1 do not have a ticket to amsterdam  and vice versa  and i prefer this world to the movst normal world where i do not have a ticket to rome  in which i do not have a ticket to amsterdam either. see another interpretation of this set of desires in example 1. 
1 hidden uncertainty 
example 1 illustrates that  even if the intuitive expression of the desires does not mention normality or uncertainty issues  it implicitly refers to these. this is why we talk of hidden uncertainty in the specification of desires. 
1 	definitions 
we now introduce a notion of desires with hidden uncertainty that better fits the intuitive meaning of desires. to simplify the definition  we assume - in contrast to boutilier - the existence of maxima. we may guarantee this by stipulating  e.g.  that there are no infinite ascending chains. means that there are maximally normal worlds which are strictly preferred to all the most normal worlds. 
definition 1 truth conditions for desires are as follows  

in other words   in context a  1 desire b  is interpreted as  the best among the most normal a a b worlds are preferred to the most normal worlds . as usual  we write d b  instead of  
　there exists also a probabilistic interpretation of desires which may help to clarify their meaning. the basic idea is to use the ♀-semantics for normality  a super-f-semantics -
e.g. replacing   by cc - for utility  and the resulting concept of expected utility for interpreting desires. 
　in a sense  our definition of desires is still reminiscent of the ideality semantics  because for a desire we only consider the most normal  and the most normal.  worlds. however  the fact that we do not only consider the most normal a worlds makes a crucial difference. this is illustrated by the properties and examples below. 
1 	properties 
the definition guarantees that the conditional desire always holds if the implication is strict  i.e.  if is inconsistent. when all worlds are equally normal  desires represent pure preference in the sense that both modalities d   and l   coincide. however  in general none of the following implications 
'  ~ holds. furthermore it avoids - as 
opposed to some of its variants - the validation of conditional desires of the form  for consistent a. 
　the following example illustrates that we have no longer right weakening  strictly speaking  left weakening  given our notation  for the desires  i.e. d a  does not imply d a v b . 
example 1 let m be the following model in which -1  is always more plausible than p  whereas p is always preferred to - p . 
then m satisfies but not  
this absence of right weakening  a controversial property when reasoning with obligations in deontic logics  is also very natural for desires: take =  the woman of my dreams falls in love with me  and q =  i receive my electricity bill   needless to say where the most normal worlds are . 

multiagent systems 	1 

　the violation of right weakening also explains the distinction between the two conflicts in the following example. the example also illustrates that the conjunction  or and  rule is not valid for d. 
   is 	inconsistent  	but is consistent when q is exceptional  
as is witnessed by the following model: 
do no longer hold 
　　　　　as illustrated by the two examples above. or  more precisely  they hold only conditionally. the reason is a kind of context-dependence or  higher-order nonmonotonicity . for instance  if mod increases or decreases  it does not follow that max increases or 
decreases as well. one way to design proof rules is to ensure with additional clauses that this implication holds  which has been done for decision-theoretic defaults  brafman and friedman  1 . however  our logic of desires also validates inference rules which do not directly depend on such conditions. 
　the first formula of the following proposition illustrates that the conjunction rule holds under normality conditions  and the latter two formulas hold 
without any conditions. 
proposition 1 the following formulas are theorems of our logic: 
1.  
1.  
1.  
properties expressed in the dyadic modal logic are often hard to read. we therefore propose an alternative strategy for generating proof rules. the idea is to express desires with a suitable order modality  b means that  taking 
into account normality and adopting an optimistic perspective  a is less desirable than ♀   or inconsistent. formally speaking  we get the following truth condition for suming finitely many worlds . 
definition 1 truth condition of preference is as follows. 
b if and only if  mod a   
mod b   such that  
we have the following relationship between the conditional desires and preferences. 
proposition 1 the following translation rules are valid benormality comparisons. taken together  these modalities allow us to formulate a number of features which are conceptually easier to grasp and to handle than the corresponding conditional notions. the following proposition lists several properties using this alternative representation. 
proposition 1 the following formulas are theorems of the logic. they are called left weakening  li   right weakening  1   left strengthening  l1   left impossibility  l1   right possibility  l1   asymmetry  l1   left disjunction  l1   right dis-
junction  l1   transitivity  l1   left cautious transitivity  l1   
right cautious transitivity  lii . li  
l1  l1  
l1  l1  l1  
l1  
l1  l1  
l1  
lll  
due to lack of space we must omit proofs and discussion. 
1 	examples 
let us consider example 1 and 1 taking hidden uncertainty into account. 
example 1  dog and fence  continued   is consistent. here are four classes 
of models  which illustrate that for each normality ordering there are various preference ordehngs. class 1: dogs are exceptional  and nothing else  

class 1: not having a fence is exceptional  and nothing else  

any complete preordering satisfying constraints 
class 1: dogs and not having a fence are both exceptional 
any complete preordering satisfying constraints 
class 1: neither dogs nor not having a fence is exceptional 
any complete preordering satisfying constraints 
example 1  airplane ticket  continued  
ds = 	here is a set of models satisfying ds: 
: any order where are strictly more preferred than the other worlds. 

1 	multiagent systems 

the following example is a reformulation of the lottery paradox in terms of desires. 
example 1  overbooking  
the agent is an airline company which has sold 1 tickets for a flight on an airplane of 1 seats. for each seat occupied the company gains 1 utility units  but if all 1 persons show up  then the company looses 1 utility units. the agent may consistently express {d show-up l  t...  
d show-up 1      show-up l  	show-up 1  }  
because  individually  passenger showing up makes the ex-
pected utility of the company increase  slightly   due to the 
fact that it is very unlikely that all passengers show up. 
1 normality and update 
there are several perspectives on normality. one consists in viewing normality as distance to the current situation. when an agent figures out a  normal  1-world  he often figures out the closest  l-world to the actual world. this is in accordance with the principle used for evaluating counterfactuals. update could come very intuitively into this framework. 
　the normality ordering is then defined by the proximity to the current world  which is defined by a faithful proximity relation in the sense of  katsuno and mendelzon  1   i.e.  a collection of weak orders   where faithfulness is the condition; for all means is closer to w than tv1. we simply have iff 
           and the set of most normal worlds  i.e.  closest worlds to w  satisfying a is the update of w  denoted by the simplest and most frequent choices are: 
	diff 	and 	 
	|  where 	is the set 
of variables assigned a different value by 	and 	 
　let us consider example 1 but with a slightly different interpretation. we do not have to suppose here that flights are normally fully booked. we just assume that in the current situation  the agent does not have any airplane ticket. 
example 1  airplane ticket  continued  
ds =  
1. 1 desire to have an airplane ticket to rome; 
1. 1 desire to have an airplane ticket to amsterdam; 
1. 1 do not desire to have both an airplane ticket to rome and an airplane ticket to amsterdam; 
1 related research 
1 two tasks in qualitative decision theory 
qualitative decision theory aims at developing mainly nonnumerical - and therefore non-probabilistic - normative frameworks for decision making under uncertainty  e.g. looking for minimal sets of minimal behavioral properties or axioms of a rational agent that correspond to a given action selection criterion. most approaches  e.g.  ibrafman and tennenholtz  1; lehmann  1; dubois et ah  1   use ordinal structures for preference and uncertainty. 
　in a decision-theoretic context we can distinguish at least the task of interpreting desires  which aims at reasoning about the mental state of the agent  what he likes and what he believes  and the task of selecting an action that uses the possible mental states induced by the upstream task  like qualitative analogs of maximum expected utility. both tasks are complementary. the logic developed in this paper does not investigate criteria for action selection and therefore it is not really a new approach to qualitative decision theory. our logic aims at interpreting desires as they can be expressed by agents  for instance in an interactive elicitation process. our logic can infer some information about the normality ordering or the preference ordering of an agent's mental state but cannot predict which action he will perform. 
　there are several ways in which our logic can be extended with action selection. in example 1  when a model contains both r and - r normal worlds  	merely expresses that preferred worlds satisfy 	while the selection of action take-umbrella may well reflect that the worst among the most normal effects of this action are preferred to the worst among the most normal effects of leave-umbrella. the latter criterion is used by  brafman and tennenholtz  1  who model agents as pessimistic decision makers. noticeably  it is similar to our interpretation of desires  except that worst states have to be focused on instead of best states. it would be worth extending our logical framework with a modality paf. | j: the preference of taking action a over action j1 would be expressed by pa expressing that the worst normal effects of action a are preferred to the worst normal effects of action 	. this modality would have the same properties as the 	modality  except that the preference order has to be reversed: if 	  	f and then 	iff 
this extension is left for further research. 

	1 	formalisms of desires 
1. in the current situation 1 do not have any airplane ticket. 
   there are several other formalisms that represent desires and if the proximity relation is such that  r  a  is closer to pure preference  especially ceteris paribus constraints  doyle and than to and equally close to  and wellman  1; boutilier et al  1 . however  this and '   then we get the following normality ordering: framework deals with pure preference only and not with unbecause the ini- certainty and normality  except maybe a preliminary attempt 
tial situation is 	normality reflects proximity to the 	in  tan and pearl  1 . the combination of ceteris paribus 
initial situation. 
　of course  this assumes that a preliminary step has been done so as to translate the proximity to the current world into a normality ordering; this issue has been considered several times in the literature. see for instance  grahne  1  for the intertranslation between update and conditional logics  and  herzig  1  for a review of logics for belief update. and normality is an issue for further research. 
　thomason's framework  thomason  1  builds on reiter's default logic and deals with both normality and prefer-
ence defaults  but with a procedural strategy which departs from our completely semantical interpretation: goals are derived by first closing the facts under beliefs defaults  and thereafter under desire defaults. the same mechanism is used multiagent systems 1 
in boid architectures  broersen et al  1 . the goals are thus restricted to the most normal state. 
　finally  decision-theoretic defaults  brafman and friedman  1; poole  1  also have a semantics based on normality and preference. for example  brafman and friedman give a detailed analysis of the use of expected utility  they explain a drawback of straightforward expected utility  and they introduce defaults based on gain of utility g{a . moreover  they define weak and strong notions of defaults  where the first does not satisfy right weakening  because g a  is not informative about the behavior on subsets of a. this seems related to what we here called higher-order nonmonotonicity. 
1 summary 
the research question of this paper is how desires can be formalized with a realistic interaction between preference and normality. we start with boutilier's logic for qdt  in which preference and normality have been combined in a notion of ideal goal. however  there is only weak interaction  such that the dog and fence example as well as the airplane ticket example cannot be represented in a consistent way. we therefore interpret desires in a different way:  in context a  i desire b  is interpreted as  the best among the most normal a a b worlds are preferred to the most normal a a - b worlds . 
　we study various formal properties of these desires. we show that our d a b  docs not imply boutilier's i a b  or igf a b   nor vice versa. we show that they do not satisfy weakening nor the the conjunction rule. we show that these properties and many others hold under conditions of normality  and we show that some properties like transitivity and cumulativity hold unconditionally. we illustrate the expressive power on several classes of examples including the dog and fence and airline ticket examples  and we illustrate how update can be introduced in the framework. finally we position the desires with respect to previous work in qualitative decision theory  where we mention as subjects of further research an extension with an action selection criterion  and the introduction of normality in ceteris paribus preferences. 
references 
ibacchus and grove  1  f. bacchus and a.j. grove. utility independence in a qualitative decision theory. in proceedings of kr'1  pages 1  1. 
 boutilier et a/.  1  c. boutilier  r. brafman  h. hoos  and d. poole. reasoning with conditional ceteris paribus statements. in proceedings of ual '1  pages 1 1. 
 boutilier  1  c. boutilier. towards a logic for qualitative decision theory. in proceedings of kr'1  pages 1  1. 
 brafman and friedman  1  r.i. brafman and n. friedman. on decision-theoretic foundations for defaults. arti-
ficial intelligence  1-1. 
 brafman and tennenholtz  1  r. brafman and m. tennenholtz. on the foundations of qualitative decision theory. in proceedings ofaaal '1  pages 1 1. 
 brafman and tennenholtz  1  r. brafman and m. tennenholtz. modeling agents as qualitative decision makers. artificial intelligence  1-1. 
 broersen etal  1  j. broersen  m. dastani  j. hulstijn  and l. van der torre. goal generation in the boid architecture. cognitive science quarterly  1-1 :1  1. 
 cohen and h.levesque  1  cohen and h.levesque. intention is choice with commitment. artificial intelligence  1-1. 
 doyle and thomason  1  j. doyle and r. thomason. background to qualitative decision theory. ai magazine  1:1 1. 
 doyle and wellman  1 j. doyle and m. p. wellman. preferential semantics for goals. in proceedings ofaaai1/  pages 1 1. 
 doyle  1 j. doyle. rationality and its rules in reasoning  extended abstract . in proceedings ofaaai'1  pages 1 1. 
 dubois etal  1  d. dubois  h. prade  and r. sabbadin. qualitative decision theory with sugeno integrals. in proceedings of uai'1  pages 1  1. 
 dubois et ai  1  d. dubois  h. fargier  and p. perny. on the limits of ordinality in decision making. in proceedings of kr'1  pages 1 1. 
 grahne  1  g. grahne. updates and counterfactuals. in proceedings of kr'1  pages 1  1. 
 herzig  1  a. herzig. handbook of defeasible reasoning and uncertainty management  volume 1  chapter logics for belief base updating  pages 1. kluwer academic publishers  1. 
 katsuno and mendelzon  1   h. katsuno and a. mendelzon. propositional knowledge base revision and minimal change. artificial intelligence  1-1. 
 lehmann  1  d. lehmann. expected qualitative utility maximization. games and economic behavior  1 :1 1. 
 pearl  1  j. pearl. from conditional ought to qualitative decision theory. in proceedings of the uai'1  pages 1. 
 poole  1  d.poole. decision-theoretic defaults. in proceedings of the ninth biennial canadian artificial intelligence conference  pages 1  1. 
 rao and georgeff  1  a. rao and m. georgeff. modeling rational agents within a bdi architecture. in proceedings ofkr'1i  pages 1  1. 
 tan and pearl  1  s.w. tan and j. pearl. specification and evaluation of p