 
formalisms and axiomatic theories are designed to support reasoning  they are often intended with a preferred interpretation and a targeted ontology. questions of proper interpretations and of the possible challenge of an intended interpretation arise when integrating a particular theory in pre-existing formal and ontological settings. this paper reports on an instance of this general problem of ontological engineering. the case study is that of the integration of the region connection calculus for spatial reasoning in the cyc knowledge base. we show that given the assumptions on the cyc ontology  rcc had to be interpreted within a substantivalist metaphysic of space as a boolean algebra of spatial regions which are distinct from their occupants. the rcc literature suggests such an intended interpretation  and this paper intends to show that this was a necessary condition of integration in cyc's ontology. this led to the enrichment of the cyc knowledge base  rather than to a radical modification of the upper-level ontology. 
1 introduction 
our standpoint is that of ontological engineers attempting to integrate a comparatively small and allegedly domain specific theory within a larger  multipurpose formal framework. bluntly put  our ontological interest is concerned with types of entities admitted by the respective theories  and their domains of variables   the intended interpretations of these theories  and issues of relative coherence and soundness. we consider that ontological engineering in this sense is distinct from a work of implementation. indeed  the power of information science ontologies lies in their semantic aspects and their ontological foundations. these elements will guide  but ought to remain independent from  a work of implementation within a peculiar computing system. in this context  it clearly appears that in order to use an existing axiomatic theory  it is important to know which are its possible interpretations and  especially  if one is the intended one. it is indeed crucial to evaluate how the theory has to be interpreted in order for it to fit within an existing ontology. 
1 
two main questions arise:  i  does the formal theory support an interpretation compatible with that intended for the embedding framework   ii  is it possible to bend the theory and its intended interpretation such as to allow maximal integration  this may lead either to non-trivial changes in the embedding ontology or to the choice of a peculiar interpretation for the theory to be integrated. in turn  it becomes necessary to check whether the chosen interpretation is really allowed by the integrated theory  given its axioms  and that it does not generate ontological monsters  so to speak  according to the standards of the larger ontology. when starting a work of integration  one tends to be maximally conservative from the standpoint of the embedding framework  this is  at least  our experience   for the obvious reason that  a priori  it might be simpler and more efficient to adapt a specific theory to an existing larger ontology rather than the converse. changes in the embedding ontology are always perilous and their consequences are not always easily anticipated. moreover  from the standpoint of an allegedly total or universal ontology  it is very tempting when integrating presumably specific theories to generalize their relevance by extending their domain of interpretation  and even relaxing not only the intended interpretation  but also the axiomatization. the present paper can be taken as a reminder to be cautious when making a methodological maxim of this tendency. 
　the axiomatic theory of interest is the so-called region connection calculus  rcc as put forward in  randell et al.  1    a theory prototypically applied to spatial reasoning. the embedding ontology in which we introduced rcc is that of the cyc knowledge base  cyc kb   as described by  lenat and guha  1   and which stands as a larger theory of reality. in part 1  we give some elements regarding the background of cyc's spatial ontology. in part 1  we present rcc's underlying metaphysics as informally rendered in the most significant sources. part 1 exposes how we were led to question rcc's ontological significance in our work of integration. we present in part 1 the resulting ontological settings and some extensions of the basic theory that we were able to introduce in a cyc framework. 
ontologies and foundations 1 cyc's original spatial ontology 
the cyc kb is intended to serve as an encyclopedic repository of all human knowledge  primarily common-sense knowledge. it purports to provide a medium for the representation of facts and the inscription of rules about all existing and imaginable things. cyc's knowledge is represented in a language called cycl  described in  cycorp  1   which here can be seen as a first order language. the cyc kb is structured and compartmented into theories  called microtheories   additional theories can be introduced a volo in order to account for the specificity of a given domain or context. since our objective was to produce an integration of rcc supporting spatial reasoning in the cyc system  we will focus on cyc spatial ontology. 
　the relevant fragment of the kb is nonetheless extremely broad. cyc's declared goal of achieving common-sense reasoning has  as an objective  carved up the ontology in a metaphysically determinate way. in particular   spatial reasoning  has been understood primarily as a type of reasoning about objects in space  and not primarily about space itself. roughly  this view can be outlined by the position that in the world there are objects only  in particular physical ones  delimitating their 'place'. in this context  spatial reasoning as such refers to the relations that exist between such objects  say  in virtue of being in such and such relative positioning. we shall refer hereafter to this understanding as the 'relational' approach. cyc's spatial ontology was primarily relational in this sense. its ontology's top spatial category  #$spatialthing  is defined in  cycorp  1  as that of entities  with a spatial extent or location relative to some other  instance of spatialthing  . a large part of the hierarchy under spatialthing was covered by the category so-called partiallytangible which is  in a word  that of objects with a material constituent  concrete things. in addition  spatialthing also includes certain events. but many specializations were geometrical or otherwise abstract in some sense  so-called #$intangible . meanwhile  cyc had already a large body of spatial and topological relations  most of them over partiallytangible. these were typically documented as relations holding between objects in virtue of the relations between these objects' spatial extents. indeed  many of the spatial entities in cyc could be handled as spatial extents  metonymically  but were not properly speaking identical with their extents. this is notably the case with geopolitical entities  on the other hand  cyc has a microtheory in which geopolitical entities are geographical regions  not merely located at such a region   but also with persons  which are examples of composite entities  with a tangible part  a body  and an intangible part   or even books  composed of a material support and an informational content . however  spatial extents  intuitively  spatial regions  were not 'reified' nor mentioned in assertions. their ontological status was  so to speak  implicit and mostly intuitive. on the other hand  still in  cycorp  1   cyc had a notion of  pure  spatial region used essentially to define contextually empty space. but then  for an entity  its being an instance of this collection was overtly and essentially context dependent. the documentation discusses as an example a piece of atmosphere which can be seen as empty space in a particular context  not in another. a substantivalist view of space considers space and regions of space as substances independent for their existence of what occupies them. under this view  it is not contextual for an entity to be a region of space  it is essential. in other words  regions of space as portions of an existentially independent  spatial  substance did not exist in cyc. we will not delve further into the cyc ontology. for our purpose  it suffices to observe that attempting to integrate rcc in cyc meant starting to look at rcc from an essentially relational spatial ontology. 
1 rcc and its canonical interpretation 
was this approach allowed by rcc itself  rcc is technically referred to as a mereotopology  that is  a theory with both a mereological fragment  a theory of part and whole  and a topological fragment articulated together. the basic part of the theory  so-called rcc-1  has only one topological primitive: connects-with  or c . we will assume familiarity with the basics of rcc which can be gathered in  randell et al.  1  and  informally  in the introduction of 
 cohn et ai  1 . the calculus can be assimilated to a boolean algebra  which  as we shall see  is not without ontological consequences. our interest here is mostly in the ontological significance of the theory. rcc is said to support both a spatial and a temporal interpretation. here  only a putative spatial interpretation is of interest  so regions will be spatial regions. rcc is  with respect to spatial reasoning  a theory of regions of space and of their relations  not a theory of physical objects nor of their relations to regions. it is already an other form of spatial reasoning than the one we encountered in cyc. characteristically  regions are considered as extended  rcc is originally introduced in analogy to allen's interval logic . in purely model-theoretic terms  intended models are regular open sets of rn. for commonsense reasoning  n is equal to either 1  1 or 1. going further in the specification of regions would be mostly irrelevant  as specializations derive straightforwardly from the theory. however  what is arguably not trivial is precisely what regions are  or  in other words  what their ontological status is: are they dependent or independent ontologically  that is  for their existence  on other entities which arc not themselves spatial regions  in fact  depending on whether the term 'region' refers to a part of a substantival space or to a portion of a relational space  the answer and the ensuing interpretation of the theory would be significantly different ontologically speaking. in other words  the alleged reality that the theory intends to capture is not that evident. 
　it is useful to remark that the relations in rcc are required to hold between regions of equal dimensionality. this indicates the possibility of treating uni-dimensional and bi-dimensional regions of space  even if the respective domains are independent. this means an acceptance of objects of lower dimensionality than that of physical objects  which are uncontroversially tri-dimensional . thus  if rcc is a fragment of a theory of reality  its underlying ontology probably is not restricted to physical objects and assimilated things  or  in cyc's terms  partiallytangible. however  so 

far it remains open whether one can conceive in a rcc-like framework objects of lower dimensions that are not spatial regions or  alternatively  only regions of lower dimensions at-which material objects are somehow located. the rejection of boundaries from rcc after  randell and cohn  1  is yet another evidence that the theory is about relations among regions of a given non-null dimension. 
　more generally  in rcc  the distinction between regions and their putative occupants is almost systematic in the informal litterature  especially in  randell and cohn  1; randell et al  1; cohn et al  1 . these sources suggest the acceptance of a substantivalist view of space; that is  the view that space consists in a substance in its own rights distinct from the objects that occupy portions of it. formally  the issue is scarcely addressed before  bennett  1  which represents a dramatic broadening of the scope of application of the theory  in addition to the stronger geometrical approach it presents . in multi-sortal axiomatizations  the domain is always restricted to the sort region  and secondarily to the sort null   a sort physobj for occupants of regions is mentioned only to limit the scope of the theory. the first order axiomatizations are seen as fragments of more complete theories. it is not clear how much this is  or is not  an artifact of the sortal approach which is itself an artefact of a putative implementation. presumably  however  first-order axioms should incorporate quasi-sortal restrictions implicit in the multi-sortal settings. 
1 path to integration 
cyc's general maxim for ontological integration is generalization. on the one hand  the foregoing considerations on the use of sorts in rcc provide a starting point for expanding the rcc schema by generalizing over sortal restrictions. overlooking any sortal restriction  on the other hand  is tantamount to claiming generalization of rcc to putatively all entities  namely  thing in cyc. this is clearly not desirable: the scope has to be at least restricted to spatial things. for cyc  objects in space  and physical events  are primitives. if rcc is generalizable to spatialthing and if regions spaceregion  are but a subtype of spatial things  it would be redundant and sub-optimal to develop the theory on regions only. yet  rcc takes regions as primitives. pushed to the extreme  this latter position leads to defining spatial objects in terms of regions. there would be only one substance  space. an object would be no more than a qualitative singularity in space. such an eliminatist view  doing away with the primitivity of entities in space  is not conceivable for cyc's upper-level ontology. the compromise still appears to be straightforward generalization of rcc's notions at the level of spatialthing in cyc. after all  there seems to be no prima facie objection to this in the rcc literature. indeed  the intended interpretation for rcc is as a calculus of 'spatial regions'. but the sources are all starting from the introduction of regions as primitives. there seems to be no claim in the other sense  namely that rcc means  specifically and necessarily  spatial regions  and not  more generally  spatial things in the sense of the cyc kb. 
1 
　let us assume that generalization is possible. c is then to be interpreted as a relation between objects such that these spatially connect along the rcc lines   cohn and varzi  1  situates rcc's c among a variety of interpretations . modulo the issues with openness of regions in rcc  cyc had a relation of touching among partiallytangible which intuitively was close enough to c to suggest the possibility of a sound generalization at the level of spatialthing. most rcc-1 relations  the basic set of binary relations in rcc  had proxies in cyc  with exception of inverses for implementation reasons . more precisely  there were relations at the level of partiallytangible which were holding true in virtue of their relata's putative spatial extents in rcc-like relations themselves. in particular  cyc already had a relation of co-spatiality  a relation holding true of things with identical spatial extents. meanwhile   randell et al  1  defines as identity between regions. however  in cyc  co-spatiality was not identity. there were conceivable cases of entities with the same  spatial or geographical  extent and which were not identical as alluded to in part 1. the question of whether a generalization of rcc's relations was possible could be rephrased as whether in rcc was indeed identity or could be interpreted as a co-spatiality relation on spatialthing. if the former  we would have applied rcc straightforwardly to the cyc ontology. we will see that the status of = in the rcc literature is something of a puzzle. 
　in  randell and cohn  1; randell et al  1   we find the following axiom: 

where p is  part-of. that is  x is identical to y if and only if x is a part of y and y is a part of x.  1  simply states the anti-symmetry of p  i.e.  if two objects of the domain are part of the other  they are actually one and the same. observe that given the definition of p: 

that is  x is a part of y if and only if everything that connects with x connects with y  we can infer the extensionality of c: 

there is however a progressive terminological and ideological shift in the rcc literature concerning the status of =. in  gotts  1   'eq' is the privileged notation for the relation of identity and '=' is only mentioned as an alternative notation. with  bennett  1   the matter becomes allegedly more than a notational issue.  bennett  1  argues in section 1 that an axiom of extensionality for c  and thus the anti-symmetry of p  is optional in rcc. the choice depends on the way we construe  1   either as an axiom or as a definition. a similar claim is made with the note 1 of  bennett  1 : 
  randell et al  1  define s  the relation 
eq x y  as equivalent to if this definition is regarded as an axiom rather than a definition and if eq is treated as logical equality then this axiom is equivalent to cext.  
ontologies and foundations 

cext is the right to left implication in  1   the use of 'eq' for '=' is  bennett  1 's import. using '=' is just a convenient abuse of notation  this symbol is not really that for equality. in order to follow the rationale  let us adopt momentarily this shift of notation  and reserve '=' as a symbol for equality. the thesis is radically defended by  stell  1  that because eq is allegedly defined and not simply introduced as a logical primitive  eq is not equality. eq would simply be an equivalence relation.  stell  1  mentions the note 1 in  cohn et al.  1 : 
　　 for notational convenience we will sometimes write x = y rather than eq x  y ; technically the latter is preferable  since eq is a relation defined in terms of c rather than true logical equality.   stell  1  claims that this note provides evidence supporting intuitively his claim. in our opinion  this is a misdiagnosis and the note warrants a better interpretation. namely  it is an indication that the introduction of eq  originally  =  by way of definition in rcc reflects a desire of reducing the number of primitive relations in the theory. the equality relation is defined via p  p is defined via c; thus far  there is only one primitive in the theory  c  instead of two  c and = interestingly  although not addressing this point of detail   smith  1  stigmatizes this general tendency in rcc as inherited from the classical schools of mereology. 
　there is a more serious rationale than such footnotes exegesis for not endorsing the  bennett  1; stell  1  alternative. it seems now that the contentious part of the argument rests on the claim that eq is capable of taking different interpretations according to the way  1  is conceived. let us assume that eq is not =  logical identity  and rewrite  1    1  and  1  with eq in place of =  call the resulting propositions  t    1'  and  1'  . let us see the possible consequences for the ontology. this choice apparently enables the generalization of the intended domain of interpretation from the domain of pure space to that of objects in space. eq is merely an equivalence relation   eq x y   means that x and y have the same region  the same spatial extent. this corresponds  again  abstracting away fine details of the topology  to the co-spatiality relation in cyc. note how accommodating this interpretation might be. if we can still include in our ontology regions of space and preserve the ability to interpret on this restricted domain eq as 
=  eq gives the identity criterion for space regions  = entails eq and  on regions  eq entails = . so  it seems that choosing a weak interpretation is rather positive and optimal for the resulting ontology. 
　but there is a drawback. if eq is but an equivalence relation over a broader domain  then p  which is now a relation on objects  such that the extent of one is part of the other's extent   is no longer anti-symmetric. this means that rcc no longer warrants that two objects with the same  spatial  extents are one and the same thing. in particular  there could be several distinct entities which are all the sums of a given set of objects  say three bricks. without  1  and only  1   the sum of brick 1 and of the sum of brick 1 and 1 is distinguishable from the sum of brick 1 and of the sum of brick 1 and 1. what is crucial in deciding of the possibility of generalizing the full rcc calculus  rcc-1 and additional boolean operators  is the behavior of operators in the absence of  1  or equivalently the extensionality of c. the operator for sum  for instance  is defined by  randell et al  1  by: 
 1  sum x y  
rccs literature generates a new puzzle for interpreting  1 . 
 randell and cohn  1; randell et al 1  suggest that while  1  uses the iota operator of definite description  its method of elimination is not necessarily  although possibly  to follow russell's. rather  it is intended to be eliminated such as to produce the following assertion: 

this has the effect of virtually allowing plural reference  if eq is to be interpreted otherwise than as equality  since without  1    1  is not sufficient to rule out that there may be more than one entity substitutable to the sum of two entities in  1  and thus more than one candidate for being such a sum . the trouble with operators which may lose their intended functionality  goes seemingly unnoticed. moreover   1  does not even secure the existence of a value. 
by suggesting this transcription  the authors merely seek to ensure that the boolean operators are totally defined on their domain. for this purpose  providing for a conventional value in cases where the operators do not properly denote  the introduction of the null sort  or  in other words  a notion of null region  is required. it is clear  even for these authors  that this move is not ontologically defendable  see also page 1 of  simons  1  for its vehement dismissal . rather  this is an algebraic desiderata and an implementational requirement  in short  codes have to return a value . in the context of a putative generalization  this is even more puzzling. what could possibly be the mereological product of two people  a null person  or null person's part   such a question leads to nonsense from cyc's common-sense standpoint. cyc's uneasiness with the ontological prodigality of rccs boolean operators goes further. if boolean operators denote  they denote objects in space. the sum of this cup and the spill of coffee on this desk is constructible in the theory as a spatial thing. both the cup and the puddle are in space  that is consensual. the question is whether it is desirable  and needed  to consider that there are sums of such arbitrarily united objects. ontologically speaking  there were no incentives to go after a notion of null object and totally defined operators  although even in cyc  the implementation would eventually require an apparatus mimicking the function of the null region. 
　so  conversely  what was the meaning of a russellian elimination of definite description  this would result in the following transcription of  1 : 

observe that  1  is indeed entailed by  1 . but there is something new in  1 . namely  = is indubitably logical identity and we verify that  1  entails the uniqueness of sum. if eq was not =  there could be two objects  a and b  in the domain such that eq a b  but not a=b. however  by  1'   these two objects would connect the same objects. since trivially any object is a sum  any object in the eq relation with it connects its parts  by  1'  and the first conjunct of  1  . but then a and b are identical  by the second conjunct of  1  . eq is therefore -. this  in turn  entails the extensionality of c. 
　so  if the iota operator is eliminated a la russell  c is indubitably extensional  p is anti-symmetric  and eq is =. we took this to be a reductio ad absurdum of the  bennett  
1; stell  1  thesis  and  in fine  as an indication that cyc's co-spatiality was not an rcc relation. in other words  we had to interpret rcc as a calculus of regions of a substantival space at which entities of various kinds could be located  and not as a theory of these entities. the alternative would have been either going forward with a non extensional mereo topo logy of objects-in-space departing significantly from both rcc and cyc or going back precisely to the more restricted domain of space regions. 
1 extending cyc's spatial ontology 
we thus chose to go for an interpretation according to which 
rcc was a theory of regions of substantival space. we therefore developed an ontology of space as an entity with an independent existence  choosing to rework and have #$spatialregion for domain of rcc relations. in order to bridge the gap between spatial things and spatial regions  we developed a locative apparatus inspired largely by  casati and varzi  1 . this enabled us to formalize the meaning of object level spatial categories and relations  and make explicit their metonymical character: spatial relations among objects were holding in virtue of similar relations between these objects' spatial extents. originally  only spatial objects were in the ontology. we introduced  pure  spatial regions  rcc relations among some of these regions  and relations of location between spatial objects and regions. we used these in order to explicitly define spatial relations. this resulted in a spatial reasoning language with greater expressive power  clearer semantics  and an enriched ontology. it also facilitated spatial reasoning with access to a greater variety of data. we could use spatial regions for instance as handles when manipulating datasets for gis based reasoning. there is unfortunately not enough room here to give specifics. 
　in a dedicated microtheory  we put some basic constraints on our calculus following rcc's intended interpretation  these motivated in particular further categorial distinctions. to begin with  rcc is region based: relationships are understood as holding among extended regions  i.e.  neither points or scattered sets of points are in the domain. we interpreted the regularity of the open sets in the alleged models of rcc as founding yet another category of spatial regions  namely regions homogeneous in dimensionality. we wanted to apply rcc to regions of the three basic spatial dimensionalities  namely  one  two and three dimensional regions   consistently with cyc's common-sense reasoning leanings. we chose to introduce dimensionality as primitive notions  at the topological level  and as instances of attribute value  properties of entities as abstract par-
1 
ticulars . this afforded us to define three specializations of extended spatial regions which were homogeneous in dimensionality  i.e.  regular in the intended sense. we were only requiring our relations to take as arguments homogeneous extended regions and were axiomatically enforcing constraints on co-dimensionality of the relata. so  in the end  we had a single set of rcc relations and operators which were applicable within each dimension independently of other dimensions. 
　anecdotally  we carried on in a specific microtheory an atomic extension of rcc along the lines suggested in  randell et al  1  by imposing categorial restrictions on the relevant axioms. despite rcc being a region based calculus  a larger ontology such as cyc could make use of pointbased reasoning and zero dimensional elements. we developed a variant of rcc in a specific microtheory introducing the category of #$spatialpoint as a primitive and a relation of incidence of points in a region as suggested by  randell et al.  1 . we refined this elementary treatment with more topologically oriented primitives of interior and boundary point incidence. additionally  we developed a set of trans-dimensional relations among entities of other dimensions. if material objects are always located at a three dimensional region  they can be geographically located at a given parallel for instance. moreover  their footprints  geographical projection  are two-dimensional extents with similar locational properties. so  on the one hand  we allowed partial location of entities at regions of lower dimensionality  possibly at points. on the other hand  we designed projective locations  typically intended to account for geographical positioning. more generally  this allowed approaching regional boundaries in terms of incidence. 
1 concluding remarks 
there exist alternatives in the metaphysics of space. the main distinction being between substantival and relational space. this paper intended to provide evidence that the rcc contributors are 'right' in putting forward certain ontological basics as a frame for using their theory  namely a substantival view of space. the reason why it could not be relational is that the distinction between co-spatial and identical ob-
jects would be lost  while co-spatiality is not an identity criterion of objects in space. once the ontological independence of spatial regions is endorsed  however  two solutions exist. on the one hand  objects are themselves independent from the regions they occupy or they are not. if they are  as in cyc  rcc has to be interpreted as we put forward here. however  there might be a way in which we could mimic if not secure a relational formalism. rcc predicates could be predicated of objects and events in space  nonetheless  the denotations of operators such as sum  for instance  provided they exist  would be spatial extents. in that context  the sum of two entities in the rcc sense would be the sum of their extents. as the extensionality of c would be preserved by this functionality of sum  this would be identical to the extent of any of their putative sums  in a purely mereological sense . one can then endorse the thesis that such extents are 
ontologies and foundations 

parts of some kind  namely  spatial  of entities in space. cospatiality becomes a form of overlapping  it is identity of spatial parts. however  this solution requires a broad and strong mereological treatment at the upper-level of the ontology which goes far beyond spatiality. such a solution which was not affordable in the terms of cyc's ontology suggests the possibility of alternative interpretations for rcc provided it is to be embedded in an ontology with a more general and primitive mereological framework. 
acknowledgements 
the redaction of this paper was supported by the alexander von humboldt foundation under the auspices of its wolfgang paul program. this paper stems from research done while working at cycorp. such work  in particular that alluded to in section 1  could never have been accomplished without the participation of james masters  many thanks go to him for the many discussions and debates we had there. additional thanks go to james zaiss  pierluigi miraglia  michael pool  fritz lehmann and william jarrold for helpful comments and discussions during this period. thanks go to brandon bennett for discussions during his visit at ifom1s  and to finish with to the anonymous reviewers of ijcai for their insightful comments. they are not responsible for any errors which remain. 
