 
default logic is used to describe regular behavior and normal properties. we suggest to exploit the framework of default logic for detecting outliers - individuals who behave in an unexpected way or feature abnormal properties. the ability to locate outliers can help to maintain knowledgebase integrity and to single out irregular individuals. we first formally define the notion of an outlier and an outlier witness. we then show that finding outliers is quite complex. indeed  we show that several versions of the outlier detection problem lie over the second level of the polynomial hierarchy. for example  the question of establishing if at least one outlier can be detected in a given propositional default theory is -complete. although outlier detection involves heavy computation  the queries involved can frequently be executed offline  thus somewhat alleviating the difficulty of the problem. in addition  we show that outlier detection can be done in polynomial time for both the class of acyclic normal unary defaults and the class of acyclic dual normal unary defaults. 
1 	introduction 
default logics were developed as a tool for reasoning with incomplete knowledge. by using default rules  we can describe how things work in general and then make some assumptions about individuals and draw conclusions about their properties and behavior. 
　in this paper  we suggest a somewhat different usage of default logics. the basic idea is as follows. since default rules are used for describing regular behavior  we can exploit them for detecting individuals or elements who do not behave normally according to the default theory at hand. we call such entities outliers. an outlier is an element that shows some properties that are contrary to those that can be logically 
justified. 
　outlier detection can be useful in several application contexts  e.g.  to single out exceptional behaving individuals or system components. note that according to our approach  exceptions are not explicitly listed in the theory as uabnormals   as is often done in logical-based abduction fpoole  1; 
palopoli ing.unirc.it 
console et ai  1; eiter and gottlob  1 . rather  their  abnormality  is singled out exactly because some of the properties characterizing them do not have a justification within the theory at hand. for example  suppose that it usually takes about two seconds to download a one-megabyte file from some server. then  one day  the system is slower - instead four seconds are needed to perform the same task. while four seconds may indicate a good performance it is helpful to find the source of the delay another example might be that someone's car brakes are making a strange noise. although they seem to be functioning properly  this is not normal behavior and the car should be serviced. in this case  the car brakes are outliers and the noise is their witness. 
　outlier detection can also be used for examining database integrity. if an abnormal property is discovered in a database  the source who reported this observation would have to be double-checked. 
　detecting abnormal properties  that is  detecting outliers  can also lead to an update of default rules. suppose we have the rule that birds fly  and we observe a bird  say tweety  that does not fly. we report this occurence of an outlier in the theory to the knowledge engineer the engineer investigates the case  finds out that tweety is  for example  a penguin  and updates the knowledgebase with the default  penguins do not fly.  
　in this paper  we formally state the ideas briefly sketched above within the context of reiter's default logic. for simplicity  we concentrate on the propositional fragment of default logic although the generalization of such ideas to the realm of first-order defaults also worth exploring. so  whenever we use a default theory with variables  as in some of the following examples  we relate to it as an abbreviation of its grounded version. 
　the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we give preliminary definitions as well as a formal definition of the concept of an outlier. in section 1  we describe the complexity of finding outliers in propositional default logic. section 1 analyzes the complexity of detecting outliers in disjunction-free propositional default logics  and section 1 describes some tractable cases. related work is discussed in section 1. conclusions are given in section 1. 
　because of space limitations  throughout the paper proofs of results are sketched or omitted. full proofs can be found in  angiulli et a/.  1j. 

nonmonotonic reasoning 	1 

1 	definitions 	stand  we first look at an example. 

in this section we provide preliminary definitions for concepts we will be using throughout the paper. 
1 	preliminaries 
the following definitions will be assumed. let t be a propositional theory. then  denotes its logical closure. if 1 is a set of literals  then - s denotes the set of all literals that are the negation of some literal in s. 
　default logic was introduced by reiter ireiter  1 . a propositional default theory  is a pair  d  w  consisting of a set w of pmpositional formulas and a set d of default rules. a default rule has the form  or  equivalently where and   a r e propositional formulas  called  respectively  prerequisite  justification  and consequent of s. the prerequisite could be omitted  though justification and consequent arc required. if the default rule is called normal. 
the informal meaning of a default rule is the following: if is known  and if it is consistent to assume   then we con-
clude . an extension is a maximal set of conclusions that can be drawn from a theory. an extension e of a propositional default theory =  d  w  can be finitely characterized through the set of generating defaults for e w.r.t. 
  i.e.  the set 
indeed   
　let a be a default theory and i a literal. then means that / belongs to every extension of . similarly  for a set of literals means that every literal belongs to every extension of . a default theory is coherent if it has at least one extension. 
　we review some basic definitions about complexity theory  particularly  the polynomial hierarchy. the reader is referred to igarey and johnson  1  for more on complexity theory. the classes = 
j  and for all  
models computability by a nondeterministic polynomial-
time algorithm which may use an oracle  loosely speaking a subprogram that can be run with no computational cost  for solving a problem in   is de-
fined as the class of problems that consists of the conjunction of two independent problems from   respectively. 
note that for all a problem 
a is complete for the class c iff a belongs to c and every problem in c is reducible to a by polynomial-time transformations. a well known -complete problem is to decide the validity of a formula qbe   that is  a formula of the form 
	  where q is 	if k is odd 
and is if k is even  x1 ...  xk are disjoint set of variables  and f x 1  ...  xk  is a propositional formula in x  ...  xkanalogously  the validity of a formula that is a formula of the form 	  where q 
is if k is odd and is ~ if k is even  is complete for deciding the conjunction where is a formula and is a formula  is complete for  
1 	defining outliers 
next we formalize the notion of an outlier in default logic. 
in order to motivate the definition and make it easy to underexample 1 consider the following default theory which represents the knowledge that birds fly and penguins are birds that do not fly  and the observations that twcety and pini arc birds and tweety does not fly. 

this theory has two extensions. one extension is the logical closure of 
if we look carefully at the extensions  we note that tweety not flying is quite strange  since we know that birds fly and tweety is a bird. therefore  there is no apparent justification for the fact that tweety does not fly  other than the fact fly  tweety  belonging to w . had we been told that tweety is a penguin  we could have explained why tweety does not fly. but  as the theory stands now  we are not able to explain why l veety docs not fly  and  thus  tweety is an exception. moreover  if we are trying to nail down what makes tweety an exception  we notice that if we would have dropped the observation -*fly twcety  from w  we would have concluded the exact opposite  namely  that tweety does fly. thus  fly  tweety   induces  such an exceptionality  we will call witness a literal like fly  tweety  . furthermore  if we drop from w both fly  tweety  and bird tweety   we are no longer able to conclude that tweety flies. this implies that fly  tweety  is a consequence of the fact that tweety is a bird  and thus bird twcety  is the property of tweety that behaves exceptionally  or the outlier . 
from the above example  one could be induced to define an outlier as an individual  i.e.  a constant  in our case tweety  that possesses an exceptional property  denoted by a literal having the individual as one of its arguments  in our case bird tweety . however  for a conceptual viewpoint  it is much more general and flexible to single out a property of an individual which is exceptional  rather than simply the individual. that assumed  we also note that within the propositional context we deal with here  we do not explicitly have individuals distinct from their properties and  therefore  the choice is immaterial. 
　based on the example and considerations mentioned above  we can define the concept of an outlier as follows. 
definition 1 let =  d w  be a propositional default theory such that w is consistent and is a literal. if there exists a set of literals such that: 
where 	and 	  then we say that 
/ is an outlier in 	and s is an outlier witness set for i in  

1 	nonmonotonic reasoning 

according to this definition  a literal i is an outlier if and only if there is an exceptional property  denoted by a set of literals 1  holding in every extension of the theory. 
　the exceptional property is the outlier witness for i. thus  according to this definition  in the default theory of example 1 above we should conclude that bird tweety  denotes an outlier and  is its witness. note that we have defined an outlier witness to be a set  not necessarily a single literal since in some theories taking a single literal does not suffice to form a witness for a given outlier being that all witnesses of such an outlier have a cardinality strictly larger than one. 
example 1 consider the default theory where the set of default rules d conveys the following information about weather and traffic in a small town in southern california: 
1. - that is  normally during a july weekend there are no traffic jams nor any rain. 
1. - in january it sometimes rains and sometimes it doesn't rain. 
1. if there is a traf-
fic jam in the weekend then normally it must be raining 
or there would have been an accident. 
suppose also that  
rain}. then  the set 	is an 
outlier witness for both weekend and july. moreover  s is a minimal outlier witness set for either weekend or july  since deleting one of the members from s will render s not being a witness set. 
here is another example. 
example 1 consider the following default theory a: 

this theory claims that normally adults who have a monthly income work  and students who take flying lessons are interested in learning how to take off and navigate. the observations are that johnny is an adult who has a monthly income  but he does not work. he is also a student in a flying school but he is not interested in learning how to take-off. based on the events of september 1  1  we'd like our system to conclude that johnny is the argument of two outliers. indeed  the reader can verify that the following facts are true: 
i nterestt akeo f f  johnny  are outlier witnesses  while adult  johnny  and flying s  johnny  are outliers. note that income  johnny  is also an outlier  with the witness  works johnny . 
1 	defining outlier detection problems 
in order to state the computational complexity of detecting outliers  in the rest of the work we refer to the following problems  also referred to as queries  defined for an input default theory =   d   w   : 
	: given 	  does there exist an outlier in    
: given and a literal   is there any outlier witness for in   
given and a set of literals '  is s a witness for any outlier . in '   
: given   a set of literals and a literal   is s a witness for / in   
1 	general complexity results 
in this section we analyze the complexity associated with detecting outliers. first  we give some preliminary definitions involving notation. 
　let l be a set of literals such that  implies that  l. then we denote by  the truth assignment on the set of letters occurring in l such that  for each positive literal ~~ '   = true  and for each negative literal  
　let t be a truth assignment on the set of letters. then we denote by lit t  the set of literals 
such that . is x{ if = true and is -*xi if t xi  - false  for  
theorem 1 	-complete. 
proof:  membership  given a a theory   we must show that there exists a literal / in w and a subset s = {s 1  ...  sn  of w such that  d  ws  
 query q'  and 	 query q  . query 
　　　-complete  while query -complete lgottlob  1; stillman  1 . thus  we can build a polynomial-time nondeterministic turing machine with a oracle  solving query as follows: the machine guesses both the literal i and the set s and then solves queries q' and q  using two calls to the oracle. 
	 hardness  let 	be a quantified 

boolean formula  where x =  
and z are disjoint set of variables. we associate with 	the default theory 	  where 	is the 
set     consisting of new letters distinct from those occurring in and  
nonmonotonic reasoning 	1 

where also are new variables distinct from those occurring in clearly  is consistent and  can be built in polynomial time. we next show that ~ is valid iff there exists an outlier in  
　in the rest of the proof we denote by i resp.  the literal xi  si resp.  and by resp.  the literal 	letting 1 be a subset of 	resp.   we denote by  
i. 
	suppose that 	is valid. then we can show that 
/ is an outlier in as is valid  then there exists a truth assignment tx on the set x of variables such that 
tx satisfies 	it can be shown that we can associate to each truth assignment 
ty on the set y of variables  one and only one extension 
ey of 	. in particular   
lit ty . 	as 	is valid  then 	and 
　　　　　　furthermore  since there is no other extension of 	' 
	consider now the theory 	. we note that 
the literal / appears in the precondition of rule whose conclusion g represents  in turn  the precondition of the rules in the set z 1  rules that allow to conclude   and that / does not appear in the conclusion of any rule of thus hence / is an outlier in  
　　　suppose that there exists an outlier in . it can be shown that the outlier is /. hence  there exists a nonempty set of literals such that 1 is an outlier witness for /in .it can then be shown that  where s  is either s  or   for i - 1   . . .   n. now we show that 
　 1  satisfies   i.e. that $ is valid. for each set   where is either   for j = 
1   . . .   m  there exists one extension el of 
s  such that . we note also that thus  in order for / to be an outlier in   it must be the case that for each set .  that satisfies f x  y  z . hence  we can conclude that is valid.  
theorem 1 q  is -complete. 
proof: the proof is analogous to that used in theorem 1. 

theorem 1 q1 is -complete. 
proof:  membership  given a theory 	and a subset s = {.si ... s } 	w  we should verify that 
 d ws  ' 	 statement q'  and there ex-
ists a literal / e w such that  d  ws i  
 statement q  . solving q' is in . as for statement q''  it can be decided by a polynomial time nondeterministic turing machine  with an oracle in np  that  a  guesses both the literal  and the s f generating defaults of an extension e of  d  wsi  together with an order of these defaults;  b  checks the necessary and sufficient conditions that de must satisfy to be a set of generating defaults for e  see izhang and marek  1 for a detailed description of 
these conditions   by multiple calls to the oracle; and  c  verifies that -s1 by other calls to the oracle. 
it can be shown that the total number of calls to the oracle is polynomially bounded. thus  q1 is the conjunction of two independent problems  one in  q1  and the other in 
 g    i.e. it is in 	  . 
　 hardness  let 	be two propositional default theories such that w  and w1 are consistent  let .si  s1 be two letters  and let q be the statement 
	w.l.o.g  we can assume that 	and 
   contain different letters  the letter si occurs in but not in wi  and  from the previous condition  not in   and the letter s1 occurs in d1 but not in w1  and hence not in  . we associate with q the default theory  q  =  d q   w q   defined as follows. let 	and let be all the literals belonging 
to w1  then  
from those occurring in a n d a n d from s  and s1- it can be shown that q is true iff   is a witness for some outlier i n w e note that q is the conjunction of a  hard and   hard independent problems  thus this proves the hardness part. 
theorem 1 	is 	-complete. 
1 	disjunction-free theories 
disjunction-free theories form a significant subset of propositional default theories because they are equivalent to extended logic programs under stable model semantics  gelfond and lifschitz  1 . a finite propositional theory  =  d w  is disjunction-free  df in short   if w is a set of literals  and the precondition  justification and consequence of each default in d is a conjunction of literals. as we see below  outlier detection for df theories is still quite complex. 
theorem 1 qo restricted to disjunction-free theories is ep1-complete. 
proof:  membership  the membership proof is analogous to that of theorem 1. we note that when disjunction-free theories are considered  q' and q  are co-np-complete and np-complete  respectively. 
 hardness   be a quantified 
boolean formula  where x 	= 	x 1  ... x n 	and y 	- 

1 	nonmonotonic reasoning 

the proof is similar to that of theorem 1.  
theorem 1 q  restricted to disjunction-free theories is h1-complete. 
theorem 1 q1 and qz restricted to disjunction-free theories are dp-complete. 
1 	tractable cases 
in this section  we look for some classes of default theories for which outlier detection is computationally tractable. 
definition 1 a default theory is normal mixed unary  nmu in short  iff w is a set of literals and d is a set of defaults of the form  where y is either missing or a literal and a: is a literal. 
definition 1 an nmu default theory is normal unary  nu in short  iff the prerequisite of each default is either missing or positive. an nmu default theory is dual normal unary  dnu in short  iff the prerequisite of each default is either missing or negative. 
thus  nmu  nu  and dnu theories have a quite simple structure. in spite of that  the complexity of detecting outliers from these theories remain often quite high  as demonstrated by the following results  proofs are omitted for the sake of brevity . 
theorem 1 the following hold over nmu default theories: 

theorem 1 the following hold over nu and dnu default theories: 

thus  restricting our attention to nmu  nu  or dnu theories does not suffice to attain tractability of the most general queries qo and q . some further restriction is needed  which is considered next. 
theorem 1  ikautz and selman  1   zohary  1   suppose  is a normal  dual normal  unary default theory. 
we can decide whether a literal belongs to every extension of in time   where n is the length of the theory. 
definition 1 the atomic dependency graph of an nmu default theory is a directed graph whose nodes are all atoms in the language of   and such that there is an arc directed from p to q iff there is a default in  in which p or  is a prerequisite and q or q is a consequence. 
definition 1 a normal  dual normal  unary default theory is acyclic iff its atomic dependency graph is acyclic. 
theorem 1 queries qo  ql  q1 and q'x restricted to the class of acyclic nu or acyclic dnu default theories can be solved in polynomial time in the size of the input theory. 
proof: it can be shown that for any acyclic nmu default theory  =  d  w  such that w is consistent and for any literal i in w'  any minimal outlier witness set for / in  is at most 1 in size. theorem's statement then follows from theorem 1.  	
1 	related work 
the research on logical-based abduction  poole  1; console et  /.  1; eiter and gottlob  1  is related to outlier detection. in the framework of logic-based abduction  the domain knowledge is described using a logical theory t. a subset x of hypotheses is an abduction explanation to a set of manifestations is a consistent theory that entails m. abduction resembles outlier detection in that it deals with exceptional situations. 
the work most relevant to our study is perhaps the paper by 
eiter  gottlob  and leone on abduction from default theories 
 eiter et al  1. there  the authors have presented a basic model of abduction from default logic and analyzed the complexity of the main abductive reasoning tasks. they presented two modes of abductions: one based on brave reasoning and the other on cautious reasoning. according to these authors  a default abduction problem  dap  is a tuple  h  m  w  d  where h is a set of ground literals called hypotheses  m is a set of ground literals called observations  and  d  w  is a default theory. their goal  in general  was to explain some observations from m by using various hypotheses in the context of the default theory  d  w . they suggest the following definition for an explanation: 
definition 1   eiter etai  1    be a dap and let then  e is a skeptical explanation 
for p iff 

there is a close relationship between outliers and skeptical explanations  as the following theorem states. the theorem also holds for ordered semi-normal default theories  etherington  1 . 
theorem 1 let 	be a normal default theory  
where w is consistent. let 	is an out-
lier witness set fori iff{1} is a minimal skeptical explanation for sin the dap p =  
hence  we can say that s is an outlier witness for / if   / is a skeptical explanation for 1  but still s holds in every extension of the theory. 

nonmonotonic reasoning 	1 


table 1: complexity results for outlier detection 
　despite the close relationship between outlier detection and abduction demonstrated by the above theorem  especially for normal defaults  we believe that there is a significant difference between the two concepts. in abduction  we have to single out a set of manifestations and a set of potential explanations. outlier detection  on the other hand  has much more to do with knowledge discovery. the task in outlier detection is to learn who the exceptionals  the outliers   or the suspects  if you wish  are  and to justify the suspicion  that is  list the outlier witnesses . 
　it also turns out that reducing outlier detection queries to abduction and vice versa is not straightforward  and therefore  when analyzing the computational complexities involved in answering outlier detection queries we have preferred to use the classical boolean formula satisfiability problems. 
1 	conclusion 
suppose you are walking down the street and you see a blind person walking in the opposite direction. you believe he is blind because he is feeling his way with a walking stick. suddenly  something falls out of his bag  and to your surprise  he finds it immediately without probing about with his fingers  as you would expect for a blind person. this kind of behavior renders the  blind  person suspicious. 
　the purpose of this paper has been to formally mimic this type of reasoning using default logic. we have formally defined the notion of an outlier and an outlier witness  and analyzed the complexities involved  pointing out some nontrivial tractable subsets. the complexity results are summarized in table 1  where c-c stands for c-complete. as explained in the introduction  outlier detection can also be used for maintaining database integrity and completeness. 
　this work can be extended in several ways. first  we can develop the concept of outliers in other frameworks of default databases  like system z  pearl  1  and circumscription  mccarthy  1 . second  we can look for intelligent heuristics that will enable us to perform the involved heavy computational task more efficiently. third  we can study the problem from the perspective of default theories as a  semantic check toolkit  for relational databases. 
acknowledgements. the authors gratefully thank michael gelfond for some fruitful discussions on the subject of the paper. 
