 
in first-order logic  a theory t1 is considered stronger than another theory t1 if every formula derived from t1 is also derived from t1. such an order relation is useful to know relative value between different theories. in the context of default logic  a theory contains default information as well as definite information. to order default theories  it is necessary to assess the information content of a default theory. to this end  we introduce a multi-valued interpretation of default theories based on a nine-valued bilattice. it distinguishes definite and credulous/skeptical default information derived from a theory  and is used for ordering default theories based on their information contents. the technique is also applied to order nonmonotonic logic programs. the results of this paper provide a method for comparing different default theories and have important application to learning nonmonotonic theories. 
1 introduction 
in knowledge representation based on logic  the relative value of a given theory is formally assessed by comparing the amount of information between theories. in first-order logic  a theory t1 is considered stronger than another theory t1 if every formula derived from t1 is also derived from t  but not vice-versa  for instance  the 
theory  

is stronger than the theory 

　in the context of default logic  reiter  1j  however  the problem is not so simple. for instance  consider the default theory: 

in this case  both t  and t1 imply flies  but the fact flics from t  is a conclusion from definite information  while the same fact from t1 is a conclusion from default information. introducing another fact flies to each theory  the conclusion flies is still derived from the inconsistent theory t  u { -iflies }  while it is withdrawn from t1 u { -iflics }. thus  two theories t  and t1 have the same extension  but conclusions derived from t  are stronger than those of t1. 
　to compare and order default theories  it is necessary to distinguish different sorts of information derived from a theory. such consideration is meaningful and important with the following reasons. 
  studies in nonmonotonic logics have been centered on answering the question:  what information is concluded from a theory  with common-sense    on the other hand  few studies answer the question:  what sort of information is concluded from a theory   since default theories contain definite and default information  distinguishing different sorts of information is meaningful to assess the information content of a theory. default theories contain incomplete information  so that the assessment provides a theoretical ground to measure the degree of  incompleteness  of a theory. these arguments are also effective in the field of nonmonotonic logic programming  baral and gelfond  1 . 
  it is important to know relative value between theories. a theory is considered more valuable than another theory if the former contains more information than the latter. comparison of theories is especially important when there exist multiple sources of information as in multiagent systems. in first-order logic  theories are ordered by logical entailment. in default logic  however  extensions of theories are not necessarily helpful forjudging relative strength between theories  as presented above . to order default theories  it is necessary to provide a better ability of comparing default theories beyond their extensions. it should distinguish different sorts of information in a default theory  and order theories according to their information contents. 
nonmonotonic reasoning 	1   in first-order logic  a theory is called more general than another theory if the former is stronger than the latter. generality relations over first-order clauses have been extensively studied in the fields of machine learning and inductive logic programming  nienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1 . in these fields  generalization is used as a basic operation for inductive learning  but it is unknown how to extend the notion to nonmonotonic the-
ones. to construct induction systems that learn nonmonotonic theories  it is necessary to extend the generalization operation and to build a theory for ordering nonmonotonic theories. ordering default theories thus has potential application to the theory of induction in nonmonotonic logics and nonmonotonic inductive logic programming. 
   with these background and motivation  this paper studies a method for ordering default theories. to this end  we first provide a multi-valued interpretation for default theories based on a nine-valued bilattice. it can distinguish different sorts of information derived from default theories. we then introduce ordering over default theories  which orders different default theories based on the multi-valued interpretations of formulas. the techniques are also applied to order nonmonotonic logic programs under the answer set semantics. the rest of this paper is organized as follows. section 1 reviews the framework of default logic. section 1 develops a theory of ordering default theories. section 1 applies the technique to nonmonotonic logic programming. section 1 discusses related issues and section 1 summarizes the paper. 
1 default logic 
a default theory is defined as a pair  =  d  w  where d is a set of default rules and w is a set of first-order formulas  called facts . a default rule  or simply default  is of the form: 
where are first-order formulas and respectively called the prerequisite  the justifications and the consequent. in this paper  any default is assumed to have at least one justification . a default theory is called super-normal if every default is of the form  as defaults and facts are syntactically distinguishable  we often write a default theory as a set as far as no confusion arises. any variable appearing in d and w is free and any default/fact with variables represents the set of its ground instances over the herbrand universe of  throughout this paper we assume a default theory which is already groundinstantiated  i.e.  for any default theory  d  w   d and w contain no variable. also  a formula means a propositional formula unless stated otherwise. 
　a set e of formulas is an extension of  d w  if it coincides with the smallest deductively closed set e1 of formulas satisfying the conditions: 	  and  ii  for any ground default 	  	  	from d  	and imply 	a default theory may 
have none  one or multiple extensions in general. the set of all extensions of is written as . given a default theory   a formula is a credulous conclusion of if it belongs to some  but not all  extensions. by contrast  a formula is a skeptical conclusion of  if it belongs to all extensions. an extension e is inconsistent if it is the set of all formulas in the language. 
proposition 1  reiter  1  l a default theory  =  ♀   w  has the inconsistent extension iffw is inconsistent. 
'this property holds for defaults with non-empty justifications. 
1 

figure 1: a lattice for logic ix 
1 ordering default theories 
in classical logic  a formula f is interpreted true/false if  is a logical consequence of a theory; otherwise it is 
undefined. in default logic  on the other hand  a formula is either a definite consequence by w or a default consequence by d. moreover  default consequences are brought by two different modes of inferences - skeptical or credulous reasoning. to characterize these different types of inferences  we first introduce a multi-valued logic for default reasoning. 
definition 1 the logic ix has the nine truth values t f    dts dfs dtc dfc    which respectively mean true  false  contradictory  undefined  skeptically true by de-
fault  skeptically false by default  credulously true by default  credulously false by default  and contradictory by default. 
the truth values of ix constitute a bilattice under the 

   under ix the interpretation of a formula in a default theory is defined as follows. 
definition 1 given a default theory  =  d  w   the mapping  j a associates a propositional formula f with a truth 

nonmonotonic reasoning 

nonmonotonic reasoning 	1 

　the above proposition presents that the order-equivalence relation c /  provides an equivalence relation which is stronger than the equivalence based on extensions. 
example 1  introductory example  let 
default theories: 	theorem 1 provides a sufficient condition to judge 
using extensions of default theories. 
　the introduction of new information may block the application of some default rules  which would cause the withdrawal of some default conclusions in a theory. this is a typical feature of default reasoning. 
	we finally provide a connection between the order relation 	. given 
  and default extensions. a not-free elp ii  cn ii  denotes the smallest set of ground literals which is  i  closed under   i.e.  for every ground 
theorem1 let     =  di.wi  and =  d1 w1  be rule from the ground instantiation of h  two default theories. then  if the following implies and  ii  logi-
conditions are satisfied: cally closed  i.e.  it is either consistent or equal to lit. given an elp ii and a set s of literals  1 is an answer set of ii if 
　answer sets represent possible beliefs of a program  and an elp may have none  one  or multiple answer sets. in particular  every not-free elp has the unique answer set. an answer set is consistent if it is not lit. the set of all answer sets of an elp ii is written as as u . 
proposition 1 an elp ii has the unique answer set lit iff 
under the answer set semantics which we consider in this paper  
 f is expressed by the semantically not l with a literal l. 
1 	nonmonotonic reasoning 

according to  gelfond and lifschitz  1    the rule l1  -
not ln is interpreted as the 
default rule: 
where for a positive literal l. ln this case  there is a 1 correspondence between the answer sets of a program and the extensions of the corresponding default theory.1 
proposition 1  gelfond and lifschitz  1 let ii be an elp and  its corresponding default theory. if s is an answer set ofu  then the deductive closure ofs is an extension of  conversely  every extension of  is the deductive closure of exactly one answer set of ii. 
using the correspondence  a multi-valued interpretation for 
　the intuitive meaning of i example 1 let ii be the program: 

example 1 let ii be the program: 

which has two answer sets {p  and has properties obtained from proposition 1 by replac-
ing 	with 	and formulas with literals. 
ordering between elps is defined as follows. 
   precisely speaking  no/ -free rules in an elp correspond to justification-free defaults. although we supposed defaults with nonempty justifications in the previous sections  the following discussion is valid apart from the results of section 1. 
nonmonotonic reasoning 
the language. a program ii j is stronger than entail more certain information than 
from the case of default logic  we compare programs in terms of literals included in answer sets. this is because in nonmonotonic logic programs the meaning of a program is determined not by individual rules in a program  but by consequent literals included in selected models of a program. thus  we capture the information content of a program as consequences brought by answer sets. 
proposition 1 let be two not-free elps which have the same literal base. then   
1 	discussion 
in the context of multi-valued logics  ginsberg  1 firstly introduces a bilattice for default logic. he distinguishes definite and default conclusions obtained from a  supernormal  default theory using the bilattice of figure 1. however  ginsberg's bilattice is seven-valued and does not distinguish between skeptical and credulous default conclusions. 
for instance  suppose the super-normal default theory  = which has two default extensions th  
	then  	dtc  and 
　　　　　　= dts in our framework  while ginsberg interprets p as * but handles both q and  as dt. thus  to distinguish skeptical/credulous default inference  additional truth values are necessary as introduced in this paper. dionisio etal.  distinguish skeptical/credulous default inference in super-normal default theories using modal logic. 
1 


figure 1: ginsberg's bilattice for default logic 
their goal is reasoning about defaults and is not ordering default theories. 
　in logic programming  fitting  1 uses bilattices to characterize the semantics of normal logic programs. he uses a four-valued logic and does not distinguish definite and default information. dix  uses the knowledge ordering under a three-valued logic to compare information obtained from a single normal logic program under different semantics. this is in contrast to our approach in which we compare different programs under the single answer set semantics. lattice-valued logics are also used for characterizing the  paraconsistenf semantics of logic programs  damasio and pereira  1 . to our best knowledge  however  the 1valued bilattice used in this paper never appears in the literature. moreover  existing studies all use multi-valued logics to provide a semantics of a single program  while we use them to compare information between different programs. the orderequivalence provides a stronger relation than the usual modelbased equivalence  proposition 1 . on the other hand  it is known another strong equivalence relation between logic programs  lifschitz etal.  1 . at the moment  we have an evidence that there is no stronger/weaker relation between the strong equivalence and the order-equivalence in general. 
　from the computational viewpoint  there is a difficulty for directly computing  for an arbitrary formula f. this is due to the fact that the interpretation  of a formula f is generally not constructive by those of the sub-formulas of f  proposition 1 . the same problem happens in the restricted class of super-normal default theories  ginsberg  1 . for checking an order between default theories  however  theorem 1 provides a sufficient condition to judge the relation using default extensions. in the context of logic programming  is checked by theorem 1 using the existing procedures for computing answer sets. 
　in the fields of machine learning and inductive logic programming  a theory of generalization has been extensively studied in the context of first-order logic inienhuys-cheng and de wolf  1 . however  generalization under logical entailment  is not directly applicable to default theories and nonmonotonic logic programs. a default ordering introduced in this paper can order default theories and nonmonotonic logic programs  thereby could give a theoretical ground for inductive generalization in nonmonotonic logic programs. for instance  for the programs 
bird x   	bird tweety  	and 	 
bird x   not abnormal x   bird twcety    the relation  holds  flics twecty  has the value t in 
while it has the value dts in    ;. thus  if we read the order as  more general   	is considered a generalization of 
　. this coincides with the view in the ilp literature  bain and muggleton  1  in which  is a specialization of . 
1 	conclusion 
in this paper  we introduced a multi-valued interpretation of default theories  which can distinguish definite and skeptical/credulous default consequences. based on this  we developed a theory for ordering default theories and applied the technique to ordering nonmonotonic logic programs. the 1valued bilattice is used for characterizing other nonmonotonic formalisms which have the same inference modes as default logic. the results of this paper provide a method of comparing default theories or nonmonotonic logic programs in a manner different from the conventional extension-based or model-based standpoint. the proposed framework is considered to have potential application to inductive learning in nonmonotonic logics  which we will investigate in future study. 
