 
the iterative closest point  icp  algorithm  is a popular method for modeling 1d objects from range data. the classical icp algorithm rests on a rigid surface assumption. building on recent work on nonrigid object models  1; 1; 1   this paper presents an icp algorithm capable of modeling nonrigid objects  where individual scans may be subject to local deformations. we describe an integrated mathematical framework for simultaneously registering scans and recovering the surface configuration. to tackle the resulting high-dimensional optimization problems  we introduce a hierarchical method that first matches a coarse skeleton of scan points  then adapts local scan patches. the approach is implemented for a mobile robot capable of acquiring 1d models of objects. 
1 introduction 
in recent years  there has been a flurry of work on acquiring 1d models from range data. the classical setting involves a range sensor  e.g.  a 1d range camera or a stereo vision system  used to acquire range images of the target ob-
ject from multiple vantage points. the problem of integrating multiple range scans into a 1d model is commonly known as scan registration. most state-of-the-art implementations are based on the popular iterative closest point algorithm l1j. the topic has received significant attention in fields as diverse as computer vision  1; 1  and medical imaging   large-scale urban modeling   and mobile robotics  1; 1; 1 . 
　icp aligns range scans by alternating a step in which closest points are identified  and a step by which the optimal translation and rotation of scans relative to each other is computed. in doing so  most of them are making a rigid object assumption: range scans  if aligned correctly  must be spatially consistent with each other. 
　many objects are deformable. for example  people change shape  as do trees  pillows  and so on. a natural research goal is therefore to extend icp to accommodate local object transformations. following recent work primarily found in the medical imaging literature  1; 1; 1; 1   we proposes an approach suited for scan registration and 1d modeling of nonrigid objects that can efficiently deal with hundreds of thou-

figure 1: the essential idea: rather assuming that the relation of measurement coordinates are fixed relative to the location from which the measurement was taken  the approach proposed here constraints the relation of measurement coordinates in a soft way. the exact configuration of a scan is calculated while scans are registered to each other. 
sands of variables. to accommodate local deformations  our approach transforms scans into markov random fields  where nearby measurements arc linked by a  nonlinear  potential function. all links are soft. they can be bent  but bending them incurs a penalty. figure 1 illustrates this transformation: rigid links between the measurement coordinates and the robot sensor are replaced by soft links between adjacent measurement points. the resulting problem of scan registration under these soft constraints becomes a high-dimensional optimization problem with orders of magnitude more variables involved than in regular icp. we show how to solve this problem via taylor series expansion  linearization   and then propose a coarse-to-fine hierarchical optimization technique for carrying out the optimization efficiently. 
our new algorithm is applied to the problem of learning 
1d models of non-stationary objects with a mobile robot. we describe an implemented robot system that utilizes a model differencing technique similar to the one described in  to segment scans. by acquiring views of the target objects from multiple sides  our approach enables a robot to acquire a 1d model of a non-stationary object. 
1 scan registration 
this section describes a variant of the well-known iterative closest point algorithm  icp   for rigid objects. the algorithm alternates two phases  one in which nearest points is identified  and one in which the distance between all pairs of nearest points is minimized. 
1 	scans 
the input to the icp algorithm is a set of 1d scans denoted 
d 	= 	d i   d 1   . . . 	 1  
perception 	1 
	 a  mobile robot with scanner 	 b  scene acquired by scanner 	 c  result of model differencing 
figure 1:  a  1d range scan acquired by mobile robot shown in  b .  c  scene from which the scan in  a  is extracted through background 

differencing. 
each such scan consists of a collection of id range measurements  arranged as a 1d  range image : 
 1  
figure 1c shows a typical scan acquired by a robot. further below  we will denote the horizontal angle of the range measurement by and the vertical one by in our experimental setup  scans are obtained by a sick laser range finder mounted on a tilt unit shown in figure 1a. 
　the problem of scan registration can be formulated as the problem of recovering the vantage points from which the scans were taken. in our approach  scans are taken from a mobile robot; hence each vantage point is described by three variables: its location in cartesian coordinates and its orientation 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　 1  here denotes the vantage point from which scan was acquired. the set of all vantage points will be denoted x. recovering the vantage points x is equivalent to registering the scans if one vantage point is  arbitrarily  defined to be 
1 measurement model 
scans are registered in world coordinates. to do so  measurements must be mapped into 1d world coordinates. this is achieved by a projective function which takes as an argument a range measurement and a vantage point and returns as its output the corresponding coordinate in 1d world coordinates: 
 1  
here and are the orientation of the range measurement relative to the sensor. the variable is the generic height of the sensor which in our robot system is fixed  but is easily generalized to variable heights. for brevity  we will sometimes write instead of 
　we define the quality of a pairwise scan registration by the probability representing the likelihood of a range measurement under a fixed  hypothetical  registration: 
 1  
this likelihood distinguishes two cases. the first case models the noise in range perception by a gaussian with a sensorspecific covariance   usually a diagonal matrix . the measurement error under this gaussian is given by the distance between the point  under consideration  and the point in scan d/ that maximizes this gaussian. as is easily to be seen  this point minimizes the mahalanobis distance to 
   thus  is simply the point  nearest  to in the scan d/ under 
　however  finding the nearest point only makes sense if falls within the perceptual range of scan d/. if is occluded  it might be perfectly well-explained by an object not detectable from the vantage point this is captured by the second case in  1   which applies when lies outside the free space of scan the free space of scan is denoted it is defined as the region between the robot and the detected objects. if lies outside this region  the measurement probability is assumed to be uniform. the value of this uniform depends on the range of occluded space  but it plays no role in the optimization to come; hence we leave it unspecified. 
1 registration as likelihood maximization the goal of scan registration is to determine the vantage points x that maximize the joint likelihood of the scans d and x: 
		 1  
the first term of this product is obtained by calculating the product over all individual measurement likelihoods  assuming noise independence in each measurement: 
 1  
the term p x  in  1  is the prior on the individual vantage points  and nence on the registration . the prior of the point is expressed as a gaussian with mean and covariance 
matrix 
in our robot system  this prior is obtained from the robot's 1d localization routines  supplied by a public domain software package . 

figure 1: illustration in 1d:  a  initial configurations of two scans in red and blue   b  result of optimal registration   c-f  result of recovering 

the object configuration by our new adjustable shape technique. 
　the negative logarithm of the joint likelihood  1  is given by the following sum: 
scans are registered by minimizing the sum  which is equivalent to maximizing the likelihood function. 
　unfortunately  minimizing g is not possible in closed form for the following three reasons:  1  the exact terms in the sum depend on the occlusion constraint which are a function of the vantage points x;  1  the result of the minimization over involves a discrete search for a nearest neighbor  whose outcome is again a function of x;  1  the projection functions are nonlinear in the points x  and the resulting nonlinear 
optimization problem is hard. 
1 	optimization procedure 
icp-style algorithms minimize the negative log-likelihood by calculating a sequence of vantage points  registrations : 
 1  
the first set of points are obtained from the prior  e.g.  the robot odometry : the th vantage points are computed from the -th ones by the following five step algorithm: 
　step 1. the set of occluded points is determined for the n-th points this step involves the calculation of a relative orientation of a point to scan it furthermore involves a range comparison with the corresponding measurement in scan d/  to determine if is occluded relative to 
　step 1. the minimization in  1  is carried out by determining the closest measurement in each scan relative to each point 
1  
for 	= const.   /  this calculation is equivalent to finding the closest points  hence the name of the algorithm . 
　step 1. the projection function is linearized to obtain a quadratic objective function. this is achieved by the taylor series expansion: 
 1  
here j n  is the jacobian  gradient  of n at xj.   which is directly obtained from the definition of n in  1 : 
with this approximation   the negative log-likelihood function g in the n-th iteration  becomes quadratic in and is of the form 
 1  
here a is a matrix  a vector  and x the vector of all vantage points  the unknowns . the various sums in  1  are simply integrated into a and   and generalizes to the full space of all points x: 
　step 1. the now obtained through a closed-form solution of minimizing this solution is obtained by setting the first derivative of with respect to x to zero  derivation omitted  see  1 : 
in the original icp algorithm   this step is implemented by calculating the the  center of mass  of each scan and shifting the scans accordingly  which is computationally simpler ; our approach also accommodates a prior on x. 
　step 1. because of the linearization  only cartesian coordinates are actually updated in step 1; the orientation coordinates remain unmodified. for this reason  the original icp literature introduced a separate step for calculating orientations. this is achieved by a singular value decomposition  svd  step  in which the correlation between residual errors in the scan is determined  and each scan is rotated so as to minimize these error correlations. details on this step can be found in the icp literature . 
　all steps are iterated until a convergence criterion is reached. satisfactory registrations are usually obtained within the first three to four iterations. if the total number of scans is small  e.g.  less than 1   the computationally most expensive 

perception 	1 

step is the determination of the closest points in step 1. this step is usually implemented efficiently by representing scans through kd-trees . 
figure 1a-b illustrate the result of scan registration in 1d. 
the initial configuration in figure 1a is transformed into the one shown in figure 1b  which is the one that minimizes the squared distance  maximizes the likelihood . clearly  both scans are incompatible in shape. pure registration techniques are unable to handle such shape deformations  but the technique presented in the next section is. 
1 recovering the surface configuration of nonrigid objects 
the key idea for extending icp to nonrigid objects was already discussed in the introduction to this paper  and is highlighted in figure 1. technically  it involves two modifications: first  the static relationship between points and the corresponding vantage points is replaced by nonrigid links between adjacent points. these links can be bent  but at a probabilistic penalty   to accommodate nonrigid surfaces. second  and as consequence of this  the optimization now involves the determination of the location of all points in addition to the robot poses  this optimization problem is much higher dimensional  and we will discuss a hierarchical optimization technique for tackling it efficiently. a key characteristic of the approach proposed here is that it fits neatly into the icp methodology above: again  under appropriate linearization the target function is quadratic  and estimates are obtained just as in  1 . 
1 	links 
the definition of links between pairs of adjacent points makes it necessary to augment the notion of a measurement point. in particular  our approach associates an  imaginary  coordinate system with each node. the origin of each coordinate system is the familiar coordinate and its orientation is specified by three euler angles  an alternative formulation may use quaternions : 

the orientation is initialized arbitrarily; e.g. =  1 1 t.  the result of the optimization is invariant with respect to this initialization.  a link is now given by the affine coordinate transformations among the coordinate systems of adjacent measurements. each link possesses six parameters  three for rotation  denoted and three for translation  dethey are calculated as follows: 
here the r's are the rotation matrices around the three coordinate axes. links enable us to recover a node's coordinates from any of its neighbors: 
to model nonrigid surfaces  our approach allows for violation of these link constraints. this is obtained by introducing the following gaussian potentials for each link 
is a markov random field f 1 . 
1 	target function 
the negative logarithm of these potentials  summed over all links  is given by the following function //  constant omitted : 
as in the scan registration problem  all these terms are nonlinear in the node coordinates and the orientations to obtain a closed-form solution for the resulting equation system  the link function is linearized via a taylor series expansion: 
where specify the coordinate system for the node in the 1i-th iteration of the optimization. the matrix 
is a jacobian matrix of dimension six by six  which is obtained as the derivative of the functions  1 . 
　by the same logic by which g can be approximated by a quadratic function in the scan registration problem  substituting our approximation back into the definition of h gives us a quadratic function in all variables and this function can be written in the form 
where is the vector of all coordinate system origins  r the vector of all euler angles  and b is a matrix and f a vector. calculating and f is involved but mathematically straightforward. 
1 	optimization procedure 
our new version of icp now minimizes the combined target function g + h  which is again quadratic in all parameters  x  and r . by doing so  it simultaneously recovers the scan registration and the surface configuration of the object. the solutions for x and are completely analogous to the one in  1 : 
the global orientation is still optimized by a single global 
svd as above. our new augmented optimization leads to relative adjustments between measurement points  in which the links play the role of soft constraints. 
this is illustrated in figure 1c-f  for different values for 

 as the various diagrams illustrate  scans are deformed to improve their match. the degree of the deformation depends on the value of which defines the rigidity of the surface. figure 1c-f illustrates that our approach succeeds in locally rotating and even rescaling the model. 

figure 1: example of a thinned graph superimposed to the original scan left  and before and after adjustment  right . thinning is 

necessary to perform the optimization efficiently. 
1 	efficient variable resolution optimization 
the main problem with the approach so far is its enormous complexity. the number of variables involved in the optimization is orders of magnitude larger than in scan registration. this is because the target function h is a function of all measurement points n and orientations r  whereas g has only the vantage points x as its arguments. the matrix b in  1  is  thus  a  sparse  matrix with many thousand dimensions. 
　to tackle such problems efficiently the optimization is reduced to a sequence of nested optimization problems. in a first step  scans arc analyzed for connected components  regions without large disparities ; links exist only between connected components in each scan; hence h factors naturally into different subproblems for different connected components. next  the resulting scan patches are thinned. thinning proceeds by identifying a small number of representative landmark measurements that are approximately equally spaced. this computation is performed by stipulating a grid over the scan  in workspace coordinates   and selecting measurements closest to the center points of each grid cell. an all point shortest path search then associates remaining measurements with landmark measurements. the optimization is first performed for the thinned scan; after the landmark scans are localized  and the corresponding coordinate transformation are computed   the remaining measurements are optimized locally  in groups corresponding to individual landmark measurements. smoothness is attained by using multiple landmark measurements as boundary conditions in this optimization. figure 1 shows an examples of a thinned graph  for which the optimization can be carried out in seconds. 
1 setup and experimental results 
start loop # 1 loop #1 loop #1 moving arms scan 1 scan 1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
1 -stretched body 
scan 1 scan 1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
1 our approach was implemented using a mobile robot  in an attempt to acquire 1d models of non-stationary objects. in a 
tabie 1: average distance to the closest points to the matched model after scan registration. the decrease of this distance measures the improvement of the model through local surface deformations. technique adopted from   we first acquired a map of the environment  see figure 1 . non-stationary objects were detected through differencing of scans  using the robot's localization routines to get a rough estimate of this pose. figure 1b illustrates the segmentation process. red scans are retained while the black scans are assumed to correspond to the background and are henceforth discarded. 
　figure 1 illustrates one iteration of the algorithm in all essential steps  using data acquired by the robot. results for matching three scans with different postures are shown in figure 1 a-b . while the standard registration procedure leads to a model with six arms  our approach correctly deforms the scan to arrive at an improved model  with two arms. a similar result is shown in figure 1 c-g   which shows three raw scans on the left  followed by the result of  rigid  scan registration and the result of our approach. another example is the chair in figure 1 a-d  scanned in different heights. the standard registration will lead to multiple feet  our approach correctly aligns them. table 1 shows the cumulative distance between points in the nearest neighbor calculation. the value marked as  start  is the result of an initial registration phase  reflecting the remaining distances under the rigid body assumption. all other columns correspond to further iterations of our algorithm as it adjusts the shape of the scans. this result illustrates numerically the integrity of the result is indeed improved by iterate the process. 
1 discussion 
this paper proposed a technique for simultaneous scan registration and scan deformation for modeling nonrigid objects. the deformation was made possible through the definition of  soft  links between neighboring scan points  whose configuration was calculated during registration. to tackle the resulting optimization problem efficiently  we described a hierarchical optimization techniques that operated on thinned graphs. experimental results obtained using a mobile robot illustrated the viability of this approach. 
　there are many problems in object modeling that this paper does not address  but whose inclusion shall be the subject of future research. for example  the present segmentation approach is somewhat simplistic: it will fail if more than one non-stationary object appears in the scene. the approach requires deformations to be small  and the target object may not move very far during acquisition. objects are not subsegmented. this will cause difficulties when components of objects are adjacent to different other components  or missing entirely  which can happen if components are combined and 

perception 	1 

figure 1:  a  thinning   b  nearest neighbor search   c  optimization  first iteration    d  optimization  second iteration    e  optimization of remaining nodes. 
figure 1:  a  optimal scan registration with rigid object assumption   b  corresponding result for our approach   c-e  three scans   f  results of optimal scan registration and  g  our approach. 
 m. k. chung  k. j. worsley  s. robbins  p. paus  j. taylor  j. n. giedd  j. l. rapoport  a. c. evans. deformation-based surface morphometry with an application to gray matter deformation. neurolmage  1  1. 
 j. feldmar  n. ayache  and f. betting. 1d-1d projective registration of free-form curves and surfaces. cviu  
figure 1: adjustable chair: scans of the chair in high position  a   1   1. scan from the chair in low position  b   the resulting model of the  j.-s. gutmann and k. konolige. incremental mapping chair with multiple feet  c   and the resulting model of the chair with of large cyclic environments. cira-1  1. 

the transformed scan  b . 
cannot be separated to find the corresponding part. a final direction of future research involves the integration into advanced techniques for between-object data association when modeling multiple objects in non-stationary environments . 
