 
this paper presents an approach to the approximate description of univariate real-valued functions in terms of precise or imprecise reference points and interpolation between these points. it is achieved by means of gradual rules which express that the closer the variable to the abscissa of a reference point  the closer the value of the function to the ordinate of this reference point. gradual rules enable us to specify sophisticated gauges  under the form of connected areas  inside of which the function belonging to the class under consideration should remain. this provides a simple and efficient tool for categorizing signals. this tool can be further improved by making the gauge flexible by means of fuzzy gradual rules. this is illustrated on a benchmark example. 
1 introduction 
signal functions  such as time series  medical ecg's  arc usually viewed as analytical mappings. then  a precise representation is often used. even when uncertainty is dealt with  it is supposed to pervade parameters of the analytical models  leading to probabilistic or interval-based processing. the main objective of this paper is to propose an alternative to this classical type of approaches by investigating the interest of a special kind of fuzzy   if.  then   rules  named gradual rules  dubois and prade  1; 1   for developing imprecise representations. actually  the proposed strategy relies on interpolative reasoning. by specifying the interpolate representation with gradual rules  there is no need to choose an analytic form for the interpolator and an imprecise model is directly obtained from the constraints expressed by the rules. the proposed rule-based approach is an alternative to works based on fuzzy polynomials  lowen  1  or fuzzy spline interpolation  e.g.  kawaguchi and miyakoshi  1   which rely on fuzzy-valued functions and still depend on the analytical form of the interpolant. 
what is supposed to be known  in a precise or in an imprecise way  is the behaviour of the function at some reference points  the problem being to interpolate between these points. figure 1 illustrates our purpose of building an imprecise model in a case where the points on which interpolation is based are imprecise and modelled by rectangular areas. 

figure 1: imprecise interpolation 
so  we are no longer looking for a function  but for a relation linking the variable to the possible value of the function. then  this relation is represented by its grapht defined on the cartesian product x x z  where x is the input domain  and z the function range . a similar approach used in automated control  recently proposed in  sala and albertos  1   also considers the building of uncertain fuzzy models in the setting of the approximation of multi-valued functions called  ambiguous functions . 
the paper  after some brief background on gradual rules  discusses the design of the imprecise interpolate representation in terms of gradual rules  constrained by precise or imprecise reference points. the proposed approach is then applied to the classification of time series. moreover  a more powerful representation framework  based on fuzzy sets of gradual rules  called fuzzy gradual rules for short  is proposed. it enables us to describe areas through which it is not completely possible that the function may go. 

qualitative reasoning 	1 

1 interpolation and gradual rules 
the idea of imprecise interpolation suggested above is based on constraints to be satisfied. namely the results of the interpolation should agree with the reference points. these constraints define the graph of a relation on 
we first consider the case of precise interpolation points 
with coordinates 	then the relationt should 
for the interpolation  we only have: 
if 	and c i o s c t1 	is the degree 
of truth of the proposition 	is close to 	   
we have just to define what is meant by  close to . let denote the fuzzy set of values close to it is natural to set and to assume that the membership degree to decreases on each side of with the distance to however will not be necessarily symmetrical. the simplest solution consists in choosing triangular fuzzy sets with a support denoted by  in a similar way  the closeness to  will be modelled by a triangular fuzzy set b  with modal 
value zi and support 	then the interpolation relation 
only depends on 1n parameters 	for 	interpola-
tion points. in order to simplify their tuning  we further assume that at most two rules are simultaneously fired at each point of the input domain  
for increasing reference points and it has been established in  galichet et 
al.  1  that the interpolation graph is made of connected 1sided areas  as pictured in figure 1  when the following constraints hold between the parameters: 
 1  
 1  
similar relationships can be obtained when considering decreasing reference points. these constraints can be related to consistency requirements between gradual rules  dubois ct al.  1   ensuring the non emptiness of the image of each input point via the relation 
figure 1 pictures the interpolation graph which is obtained with three interpolation points  and thus three gradual rules whose afs and bi's also appear in figure 1. the partitioning of x is obtained by cutting the intervals into three 
ed by the parameters which define the fuzzy sets the extreme values and are also predefined. lastly  the other parameters can be obtained by solving the system of equafigure 1: piecewise quadrangle-shaped graph 
this approach straightforwardly extends to imprecise reference points provided that trapezoidal membership functions are used in place of triangular ones  see figure 1 . 

figure 1: imprecise reference points 

1 classification of time series 
our purpose is now to illustrate how the imprecise intcrpolative representation framework can be used to classify time series  see  e.g.  kadous  1 . supervised classification is assumed  contrary to clustering techniques whose recent developments are often based on hidden markov models  biswas et al.  1; li  1 . the proposed experiment deals with the  database  freely available from the 
uci data archive  uci kdd archive . it is a 1-class problem  with 1 examples of each class  a prototype of each class being presented in figure 1. a categorization of process trends  based on types of variation  is also adopted in qualitative reasoning and model-based diagnosis  colomcr et al.  1 . 
normal  class 1  
cyclic  class 1  
increasing trend 
 class 1  
decreasing trend 
 class 1  
upward shift 
 class 1  
downward shift 
 class 1  
figure 1: one example of each class 
given an unlabeled time series  the aim of the classification is to decide to which class it belongs. the idea behind the proposed methodology consists in developing an imprecise model of each class. then  the time scries to classify will be assigned to the class whose model presents the maximal adequacy with the temporal data under consideration. the imprecise models are specified using gradual rules as advocated in the previous section. 
in figure 1  ten examples of class 1 are plotted simultaneously. it clearly shows that the reference points arc no longer precise. in this context  triangular membership functions are replaced by trapezoidal membership functions whose cores delimit the rectangular areas associated with the imprecise reference points. according to this slight modification  the graph plotted in figure 1 is obtained from two gradual rules  i.e.  it can be shown that the constraints on the graph shape expressed by equations  1  and  1  are still valid. 
imprecise reference 
points 
figure 1: imprecise model of class 1 
the model so built can be further improved by truncating the upper and lower parts of the quadrangle-shaped graph. an easy strategy to implement the graph cutting consists in adding a new rule that directly translates the interval-based constraint and b1 arc defined in figure 1. such an approach results in the final graph given in figure 1. 

figure 1: model of class 1  truncated graph  
figure 1 and 1 present the implemented models for two others classes. the first one associated with class 1 is based on reference points whose imprecision is only relative to the output. using strong partitions with triangular input membership 
functions and trapezoidal output ones  imprecise linear interpolation is obtained by means of the two rules  and 


qualitative reasoning 	1 


figure 1: model for class 1  decreasing trend  
concerning cyclic time scries  figure 1   the non-monotonic underlying behavior induces some difficulties in the modelling process. actually  closeness on the right and on the left of the reference points must be handled in different ways. it means that two distinct fuzzy subsets are required for correctly dealing with each reference point. in this framework  the imprecise models of figure 1 is composed of 1 gradual rules. 

　　　　　　 c  cyclic figure 1: model for class l  cyclic  
imprecise models are built for the six classes so that the graphs include all the points that compose the training time series  1 for each class . the classification of a time-series  given as a collection of points  is then carried out according to its adequacy with the class models. the latter is determined from the number of points of the time series under consideration that belong to the graph of each model  that is: 
where denotes the model graph of the class. the final decision is then to assign the time series  supposed unlabeled  to the class that maximizes ...  1. applying this strategy to classify the 1 available examples  perfect classification is obtained  i.e. the error rate is null for the training examples but also for the test time scries. this result is better than the one obtained with other approaches of the same problem  kcogh and kasetty  1; nanopoulos et al.  1 . it is however important to be cautious about this good performance. indeed  the discrimation between some classes is not robust. this point is illustrated by figure 1 in the case of classes 1 and 1 which are difficult to differentiate. the adequacy between the 1 time series of class 1 and models of classes 1 and 1 is plotted. it can be stated that  for many time series  the difference between both obtained scores is small  which means that a slight modification of the models would probably result in different final decisions. actually  an important intersection between both models induces a loss of the discrimination power of the adequacy index. in this framework  one may think of improving the robustness of the classification by refining the imprecise models. one possible strategy is then to introduce some membership degrees in the four sided areas while keeping their support unchanged. this can be made by using fuzzy sets of gradual rules as shown now. 
number of points that belong to the models 

	1 	time series number 	1 
figure 1: adequacy of class 1 examples with models of classes 1 and 1 
1 interpolate fuzzy graph 
according to the previous sections  it is clear that given a set of rules  i.e. a set of reference points  a collection of crisp graphs can be obtained by varying the support parameters of 
the  and/or t h e m o r e o v e r   inclusion properties between the built graphs can be exhibited for controlled variations of the supports as expressed by the following statements. 


 1  
a single fuzzy 
where 	and. 	such that 
qualitative reasoning 1 figure 1 plots the fuzzy graph obtained when the lower graph r1 is precise and piecewise linear and the upper graph f＜ has the quadrangle-based shape of figure 1. 
one interesting point is that the 1-sided shape introduced in section 1 is shared by all nested graphs provided that the lower and upper graphs are themselves 1-sided areas. in other robustness of the classification is improved as illustrated by figure 1  where histograms of the difference n1 - n1 are plotted for class 1 time series  see figure 1 . it is clear that the  1  
where 	and 	such that 	are the upper and low-
er bounds of the family. it should be noted that the inclusion ordering of the using is the converse of the one of the due to opposite behaviors with respect to graph inclusion. 
using the so-built fuzzy subset families  see figure 1  results in the following graph inclusions: 
 1  
	1 	1 	1 
figure 1: a graph based on 1 fuzzy gradual rules 
using fuzzy gradual rules for dealing with the example of 
	figure 1: nested fuzzy subsets 	section 1 still results in perfect classification. moreover  the 
number of examples for which the final decision is brittle  i.e. 
words  equalities  1  and  1  hold for any for the small values of n1 - n1 which are accounted for in the as expressed by property p1. two first bars  decreases when fuzzy gradual rules are used. 
these results have been obtained by using the same form of indices nj given by equation  1  for crisp and fuzzy graphs 

except that in the fuzzy case. further improvements could probably be obtained by defining more sophisticated indices in the fuzzy case. 

figure 1: effect of fuzzy gradual rules on the discrimination 
1 conclusion 
this paper has proposed a modelling framework which is faithful to the imprecision of available data. in the intervals between interpolation points where it is difficult to specify an analytical model  imprecision is captured by means of 1-sided areas. the application of the modelling methodology for classifying time series has exhibited interesting performance. moreover  the discrimination power of the approach is improved by using fuzzy gradual rules as introduced in the previous section. indeed  they enable us to distinguish between typical members of a class which remain in subareas with high membership degrees from borderline members which go through subareas with smaller membership degrees. besides  one may probably take further advanvage of the easy interface with the user  provided by the use of gradual rule  for specifying queries in data mining applications  see  keogh et al.  1  for an example of such possible use . lastly  further research should deal with multidimensional spaces where the language of gradual rules may prove useful in the description of imprecise graphs. 
