 
belief has been formally modelled using doxastic logics in recent decades. the possible worlds model provides an intuitive semantics for these logics. but it also commits us to the problem of logical omniscience. a number of logics have been introduced to circumvent the problem. of particular interest is the logic of awareness. in this paper we present a new method to put awareness into doxastic logic so as to get a flexible way to model actual belief. the underlying logics are two-dimensional logics. two two-dimensional doxastic logics are given. in the first logic  a quite limited concept of actual belief is presented. in the second logic  twodimensional and classical semantics are combined into a hybrid system. 
1 	introduction 
there has been a long story in philosophy to find a suitable semantics for logics of knowledge and belief since the twentieth century. the subject was picked up by researchers in the area of artificial intelligence  in which human reasoning or resource-bounded agents reasoning is considered. 
　the standard approach for characterizing knowledge and belief is based on the possible-worlds model. the intuitive idea  which was discovered and labelled by hintikka  hintikka  1   is that an agent considers a number of situations as possible. under this interpretation  an agent is said to believe a fact if it is true in all the states that the agent regards as possible. thus belief is modelled by means of accessibility relations as they are present in possible worlds models. the model is a structure m of the form where s is the set of all worlds  is the truth assignment for every atom and every world  and are the binary relations in s. 
　on the basis of the possible worlds model a logic of belief can be devised. to this end  introduce modal operators  to be interpreted as  the agent i believes that   
   * authors were supported in part by the logical structure of cognition in open worlds project grant under ministry of education  china grant 1dxm1. 
'corresponding author. e-mail address: hssjse zsu.edu.cn 
and give them formal semantics by a clause: if and only if for each world / such that it holds that 
to complete the logic  assume that  besides propositional atoms  formulas can also be composed by means of the usual propositional connectives 
　in order to be sure that certain properties that intuitively hold of belief are valid in this setting  some constraints should be put on the accessibility relation the standard way to do that is requiring that be serial  transitive  and euclidean. from these constraints  three intuitive properties of belief can be captured: consistency  positive introspection  and negative introspection  they are reflected as the below axioms a1  a1  and a1 respectively . 
　this notion of belief is completely characterized by the following sound and complete axiom system  traditionally called kd1. 

modelling knowledge and belief of this kind yields what 
hintikka called logical omniscience. logical omniscience presupposes that an agent's beliefs are closed under logical consequence. furthermore  valid sentences are always believed. it is clear that rational agents can never be so intelligent that they become omniscient. 
　to avoid these undesired properties  something nonstandard is needed. in the literature there appear quite a number of drastically varying approaches. of these  of particular interest to us is awareness logic. 
　a number of ways of modelling awareness and actual belief have been suggested in the literature  among them we would like to refer to  rantala  1    fagin and halpern  1    wansing  1  and  thijsse  1 . 
　the main problem of logical omniscience is that it forces an agent to believe too much. fagin and halpern suggested a variation of the standard kripke model  fagin and halpern  1   named the logic of general awareness  abbreviated 
　
resource-bounded reasoning 	1 
　
gal . the underlying idea is to use awareness as a  sieve  to remove the undesired parts of the logic. though an agent im-
plicitly believes a fact  the agent may not believe it explicitly if it is not aware of it. gal distinguishes between implicit belief and explicit belief by the following equation: 
explicit belief = implicit belief awareness 
　the model is endowed with function  that act as a kind of sieve  filtering out explicit beliefs from the bulk of implicit beliefs. 	the model is a tuple m of the form 	where 	and have their usual meanings. for each possible world 	 cs  is an arbitrary set of formulas of the language  indicating the formulas that the agent is aware of in s. 
	the language contains operators. 	which reflect 
awareness  as well as the implicit belief operators and explicit belief operators 
　the semantics of the language is as usual  except for adding two clauses for the operators and note that the one for is not expressed recursively. 
the explicit beliefs are just those implicit beliefs that belong to the awareness set. the sentence a1 is valid in the model. fagin and halpern showed in  fagin and halpern  1  that by adding a1 to kd1  the resultant system completely characterize the semantics of gal. 
　gal  despite its simplicity  is a very flexible and powerful tool. wansing exhibited in  wansing  1  that a slight generalization of gal  let  be any binary relation in s  can characterize every modal system that contains classical logic. 
　gal has also some disadvantages. useful information is neglected in this semantics. there are two reasons that commit an agent not to explicitly believe a sentence one is that the agent is not aware of the other is that the agent does not implicitly believe . gal cannot express these different situations. even if we know the fact that an agent does not explicitly believe a sentence  we still do not know where it comes from. in our proposal  the difference between them is able to be distinguished. 
　in gal  it is possible for a sentence to be true even if the agent is not aware of some parts of the sentence. for example  consider the sentence  if an agent believes that it rains  it will take an umbrella.   formalized as  the sentence can be true in a world s even if the agent is not aware of anything about  rain  in s. in a different opinion of belief and awareness  it may be argue that the above sentence seems nonsensical to the agent if it does not know what the  rain  is. from that opinion  the sentence can never be simply true. we will introduce a method such that different opinions of belief and awareness can be easily modelled. 
　it is important to distinguish between objective truth and subjective truth. it is reasonable for the above sentence to be objective true  as a truth of fact   but not subjective true  from the point of view of the agent . we leave the item aside for the moment. we will present two logics below. the first logic only concern about subjective truth. the notion will be picked up in the second logic. 
　we use a different way to add awareness sieve to doxastic logics. what we use is two-dimensional logics. in twodimensional logics  the value of a formula ranges over the set  each member of the set 
is called a truth-degree. every truth degree has two dimensions. intuitively  the first dimension of a truth-degree  called a truth-value  represents the truth value of  and the second  called an awareness-value  keeps track of the value of the awareness condition  we will clarify the notion below  of though the logic looks like a type of four-valued logic  it is in fact two-valued. whichever way it is read  we are still left with two-values  with 1 as true and 1 as false. 
　we got the idea of using two-dimensional logics in this way from theoretical linguistics  where two-dimensional logics are used to give the semantic concept of presupposition  bergmann  1 . usually  the sentence exists''' is looked upon as the presupposition of the sentence we interpret  an agent is aware of exists in the agent's memory . and then we treat the sentence as the presupposition of the sentence  the agent explicitly believe  here the presupposition is indeed the existence of a denotation of in the agent's memory. we call it the awareness condition. the denotation is subjective. it denotes things in the given memory  unlike in the case of the sentence  a exists   whose usual meaning is that a has an objective denotation. another difference between them is that the subjective denotation is a denotation of a sentence other than a denotation of a term. 
　two-dimensional logics allow us to calculate the truth value of a sentence and its awareness condition independently. this gives us flexibility to construct different models of actual belief. intuitively  the awareness condition of a sentence should affect its truth value. however  it may be no agreement on what the effect should be. by amending its matrices  two-dimensional logics are flexible enough to characterize different concepts of actual belief. 
　it is easy to see that gal can be represented by a twodimensional logic. the only thing we need to do is to make the awareness condition of a sentence does not disturb its truth value. 
　we would like to emphasize again that what we present in this paper is not only a more rigorous concept of actual belief than gal's  but also a method by which different opinions to actual belief can be modelled readily. we will give two doxastic logics use two-dimensional logics in the rest of the paper. the first logic can be viewed as an example of using our method  in which a more limited concept of actual belief is presented. the second logic extend the first logic to a hybrid system. 
　to be concise  we only consider one agent mode and use operators b l a substitute for  respectively. it is easy to extend the results of the paper to multi-agent mode. 
　we think many-dimensional logics may play an important role in may topics. the problems in many topics are in the following style: there are several factors that affect the outcome event's situation. to construct a logical structure of such problem  many-dimensional logics are preferred. each factor or outcome is put in a different dimension of the truth 
　
1 	resource-bounded reasoning 
　
degree. in such a many-dimensional semantics  it can be clearly indicated that how the factors affect the outcome. of course  it is an  out of focus  topic in the present paper. 
　by the way  we got some ideas of this paper from our work on  open worlds . interested readers may refer to  shier and hu  1 . 
1 	two-dimensional awareness logics 
1 semantics 
by awareness different people can understand in quite different ways. in this section  we present a logic in which a sentence's awareness condition is considered as a very rigorous limitation to the sentence: if the awareness condition is not satisfied  then the sentence is nonsensical to the agent and is invariably false. we call the resultant logic two-dimensional awareness logic  abbreviated tdal. 
　the language of tdal is the same as gal's. a tdal model is a tuple m =   where  
  s is a non-empty set of possible worlds; 
  is a truth degree assignment function from the set of atoms to per possible world. by convention  the parentheses and commas of truth degrees are dropped; 
  is a binary relation that is serial  transitive  and euclidean; 
  a is the awareness function  assigning each possible world a set of formulas. the matrices are: 
a ~a avb 1 1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
aab 1 1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 
a -   b 1 1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 　notice that and can be defined from ~ and the latter two connectives are considered as primary. 
the truth degree conditions for the modal operators are: 
model m and every possible world s  denoted by 
　the semantics of tdal needs some explanations. the assignment function  is indeed two-valued. it assigns only two values  1 and 1  to each atom. the primary awarenessvalue is always assigned as 1. only an occurrence of the b operator can introduce falseness as awareness-value. the reason is this: the awareness condition only makes sense when explicit belief is considered. an atom has no awareness condition at all. it is natural to assign atoms a trivial awareness-value  i.e. an always true value. it is easy to see that this definition is sound: an always true awareness-value does not disturb the calculation of truth value. this also explains the semantic definition of a and l operators  where the awareness-value of each formula of the form is always true. 
　awareness-value is contagious: the awareness-value of a sentence governed by one of the binary connectives is false if the awareness-value of one of its immediate components is false. if the awareness-value is always true  the truth-value is calculated classically. 
　clearly  tdal is along skeptical lines. it characterizes a cautious agent: the agent deems a sentence to be true only if every propositional part of it has no uncertainty. 
　note that the semantics of tdal can be reduced to a threevalued logic because the truth degree 1 can never result  neither from logical connectives nor from modal operators. 1 can be dropped safely from the matrices. at first sight  the resulting three-valued propositional logic looks the same as weak kleene logic. if we substitute the truth values and for the truth degrees 1 and 1 respectively  then we get the matrices of weak kleene logic. however  the two logics are quite different. in tdal  the assignment function is indeed two-valued  unlike kleene's. 1 can only result from application of the modal operator b. this characteristic makes tdal very different than weak kleene logic. for example  there are no propositional tautologies in weak kleene logics  but in tdal  some of them are preserved. 
1 	discussion and formalization 
definition 1 an occurrence of a b operator in a formula  is bound if that occurrence is in the scope of one of the modal operators; otherwise  such an occurrence ofb is free. a formula is bound iff each occurrence in it of b is bound  and is free iff it is not bound. 
　some classical tautologies are not valid in tdal. a limitation is required in order to make them valid. 
proposition 1 the following sentences are valid in tdal. 
 a 1  all bound classical tautologies. 
proof trivial. 
　the next proposition shows that the axioms with respect to the properties of implicit belief are all preserved in tdal  as they should be. 
proposition 1 a1-a1 are all valid in tdal. 
proof the proof is as usual. 
　intuitively  the axiom a1  which characterize explicit belief  should not hold in tdal because we have a different view to awareness condition here. it is just the case. this is easy to see by taking a model that contains a worlds s such that the agent is not aware of  in s. instead of a1  we have 
　
resource-bounded reasoning 	1 
　

resource-bounded reasoning 
　
1 	hybrid two-dimensional awareness logic 
1 semantics 
thijsse presented in  thijsse  1  a noteworthy method of modeling actual belief. his so-called hybrid system consists of an inner partial logic  within the actual belief operator  and an outer classical logic. it is implemented by distinguishing two kinds of truth relations: a bivalent truth relation  reflecting objective truth and a trivalent truth relation  reflecting subjective truth. 
　our proposal is to take tdal as the inner logic  unlike thijsse's logic  where partial logic is adopted. there is a reasonable motivation to proceed tdal into a hybrid semantics. as has been shown   truth  discussed in tdal is indeed subjective truth: in tdal  the meaning of a sentence being said to be true is that from the point of view of an agent it is true. the semantics of tdal is reasonable only if we understand it in this way. for example  it is intuitive that a1 should be objectively true; however  from the point of view of an agent  it may not be  subjectively  true. 
　we call the resultant logic hybrid two-dimensional awareness logic  abbreviated htal. formally  a htal model is a 
　when checking the truth value of a formula  one starts with a two-valued evaluation and is dragged into the multi-valued mode only by the belief operators. within the belief operators  sentence's truth value is calculated by tdal  reflecting subjective truth. outside belief operators  it is calculated classically  reflecting objective truth. 
　except adopting different logic as inner logic  there is another significant difference between htal and thijssc's logic. in the latter  partiality is specified by evaluation  and does not come from the limitation to actual belief. its  hybrid  character when taken by itself is irrelevant to an awareness condition. while in htal  the jumping-off point is indeed two-valued  both for inner logic and outer logic. atoms are always assigned values classically. the non-classical aspect appears only when a belief operator occurs. 
1 	discussion and formalization 
in contrast to tdal  where limited versions of a1 and classical tautologies are present  a1 and all classical tautologies are valid in htal. this is reasonable because validity in htal is defined as over-all classical truth  which reflects objective truth. 
the two truth relations  are closely related. 
 details 
　it directly follows from proposition 1 i  that tdal is a sub-logic of htal. all provable formulas of system t are valid in htal. 
　the necessity rule  r1  does not hold in general in htal. instead  there is a limited version. 
r1': from to infer 	where 	is bound. 
it is easy to verify that r1' is valid in htal. 
　the system corresponding to the semantics of htal consists of all axioms of kd1 and t  r1 and r1'. call it the system h. to prove the completeness of h  the following proposition is needed. 
　notice that a standard canonical model of h is indeed a classical kripke model. so to prove the completeness of 1  a more complicated canonical model has to be considered. the model is similar to the h-canonical model presented in  thi-
jsse  1 . the set of worlds of the model contains just one h-maximal consistent set as its root  all other worlds are maximal consistent set. the root is not accessible from other worlds. formally  for a given h-maximal consistent set 
　the next lemma makes clear the benefit of h-canonical model. 
resource-bounded reasoning 	1 then for 
proof. since the sub-model of m obtained by restricting it to 
st is just a canonical model of the system t  the proof of  i  has already been given in theorem 1. 
   the proof of  ii  is by induction on the structure of the basic steps  is an atom and are direct. because h contains all classical tautologies  the induction step for ~ and  is carried out by the standard techniques of propositional 
reasoning. 

　notice that the axioms a1-a1 are contained in all worlds of the h-canonical model. so by proposition 1 i   
for all worlds s in m  where 	. thus the rela-
tion k defined in the h-canonical model is indeed transitive  euclidean  and serial. 
theorem 1 system h is sound and complete for the semantics ofhtal. 
proof the soundness is easy to check. to show completeness  suppose does not hold. then there exists a hmaximal consistent set such that construct a hcanonical model of with designated world by lemma 1  does not hold. 
1 	conclusion 
many doxastic logics have been suggested in the literature  reflecting quite different concepts of actual belief. one may wonder why there are so many proposals. were all of us to agree on what human belief is  an  unique right  model of belief would be possible. however  it is not the case  as can be seen from philosophical controversies continuing from long ago. thus all of the logics have their own claim to  correctness   if they have clear explanations. 
　the method using two-dimensional logic to model awareness and actual belief has  in our opinion  particular benefits. processing awareness condition independently gives us more flexibility in controlling the model that is constructed. different opinions about the relation between awareness and actual belief will be reflected in different models  which can be obtained by amending the underlying two-dimensional logic. of course  there are other  maybe many  alternatives to the logics presented in this paper. for example  it is possible to give a doxastic logic with the two-dimensional logic presented by bergmann in  bergmann  1   in which the logic is intended to be along russellian lines. examination of this or other forms of doxastic logics and the relations among them would call for further research. 
　there has begun to be use of awareness logic for net protocol verification  accorsi  1 . we think the method presented in this paper may be useful in that purpose. this also calls for further research. 
1 	acknowledgements 
we would like to thank nuel belnap for his detailed reading of the earlier version of this paper and numerous pertinent comments and criticisms. 
