 
in fields such as medicine  geography  and mechanics  spatial reasoning involves reasoning about entities-for example cavities and invading particles-that may coincide without overlapping. the purpose of this paper is to develop a mereotopology for domains that include coincident entities  such as material objects  holes  geopolitical entities and spatial regions. in addition  i construct mathematical models of this mereotopology in which nontrivial coincidence relations are defined. 
1 	introduction 
two objects coincide when they occupy overlapping regions of space.1 my hand and my body  partially  coincide. the mississippi river and minnesota  partially  coincide. note that the objects in both pairs actually stand in a stronger relation than coincidence. the objects in each pair overlap  i.e. share parts . my hand is a part of both itself and my body. the first ten kilometers of the mississippi river are part of both the river and the state. any two overlapping entities are  trivially  coincident- their locations are identical at their common parts. 
　it is an assumption of this paper that the relation of coincidence is broader than that of overlap. in other words  i assume that there are pairs of coincident objects which do not share parts. the food that is currently being digested in my stomach cavity coincides with  but does not overlap  my stomach cavity. the u.s. embassy in paris coincides with  but does not overlap  france. any object coincides with  but does not overlap  the spatial region at which it is located at a given point of time. 
　a mereotopology is a formal theory of parthood and connection relations. it has long been recognized that mereotopology forms an essential part of formal ontology. several different mereotopologies have been proposed in recent literature  including  asher and vieu  
1  note that with this usage  coincident objects need only occupy overlapping spatial regions. i will use the term  complete coincidence  for the stronger relation that holds between objects that occupy identical spatial regions. 
1; borgo et al  1; gotts et al.  1; smith  1 . these theories are ultimately intended for reasoning about spatial relations among material objects. however  it is assumed in nearly all of this work that the immediate domains of application are restricted to spatial regions.1 when material objects are introduced  as in  cohn  1   mereotopological relations are still restricted to regions. each object's spatial properties are determined by those of the region at which it is located. thus  distinctive coincidence relations are not usually introduced into standard mereotopologies: on domains of regions  coincidence is just overlap. 
　likewise  mathematical models for these theories typically use domains consisting of subsets of a topological space. see  for example   biacino and gerla  1; asher and vieu  1; cohn and varzi  1 . on these domains  there is no natural way of defining a coincidence relation that is distinct from overlap. 
　the goal of this paper is to construct a mereotopology for domains that include coincident but non-overlapping entities. in particular  domains for the theory may include both material objects and the regions at which they are located  in addition to other types of entities  such as holes or geopolitical entities  which may coincide with material objects. my theory allows mereotopological relations to apply directly to all entities within the domain  be they regions  material objects  holes  or what have you. it also extends mereotopology by adding coincidence relations and by making explicit the relation between an object and the region at which it is located. to guide the development of the formal theory  i construct mathematical models in which a coincidence relation distinct from overlap is defined. 
　the formal theory presented in this paper borrows much from the theory of location of  casati and varzi  
1 . it differs in that it divides the domain into differ-
 here and throughout this paper the term  region  designates any part of an immaterial space in which objects are located. 1 leave open the question of whether these parts may be of mixed dimensionalities. this contrasts with the usage in  for example  gotts et al.  1   where the term  region  does not apply to lower-dimensional entities  such as boundaries or points. 

spatial reasoning 	1 

ent layers  each of which is mereotopologically independent of the others  and also in providing mathematical models that allow distinct members of the domain to be located at the same region. additional work on combining either coincidence or location relations with other spatial relations can be found in  bennett  1; borgo et al.  1; cohn  1; schulz and hahn  1 . 
1 layered models 
i introduce a class of mathematical structures in which members of the domain can coincide without overlapping. i call these structures layered models because their domains are partitioned into equivalence classes  called layers. members of the same layer coincide only when they overlap. members of different layers never overlap and cannot be parts of the same object  though they may coincide. examples of types of entities assigned to distinct layers are: 1. spatial regions  1. material objects  1. holes within these material objects. all regions are parts of a special layer that covers the entire space. 
layered models are the target models of layered 
mereotopology  the formal theory developed in  
　layered models are defined as follows. let   be a topological space  where x is the set of points 
and cl is the closure operator. let /be either  n  the set of all natural numbers or an initial segment of n. the elements of the domain  d  of a layered model are ordered pairs  	where 	and 	 i will generally use the abbreviation  	for 	all variables referring to objects in layered models appear in arial font to distinguish them from the variables of the formal theory.  the second component of each ordered pair determines the layer to which the pair belongs. all pairs of the form belong to a special layer  called the region 
layer. 

then it follows that only objects which are parts of the same layer can overlap: 1 x  yj  iff x n y and i = j. if underlap  u  is defined in the usual way  

then it follows that  since all objects are parts of their layer  objects underlap if and only if they are parts of the same layer: u xj  yj  iff i = j. 
a connection relation  c  is defined on d as: 

as with parthood  only objects residing on the same layer can be connected to each other. 
　other mereotopological relations  such as external connection and tangential parthood  can be defined in terms of p and c in the usual way. for example  an external connection relation  ec  can be defined as follows: 
	e 	 
　in contrast to parthood and connection relations  coincidence relations can hold between objects from different layers. three different coincidence relations are defined on d. 
 coincidence  
 complete coincidence  
 covering  
　another relation that can hold among objects from different layers is abutment  a. 

　finally  i add the function  r  from d to layer 1 which assigns each member of the domain to its representative on the region layer: 
r x1  = x1 
notice that  when restricted to layer 1  r is the identity function: for any  also notice that two objects abut if and only if their regions are externally connected. 
　i will give a simple example of a layered model designed to illustrate the way in which the models can be used to represent spatial relations among regions  material objects  and immaterial entities such as holes. the background topological space for this model is k1 with its standard topology. the region layer in this model has as parts the members of the set  
　suppose that we wish to represent relations holding among a vase  a portion of water in the vase  a flower standing in the vase  and the interior of the vase. the vase  water  and flower are represented  respectively  by parts  v1  w1  and f1  of layer 1 where the subsets  v  w  and f  of  are disjoint. the interior of the vase  a hole  is represented by h1 on layer 1 where h and v are dis-
joint  but connected  w is a proper subset of h 
and h and f have a nonempty intersection according to this representation  the water is not part of the hole  but the fact that the water is contained in the interior of the vase is represented in the model by the covering relation  cov w1  h1   holding between w1 and h1. similarly  the flower does not overlap the interior of the vase  but the fact that the flower is partially contained in the interior of the vase is represented by the coincidence relation: coin f1  h1 . the vase and its interior do 

not coincide. nor are they connected. but the fact that the vase touches its interior is represented by the abutment relation: a v1  h1 . finally  every object is exactly colocated with its spatial region. this is represented in the model by the complete coincidence of the object and its region. for example  ccoin  
1 layered mereology 
a mereology is a formal theory of the binary parthood relation. my aim in this section is to develop a mereology  called layered mereology  that is satisfied by the parthood relation  p  defined on layered models. layered mereology is extended in and to layered mereotopology  a theory that also includes coincidence and connection relations. 
　layered mereology  and also its extension  layered mereotopology  is formulated in first-order logic. relations and functions are represented in the formal theory with plain text letters to distinguish them from the relations and functions defined in layered models. layered mereology assumes one primitive  the binary relation p  which  on the intended interpretation  represents parthood. 
　the following relations are defined in the formal theory in terms of p: 

　it is trivial to see that  if p is interpreted as p in layered models  the defined relations o and u will be interpreted as u and o  respectively. 
　the axioms of layered mereology will be somewhat nonstandard. for example  they cannot require that any pair of objects  x and y  have a mereological sum. my goal is to axiomatize p in such a way that  when restricted to a single layer  it satisfies the axioms  and axiom schema  of general extensional mereology 
in  gem1  stands for any first-order formula in which z does not occur free.  gem1  states that if any member of the domain satisfies the formula then there must be a sum of all objects satisfying in the domain. 
 gem1  must be altered for layered mereology because layered models only include the sums of objects that arc parts of the same layer. 
　i will discuss summation in layered models in more detail shortly. for now  notice that the relation p in layered models satisfies each of the first four axioms of 
1  throughout this paper  initial universal quantifiers arc suppressed unless they are needed for clarity. 
gem. they are therefore used in their original forms as axioms for layered mereology.1 
　the first three axioms require that p is a partial ordering.  pi  says that p is reflexive.  p1  says that p is antisymmetric.  p1  says that p is transitive. that  p1 - p1  are satisfied by p in layered models follows immediately from the fact that p is just the subset relation restricted to the separate layers. 
　 p1  says that  if x is not a part of y  then there is some part  z  of x that does not overlap y.  p1  is satisfied in 
layered models by virtue of condition 1 of  
　it follows from  pi  -  p1  that overlap  o  is extensional. this means that any two members of the domain that overlap the same objects are identical. 

　because o is extensional  for any formula in which z does not occur free  if we can assign z to a member of the domain that satisfies 
		 *  
then this object is the unique sum of all  however  for any such formula there need not be an object satisfying even if some member of the domain satisfies for example  let be x = x and let d be the domain of a 
layered model. then every member of d satisfies  | . but if there are with then no member of d satisfies this is because such an object would have to overlap every member of d and there can be no member of d that overlaps both and for  
　thus  we need a restricted version of  gem1  that requires sums to exist only if all summands are part of the same layer. such an axiom schema will be satisfied in all layered models by virtue of condition 1 of  given that two objects in a layered model are parts of the same layer if and only if they underlap  the restricted summation axiom schema can read as follows: 

replaced by y  and where variable substitution is performed as necessary so y is free in where x is free in 
    p1  says that if there is some object that satisfies and any two objects that satisfy underlap  then there is a sum of all objects satisfying  
　for convenience  when is any formula in which z does not occur free  i will use the abbreviation for the substitution instance of the formula  
　we would like to be able to say more things about layers within the mereology. so far  we can only say that two objects are on the same layer. we would like to be able to say that a certain object is a layer or is the layer of a particular object.  d1  defines a relation holding between y and z when z is the sum of all objects that y underlaps  i.e. y's layer . 

1  all axioms of layered mereology are labeled with a  p .  pt  is used for theorems of layered mereology. 

spatial reasoning 	1 

   it is easy to see that when p is interpreted as p in layered models  holds if and only if = layer i. however  axioms  p1 - p1  do not allow us to infer that for any object  y  there is some object that is the sum of all objects that underlap y. in other words  our axioms so far do not allow us to infer that every object has a layer. this would follow from  p1  if we knew that any two objects that underlap y must underlap each other  i.e. that u is transitive . notice that the underlap relation for layered models  u  is an equivalence relation  reflexive  symmetric  and transitive  and that the sets consisting of all objects from a single layer are the equivalence classes determined by the u relation. it follows from  p1 - p1  that 
u is reflexive and symmetric  but not that u is transitive. i  therefore  add a final axiom to layered mereology: 
	 underlap is transitive  
it follows immediately that every object has a layer: 
 pt1  	 every object has a layer  
thus the relation  l  is a function. i will use the functional term l x  to stand for the layer of x. 
the following theorems can also be derived: 
 pt1  pxl x  	 every object is part of its layer  
 pt1  uxy  -  l x  = l y  
 two objects underlap iff they have the same layer  
 pt1  uxy  -  pyl x  
 x underlaps y iff y is part of x's layer  
　the unary predicate  ly  distinguishes certain members of the domain as layers. 
 d1  lyz =:  lxz 	 z is a layer  
it follows easily from  pt1    pt1   and  d1  that: 
 pt1  lyz  lzz  z is a layer iff z is its own layer  
 pt1  tells us that layers are those members of the domain which are the mereological sums of all objects that they underlap. 
　when p is interpreted as p in layered models  lyxj if and only if xi = layer i. 
　we can use the formula schema zsmx    to introduce more useful relations.  d1  -  d1  are the standard definitions of the sum  product  and difference relations.  d1  defines a relative complement relation. 
 d1  + v  y  z  =: zsmx pxv v pxy  
 z is the binary sum of v and y  
 d1  x v  y  z  =: zsmx pxv & pxy  
 z is the binary product of v and y  
 d1  - v  y  z  =: zsmx pxy & ~oxv  
 z is the difference of v in y  
 d1  - v  z  =: zsmx uxv & ~oxv  
 z is the relative complement of v  
　the following theorems concerning the relative complement can be derived: 
 pt1  lyx  x has a relative complement 
iff x is not a layer  
 pt1  - x  z  - x  i x   z  z is x's relative complement iff z is the difference of x in x's layer  
　using  pt1  it is easy to prove that  when they exist  sums  products  and relative complements belong to the same layer as the original object s . 
　it is straightforward to show that any layer of a model of layered mereology is a model of general extensional mereology  gem . more precisely  we can prove the following: 
 meta-theorem let m be any model of layered mereology with domain  d. note that m need not belong to the class of layered models defined in ′1. let w e d and let dw = {y : y  d & l y  = l w }. let mw be the structure whose domain is dw with p interpreted as in m  i.e. pyz holds in mw iff y  z  dw and pyz holds in m . then mw satisfies axioms  pi  -  p1  and axiom schema  gem1 . 
1 the region function 
in layered mereology  we have no way of stating that two objects coincide. layered mereology lets us describe the parthood relations between objects. it does not let us describe the  relative  locations of objects. to do this  i extend layered mereology by adding the unary function  r. on the intended interpretation r assigns each object  x  to the region  r x   at which x is exactly located. in layered models  r is interpreted as the function r. 
　using r  we can define a one-place predicate  r  which distinguishes the sub-domain of regions. 
 d1  ry =:  r x  = y  	 y is a region  
when r is interpreted as r in layered models  rx  if and only if i = 1. 
　the axioms for r are added to axioms  pi  -  p1 .1 it is easy to check that they are satisfied in layered models. 
 rl  ry & rz -  uyz  all regions are located in the same layer  
 r1  ry & uyz -  r z  = z  every member of the region layer is its own region  the theorems below are immediate consequences of  rl and r1 . 
 rt1  ry -  r y  = y 	 every region is located at itself  
 rt1  ry & uyz -  rz  every member of a region's layer is a region  
 rt1  ex 	  -  rx  & zsmx -  rz 
 every sum of regions is a region  
　additional axioms relate the region function to parthood. 
 r1  pxy -  pr x r y   if x is part of y  then x's region is part of y's region  
　notice that the converse of  r1  is not generally satisfied in layered models. r xj  may be part of r yj  even though xj is not part of yj. this will be the case whenever x  y  but i # j . 
　on the other hand  in layered models  if 1 r xj   r yj   and i = j  then 1 x  yj must also hold. 
1  all axioms specific to the r function are marked with  r . theorems specific to the r function are marked with  rt . 

 r1  uxy & 1 r x   r y   -  oxy  if x and y are on the same layer and x's region overlaps y's region  then x overlaps y  
　the coincidence relations are defined in terms of the region function  r. 
 dl 1  ccoin x  y  =: r x  = r y  x 	and y completely coincide  
 d1  cov x  y  =: p r x   r y    y covers x  
 d1  coin x  y  =: 1 r x   r y    x and y coincide  
　it is easy to check that when p is interpreted as p and r as r in layered models  ccoin  cov  and coin are  respectively  ccoin  cov  and coin. 
　the following theorems can be derived from  p1 - p1  and rl - r1 . 
 rt1  cov x  y  & cov y  x   -  ccoin x  y   y covers x and x covers y iff x and y completely coincide   rt1  ccoin x  y  & ccoin x  z  & uyz -  y = z  any object can completely coincide with at most one object in any layer  
 rt1  ccoin x  y  & uxy -  x = y  if x and y completely coincide and are on the same layer  then x = y   rt1  cov x  y  & uxy -  pxy  if y covers x and x and y are on the same layer  then x is part of y  
 rt1  coin x  y  & uxy -  oxy  if x and y coincide and are on the same layer  then x and y overlap  
　in addition  the implications illustrated in the diagram below can be derived. the arrow indicates that the atomic formula at the start of the arrow implies the atomic formula at the end of the arrow. 

figure 1: implication hierarchy 
1 layered mereotopology 
the base theory can be extended to layered mereotopology in a straightforward way by adding a connection relation  c  where cxy means  x is connected to y . c is interpreted as c in layered models. 1 
 ci  cxx 	 connection is reflexive  
 c1  cxy -  cyx 	 connection is symmetric  
 c1  pxy -   czx -  czy   if x is part of y  everything connected to x is connected to y  
 c1  cxy -  uxy 	 if x and y are connected  
then they are parts of the same layer  
 c1  cxy -  c r x   r y    if x and y are connected  their regions are also connected  
 c1  uxy & c r x   r y   -  cxy  if x and y are members of the same layer and their regions are connected  then x and y are connected  
　external connection and abutment are defined as follows. 
 d1  ecxy =: cxy & ~ oxy  x and y are externally connected  
 d1  axy =: ec r x   r y    x and y abut  when c is interpreted as c in layered models  ec is the relation  ec and a is the relation  a. 
the following theorems are easily derived: 
 ct1  ecxy -  axy  if x and y are externally connected  then x and y abut   ct1  uxy -   axy  -  ecxy   if x and y are on the same layer  then they abut iff they are externally connected  
 ct1  axy -  ~coin x  y   if x and y abut  then they do not coincide  the tangential part relation  tp  is usually defined in terms of external connection as follows: tpxy =: pxy &  eczx & eczy   
　this definition is not appropriate for layered models. to see why  consider the layered model whose underlying topological space is k with its standard topology and whose layers have the members of the following sets as parts: 
layer 1: 
layer 1:  
　it would follow from the standard definition of tp that  1  l 1 has no tangential parts  since it is not externally connected to any member of the domain. for example  it would follow that  1  1 and  1  l 1 are not tangential parts of  1  l 1. 
　i will therefore use the following definition of tangential part: 
 d1  tpxy =: pxy &  azx & azy  	 x is a tangential 
part of y  
　applying this definition to the previous model  it turns out that any part of  1  l 1 that contains either  1  1 or  1  l 1 is a tangential part of  1  l  1 . more generally  it follows from  d1  that  for objects x and y on the same layer  x is a tangential part of y if and only if x's region is a tangential part of y's region. 
 ct1  uxy -   tpxy  -  tp r x   r y    interior parthood is then defined as usual. 
 d1  ipxy =: pxy & -tpxy 	 x is an interior part of y  
　relational counterparts of topological operators can now be defined in the usual way. for instance  an ob-
ject's interior can be defined as the sum of its interior parts: 
 d1  int y  z =: zsmx ipxy  	 z is the interior of y  
　since each layer of any model of layered mereology is a model of gem  it is easy to show that each layer of any model of layered mereotopology is a model of the standard mereotopology which uses  as the definition of tangential parthood and includes axioms  c1 - c1  in addition to those of gem. 

spatial reasoning 	1 

1 conclusions and further work 	