 
we present a generalization of similarity-based retrieval in recommender systems which ensures that for any case that is acceptable to the user  the retrieval set contains a case that is at least as good in an objective sense and so also likely to be acceptable. our approach recognizes that similarity to the target query is only one of several possible criteria according to which a given case might be considered at least as good as another. 
1 introduction 
an advantage of case-based reasoning  cbr  in product recommendation is that if none of the available products exactly matches the user's query  she can be shown the products that are most similar to her query  wilke et al.  1 . however  a known limitation of similarity-based retrieval is that the most similar case may not be the one that is most acceptable to the user  burkhard  1; smyth and mcclave  1 . the  strategy of retrieving the k most similar cases only partially compensates for this limitation  as the number of cases that can be presented to the user is necessarily restricted in practice. so the existence of an acceptable case does not guarantee that it will be retrieved. 
   we present a new approach to retrieval called coverageoptimized retrieval  core  which ensures that for any case that is acceptable to the user  the retrieval set contains a case that is at least as good in an objective sense and so also likely to be acceptable. similarity to the target query is only one of several possible criteria according to which a given case might be considered at least as good as another in the approach. 
1 the core retrieval set 
poster papers the similarity of a given case c to a target query  over a subset of the case attributes a is typically defined as: where for each is a numeric weight representing the importance of a and is a measure of the similarity of the value of in to the preferred value of a. apart from its similarity to the target query  another factor likely to influence the acceptability of a given case is the compromises it involves  or preferences of the user that it fails to satisfy  burkhard  1 . often in e-commerce domains  one can identify attributes whose values most users would prefer to maximize or minimize  wilke et al.  1 . in core  we assume that the value specified by the user is a preferred minimum in the case of a more-is-better attribute or a preferred maximum in the case of a less-is-better attribute. 
definition 1 for any query q and case c we define: 
¡¡is the set of attributes with respect to which c fails to satisfy the user's preferences. below we define four dominance criteria according to which a given case c  might be considered at least as good as another case c1: 

we say that c  dominates c1 with respect to d1. we say that a given case c1 is covered by a retrieval set rs if c1 rs or there exists c  rs such that c  dominates c1. the importance of coverage in this sense is that if an acceptable case that is not retrieved is covered by a retrieved case  then the retrieved case is also likely be acceptable. another basic premise in our approach is that the likelihood of the retrieved case also being acceptable increases with the strength of the dominance criterion with respect to which it 
1 

travel case library  www.ai-cbr.org . as might be expected  there is a trade-off between the strength of the dominance criterion in terms of which coverage is defined and the size of the retrieval set required to provide full coverage of the case library. though unable to compete with core-1 in terms of coverage efficiency  core-1 has an average retrieval-set size of only 1 cases. 
figure 1. generic algorithm for coverage-optimized retrieval. 
we refer to the versions of core based on dl  d1 and d1 as core-1  core-1 and core-1 respectively. it is worth noting that with do as the dominance criterion  core is equivalent to 1-nn  and so core is in fact a generalization of similarity-based retrieval. 
theorem 1 the core retrieval set provides full coverage of the case library and no smaller retrieval set can provide 
full coverage of the case library. 
   while it can easily be shown that the maximum possible sizes of the core-1 and core-1 retrieval sets for a given 
query  respectively  the maximum possible size of the core-1 retrieval set is not as easily determined. in practice  core-1 and core-1 retrieval sets are usually much smaller than their maximum possible sizes. figure 1 shows the maximum  average  and minimum sizes of core retrieval sets for full-length queries on the 