 
w.c. rounds and g.-q. zhang have recently proposed to study a form of resolution on algebraic domains  rounds and zhang  1 . this framework allows reasoning with knowledge which is hierarchically structured and forms a  suitable  domain  more precisely  a coherent algebraic cpo as studied in domain theory. in this paper  we give conditions under which a resolution theorem - in a form underlying resolution-based logic programming systems - can be obtained. the investigations bear potential for engineering new knowledge representation and reasoning systems on a firm domaintheoretic background. 
1 	introduction 
domain theory  abramsky and jung  1  is an abstract mathematical theory for programming semantics and has grown into a respected field on the borderline between mathematics and computer science. studying relationships between domain theory and logic is of acknowledged importance in the field. there has been much work on the use of domain logics as logics of types and of program correctness  with a focus on functional and imperative languages. however  there has been only little work relating domain theory to logic programming or other ai paradigms  two exceptions being the application of methods from quantitative domain theory to the semantic analysis of logic programming paradigms studied by hitzler and seda  hitzler and seda  1x   and the work of rounds and zhang on the use of domain logics for disjunctive logic programming and default reasoning  rounds and zhang  1 . 
　the latter authors  in  rounds and zhang  1   introduced a form of clausal logic generalized to coherent algebraic domains  motivated by investigating the logical content of the smyth powerdomain construction. in the following  we study this clausal logic  henceforth called logic rz for convenience. the occurrence of a proof theory based on a generalized resolution rule poses the question whether results underlying resolution-based logic programming systems can be carried over to the logic rz. one of the most fundamental results underlying these systems is the resolution theorem 
poster papers 
which states that a clause x is a logical consequence of a theory t if and only if it is possible to derive a contradiction  i.e. 
the empty clause  via resolution from the theory  robinson  1 . 
　what we just called resolution theorem is certainly an immediate consequence of the fact that resolution is sound and complete for classical logic. however  it is not obvious how it can be transfered to the logic rz  mainly because it necessitates negating a clause  and negation is not available in the logic rz in explicit form. this observation will lead our thoughts  and in the end we will develop conditions on the underlying domain which ensure that a negation is present which allows to prove an analogue of the theorem. 
1 the logic rz 
we assume that the reader is familiar with basic domaintheoretic notions  and we will follow the terminology from  abramsky and jung  1  and  rounds and zhang  1 . in the following   will always be assumed to be a coherent algebraic cpo. we will also call these spaces domains. an element a d is called an atom  or an atomic element  if whenever x a we have =  l the set of all atoms of a domain is denoted by a z  . 

　rounds and zhang originally set out to characterize logically the notion of smyth powerdomain of coherent algebraic epos. it naturally lead to the clausal logic rz from definition 1. 
1 
   we can provide a sound and complete proof theory with simple rules. consider the following rule  which we call simplified hyperresolution. 
		 shr  
　also consider the following rules  which we call the reduction rule and the extension rule. 

theorem 1 the system consisting of  shr    ext  and  red  is complete. 
　for derivations with the rules from above  we use the symbol |- as usual. 
1 	a resolution theorem 
we simplify proof search via resolution by requiring stronger 
　in view of theorem 1  it suffices to study theories t and atomic clauses x. we can actually obtain a stronger result  as follows  which provides some kind of normal forms of derivations. for a theory t  define  
theorem 1 let d be an atomic domain  t be a theory  x be a clause and 

be a derivation. then there exists a derivation 

using only the atomic extension rule 

and the multiple atomic shift rule  mas   as follows. 
it also turns out that the rules from theorem 1 are sound. we investigate next a notion of negation on domains. 
definition 1 an atomic domain is called an atomic domain with negation // there exists an involutive and scottcontinuous negation function 
　the following result  an analogue to the resolution theorem mentioned in the introduction  allows one to replace the search for derivations by search for contradiction. 
theorem 1 let d be an atomic domain with negation. let t be a theory1 and x be an atomic clause. then and only  
　on atomic domains with negation  we can therefore establish the following sound and complete proof principle. 
