 1 a reformulation of constraint hierarchies we provide a reformulation of the constraint hierarchies  chs  framework based on the notion of error indicators. adapting the generalized view of local consistency in semiring-based constraint sat-
isfaction problems  scsps   we define constraint hierarchy k-consistency  ch-k-c  and give a ch1-c enforcement algorithm. we demonstrate how the ch-1-c algorithm can be seamlessly integrated into the ordinary branch-and-bound algorithm to 
make it a finite domain ch solver. experimentation confirms the efficiency and robustness of our proposed solver prototype. unlike other finite domain ch solvers  our proposed method works for both local and global comparators. in addition  our solver can support arbitrary error functions. 
1 introduction 
the constraint hierarchy  ch  framework  borning et al.   1  is a general framework for the specification and solutions of over-constrained problems. originating from research in interactive user-interface applications  the ch framework attracts much effort in the design of efficient solvers in the real number domain  badros et al.  1; hosobe et al. 1 . to extend the benefit of the ch framework to also discrete domain applications  such as timetabling and resource allocation  the paper takes a step towards a general and efficient finite domain ch solver  based on consistency techniques and tree search. 
   *a more complete and detailed version of this paper can be obtained from the authors. 
   *part of this research has been carried out while the author was visiting the department of computer science and engineering  the chinese university of hong kong  china 
1 	poster papers 


notice that by definition  all local/global comparators ignore constraints in hierarchy levels greater than or equal to /. 
　we are now ready to define the solution set with variables v by: 


　notice that the above lemma let us compare valuation for both local and global comparators  because the  order implies all the orders induced from any specific comparator  and for arbitrary error functions. 
　we also introduce the notion of a hierarchy problem which is a ch augmented with an error indicator store. 

which have a  worse  error than the estimates provided in in   by the definition  the solutions of h always contain those of 
 equality holds when the error estimates provided in /// fails to  filter  out any solutions of //. 

ror value 1  i.e. no error information . this fact is useful in ensuring the correctness of our local consistency algorithm and the completeness of our branch-and-bound solver later. 
　'note the similarity of in notation to which denotes the error indicator of a valuation here  is a store containing an estimate of the error associated with valuations containing  
1 	summary of the results 
the notion of constraint hierarchy k-consistency  ch-fc-c   is defined using error indicators which are structures isomorphic to the structure of a given ch used for storing the error information of the ch problem  similar notion was defined by bistarelli et al.  . in particular  we give an algorithm for enforcing ch-1-c of a ch problem. while classical consistency algorithms  mackworth  1  aim to reduce the size of constraint problems  our ch-1-c algorithm works by explicating error information that is originally implicit in ch problems. the space complexity of the ch-1-c algorithm is simply of 1{nvndnc  in the worst case where nc is the number of labeled constraints  nv is the number of variables  and rid is the size of the largest variable domain. 
　incorporating a ch-1-c enforcement algorithm in a branch-and-bound algorithm  we obtain a general finite domain ch solver  which works for arbitrary comparators. search space is pruned by utilizing the error information generated by the ch-1-c algorithm. unlike other finite domain ch solvers  our proposed solver is applicable to arbitrary comparators. 
　we compare the performance of our proposed solver with generate-and-test  basic branch-and-bound  and the reified constraint approach by lua .experiments confirm the efficiency and robustness of our research prototype  which brings us one step towards practical finite domain ch solving. 
