 
a standard intuition underlying traditional accounts of belief change is the principle of minimal change. in this paper we introduce a novel account of belief change in which the agent's belief state is modified minimally to incorporate exactly the new information. thus a revision by p v q will result in a new belief state in which p v q is believed  but a stronger proposition  such as p a q  is not  regardless of the initial form of the belief state. 
　a reasoning entity will need to maintain its stock of beliefs in the face of new information. such belief change is not arbitrary; rather belief change is generally taken to be guided by various rationality criteria. one of the most widely advocated rationality criterion is the principle of minimal change: that a belief state is modified minimally to incorporate new information  makinson  1 . perhaps the most evident way in which a change in belief can be said to be minimal is in terms of standard constructions such as systems of spheres lgrove  1  i.e.  orderings of possible worlds. 
　in this paper we introduce an account of belief change that is orthogonal to the notion of revision in which  minimal change  is taken with respect to the new information. we examine an account of belief change in which all we wish to accept is the new information itself-no more  no less. this is reminiscent of the gricean principle of conversational im-
plicature  that in interpreting a speaker we should assume that the speaker means no more  and no less  than what she says. our approach ensures that  in a sense to be specified  exactly the sentence accepted as evidence is incorporated. it proves to be the case that a modified knowledge base is a conservative extension  see section 1  of the sentence for belief change; consequently we term this conservative belief change. 
1 motivation and examples 
the following example illustrates the traditional account of integrating new information  in accord with minimal change. 
example 1  exclusive disjunctive update  leslie 	and 
robin are two students who share an apartment above your's. while they get along  they are independent and have 
    also affiliated with national ict australia and the arc centre of excellence in autonomous systems. 
their own circles of friends. you initially believe that for the upcoming weekend neither will be in the apartment  say 
 however  come the weekend you hear muted but unmistakable sounds of domestic activity. you modify 
your beliefs minimally to account for this new information  and consequently you conclude just that one of them has not gone away for the weekend  i.e.  
to be sure  this result is not dictated by the standard postulates but it seems to be the most plausible minimal change  given the information available; as well  this phenomenon recurs in the standard distance-based approaches to update  e.g.   winslett  1    as well as in the belief revision counterparts. the next example illustrates that these results aren't necessarily desirable all the time. 
example 1  inclusive disjunctive update  there are two rooms in a warehouse  on the left and on the right. let i and r denote the fact that the respective rooms are not empty. there are a number of boxes outside the warehouse but the rooms are initially empty  and so  it subsequently be-
gins to rain  and the boxes are moved inside. one concludes 
just that the rooms are not empty  i.e.  
this example apparently violates the principle of minimal change. as well it conflicts with the aforecited distance-based approaches  which dictate that the result be  that all the boxes are in one room or the other. 
　the idea here is that for a revision  or update  by a formula  exactly  is to be incorporated into the knowledge base. consider k *  pv q . if the idea is that all we know about p and q is that p v q is true  then we would want the possible combinations of truth values {p  q}  and to 
be considered possible  and so be consistent with this sense is reminiscent of gricean conversational implicature  grice  1  wherein a speaker is required to be maximally informative. thus if a listener is told that p v q is true  then the communicator does not know which of p  q are true; if they did  they would have conveyed the stronger information to the listener. a similar notion has been studied by levesque  and lakemeyer and levesque  see  lakemeyer and levesque  1   dealing with  only-knowing  or  onlyknowing about . these concepts arise in autoepistemic default reasoning where one may want to assert that all an agent  ---  is material biconditional and = is logical equivalence. 

poster papers 	1 

knows is or all that an agent knows about  techni-
cally in our approach this will amount to the result of a belief change being a conservative extension  section 1  of the formula to be incorporated in the knowledge base. 
1 preliminaries 
we consider a finitary propositional language  over a set of atoms  or propositional letters  p = {a 1  c ...}  truth-functional connectives and and truthfunctional constants t and interpretations and models are defined in the standard way; m is the set of interpretations of denotes the set of models of sentence over language the subscript may be dropped if the 
language is clear. for we will define  the language in which is expressed  as comprising the minimum set of atoms required to express  see  parikh  1  . thus 
this extends to sets of sen-
tences in the obvious way. it follows that if 	then and if 	then 	 
　we will make use of the notion of a conservative extension of one set of sentences by another. 
definition 1 for sets of sentences 	we have 
that t'1 is a conservative extension of t1 iff for every  then  
intuitively t1 is a conservative extension of t1 iff t1 extends y  but tells us nothing more about sentences that are in the language of t1. t1 may entail sentences in its extended language of course but as far as the language which it shares with t1 is concerned  it says no more than t1 
　a common approach in addressing belief revision has been to provide a set of rationality postulates for belief change functions. the agm approach  gardenfors  1  provides the best-known set of such postulates. the goal is to describe belief change at the knowledge level  that is on an abstract level  independent of how beliefs are represented and manipulated. belief states are modelled by sets of sentences  called belief sets  closed under logical consequence. k can be seen as a partial theory of the world. for belief set k and formula is the deductive closure of the expan-
sion of k by expansion is intended to be applied when new information is consistent with current beliefs. is the 
inconsistent belief set  
　in belief revision  the new information may be inconsistent with the reasoner's beliefs and needs to be incorporated in a consistent manner where possible. see  gardenfors  
1  for the revision postulates. we will make reference to grove's use of a system of spheres  sos  model for characterizing agm revision  grove  1 . a system of spheres centred on x is a total  well-founded preorder on the set of interpretations  in ♀ such that for x  m we have that: x x iff x y for all y  m.  that is  x is the least set of worlds in the preorder.  we will often omit the for readability. revision is defined for 
 1  
　　　　　denotes the minimal models under grove shows that for every belief revision operator satisfying the agm postulates there is a system of spheres characterising that operator  and vice versa. 
1 conservative belief revision 
we use  to denote the type of belief revision described in section 1  called  conservative belief revision  or  crevision.  the idea we wish to capture is that  for is exactly what will be believed in the resulting knowledge base  relative to the  subject matter  or  context  implicit 
so for the idea is that  p v q   a r constrains the truth values of the atoms in {p  q  r}  and that exactly  will be known about these atoms in the re-
 sulting knowledge base. in particular  strengthenings of p v q  such as p or  will not be true in the resulting knowledge base. this will be the case even when k implies p or  hence a revision may in fact yield a weakening 
of the knowledge base. this restriction does not necessarily hold for the sentences not in  
　the semantic intuition behind our proposal is easily visualised. in figure 1 we consider a revision where the underlying language is generated from atoms x  y and z. the agent believes  and encounters e v i d e n c e a c c o r d - ingly the models are partitioned into four cells corresponding to the interpretations over the best worlds from each of the three cells satisfying are chosen to represent the revised knowledge base. clearly  the belief content of the new knowledge base modulo will be exactly beliefs regarding will depend on extralogical factors  namely the plausibility of different worlds. 

figure 1: conservative revision - semantics 
now  in determining c-revision  we consider the plausibility of different worlds represented in figure 1 by the concentric  rings . the worlds that are more centrally located are more plausible. accordingly  from the cell  the world  is selected  whereas worlds and are selected from the cells and respectively. since some of these selected worlds satisfy z and some under this plausibility ordering the belief z is lost. in fact  the new beliefs regarding z can be captured by the beliefs x z and that are retained from the old knowledge base.  
　we can formalize this analogously to grove's system of spheres model for characterizing agm revision. given  1   we have the analogous definition for c-revision: 

1 	poster papers the overall result is captured by the following theorem: 
theorem 1 for any belief set k and input sentence  is a conservative extension of  i.e.  for  
we obtain the following elementary results. theorem 1 

this gives rise to the question of whether a specific c-revision function can be captured using the standard definition of revision  1  in some suitably-constructed system of spheres. in general the answer is negative; for a counterexample  consider where and we are given a c-revision function such that and in which 
this entails the following constraints on the ordering: 
however  as is easily verified in this case  
this however cannot be obtained by standard revision given the above constraints on the ordering  since it would require  at the same level. 
　while a given system of spheres determines a unique crevision  as constructed by  1    the converse in general does not hold. the following example demonstrates this. 
represent an identical subsequence. the c-revision based on these sos's  using definition 1  exhibit identical behaviour since no cell of any partition based on a sub-language of {x  y  z} will pick up exactly the set  
thus we notice an asymmetry between the classical agm account of belief revision and c-revision. an agm revision operation *  given a fixed belief set k  determines a unique system of spheres. on the other hand  the c-revision operation  given a fixed belief set a'  corresponds to a class of systems of spheres. it is of interest to characterise the class of systems of spheres that a given c-revision operation  determines. however  we leave this to future work. 
we consider next those postulates satisfied by c-revision. 
theorem 1 let k be a belief set  	and let 	be defined via  1   then * satisfies the following properties: 

the numbering is intended to reflect correspondences with the agm revision postulates. postulate is new and states that is a conservative extension of since crevision behaves the same as  standard  agm-style  revision if the formulas involved in a revision are equivalent to sets of literals  agm postulates 1 and 1 hold in c-revision if  and  are equivalent to conjunctions of literals. 
there are counterexamples to other agm postulates. 
1 conclusion 
we have outlined a theory of conservative belief change and presented an analysis of its properties. the main intuitive motivation for this work stems from an attempt to make the most of the information presented by new evidence that a reasoner acquires. as such  our approach focuses much more on the content of the new evidence. our current analysis suggests that the operator we introduced based on these intuitions possesses some interesting and appealing properties. 
　with respect to semantics  the distinction between standard agm revision and c-revision is very much analogous to the distinction between revision and update  and in fact the two distinctions may be seen as duals of each other. for an  agm  revision   we consider the set of all models of k  and revise by selecting the closest models of to that set. for an update   we consider instead each model of a' individually  and for each model of a' look for the closest models of the update is the union of all such models. analogous to 
update  for a c-revision   we consider each model of  and revise a' by this model; the c-revision is the 
union of all such models. in a similar way in which we motivate c-revision from standard revision  we can define a notion of c-update from standard update. this duality between cand standard belief change on the one hand  and between revision and update on the other  completes a classification of belief change operators  in terms of whether the models of a knowledge base or formula for change are considered en masse  or individually. it is also relatively straightforward to define syntax-dependent versions of both c-revision and cupdate. also we can look at c-contraction operations  both syntax-independent and dependent versions . however we leave this to future work. 
