  
churn-jung liau 
institute of information science 
academia sinica  taipei  1  taiwan liaucj  iis.sinica.edu.tw 

　arbitration is the process of settling a conflict between two or more persons liberatore and schaerf  1; revesz  1; 1 . the first version of the arbitration operator between knowledge bases is proposed in  revesz  1  via the socalled model-fitting operators. the postulates for modelfitting operators and the corresponding semantic characterization are presented. arbitration is defined as a special kind of model-fitting operators. 
　in  revesz  1   the arbitration operator is further generalized to make it applicable to weighted knowledge bases. a set of postulates is also directly used in characterizing the arbitration between a weighted knowledge base and a regular knowledge base. a weighted knowledge base in  revesz  1  is defined as a mapping  from model sets to nonnegative real numbers and a regular knowledge base is just a finite set of prepositional sentences. a generalized loyal assignment is then defined as a function that assigns to each weighted knowledge base a pre-order  between prepo-
sitional sentences so that some conditions are satisfied for the pre-orders. finally  the arbitration of a weighted knowledge base by a regular knowledge base is defined as 
where 	is the set of 	minimal sentences in 
　　however  this kind of arbitration is obviously syntaxdependent. for example  if and are two prepositional sentences such that then  
even though the two knowledge 
bases 	and 	are semantically equivalent. 
　an alternative  seemingly more natural characterization for arbitration is given in  liberatore and schaerf  1  without resorting to model-fitting operators. a knowledge base in that work is identified with a set of prepositional models. thus the semantic characterization for this kind of arbitration is given by assigning to each subset of models a a binary relation  over the set of model sets that satisfies the following conditions  the subscript is omitted when it means all binary relations of the form  : 

then the arbitration between two sets of models a and b is defined as 
 1  
note that although the relationship is defined between sets of models  in the definition for arbitration  only between singletons is used. thus by slightly abusing the notation   may also denote an ordering between models. 
　while arbitration is originally proposed for the merging of knowledge bases  it is also applicable in multi-agent systems. in particular  we can apply it to the reasoning about belief fusion of multiple agents. epistemic logic is an important framework for reasoning about knowledge or belief of agentslfagin et al.  1   so the incorporation of arbitration operators into epistemic logic will facilitate its application to belief fusion. 
　to incorporate the arbitration operator of  liberatore and schaerf  1  into epistemic logic  we must first note that according to  1   the arbitration is commutative but not necessarily associative. therefore  the arbitration operator should be a binary one between two agents. we can directly add a class of modal operators for arbitration into epistemic logic. however  to be more expressive  we will also consider the interaction between arbitration and other epistemic operators  so we define the set of arbitration expressions over the agents recursively as the smallest set containing and closed under the binary operators +  .  and here + and   correspond respectively to the distributed belief and the socalled  everybody knows  operators in multi-agent epistemic logic fagin et al.  1 . 
let c denote the language of our logic. the alphabet of 
♀ consists of a countable set  = {p  q  r ...} of atomic propositions  the prepositional constants   falsum or falsity constant  and   verum or truth constant   the binary boolean operator v  or   the unary boolean operator  not   a set ag = {1 ...  n} of agents  the set of arbitration ex-

pressions over ag  and the auxiliary symbols                 t . and    . 
　the set of well-formed formulas wffs  of c is the smallest set containing  and closed under boolean operators and the following rule: 
1 	poster papers 

  if is a wff and a is an arbitration expression  then is a wff. 
　as usual  other classical boolean connectives  and    implication   and   equivalence  can be defined as abbreviations. also  we will write  as the abbreviation for 
 note that it has been shown that the only associative arbitration satisfying postulates 1 and 1 of  liberatore and schaerf  1  is = a b  so if is an associative arbitration satisfying those postulates  then is reduced to  which is  in turn  equivalent to  for the semantics  a possible model is a tuple 

where 
  w is a set of possible worlds  
  each 	is a serial binary relation over wl  
  is a truth assignment  and 
  is a function assigning to each subset of possible worlds a a binary relation satisfying 
the five conditions for the definition of arbitration operator. 
note that the first two conditions imply that  is a pre-order over 1w. for each arbitration expression  we can define the 
 1  
 1  
 1  
　when the arbitration expression a is a single agent index  the formula corresponds to in epistemic logic  which means that the agent a knows or believes we can also abbreviate as  g  where g - corresponds to the distributed knowl-
edge formula 	of  fagin et al.  1   which means that the combined knowledge of agents in g implies ip. 
　since the set of possible worlds w may be infinite in our logic  the minimal models in  1  may not exist  so we define coherent models as those satisfying the limit assumption arlo-costa and shapiro  1  for each binary relations  such that a w: for any nonempty u is nonempty. 
　an axiomatic system for coherent models is presented in figure 1  where a  b  and c are meta-variables for arbitration expressions  i is for agent  and are for wffs  and g1 and g1 are for groups of agents. axioms  f - l  correspond to the postulates 1 of  liberatore and schaerf  1  and the limit assumption is needed for the soundness of axioms  i  and  1 . though the completeness of such a system is not yet proved  this brief presentation has shown that the modal logic approach can provide a framework for integrating epistemic reasoning and different knowledge merging operators at the object logic level. 
l
a binary relation r over w is called serial if it satisfies: 

1. axioms: 

1. rules of inference: 
 a  modus ponens mp : 

 b  necessitation nec : 

figure 1: an axiomatic system for the logic of arbitration 
acknowledgments 
we would like to thank two anonymous referees for their helpful comments. 
