 
this paper describes a logic-based framework for interpretation of sequences of scenes captured by a stereo vision system of a mobile robot. an algorithm for anchoring and interpretation of such sequences is also proposed. 
1 introduction 
in this work we extend the logic-based spatial reasoning system for scene interpretation proposed in  santos and shanahan  1  and develop an algorithm that encodes the interpretation process. this algorithm also accounts for the process whereby mappings between logical symbols and sensor data are built up and maintained over time. this is an aspect of the so-called symbol anchoring problem  coradeschi and saffiotti  1 . 
　this paper assumes a stereo vision system embedded in a mobile robot as the source of data about the world. a symbolic representation of the sensor data from the vision system is constructed assuming a horizontal slice of each snapshot. a horizontal slice is  in effect  a 1d depth profile of the scene before the robot  taken at a particular height. within these depth profiles  peaks occur that are caused by nearby objects or collections of objects  these peaks are called depth peaks. the size and disparity values of single depth peaks  the distance between pairs of peaks and the transitions that occur in these attributes through consecutive pairs of profiles are the building blocks for our spatial reasoning theory. 
　within this framework scene understanding is understood as a process of hypothesising the existence and the dynamic relationships between physical objects  and between physical objects and the observer  assuming temporally ordered sequences of depth profiles. this process recalls sensor data assimilation as abduction first proposed in  shanahan  1   in fact the initial motivation for the present research was to propose a new qualitative background theory about space-time within this framework by using notions from qualitative spatial reasoning theories such as  randell et al.  1 . 
* supported by capes. 
1 depth profiles 
this work assumes sequences of depth profiles as temporally ordered snapshots of the world. a sketch of a depth profile is shown in figure lb. 

figure 1: a  two objects a  b noted from a robot's viewpoint v  b  depth profile  relative to the viewpoint v in a  representing the objects a and b respectively by the peaks p and q. 
　the axis disparity in depth profiles is constrained by the furthest point that can be noted by the robot's sensors  this limiting value is represented by l in these charts  figure lb . in fact  l is determined by the specification of the robot's sensors. 
　differences in the size  and/or disparity  of peaks and transitions of the size  disparity  of a peak in a sequence of profiles encode information about dynamical relations between objects in the world and between the objects and the observer. this is the initial insight upon which the scene interpretation system proposed in this paper is based. the next section presents some relations that represent transitions in depth profiles. 
1 relations on depth profile transitions 
this work assumes a relation 
for short  representing that there is a peak p assigned to the physical body b with respect to the viewpoint v. in this work we are dealing with the viewpoint of a single robot  therefore we abbreviate  to p-o p  b . the relation p o/1 
plays a similar role of the predicate grounding relation defined in  coradeschi and saffiotti  1 . 
　assuming that the symbols a and b represent physical bodies  p and q depth peaks  and t a time point  

1 	poster papers 

the following relations are investigated in this paper: extending p-o p b  t   states that the disparity value of a peak p is increasing at time t  shrinking p-o p b  t   states that the disparity value of a peak p is decreasing at time t; approaching p-o p a  p-o qib  t   represents that two peaks p and q are approaching each other at time t; receding p o jp a  p-o q b  i   states that two peaks p and q are receding each other at time t; coalescing p o p a  p o q b  t   states that two peaks p and q arc coalescing at time t;  states the case of one peak 
splitting into two distinct peaks p and q at time t. these relations are hypotheses assumed to be possible explanations for transitions in the attributes of a peak  or set of peaks . 
　similarly to  santos and shanahan  1   the relations described above can be connected to descriptions of transitions on sensor data and  further  to relations about changes in the robot environment by means of sets of axioms. due to space restrictions  however  we do not present axioms for these relations. 
informally  	and 
to the event of an object a occluding an object 1 and of a appearing from behind b. therefore  once a hypothesis on peak transition has been obtained  a relative hypothesis on objects in the world can be inferred from the appropriate axiom stating this connection. this is a central idea underlying our solution for anchoring. in fact  this solution assumes processes of explanation and expectation as described in the following sections. 
1 sensor data assimilation 
following the ideas proposed in  shanahan  1  and  santos and shanahan  1   the task of the abductive process for sensor data assimilation is to infer the relations described in section 1 as hypotheses given a description  observation  of the sensor data in terms of depth peaks transitions. more formally  assuming that  is a description  in terms of depth profiles  of a sequence of stereo images  and is a background theory comprising axioms connecting the relations in section 1 to sensor data transitions and to changes in the robot's environment  the task of assimilation as abduction is to find a set of formulae such that 

1 expectation 
expected peak transitions are suggested by the conceptual neighbourhood diagram  cnd  of the relations described in section 1  shown in figure 1. 
　given an abduced explanation for a transition on a pair of peaks  the expected future relations involving these peaks are the neighbours of this transition in the diagram in figure 1. as this process generates multiple competing expectations  only those that are verified by further sensor data lead to the 
   'for brevity  we are omitting from this diagram the relations extending/1 and shrinking/1. 
generation of new predictions. in practice  prediction in this work is  thus  reduced to a table look-up procedure. 

figure 1: conceptual neighbourhood diagram. 
1 image segmentation 
from a practical point of view  horizontal slices defining depth profiles are comprised of a sequence of measurements made by the considered off-the-shelf vision system. each horizontal slice is then segmented into peaks and backgrounds via a simple threshold mechanism on disparity values. this segmentation procedure outputs a sequence of first-order terms of the form: peak  lb  disp  size  and background  lbl  lb1   displ sizel   where lb  
lb1 and lb1 are variables for p-o/1 terms labelling peaks. in particular lbl and lb1 are the labels of the peaks bounding the background segment; disp and size are the values of disparity and size of the peak lb; and  displ and sizel are the disparity and size values of the background segment labelled  lbl  lb1 . if it is the case that a background is bounded by one of the end points of a depth profile  borders of the field of view   a corresponding symbol is assigned to compose its label. in other words  in such cases  either the symbol borderleft or borderright are part of the pair defining the label of a background segment. 
　subsequent pairs of horizontal-slice descriptions are input to an algorithm that provides the appropriate interpretation in terms of the dynamic relations discussed in section 1. this algorithm is summarised in the next section. 
1 the anchoring and interpretation algorithm 
this section describes an algorithm for interpretation and anchoring  so called a&i algorithm  that works by matching peak segments in consecutive pairs of profile descriptions that are depicting the same object in the world. each profile description is comprised of a finite number of segments peak and background  which are provided by the segmentation routine described in the previous section. 
　in order to describe the a&i algorithm let pi and pz+1 be one consecutive pair of profiles  we assume that pi has n segments and p +i has m. in this section we denote a segment r in a profile k by sk r thus  pi and pi+1 can be denoted as: 
and  	
　let pred and int be initially empty lists containing  respectively  a set of predictions and a set of interpretations 

poster papers 	1 

for the profile pair we assume also a symbol o denoting a physical body. 
　for every subsequent pair of profile descriptions the algorithm's task is to match pairs of segments in that depict the same object in the world. the segments are considered from left to right in the profile descriptions  starting with the first pair of segments  the algorithm is summarised as follows. 
begin:  a & j algorithm  
while  pi and p i + 1 are non-empty  
1. if  are peak segments; then 
 a  if si j is bound to a term then assign the term p~o r  o  to the label of  
 b  else  create two new terms 	and 
and assign them respectively to the labels of and  
 c  compare the size and disparity measurements in both segments and put into int the appropriate interpretation according to the relations extending and shrinking  in section 1; 
 d  from these interpretations and the conceptual neighbourhood diagram in figure 1 obtain the predicted predicates and insert them into pred;  e  return the next pair of segments:  
1. if 	and 	are background segments; then 
 a  unify their labels; 
 b  compare the sizes of  and consider the difference between these values  which gives the difference in the distance between the two peaks bounding 
 c  interpret this difference in terms of the relations approaching and receding  and insert the appropriate interpretation into int; 
 d  from this interpretation and the cnd in figure 1 insert the relative predictions into pred;  e  return the next pair of segments:  
1. if si j is a background segment and  is a peak segment then check in the prediction set pred whether the two peaks bounding si j have been expected to be coalescing or splitting  
 a  if so  assume this expectation as explanation for si j and si+1 r inserting it into int. execute the appropriate unifications on peak variables and terms p-o/1 as explained in step la and lb. then  obtain the predicted predicates  inserting them into 
pred. return the pair  to be considered for interpretation; 
 b  else explain away the peak si j as noise and assume the pair for interpretation; 
1. if 	is a peak segment and 	a background segment then proceed analogously to the previous case. 
end while. 
  if p{ is empty  get the next pair of profile descriptions 

  else  if is empty but pi is not  then explain away the remaining peak segments in pi and consider the next 
pair of profile descriptions 
the while loop above is repeated until there are no more depth profile descriptions. end. 
　informally  the algorithm above considers consecutive pairs of depth profile descriptions as lists. pairs of elements from these lists are compared and a match for peak segments is obtained according to the expected transitions in depth profiles. the result of this process is the interpretation of peak transitions  which are related to changes in the objects depicted by peaks. 
　the algorithm main processing is the while loop that considers  in pairs  every segment in the depth profile descriptions. the running time of this algorithm is  thus  linear on the size of the list: containing these descriptions. however  as the number of segments in these lists is related to the number of objects depicted by the considered depth profiles  and there are only a finite number of objects in each scene  the asymptotic upper bound of this algorithm is 1 . 
1 conclusion 
this paper presents a new step towards an abductive framework for sensor data interpretation of sequences of stereovision images obtained by a mobile robot's vision system. we proposed a symbolic representation of the stereovision data based on depth profiles obtained from horizontal slices of snapshots of the world. these profiles encode information about objects in the world as peaks. each profile was  then  segmented into first-order statements that were input of an algorithm whose task was to unify pairs of segments  providing the interpretation for the occurred transition in depth peaks. 
　further research has to consider two main open issues in this framework. first  we have to develop of a qualitative theory about object's shape from multiple horizontal slices of a scene. this theory would enhance the representation of the environment and  therefore  improve the capabilities of the reasoning system. a second issue is the development reasoning modules capable of explaining away noise patches in the image sequences according to common-sense knowledge about the world and about the sensor's limitations. 
