 
this paper summarizes a probabilistic approach for localizing people through the signal strengths of a wireless ieee 1 lb network. our approach uses data labeled by ground truth position to learn a probabilistic mapping from locations to wireless signals  represented by piecewise linear gaussians. it then uses sequences of wireless signal data  without position labels  to acquire motion models of individual people  which further improves the localization accuracy. the approach has been implemented and evaluated in an office environment. 
1 introduction 
this paper addresses the problem of localizing people using a 
wireless network. various researchers have recently developed techniques using the signal strength of ieee 1 lb access points for people localization 1; 1; 1; 1; 1. in doing so  these techniques require measurement data labeled by the position at which the data was acquired. 
　our approach builds on this idea  but augments it by a learned probabilistic motion model of people. the data used for training the motion model is acquired as people walk through the environment. we employ the em algorithm to train the resulting hidden markov model. 
1 signal strength maps from labeled data 
at the most basic level  our approach acquires a map of the wireless signal strength at different locations in the environment. for that  it requires the availability of signal strength measurements labeled by the true position. our implementation represents this map by a piecewise linear gaussian  that follows the  mostly  one-dimensional manifold of the center of each corridor in the building. figure 1 illustrates the signal strength measurements for one of the access points in our test building. the measurement noise is modeled as a gaussian  whose covariance is estimated from the data using the maximum likelihood estimator. 
1 probabilistic localization 
the signal strength map is sufficient to coarsely localize people. following   our approach implements a continuousstate hidden markov model  hmm   in which the person's position is the internal state  and the signal strengths are the measurements. the signal strength map provides the measurement probabilities of the hmm. the next state transition  or motion model  may be as simple as a probabilistic model of brownian motion; a more sensible choice will be discussed below. 
　our approach uses this hmm to track the location of the person  by calculating an approximate posterior. this is achieved using the well-known monte carlo localization algorithm   1  a variant of particle filters 1 . 
1 motion models from unlabeled data 
the principal limitation of the approach thus far is its reliance on labeled data. such data is difficult to collect  as it requires an independent means for generating correct position labels when carrying a wireless receiver through a building. our approach specifically addresses the use of unlabeled data. such data is acquired as people walk through the building. 
　this unlabeled data consists of signal measurements without a pose estimate. we use this data to learn a motion model of a person. this motion model is realized by mixtures of gaussians that characterize the relative change of position within a fixed time interval  each linear sub-piece of the signal strength map possesses its own gaussian mixture; in this way  the approach can learn location-specific predictions of people's motion. the motivation to use a gaussian mixture model arises from the fact that people often engage in one out of a small number of different motions  e.g.  turning left or right at an intersection; see figure 1 . in our approach  the number of gaussians is fixed  as is their variance. our approach learns the means of the gaussians and the mixture weights as a function of people's location. 
　learning from unlabeled data is achieved using the em algorithm  see 1; 1; 1 for related work . beginning with an initial motion model  position probabilities are computed based on the signal strength  using the particle filter described above. these position probabilities are then used to calculate a distribution over the mixture components of the gaussian  and subsequently to calculate the mean and new mixture weights. this methodology is a straightforward application of the em algorithm  assuming that both a person's pose and the index of the gaussian mixture are latent variables . in our implementation  we bias the initial motion model  before learning  towards typical motions people might take  such as going forward  turning left or right  and standing in place. 
1 experimental results 
systematic experimental results were conducted in an office environment equipped with approximately 1.1b wireless access points  distributed over an area of size 1 by 1 

poster papers 	1 


figure 1: access point strength as a function of measured location. 


figure 1: an example motion model. clearly visible are some of the modes induces by the different actions a person may take. 
meters. on average  five access points are within communication range of each location in the environment. 
　all labeled data was acquired by using a laser range finder for localization  similar to work in mobile robotics 1 . a set of labeled data was collected by simply walking about the environment  traversing each corridor at least three times in each direction  along the center  left  and right of the hallway . we also collected a large set of unlabeled training data by traversing paths characteristic of the movements of an individual  all paths originated or terminated at a specific office . finally  we collected an independent test set with labels. 
　figure 1 shows a key result  obtained for 1 particles. this figure shows the cumulative probability function over the average localization error from our labeled test set for different techniques. the top blue curve corresponds to the combined labeled-unlabeled data approach described above  utilizing the learned mixture models. the green dashed curve reflects the performance of the same system with no learning; all mixture weights are uniform. the red dot-dashed curve represents the performance of a pure brownian motion model  rather than a mixture of gaussians. 
　a localization error of 1 meters is achieved 1% of the time when only using the labeled data. this number appears to be well in tune with results reported in  while requiring a factor of 1 less labeled training data. this error is reduced by 1% as the motion model is trained with the unlabeled data. this illustrates the relative improvement that can be achieved by adding unlabeled measurements to the pool of training data. 

figure 1: cumulative probability versus error in meters. 
