network meta-reasoning for information assurance in mobile agent systems 
	donovan artz 	max peysakhov 	william regli 
department of computer science 
drexel university 
philadelphia  pa 1 

1 introduction 
this paper develops a practical means of measuring information assurance for mobile agent systems operating on wireless  ad hoc networks based on meta-reasoning  dix et ai  1; xuan et al  1  to improve the security of communication. figure 1 shows an agent system and its two distinct layers of communication: host-to-host and agent-toagent. given the plethora of new techniques for identifying network intruders  we study the compromised host problem: determining the appropriate response to an identified intruder. in the context of a mobile  multi-agent system operating on an ad hoc network  forman & zahorjan  1   it is not merely a simple matter of removing the compromised hosts and its agents. while keeping the compromised host can result in information disclosure  removal of the host can degrade or even sever the network. wc develop a state description for an agent system and introduce a measure of* information assurance for the system in terms of the integrity of the messages delivered to the agents in a given network state. agents have three responses to a compromised host: ignore the compromised host; reroute around the compromised host using network route redundancies; or remove the compromised host  by having the agents instruct their hosts to eliminate it from the network. these responses are shown in figure 1. 
1 technical formulation 
a state description for a mobile agent network is defined in terms of sets of hosts  h  and agents  .1 . given h and a  we can define: 

figure 1: nodes are either physical hosts or agents; edges are network host or agent-to-agent connections. the shaded node is a compromised host. the bold arrow is a safe network route; the dashed arrow is a compromised network route. 

1 evaluation of an agent system network 
we model the information assurance level in an agent network by analyzing how agents communicate. observe that agents must send messages to other agents in order to collaborate in any decision procedure. in a decision procedure  typically certain agents are authorities that collate voting messages from all other agents involved in the decision. in the context of th  any host housing an agent involved in at least 

one decision procedure authority is a sink in the network topology graph into which messages flow. for a simple decision  there may be only one sink; in the most complex case  all hosts are sinks. this paper will assume the most complex case  in which all hosts are housing decision authority agents. 
　for any decision procedure  messages sent to the decision authority can be classified into successful messages and failed messages. a successful message is delivered without using the compromised host. a failed message either:  1  originates or ends at the compromised host;  1  is routed through the compromised host; or  1  cannot be routed because no network route exists. 
for a given tv  a change in 1// can could cause a change 
poster papers 	1 


figure 1: responses to compromised hosts:  a  ignore   b  reroute;  c  remove. 

in routing. if a route changes  the time taken to transmit a message over that route may also change. a change in message delivery time can negatively impact a decision procedure. moreover  a compromised host contains agents that may violate their expected behavior in a decision procedure. both factors must be considered when evaluating a state tv. 
wc define two values that can be used to evaluate tv with respect to each factor: 
1. a message integrity rating  which relates successful messages received to failed messages. 
1. a time rating  which is an estimate of optimality for the current network routes. 
measuring message assurance. if each agent is in communication with all of the other agents    is the total number of messages that the 
agents on host hi expect to receive from agents on other hosts per unit of time given state tv. based on the current routes 
one can calculate the number of successful messages received on host the message integrity rating for host h1 
note  as mi increases  the 
integrity of messages sent to host hi also increases. when all messages sent to are successful  mi= 1. when all messages sent to fail  = 1. the mean message integrity rating over the entire mobile agent network in state tv 
is:  
measuring network routing efficiency. the trade off is between message integrity and the timeliness of message delivery. network routing algorithms find sets of routes that minimize some value for all routes in a network. in general  routing algorithms use a weight function on each route and find the shortest  single source  paths to all vertices in th. in this context  the function p represents the network routing algorithm which returns a set of shortest path routes for the set of hosts  given their current physical network topology:  where w is the edge weight fiinction. there are several schemes that can be used to weight routes in wireless  ad hoc networks  royer & toh  1   all of which can be approximated or bounded using a w that returns a value proportional to the time required to transmit a message through the network. the units of time returned by w are used for relative comparison of network routes  which we normalize w to simplify computations: w :tz   1   h|   where  = |h| signifies that the route from host ht to h1 is non-existent and weight of the longest possible route is  h  - 1. now we can define a time rating  ti for the network routes used by host h% as: ti = note  as tt increases  the routing efficiency to host hi decreases. when the routing efficiency is minimized  i.e.  no connections exist  for a host  = 1. as the routing efficiency increases  i.e.  shorter routes are used  for host hi  ti approaches 1. 
hence  the mean time rating for the entire mobile agent net-

assurance for whole mobile agent network. a linear combination of message integrity rating and time rating defines a utility function assessing a mobile agent network in state tv in terms of both assurance and routing efficiency: 
		 1  
a is a coefficient between 1 and 1 that determines the balance between assurance and network performance. if - 1  only message integrity is considered; if - 1  only time efficiency is considered. note that v : tv  1 1   where v tv  = 1 is the best possible result. 
1 	operators on an agent system network 
using equation 1  agents can decide how to operate on their network. naturally  the ignore operator does nothing. the reroute operator generates a new set of network routes  using only safe routes wherever possible. if vr'is the set of safest possible routes  the resulting mobile agent network 
= is generated using the reroute operator on tv  figure 1 b  . given the routing algorithm p and route weight function w  the following algorithm can be used to compute tv'; 
algorithm 1 	reroute n hc  

   the remove operator results in the complete removal of the compromised host from participation in the agent system's underlying network. the new mobile agent network   is the result of applying the removal 
1 	poster papers operator on tv and is generated by the following algorithm: 

　in order to select the operator resulting in the highest valued agent system  consider the values v{n   v n'   and v n  . the highest of these values represents the best action for the agent system. 
1 application: a compromised auction 
the disclosure of bids to a compromised host can affect the intended  timely  outcome of an auction. a vickrey auction is a sealed bid auction where the second highest bid is paid by the highest bidder  vickrey  1 . all bidders maximize their payoff if they employ a truthful bidding strategy. agents often use vickrey auctions to acquire resources. each agent submits its bid to an auctioneer host hi  the sink -but unless the physical host of a bidding agent is directly connected to h1  the message containing the bid must pass through other hosts in the agent system. all agents operating under normal conditions have neither the intent nor the capability of reading bids that are routed through their physical hosts. 

figure 1: bid propagation to host h  in a vickrey auction:  a  h1 and h1 bid  b  h1 and h1 bid  c  h1 and h.1 bid  d  h1 bids 
　first  a compromised host  hc can read all bids that are sent directly to or routed by means of hc and potentially corrupt the auction. in this case  instead of maximizing absolute payoff  the bidding agents on hc maximize their payoff relative to other bidding agents. in this type of  antisocial bidding   brandt & weiss  1   assuming there are n bidding agents in the agent system  hc most successful if it knows all bids 1i  b1 ...  bn placed by all of the other bidding agents. the worst case is when all physical hosts use routes that contain hc. in general this is not the case. hence  if there are n' hosts that use routes containing hc  the probability that the highest  or any  bid is disclosed to hc is equal to  
　secondly  time is an issue: auctioneers are not willing to wait indefinitely for all bidders to respond. in any given decision problem there is some threshold  t  such that  if a bidder is more than hops from the auctioneer  its bid will not reach the auctioneer in time. let be the set of all hosts that communicate with host hi via a route longer than r hops:  may contain hosts 
that use a route containing the compromised host. to adjust for this overlap  compute the set ct of hosts affected by the 
operator m t v n  c1/n u1/n ignore 
reroute remove 1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 table 1: the terms and result of v n  using = 1  the probability of compromised messages   and the probability of unreceived messages  for the result of each operator. 
compromised host  but not by the required message delivery time:  
　the disclosure of bids to a compromised host during this decision procedure is illustrated in figure 1. assume for timing that r - 1. in this example  the probability  is representative of the effect of compromised messages  and the probability  is representative of the effect of time. as either probability increases  the value of the underlying mobile agent system should decrease. 
　table 1 demonstrates how v n  can be used to minimize the effect of a compromised host in a vickrey auction. as the probability of compromised messages increases  the message integrity rating decreases. as the probability of unreceived messages increases  the time rating also increases. the operator yielding the highest value in this example is reroute. 
1 conclusions 
this paper developed a utility-based model for agents to balance information assurance and network routing efficiency. we have discovered that there exists a natural tradeoff between information assurance and network routing efficiency for ad hoc mobile agent networks. further  by empowering agents to decide for themselves how they communicate at the network level  one can increase the overall level of message integrity in an agent system. our approach involves a novel exploitation of properties of ad hoc networks  enabling mobile agents to automatically adapt to changes that affect the security of their communication and migration. the capability to dynamically reason about the state of their network will provides new possibilities for secure computing. 
