bidding marginal utility in simultaneous auctions 
amy greenwald 
department of computer science 
brown university  box 1 
providence  ri 1 amy cs.brown.edu 

　one of the key challenges autonomous bidding agents face is to determine how to bid on complementary and substitutable goods-i.e.  goods with combinatorial valuations-in simultaneous  or parallel  auctions  sas . complementary goods are goods with superadditive valuations:  substitutable goods are goods with subadditive valuations: 
	the simple bidding strat-
egy  for each good x in auction x  bid its  independent  valuation  is inapplicable in this framework. 
　rather than attempt to reason about the independent valuations of goods  bidding agents that operate in this setting can reason about marginal valuations  or the valuation of a good x relative to a set of goods ar. if an agent holds the goods in ar  it can ask questions such as:  what is the marginal benefit of buying x   or   what is the marginal cost of selling xt to do so  the agent must reason about the set of goods or relative to the set x-the valuations of which arc well-defined. 
　in reasoning about sets of goods bidding agents may pose and solve questions such as the following  greenwald and boyan  1 : 
1.  given only the set of goods i already hold  what is the maximum valuation i can attain  by arranging my individual goods into sets of goods   
1.  given the set of goods i already hold  and given market prices and supply  on what set of additional goods should i place bids so as to maximize my utility: i.e.  valuation less purchase costs   
1.  given the set of goods i already hold  and given market prices  supply  and demand  on what set of goods should i place bids or asks so as to maximize my utility: i.e.  valuation plus proceeds less costs   
the third  and most general  of these problems  which we call completion  provides a foundation for bidding strategies in simultaneous single- and double-sided auctions. the second problem  which we term acquisition  provides a foundation for bidding strategies in singlesided auctions. the first problem  allocation  is a special case of the others in which all goods cost either 1 or oo  and all goods are worth either 1 or  these socalled bid determination problems are formally defined in  greenwald and boyan  1   where it is argued that completion can be reduced to acquisition. 
1 bidding principles 
this paper advocates the following bidding principle for agents participating in simultaneous auctions for complementary and substitutable goods:  coherent  marginal utility bidding: i.e.  bidding marginal utilities on a coherent subset of goods. to validate this principle  we compare two combinatorial bidding strategics inspired by attac  stone el a/.  1  and r o x y b o t  greenwald and boyan  1   two agents in the trading agent competition  tag   see  wellman et al  1  : 
1. one strategy computes the marginal utility of each good independently  much like a t t a c 
1. one strategy computes coherent marginal utilities it solves the acquisition problem before bidding marginal utilities-much like r o x y b o t 
　it is established that approach 1 outperforms approach 1 in certain environments. in a longer version of this paper  we experiment with stochastic versions of these algorithms  and establish that approach 1 also outperforms approach 1 in uncertain environments. the insights gained from this study about the design of autonomous bidding agents are applicable beyond the scope of tag: 
e.g.  ebay is home to numerous sas for complementary 
and substitutable goods. 
1 bidding under certainty 
in constructing bidding policies mappings from goods to prices-for multi-unit sas  such as those that characterize tac  we propose the following natural breakdown of an agent's bidding decisions: 
1. how many copies of each good do i want  
1. for the goods i want  how much am i willing to pay  
　one straightforward approach to answering these questions  which was employed by a t t a c  stone et al  1   is for the agent to skip question 1  and simply compute how much it is willing to pay for each copy of each good. an alternative approach  employed by roxybot  is to explicitly answer question 1 before question 1; in this way  the agent is certain to bid on a  coherent  set of goods: i.e.  a set of goods which together comprise an optimal solution to the acquisition problem. 

poster papers 	1 

　in this short paper  we compare these two approaches under two assumptions:  i  prices are exogenously determined: i.e.  we ignore the impact of agent behaviors on prices; and  ii  prices are known with certainty. these assumptions are clearly applicable when prices are posted. in an auction setting  we interpret these assumptions as follows: the payment rule is  pay the known price;  the winner determination rule is  win by bidding equal to or more than the price.  it is as if an agent is capable of perfectly predicting all other agents' bids  as well as the impact of its own bids on clearing prices. 
　we begin by investigating a t t a c ' s approach. one formula for determining willingness to pay is to compute marginal utilities  mus . this direct mu approach to answering the aforementioned bidding questions explicitly answers only question 1  but implicitly answers question 1: a willingness to pay 1 suggests that an agent wants 1 additional copies of that good. 
　as alluded to earlier  computing mus depends on solving the acquisition problem. let us introduce some notation  and formally define acquisition and mu. let x denote a set of goods; let v x  denote the  combinatorial  valuation of x; let p x  denote the price of a;  x and p x '  finally  let u{x  = v x  -p x  denote the utility of x. 
definition 1 given a set of goods a   a combinatorial valuation function and an exogenous pricing mechanism p : x   an optimal solution to the acquisition problem is a subset x s.t 
 i  
definition 1 given a set of goods x  the marginal utility of good x is defined as follows:  
where 
 1  
and 
 1  
　in words  the marginal utility of good x  relative to the set x  is simply the difference between the utility of 
x  assuming x costs 1  	and the utility of 
x  assuming x costs oo   
　as is evident from the definition of mu  computing marginal utilities requires two calls to a combinatorial optimization solver. if an agent explicitly answers question 1 before question 1  it might determine that it is not necessary to compute marginal utilities for all copies of all goods  although in the worst case it solves one additional optimization problem . r o x y b o t explicitly answers question 1  before question 1  and usually achieves computational savings over direct mu calculation. but the real motivation behind roxybot's approach is that reasoning about individual goods  rather than coherent sets of goods  when valuations are combinatorial  is suboptimal. in the following example  roxybot's approach is optimal  but the direct mu approach is not. 

　the main observations reported in this paper are the following:  i  for all goods x in an optimal acquisition  the price of x does not exceed the marginal utility of x;  ii  for all goods x not in an optimal acquisition  the marginal utility of x does not exceed the price of x. it follows that bidding marginal utilities on precisely those goods in an optimal acquisition is an optimal bidding policy  if prices are exogenous  e.g.  an agent's individual bidding behavior does not impact prices   and prices are known with certainty. 
　roxybot's strategy answers questions 1 and 1 in turn  and bids marginal utilities on all the goods it wants. this strategy is optimal  under our assumptions  by the previous observation. in particular  r o x y b o t wins all the goods it wants by bidding marginal utilities. of course  bidding p x   or  are also optimal policies in this setting. but bidding the marginal utility of good x is a reasonable heuristic  since it is in fact an optimal bidding policy if the prices of all goods other than x are exogenous and certain. 


1 	poster papers 
