a formalization of equilibria for multiagent planning 
michael bowling  rune jensen  and manuela veloso 
computer science department 
carnegie mellon university 
pittsburgh pa  1 

1 introduction 
traditionally  planning involves a single agent for which a planner needs to find a sequence of actions that can transform some initial state into some state where a given goal statement is satisfied. but in general   planning  can be viewed as being concerned with a general action selection problem. the planning framework has been extended from the classical deterministic plan generation problem along many other dimensions  in particular nondeterministic actions. with the introduction of nondeterministic actions  the presence of an environment and other agents can become a consideration. in fact  actions may have nondeterministic effects not only because of the uncertainty of their own execution  but also due to the uncertainty of the actions of other agents. the possible presence of other agents as executors is the challenge of  multiagent planning.  the interest in this area has been steadily increasing and many issues remain open. 
　despite the existence of planning languages with explicit models of uncontrallable agents  jensen and veloso  1   we believe that there has not been a formal discussion of the space of multiagent plans or solutions. in this work  we do not focus on the problem of plan generation for multiagent planning. instead  we focus on the interesting question of analyzing and comparing solutions for multiagent planning. our motivation comes from making an analogy with game theory and the notion of equilibria  owen  1 . 
　inspired by game theory and extending previous formal definitions of single-agent planning  cimatti et al  1   in this paper  we introduce a formal definition of equilibria for multiagent planning. 
1 planning equilibria 
in this section  we formalize the concept of a multiagent planning equilibrium. in order to help make these concepts clear we will first describe an example  which is small enough to easily enumerate all of the states. 
1 	a simple example - the narrow doorway 
consider a two agent robot domain where both agents are in a hallway and want to move into the same room through a single doorway. the agents have an operator to go through the door  g  that only succeeds if the other agent is not also trying to go through the door. they also have the choice of waiting  w . each agent's goal is simply to be in the room. 
1 	the formalization 
we first begin by formalizing some planning related concepts. the definitions parallel closely with cimatti and colleagues' single-agent formalization . we extend their definitions of planning domains  problems  and solutions to encompass multiple agents. we then follow this formal framework with a definition of multiagent planning equilibrium. notice that the definitions and concepts presented are not bound to any particular planning algorithm or language. 
we start by defining a multiagent planning domain. 
definition 1  multiagent planning domain  
a 	multiagent 	planning 	domain 	d 	is 	a 	tuple 

i.e.  each agent's set of actions that can be executed from a state are independent. 
　in addition  let acti s  ai be the set of applicable or executable actions in state s. formally  

the additional condition in the planning domain definition on r requires that each agent be capable of selecting actions independently. formally this amounts to the following. for all states s and executable actions for the agents there exists some transition that is in 1v. 
　in the doorway domain  v contains two propositions  ain-room and b-in-room. the set of states s corresponds to all four possible subsets of p  since all combinations of propositions are valid in this domain  n is two and is the set of actions {g  w}. the transition relation is defined by the rules described above. the complete enumeration of states and transitions is shown in figure 1. the figure also numbers the states so they can be referred to in an abbreviated 

1 	poster papers 


figure 1: doorway domain. a n d r e p r e s e n t as and b s goal states  and   respectively. 
form. note that this domain satisfies the independent action condition on r. 

in the doorway example  the goal states for agent a are 
{1} and for agent b are {1}. the initial state set is the singular set {1}. with this definition of domain and problem  we can now formalize a notion of a plan. 
definition 1  state-action table  
a state-action table 	for agent i in domain v is a set of pairs 
	a joint state-action 	table 
constructed from state-action tables for each agent is the set of pairs 

a  joint  state-action table is complete if and only if for any .s  s there exists some pair  s     in the state-action table. 
   for the doorway domain  a state-action table  or plan  for each agent might be  

these are also complete state-action tables since they specify at least one action for each state. we can combine these tables into a complctcjoint state-action table. in general  a joint state-action table together with a multiagent planning domain determines the entire execution of the system. in order to define what it means for a plan to be a solution to a planning problem we need to formalize the notion of reachability and paths of execution. we will do this by first defining the execution structure of the multiagent system. 

   intuitively  q is the set of states that the system could reach during execution of the plan  and t is the set of transitions that the system could cross during execution. for our doorway domain the execution structure induced by our example 
joint state-action table is  

we can now formalize an execution path. 
definition 1  execution path  
let k =  q  t  be the execution structure induced by a stateaction table from x. an execution path of k from so t is a possibly infinite sequence sq si   .s1 ... of states in q such that  for all states si in the sequence: 
  either si is the last state of the sequence  in which case si is a terminal state of k  or 

a state s' is reachable from a state s if and only if there is an execution path with s1 = s and si = s1. 
　for our doorway domain and example joint state-action table one execution path from the initial state is  

we are now in a position to define what it means for our plan to solve a planning problem. we actually define multiple concepts increasing in strength. these concepts formalize some of the intuitive discussion from the previous section about whether a plan has one or more of the following properties: 
  the possibility of reaching the goal  
  a guarantee of reaching the goal  and 
  a guarantee of reaching the goal in a finite number of steps. 
these concepts and their formalization are inspired and highly related to cimatti and colleagues' single-agent solution concepts  cimatti et al.  1 . 
definition 1  multiagent planning solutions  
let v be a multiagent planning domain and p =  be a multiagent planning problem. let  be a complete joint state-action table for v. let k -  q t  be the execution structure induced by from 1. the following is an ordered list of solution concepts increasing in strength. 
j.  is a weak solution for agent i if and only if for any state in i some state in  is reachable. 

1.  is a strong cyclic solution for agent i if and only if from any state in q some state in  is reachable. 
1.  is a strong solution for agent i if and only i/all execution paths  including infinite length paths  from a state in q contain a state in  
poster papers 	1 


　for our doorway domain  the joint state-action table is a strong cyclic solution for both agents but not strong  i.e.  it has a strength of 1 for both agents . this means that there is a path to the goal from any reachable state. but there are also paths that do not include either agents' goal states  and so it is not a strong solution for either agent. 
　these solutions define what it means for one agent to be successful given a joint state-action table. the goal of planning from one agent's perspective is to find a plan that has the highest strength given the plans of the other agents. but the other agents' selection of a plan is equally contingent upon the first agent's plan. this recursive dependency leads to our main contribution of the paper: planning equilibria. 
definition 1  multiagent planning equilibria  
let v be a multiagent planning domain and v 	-
 be a multiagent planning problem. let  be a complete joint state-action table for v. let k -  q  t  be the execution structure induced by from x. is an equilibrium solution to v if and only if for all agents i and for any complete joint state-action table such that  
i.e.  each agent's state-action table attains the strongest solution concept possible given the state-action tables of the other agents. 
　note that our example joint state-action table for the doorway domain is not an equilibrium. both agents a and b currently have strength 1  but b can achieve a strength of 1 by choosing a different state-action table. specifically  b should select the wait  w  action from the initial state and the go  g  action in state 1. 
　to make the concept of planning equilibria clearer  we illustrate it in the doorway domain. we gave above an example 
joint state-action table that is not a multiagent planning equilibria for this domain. an equilibria is the following stateaction tables: 

in this case agent a goes through the door while agent b waits and then follows through the door. this is a perfect plan for both agents and so obviously no agent can achieve a higher strength with a different state-action table. similarly  the symmetric tables where agent b goes through the door while agent a waits is also an equilibrium. there is an additional equilibrium  

here both agents nondeterministically decide between going through the door and waiting. this results in a strong cyclic solution for both agents  but given this state-action table for the other agent no strong or perfect plan exists for either agent. so this is also an equilibrium although obviously inferior to the other equilibria where both agents have higher strength plans. in game theory  such a joint strategy is called pareto dominated. 
collision variation. consider a variation on this domain where collisions  when both agents choose g  result in the robots becoming damaged and unable to move. in this case  the first two state-action tables above remain equilibria  but the third inferior table no longer is an equilibrium. this joint plan is now only a weak solution for both agents since there is a possibility of never achieving the goal. each agent can also change to a different plan where it waits for the other agent to get through the door thus achieving a strong cyclic plan and a higher strength. 
door closing variation. finally  consider that one agent entering the room sometimes causes the door to close behind it. once the door is closed it cannot be opened and the doorway cannot be used. in this case  the same two joint plans are again an equilibrium but now they have different strengths for the different agents. the first joint state-action table is a 
strong plan for agent a  but only a weak plan for agent b  though it can do no better. the second is just a symmetry of this. 
1 	conclusion 
we presented a formalization of multiagent planning and introduced the concept of a multiagent planning equilibrium. this is the first known solution concept that explicitly accounts for the goals of all the agents. this work provides a unifying framework for considering planning in multiagent domains with identical  competing  or overlapping goals. it also opens up many exciting questions related to practical algorithms for finding equilibria  the existence of equilibria  and the coordination of equilibria selection. 
acknowledgments 
this research was sponsored by grant no. f1-1. the content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the position of the funding agencies and no official endorsement should be inferred. 
