 
noun compound interpretation is the task of determining the semantic relations among the constituents of a noun compound. for example   concrete floor  means a floor made of concrete  while  gymnasium floor  is the floor region of a gymnasium. we would like to enable knowledge acquisition systems to interpret noun compounds  as part of their overall task of translating imprecise and incomplete information into formal representations that support automated reasoning. however  if interpreting noun compounds requires detailed knowledge of the constituent nouns  then it may not be worth doing: the cost of acquiring this knowledge may outweigh the potential benefit. this paper describes an empirical investigation of the knowledge required to interpret noun compounds. it concludes that the axioms and ontological distinctions important for this task are derived from the top levels of a hierarchical knowledge base  kb ; detailed knowledge of specific nouns is less important. this is good news  not only for our work on knowledge acquisition systems  but also for research on text understanding  where noun compound interpretation has a long history. a more detailed version of this paper can be found in  fan et al  1 . 
1 introduction 
knowledge acquisition involves building knowledge bases  kbs  from the information provided by standard sources of expertise  such as people and texts. in addition to extracting relevant information  knowledge acquisition involves reexpressing the information in a formal language suitable for machines to reason with. in general  this is difficult because the information is initially expressed in natural languages  and these expressions are notoriously imprecise and incomplete. however  the goal of our project is to improve knowledge acquisition methods by automating the translation of some kinds of expressions from natural languages to formal ones. we call this task loose-speak interpretation. 
　several kinds of expressions are good candidates for loosespeak interpretation by knowledge acquisition systems. for example  noun compounds omit information that can often be inferred  e.g. concrete floor is  a floor made of concrete   while gymnasium floor is  the floor region ofa gymnasium . another candidate is metonymic expressions. these expressions contain incompatible terms and must be expanded to make meaningful phrases. for example  the statement joe read shakespeare  means  joe read text written by shakespeare . 
　this paper focuses on the first kind of loose-speak: interpreting noun compounds in the context of knowledge acquisition. a noun compound is a sequence of nouns composed of a head noun and one  or more  modifiers. the head noun determines the type of the whole compound  with few exceptions   and the modifiers specialize the type from the head noun. although we limit our study to only pairs of nouns  our results can be applied to longer noun compounds by bracketing them into pairs of nouns  with few exceptions   and then interpreting each pair  liberman and sproat  1; pustejovsky and bergler  1; barker  1 . 
　the computational linguistics community has studied noun compound interpretation extensively  leonard  1; downing  1; levi  1; finin  1; fabre  1; laucr and dras  1; barker  1; vanderwende  1 . in these studies  the task is to select a single semantic category for each pair of nouns. the selection is usually made from a small list of semantic categories  for example category partof is selected for noun compounds like human lung  category material for marble statue  and category ohject-of for troop movement. 
　our task is more general. rather than selecting a single semantic category  our task is to find a sequence of semantic relations that links two nouns in a compound. semantic relations are a list of about 1 thematic roles such as agent  ob-
ject  has-part  location ..... for example  given animal virus  a traditional interpretation may classify this as a location category  animal virus is a virus in an animal . a loose-speak interpretation may be composed of a combination of semantic relations  such as:  an animal virus is a virus that is the agent of an invade  such that the object of the invade is the cell part of an animal . 
poster papers 	1 　furthermore  computational linguists approach the noun compound interpretation task armed with lots of examples  but little or no knowledge about the constituent nouns. typical solutions are based on statistical patterns discovered in the corpus of examples. in contrast  we approach the task in the context of the constituent nouns knowledge - their taxonomic classification  at least - but few examples of noun compounds  let alone a corpus. 
1 interpreting noun compounds during knowledge acquisition 
during knowledge acquisition  the domain expert  or  more generally  the knowledge source  may provide a noun compound in any dialogue that expects a noun. our knowledge acquisition system successfully interprets the noun compound if it finds a correct sequence of semantic relations between the head noun and its modifier and builds a correct formal representation of the noun compound. 
　if noun compound interpretation requires a priori  detailed knowledge of the head noun and its modifier  then the cost of acquiring this knowledge may overshadow the benefit of interpreting the compound. if  on the other hand  noun compounds can be successfully interpreted without much knowledge about the specific constituent nouns  then the problem is avoided  and a knowledge acquisition system might interpret one concept  the noun compound  while related concepts  the constituent nouns  are only skeletal. knowledge bases tend to grow in this uneven way - following the lead of the knowledge sources providing expertise - and a knowledge acquisition system should support it. 
　the purpose of this study is to determine what sort of knowledge is required to interpret noun compounds  and how this knowledge might be obtained. before delving into the details of the study  it's important to understand what we are not attempting to do. 
　we are not presenting a novel algorithm for noun compound interpretation. our algorithm is quite simple and is derived from previous research. also  we arc not introducing a new type of knowledge representation or a novel technique of automated reasoning. finally  we are not using a new  comprehensive knowledge base. we built a couple of them rather quickly and we're using another - not built for this task -  off the shelf.  
　in summary  what we arc doing is evaluating the knowledge requirements of a standard search algorithm applied to a variety of typical knowledge bases through a series of ablation studies. 
1 	experiments 
the challenge in measuring an algorithm's sensitivity to knowledge base content is that the results may vary across domains and across knowledge bases. we attempt to neutralize these factors by replicating our study in three domains with quite different knowledge bases. 
　the noun compound interpretation task can be viewed as follows: given a knowledge base encoded as a conceptual graph  and a pair of nouns corresponding to two nodes in the graph  find a path of semantic relations between them. the algorithm we used is a breadth-first search algorithm on a knowledge base. the algorithm is given a noun compound of the form   c1  c1   where c  and c1 are the kb concepts that are mapped from the constituents of the given noun compound. each of the first two steps conducts a breadthfirst search of the knowledge base along all semantic relation arcs. the first search starts from c1 and looks for c1 or any superclass or subclass of it. the second search starts from c1 and looks for c  or any superclass or subclass of it. step 1 combines the results  sorted by path length. 
　to avoid getting results that are skewed to a particular domain or knowledge representation  we used a variety of quite different data sets. the first consists of 1 noun compounds from a college-level cell biology text  alberts ct al.  1 . the second consists of 1 noun compounds from a small engine repair manual. the third data set consists of 1 compounds from a sun sparcstation manual. the nouns used in these data sets are mapped to the corresponding concepts in knowledge bases on these topics. 
　despite these commonalities  the kbs differ significantly. first they differ in terms of how they were built. the knowledge base for the biology text was built using the generic component library  barker ct al  1  to answer end-ofthe-chapter style questions  as one of the challenge problems for darpa's rapid knowledge formation project  clark ct al.  1 . the knowledge bases for the other two data sets  the small engine repair manual and the sparcstation manual  were built  on top of  the knowledge in wordnet  fellbaum  1 . we augmented wordnet with the upper ontology of the generic component library plus about ten concepts that are important to each of the two domains whose partonomies are not complete in wordnet. through this process  we encoded 1 concepts in about 1 man-hours. the advantage of using wordnet as the foundation for these knowledge bases is two-fold: it includes most of the terms used in the data sets  linked with both taxonomic and partonomic relations  and it is widely available and well used. the kbs also differ in content. other than the shared upper ontology of the generic component library  they have few concepts in common. 
　the importance of each level of the ontology is measured through a series of ablations. when a level is ablated  the concepts on that level and all their axioms are deleted from the knowledge base. the superclasses of the subclasses of these concepts are changed to the superclasses of the concepts being deleted. as a special case  when the 1th level  the root level concept  is deleted  it is replaced by a generic concept of  thing . because the root level concept is vacuous  deleting it has no affect. 
1 	results 
ablating levels of the ontology shows that they differ in their importance for the noun compound interpretation task. without any ablation  both precision and recall of the noun compound interpretation arc around 1% across all three knowledge bases. ablating level one causes a big drop in both precision and recall. ablating level two introduces a big gap between precision and recall because the algorithm does not find interpretations for many noun compounds. as lower levels in the ontology are ablated one at a time  the impact diminishes and performance improves to the level of a knowledge base with no ablations. 
the contribution of the first two levels of the ontology is 
　
1 	poster papers 
　
observed across all three data sets and knowledge bases. this pattern strongly suggests that top levels of the ontology are most important for the noun compound interpretation task  which is likely due to some combination of two factors: 
1. top levels of the ontology include concepts that make important ontological distinctions. for example  ablating the level that introduces entity and event blurs the distinction between obviously different concept  which causes the search to stop with erroneous results. consequently  many more interpretations are returned  and because we only use the first interpretation  the possibility of it being correct is reduced. 
1. although they contain relatively few axioms  these axioms are important for the task. the top-level ontology contains the most frequently used axioms  such as that  every action involves an object that is acted upon . these axioms are used in the search as a step along the way. deleting these axioms makes it difficult to find an interpretation for many of the noun compounds  thereby causing recall to lag behind precision. 
1 	conclusion 
this paper reports an encouraging result: interpreting noun compounds does not require detailed knowledge of the constituent nouns. rather  it requires only that the nouns be correctly placed in a taxonomy  and that the taxonomy include the ontological distinctions and axioms commonly found in domain independent upper levels. these requirements are easily met in the context of knowledge acquisition  which is our focus. 
　we reached this conclusion using a novel experimental method. we measured the contribution of each level of the ontology to the task of interpreting noun compounds. we ablated successive levels of the ontology one at a time  thereby conflating ontological distinctions and removing the axioms associated with concepts at each level. we found that the upper levels of the ontology for the kbs we used are the most important for noun compound interpretation. as lower levels in the ontology are ablated one at a time  the impact diminishes to nil. a more detailed version of this paper can be found in  fan et al  1 . 
acknowledgments 
support for this research is provided by a contract from stanford research institute as part of darpa's rapid knowledge formation project. 
