 
noa is an agent architecture that supports the development of agents motivated by norms: obligations  permissions and prohibitions. obligations motivate a normative agent to act: a motive to achieve a state of affairs or to perform some action. prohibitions restrict an agent's behaviour  whereas permissions allow an agent to pursue certain activities. to test the architecture  noa agents arc applied to automated business transaction scenarios where the correct execution of contracts is paramount to create a situation of trust. 
1 introduction 
the noa normative agent architecture is designed to support the development of agent societies where agents are motivated by norms: obligations  permissions and prohibitions. the development of the noa agent architecture is driven by the particular needs of automated business transactions within electronic commerce environments. however  noa is designed as an architecture that is generally applicable for agent system development. the specific concern of the noa architecture is to provide means for the development of norm-motivated practical reasoning agents. this architecture is determined by two main elements: the noa language for the specification of plans and norms and the noa interpreter  which is capable of interpreting and executing plan and norm specifications formulated in the noa language. the noa architecture and the noa specification language for norms and plans is influenced by systems such as agentspeak l   rao  1 . there are three principal distinctions  however  between these systems and noa: 
  multiple effects. in common with planning domain specification languages such as pddl 
 pddl   but in contrast to languages such as jam  huber  1   the noa plan specification language allows all the effects of a plan to be declared. any of these effects can be the reason for the agent to select a plan. this provides greater flexibility in the specification of agent capabilities  and enables a noa agent to reason about the side-effects of executing a plan. 
  motivated by norms. noa agents arc motivated by norms rather than desires and intentions. these norms capture states of affairs or actions the agent is obliged or permitted to achieve or perform  or prohibited from achieving or performing. 
  distinction between states and actions. the norms governing the behaviour of a noa agent refer to either actions that are obligatory  permitted  forbidden  or states of affairs that are obligatory  permitted or forbidden  norman and reed  1 . 
1 the noa language 
the main elements that influence the behaviour of a noa agent are  a  a set of beliefs   b  a set of pre-specificd plans and  c  a set of norms. these concepts are reflected in the noa specification language. the general form of a noa plan carries information about when it would be allowed to select it for execution  preconditions   what kind of states of affairs it can achieve  effects  and the actual behaviour specification as the body of the plan. 

figure 1. a noa plan 
figure 1 shows an example plan  usually applicable in a 
blocks world scenario for stacking blocks. noa plans are chosen for achieving a state of affairs according to their effects  see the effects list in figure 1 . for the performance of an action  plans arc chosen according to their signature  name and parameter list . the plan body in this example shows language constructs to establish a subgoal  achieve clear  x   and to perform primitive actions. 

poster papers 	1 


figure 1. a noa norm specification 
figure 1 shows a norm specification: an obligation for agent biockmover to achieve the placement of a block a on the table  again in an imagined blocks world . each normative statements carries information under what circumstances such a norm is  active  and therefore relevant to an agent. normative statements include activation and expiration conditions that determine when a norm is active and when it expires. 
1 	the noa interpreter 
the behaviour of a noa agent is determined by norms and plans. norms arc relevant to an agent only if they are  active . norms become active when the agent's beliefs reflect their specified conditions of activation. activated norms influence the behaviour of an agent in two ways   a  by motivating the generation of a goal that must be achieved or an action that has to be performed  these are externally motivated activities  and  b  by being used in a special  norm filtering  step within the execution cycle of the noa architecture by restricting the options of the agent in fulfilling its responsibilities. 
plans arc instantiated when their preconditions hold. 
from this set of plan instances  a set of plan options has to be selected. this selection takes place according to one of their effects  whereas all other effects represent sideeffects of this plan  which occur during its execution. all the effects of a plan must be taken into account when it is considered for execution  e.g. a plan selected for satisfaction of one obligation may have a side-effect that is contrasting other norms. 
while state / action requested if achievement of state is requested then plan options = choosc plan  .instances  state  else plan options - retrieve  j lan  action  
endif 
filtered..plans - norm filter  plan .options  
if filtered plans not empty then plan - deliberate  filtered plans  execute  plan  
endif 
endwhile figure 1. execution cycle of the noa interpreter 
the execution cycle of the noa interpreter is shown in figure 1. it is assumed that a change in the agent's beliefs activates / de-activates  a  obligations that motivate the achievement of a state of affairs or the performance of an action   b  prohibitions and permissions relevant for the norm filtering step  and  c  instantiates plans. in case that a state of affairs must be achieved  a set of plan instances is chosen according to one of the effects they would produce if they would be executed  see figure 1 . from the set of currently instantiated plans  because their preconditions hold  the set of plan options is chosen. in case that the direct performance of an action is required  one specific plan instance is chosen. active norms such as prohibitions and permissions are applied to this set of plans to filter out those that would produce effects that are forbidden or arc directly acts that are forbidden. one of the plans must be chosen for execution. the execution of a plan can have various outcomes: performing a primitive action affecting the world  updating beliefs or establishing a subgoal or subsidiary actions. 
1 	conclusion 
in this paper  the noa normative agent architecture has been presented as a framework that supports the development of agent societies where agents arc motivated by norms. this architecture introduces norms as external motivators for an agent to achieve states of affairs or perform actions. it provides agents with capabilities of decision-making driven by such norms expressing the obligations  permissions and prohibitions of an agent. the noa normative agent architecture is based on three key concepts:  a  a clear distinction between an agent taking responsibility for the achievement of a state of affairs and the agent taking responsibility for the performance of an action   b  agents understand normative statements within contracts and how to correctly execute them and  c  goal / action generation and plan selection is based on norms. 
