 
bi-lateral negotiations represent an important class of encounter in agent-based systems. to this end  this paper develops and evaluates a heuristic model that enables an agent to participate in multiple  concurrent bi-lateral encounters in competitive situations in which there is information uncertainty and deadlines. 
1 introduction 
automated negotiation is a key form of interaction in agentbased systems. such negotiations exist in many different forms including one-to-one  one-to-many and many-to-many. generally speaking  however  the latter two cases are dealt with using some form of auction protocol  be it single-sided or double-sided  respectively   while the former are often tackled using some form of heuristic method. here we focus on the one-to-one case  in which one agent wants to purchase a service1 from another. moreover  we consider competitive situations in which the agents have no a priori knowledge about the preferences of their opponents. in such cases  the agents exchange proposals  representing acceptable solutions  until either an agreement is reached or the negotiation terminates with a failure. 
　to date  one of the inherent drawbacks of bi-lateral negotiation models is that the agent has to a priori identify a single partner to interact with. however  this is inefficient in an uncertain setting where there are multiple providers of the service that each have different characteristics. in this case  there are two alternatives:  1  negotiate sequentially with all the providers or  1  negotiate concurrently with them. the former has the disadvantage that it may result in lengthy negotiation encounters  but has the advantage that it is comparatively easy to use the outcome of one negotiation to dictate behavior in subsequent ones. the latter case has the advantage of taking less time  but the disadvantage that coordinating behaviors among the various negotiation threads is more difficult. 
* department of electronics and computer science  university of 
southampton  uk. email: {tdnolr  nrj} ecs.soton.ac.uk 
   'a service is here viewed an abstract representation of the capability of an agent. 
since we are interested in situations in time-constrained domains  such as e-commerce and grid computing   we concentrate on the concurrent case and develop a coordinated bidding model in which the various negotiation threads mutually influence one another. by mutually influence  we mean that the progress and agreement in one negotiation thread is used to alter the behavior of the agent in another thread for the same service. for example  having obtained a good deal in one thread  the agent may adopt a tougher stance in its other threads  to see if it can get an even better deal than the one it already has1. 
1 the concurrent negotiation model 
the agent that wishes to purchase the service is called the buyer and the agents that offer the service are called the sellers. service agreements  contracts  are assumed to be multidimensional  covering issues such as price  quality  quantity  etc. . the buyer has a deadline tmax by when it must conclude its negotiations for the service. similarly  each seller i has its own negotiation deadline  all the agents have their own preferences about the service and this information is private  as are the strategies the individual agents follow . the agents follow an alternating sequential protocol  in which the illocutions are offer  a proposal made by one agent to the other   counter-offer  a counter proposal from an agent in response to a proposal it received   accept  accept a proposed offer   finalize  secure a deal with the chosen seller   decline  reject the previously accepted offer  and withdraw  terminate the negotiation thread . the difference between an accept and 
finalize is necessary in this work to deal with the problem of concurrent encounters. if the buyer accepts an offer from a seller then this is viewed as binding on the seller  for a specified period of time that is assumed to be longer than however  it is not binding on the buyer. thus  the buyer may accept several offers from multiple sellers in any one negotiation episode. however  when it has completed all the negotiations  the buyer will finalize one of the accepted deals with one of the sellers and decline the others  thus freeing them 
　　1 this model differs from a onc-to-many auction in that it allows direct interaction between the agent requiring the service and the providers offering it. this ability to exchange unmediated counteroffers enables the participants to indicate their preferences and constraints directly to one another. 

poster papers 	1 

from their commitment to the proposal . this two phase process is necessary so that the buyer can use accepted deals as a base line for the subsequent concurrent negotiations.1 

figure 1: system architecture 
　in more detail  the model for the buyer agent consists of two main components: a coordinator and a number of negotiation threads  see figure 1 . the negotiation threads deal directly with the various sellers  one per seller  and are responsible for deciding what counter-offers to send to them and what proposals to accept. for maximum flexibility  we assume that the buyer agent may adopt different strategies in each of its threads. we adopt separate semi-independent threads for reasons of modularity and coherence. the alternative of having every single negotiation move centrally coordinated and intercepting all the bids received from all the sellers  is viewed as a computational bottleneck for the timeconstrained environments we are targeting. 
　each negotiation thread inherits the preferences from the main buyer agent  including the acceptable ranges of values for each negotiation issue  the deadline of the negotiation and the current reservation value  the lowest utility value of an offer that the agent considers acceptable . the coordinator decides the negotiation strategies for each thread. after each negotiation round  the threads report back their status to the coordinator. if a thread reaches a deal with a particular seller  it terminates its negotiation. based on the coordination schema it is using  see section 1 for more details   the coordinator will then notify all other negotiation threads of the new reservation value and it may change the negotiation strategy of some of them. the detailed working of the two components are described below. 
1 	the coordinator 
the coordinator is responsible for coordinating all the negotiation threads and choosing an appropriate negotiation strategy for each thread. 
　as a first step  the coordinator acts like a blackboard for shared information about the ongoing encounters. it receives the current status from the various negotiation threads  including the proposal's values   keeps a list of agreements reached and notifies the threads about any changes in their reservation values. second  and more importantly  the coor-
　　1 this model is obviously biased in favor of the buyer and future work will look at relaxing this constraint so that sellers can also renege on deals. 
dinator decides the negotiation strategy for each thread initially and whether this should change over time to reflect any agreements that have been made to date. 
　to ground our model  at this time we consider the set of strategies s to be composed of the class of time dependent strategies advocated in  faratin  1  for bi-lateral negotiations in uncertain environments with time constraints. these 
strategies fall into three categories  namely: conceder  sc   linear  1/  and tough  st  where s =  all of 
the strategies start with the same initial value that is generated in relation to the deadline and the reservation value. the conceder strategy quickly lowers its value until it reaches its reservation value. the linear strategy drops to its reservation value in a steady fashion. finally  the tough strategy keeps its value until the deadline approaches  then it rapidly drops to its reservation value. 
　in his empirical analysis of the behavior of negotiating agents that adopted these strategies  faratin showed that if it is possible to approximate the type of the opponent then the agent can alter its strategy to be more effective. given this observation  the coordinator attempts such a classification. specifically  at time t:  called the analysis time  the coordinator tries to determine if a given seller is a conceder or a non-conceder. in particular  assume olj is the value of the offer that seller agent i made at time j : 1 j t. then seller i is considered a conceder if 
is the threshold value 
set on concessionary behavior. there is a similar characterization of non-conceders and if the agent falls into neither category  it is judged not classified. 
　let the set of conceder and non-conceder agents be represented by and respectively. now  given the set of strategies s = and the set of agents a = 
　　　　　the coordinator changes the strategy for each negotiation thread based on the type of the agent it is negotiating with  in order to try and obtain better outcomes. agents belonging to the set ac are willing to concede in order to end up with agreements. therefore  if the agent negotiates toughly with some of them  keeping its offer consistent   it may obtain a deal that has higher value than if it continues negotiating in its present manner. however  if the agent negotiates in this way with all the agents  it may not obtain any deals at all. therefore  for reasons of balance  the agent will negotiate in a tough manner with a subset of the agents in specifically with a percentage  of them. for the re-
mainder of the agents in ac  the strategy remains unchanged. similarly  if the agent believes a particular agent is in the set an then in order to make sure it obtains a deal with some of them  it makes some of its own strategy more conciliatory. specifically  for the agents belonging to the set an  a fixed percentage  of them will have their behavior made conciliatory  while the remainder have their strategies unchanged. there is no change to agents whose behavior cannot be classified. 
1 	the negotiation threads 
an individual negotiation thread is responsible for dealing with an individual seller agent on behalf of the buyer. each 

1 	poster papers 

such thread inherits its preferences from the buyer agent and has its negotiation strategy specified by the coordinator. 

figure 1: a single negotiation thread 
　in each thread  see figure 1   there are three main subcomponents; namely communication  represented by the dotted lines   process  represented by the bold lines  and strategy. the communication subcomponent is responsible for communicating with the coordinator. before each round  it checks for incoming messages from the coordinator and if there are any  it passes them to the process subcomponent. after each round  it reports the status of the thread  including proposed proposals and the deal's value if an agreement is reached  back to the coordinator. the process subcomponent processes messages from the communication subcomponent. this can either be changing the reservation value or changing the strategy. the strategy subcomponent is responsible for making offers/counter-offers  as well as deciding whether or not to accept the offer made by the seller agent. it uses the reservation value as the basis for deciding whether to accept the seller's offer; in this case any offer with a value greater than this is accepted  otherwise a counter-proposal is made  unless the deadline has passed in which case a decline is sent . 
1 	empirical evaluation 
having defined the model  the next step is to evaluate it. given the aims of our work  we are interested in operational performance and so we decided to evaluate it empirically. in particular  we posed a number of hypotheses and evaluated them in different types of environment. 
　our concurrent model is compared against a sequential negotiation model based on  faratin  1 . in this model  all the agents' preferences  as well as the allocation of the strategies  are drawn from the same distributions as the concurrent ones. the only difference with  faratin  1  is that if the buyer agent reaches an agreement of value p in negotiation i  then in all subsequent negotiations p will be its new reservation value. 
　we now turn to specific hypotheses. due to the limitation of space  we cannot show the corresponding graphs to support our claims  see  nguyen and jennings  1  for more details   but  nevertheless we can summarize our main findings: 
result 1 the time to complete the negotiation is less for the concurrent model than for the sequential one. 
result 1 the number of proposals that are made in the concurrent model is less than the number made in the sequential model. 
result 1 to realize the benefits of concurrent negotiations  the buyer agent's deadline must not be too short. 
result 1 the final agreements reached by the concurrent model have  on average  higher or equal utility'for the buyer than those of the sequential model  assuming the deadline is not too short . 
result 1 changing the strategy in response to the agent's assessment of the ongoing negotiation is equal or better than not doing so. 
result 1 to improve the performance of the concurrent model  the analysis time should be moderately early  to have time to have some effect  but not too early  so it is reasonably accurate . 
result 1 when dealing with sellers in ac  the tougher the buyer negotiates the better the overall outcome it obtains. 
1 	conclusions and future work 
this paper has developed a heuristic model for managing concurrent negotiations in time-constrained settings where agents have no prior knowledge of their opponents or their types. through empirical evaluation  we showed how the model leads to better deals  more quickly than its sequential counterpart. we also highlighted the importance of the time when the opponents' negotiation strategies arc classified and on the response to this assessment in terms of the degree of toughness adopted. 
　there are  however  a number of areas that still require further work. first  the means by which negotiation opponents are classified as being conccder or non-conceder needs to be refined so that this monitoring can be made on an ongoing basis  rather than as a one-off decision . second  we need to allow for the possibility of sellers decommitting and then having these commitment changes feedback into the buyer's negotiation behavior. third  we wish to extend the implementation so that the coordinator and the negotiation threads also embody fundamentally different models of bi-lateral negotiation  e.g. based on constraint-satisfaction  game-theory or any other method that is likely to be effective . in this case  the key challenge is in designing the coordinator so that it can select  monitor and modify these strategies in line with the agent's overarching negotiation objectives. 
