 
robust face identification system in complex airport environment  which can identify certain candidates from a crowd of people in real time  is in urgent demand. s-adaboost is discussed in this paper as a variant of adaboost to handle real world environment. the face identification system for airports  f1sa   based upon sadaboost algorithm  is implemented in an international airport. comparison of results obtained from fisa with those from other leading face identification approaches based on fisa database clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of fisa in real airport environment. 
1 introduction 
when adaboost  freund and schapire 1  is used to handle scenarios in complex environment with outliers  its limitations have been pointed out by researchers  dietterich  1 . some discussions and approaches  ratsch  et al.  1  have been proposed to address these limitations. 
   s-adaboost works by dividing the input space into a few sub-spaces and using dedicated classifiers to classify patterns in the sub-spaces. the final classification result is the combination of the outputs of the dedicated classifiers. the s-adaboost machine is made up of an adaboost divider  an adaboost classifier  a dedicated classifier for outliers  and a non-linear combiner. s-adaboost can enhance adaboost's capability of handling scenarios in real world complex environment. 
1 s-adaboost in classification 
s-adaboost applies the divide and conquer principle through dividing the input pattern space s into a few subspaces and conquering the sub-spaces by finding simple fittings  decision boundaries  to the patterns in the subspaces. input space can be denoted by: 

where  
x = {x } denotes the input patterns. 
y = {yi} denotes the classification results. 
p =  p1= ! xi  yi }} denotes the input pattern and classification result pairs. 
¡¡in s-adaboost  patterns in s can be divided into a few sub-spaces relative to a classifier  
 1  
where  
 normal patterns  patterns can be easily classified by f x  . special patterns  patterns can be classified correctly by f x  with bearable adjustment . 
patterns with noise  noisy patterns  
hard-to-classify patterns  patterns hard to be classified by f x  . 
   a typical input pattern space is shown in figure 1. the first two sub-spaces are further referred to as ordinary pattern space  and the last two are called outliers in sadaboost: 


poster papers 	1 

   during training  s-adaboost uses an adaboost  as a divider to divide the patterns in the original training input space ¡ì into two separate sets in and one set in is used to train the next adaboost which has good generalization characteristic; and another set in is used to train a dedicated outlier classifier which has good localization characteristic. the structure of s-adaboost is shown in figure 1. during testing  the divider  is no longer needed  testing patterns are fed directly to the two classifiers a n d f o l l o w e d by the combiner to obtain the classification results. 

figure 1: s-adaboost machine 
1 fisa 
in fisa  1 candidate's face images are stored in the candidate database. 1 images with one or multiple face images in an airport environment are collected within 1 months; about 1% of the images contain one or a few candidate faces. 1 images are randomly selected as the training set and the remaining 1 images are chosen as the test set. 
¡¡the pro-processor will detect potential faces and generate constant flow of 1 x 1 segmented potential face images to fisa. back-propagation  bp  neural network is used as the base learner for adaboost and in fisa. a three-layer rbf neural network with dynamic number of hidden nodes is chosen to implement  due to rbf neural network's good localization characteristic. the radii of hidden nodes in rbf are also chosen to be very small to enhance rbf network's good local clustering characteristic  which helps to isolate the from the  a multi-layer perceptron  mlp  neural network is used to implement the combiner c in fisa. 
   to test the effectiveness of s-adaboost  s-ab  on face identification in airports  we compared the performance of fisa  when threshold t was set to  with other leading approaches. we implemented the neural network based ebgm  elastic bunch graph matching  approach  wyner et al.  1   the statistical subspace lda  linear/fisher discriminant analysis  approach  friedman et al.  1   and probabilistic pca  principle component analysis  approach  freund  1   ppca. the false negative rate  fnr  and false positive rate  fpr  of the four algorithms as well as those of the adaboost  ab  algorithm were used in our analysis. 
the same training and testing face images  as used in 
fisa  were used in our experiment to compare the 
effectiveness of different approaches in real complex airport environment. in fisa testing  the pre-processed data  1 x 
1 images  were fed directly to and the testing results obtained from various approaches are listed in table 1. 
% s-ab ab ebgm lda ppca fpr 1 1 1 1 1 fnr 1 1 1 1 1 table 1: comparison of error rates of different approaches on fisa database 
1 discussion and conclusions 
fisa is introduced as a practical system to handle face identification in real airport environment. s-adaboost  which is a variant of adaboost and is more effective than the conventional adaboost in handling outliers in real world complex environment  is also introduced as the algorithm behind fisa. experimental results on fisa databases clearly show s-adaboost's effectives in handling classification in complex environment and fisa's capability in boosting face identification in airport. improvements of the algorithm will focus on utilizing more hybrid approaches to improve the overall identification rates of the system. 
