 
pervasive robotics will require  in a near future  small  light and cheap robots that exhibit complex behaviors. these demands led to the development of the m1-m1 macaco project - a robotic active vision head. macaco is a portable system  capable of emulating the head of different creatures both aesthetically and functionally. it integrates mechanisms for social interactions  autonomous navigation and object analysis. 
1 motivation 
one approach of ai is the development of robots whose embodiment and situatedness in the world evoke behaviors that obviate constant human supervision  brooks  1   with this in mind  we developed the m1-m1 macaco project  which is described in this paper. m1-m1 macaco is a robotic active  modular and compact system. this creature was designed to fi tdifferent mobile robot platforms or act as a standalone system. another design goal was the portability of both the mechanical and electronic devices and its brain. macaco characteristics make it a portable  fully operational robotic head whenever not assembled to a mobile platform  able to act as a social agent. a simple communications interface enables operation onboard mobile platforms  turning the robot into an autonomous  sociable machine. 
¡¡research robots are enclosed most of the time at lab facilities in which they are developed  most often operating just for demonstration goals. we expect in a near future to have both the robotic head and its brain physically present at exhibitions/seminars  interacting socially. this new approach with complex  portable research robots will lead to commercial applications and increasing synergy among roboticists. eventually  pervasive robotics - robots present everywhere to perform a variety of tasks - will be possible as smaller  lighter and cheaper robots become available. 
1 the robotic creature 
this robotic mechanism was designed to resemble a biological creature  exploiting several features of an evolutionary design  but adding others  such as a thermal camera for human detection and night vision  for improved performance. 

figure 1:  left  the m1 macaco robot  designed to resemble a dog's head.  right  the m1-macaco robotic head and processing hardware assembled to a magellan mobile platform. 

figure 1:  left  m1-macaco  a biological inspired robotic head  designed to resemble a chimpanzee head.  right  m1 robotic body built by the mit leglab. 
the replacement of a few m1-m1 macaco's aesthetic components allows for the metamorphosis of a dog-like  m1 see figure 1  into a chimpanzee-like  m1 - see figure 1  robot. the weight of the head  including motors  gears and gyro  is ~ 1kg. the hardware consists of nine small cpu boards with pentium 1 at 1mhz  all modules connected by an ethernet network. four cameras and a total of nine framegrabbers are used for video acquisition. 
1 implementation 
security is one possible operational scenario for this active head. for this class of applications  macaco robot was equipped with a behavioral system capable of searching for people or faces  and to further recognize them. in addition  human gaze direction might reveal security threats  and thus a head gaze detection algorithm was developed. probable targets for such gazings are other people and mostly important  explosives and/or guns. therefore  salient objects situated in 

poster papers 	1 

the world are processed for 1d information extraction and texture/color analysis. current work is also underway for ob-
ject and scene recognition from contextual cues. 
   another scenario includes search and rescue missions by a mobile robot  which requires additional navigation capabilities in rough terrain. finally  real world applications are often characterized by strong light variations or the absence of light. this is taken into account through thermal image processing for people detection and for night navigation. 
1 	visual pre-attentive system 
although the real world does not avail precise or singularly adequate perceptual information  unique interpretations of the world can be constructed using an attentional mechanism. a logpolar attentional system was developed to select relevant information from the cameras output  and to combine it in a saliency map  see figure 1 . this map is segmented into three regions of stimuli saliency - the attentional focus. 

figure 1:  left  object analysis.  center  social and  right  navigation mechanisms. 
a thermal camera. a navigation algorithm based on monocular cues runs at frame-rate  for night navigation. 
1 	architecture 
the software architecture includes  besides the visual attention system  releasers from body sensors and motivational drives that modulate attentional gains. action is de-

termined by competing behaviors  which also share resources to achieve multi-behavior tasking. 
1 	poster papers 
