 
travel and tourism is the leading application field in the b1c e-commerce  it represents nearly 1% of the total b1c turnover. already in the past travel applications were at the forefront of information technology  i.e.  the airline computerized reservation systems in the early 1s. the industry and its product have rather specific features which explain this circumstance: the product is a confidence good  consumer decisions are solely based on information beforehand; and the industry is highly networked  based on world-wide cooperation of very different types of stakeholders. consequently  this industry depends on advanced it applications. as such travel and tourism may serve as an example of what happens and will happen in the emerging e-markets  pointing at structural changes as well as challenging application scenarios. the paper provides an overview about the industry  describes ongoing structural changes  outlines domain-specific requirements and discusses achievements and challenges in the field  following an ai and e-commerce point of view. it finishes with considerations regarding a future it scenario.1 
1 	introduction 
despite unfulfilled business and stock market expectations  in some sectors such as the travel and tourism industry online transactions are rapidly increasing. this industry is the leading application in the b1c arena. the travel and tourism industry is witnessing an acceptance of e-commerce to the extent that the structure of the industry and the way business is conducted  is changing. the internet is used not only for information gathering; there is an obvious acceptance of ordering services over the internet. a new type of user is emerging; they become their own travel agents and build their travel packages themselves. 
in the year 1 european online bookings increased by 
1 percent  accounting for about 1 % of all consumer spending in this domain  whereas in the us this number is 
　　1  this work is partially funded by the caritro foundation and the european fp1 projects dietorecs and harmonise. 
about 1 %  according to the danish center for regional and tourism research . 1 mio. americans researched their travel options online  travel industry association of 
america ; and 1 percent of us travelers have used the internet to book travel arrangements  see www.nua.com/survevs/ . forecasts state that by 1% of all transactions in the european tourism domain will be done via the internet  at least in the german speaking countries  schuster  1 . 
　this importance of e-commerce can be explained by the features of the industry  but it highlights also another issue  not less important: e-commerce and especially the web are not only transaction and business oriented  it is also a medium of curiosity  of creating communities or having just fun  all of which may or may not result into business. especially the tourism product has to do with emotional experiences; it is not just business  werthner  1 . 
　the paper is organized as follows: the following two sections describe the industry and look at the changing business environment. section 1 provides an overview on the emerging it landscape  it discusses domain specific requirements and related application examples  pointing at open research issues. 
1 the industry 
the travel and tourism industry is a global  and a globalization  industry  with very specific features: 
  travel and tourism represents approx. 1% of the world wide gdp  following the tourism satellite account method of the world travel & tourism council . 
  there will be one billion international arrivals in the year 1  following the world tourism organization . and tourism grows faster than the other economic sectors. 
  it represents a cross-sectoral industry  including many related economic sectors such as culture  sport or agriculture  where over 1 different industrial components have been identified that serve travelers. 
  this explains the industry's heterogeneity  and due to its sme structure it has a huge importance for regional development. for example  in the eu there are around 1 mio. hotels and restaurants  1 % of all enterprises . and 1 % of them are very small  i.e.  1 employees. 

1 	invited speakers 


figure 1: structural view of the market  werthner and klein  1  

  the supply and the demand side form a worldwide network  where both production and distribution are based on cooperation. 
  the product is perishable  complex and emotional: i  a hotel bed not sold for one night represents a lost income. suppliers are in a risky situation  which can be reduced if access to information is available; ii  the tourism product is a bundle of basic products  aggregated by some intermediary. to support the rather complex bundling products must have well defined interfaces with respect to consumer needs  prices or also distribution channels; iii  vacations are emotional experience structures that involve cognitive and sensory stimulations as well as affective responses to certain events. 
　tourism is an information based business  the product is a  confidence good ; an a priori comprehensive assessment of its qualities is impossible. tourists have to leave their daily environment for consuming the product. at the moment of decision-making only a model of the product  its description  is available. this characteristic of tourism products entails high information search costs and causes informational market imperfections. consequently  the industry has comparably long information and value chains. 
　figure 1 differentiates between the supply and demand side and the respective intermediaries. links mark the relationships as well as the flow of information  showing only the most relevant links. nodes indicate the relevant types of players. 
　on the supply side we denote with  primary  suppliers enterprises like hotels  restaurants  etc.  which are mostly smes. one should note that with respect to a functional differentiation these companies are at the same level as the  big  players like airlines. tour operators can be seen as product aggregators  travel agents act as information brokers  providing final consumers with the relevant information and booking facilities. crs/gds  central reservation systems / global distribution systems   stemming from the airline reservation systems already developed in the 1s  include also other products such as packaged holidays  or other means of transport. whereas the intermediaries on the right side can be seen as the  professional  connection between supply and demand  mainly based on the electronic infrastructure of the crs/gds   the left side is relevant for the management  planning and branding of a destination. normally  these entities have to act on behalf of all suppliers within a destination and are not engaged in the booking process. the links to governmental - as dotted lines - indicate that destination marketing organizations are often governmental organizations. 
　the upstream flow of figure 1 consists of product information  whereas the downstream flow reports on market behavior  mostly represented in terms of statistical aggregates. both information flows create a tourist information network tying together all market participators and  apparently  reflecting the economic relationships between them. 
1 	the new business landscape 
the web facilitates new ways to meet changing consumer behavior and to reach new market segments  leading to an  informatization  of the overall tourism value chain. this allows different strategies to generate value  sweet  1 : 
  value extraction: increases efficiency and reduces costs  
e.g.  automation of processes or outsourcing to clients 

invited speakers 	1 

such as self check-in of hotel guests or airline passengers. 
  value capturing: client and sales data are used to support the marketing  e.g.  data mining for forecast or yield management. 
  value adding: a linear combination of products / services to create richer product bundles  e.g.  new service quality for consumers such as linking mobile services to existing web services to advise tourists during their travel. 
  value creation: the focus is on network effects  e.g.  tourists within a destination participate in service definition and planning. 
   such strategies allow for the design of new products and services  enlarging the range of options to customize and to configure products. it and  more importantly  improved organizational procedures lower the price of customization  enabling individualized offerings based on masscustomization. on the other side  configuration points at the bundling of different product or service components to integrated offerings. core product can be combined with additional service elements in order to create integrated customer solutions. 
　given the dynamics of the sector and the emerging already very competitive electronic market  nearly all stakeholders have implemented their internet strategy. travel and tourism has also become the playing field for new entrants  either start-ups or companies from the media and it sector. since tourism is an information-based business  it fits well with their respective background. 
　the overall trend points towards a further specialization and an ongoing deconstruction of the value chain paralleled by an integration of players and products. companies will compete and cooperate at the same time  boundaries within the industry are blurring. all types of market players are affected: 
  tourists will be addressed by more players  and as they accept the web as a booking channel  they will also play a more active role in specifying their services. 
  travel agents will see a diminishing power in the sales channel  as a consequence they will put more emphasis on consulting and complex products. 
  internet travel sites  as platforms with bundling of offerings will enhance by providing new market functionality and technology. this will lead to easier accessible price comparisons and market overviews  enabled by personalized intelligent tools for travelers. 
  destination management organizations will develop cooperation models within destinations and they will occupy a new role as consolidator and aggregator. 
  tour operator will blur the boundaries between individual and packaged tour  based on mass-customization and flexible configurations. 
  crs / gds show an  intel inside  marketing strategy for major tourist web sites to increase their transaction volume  and they also move into direct sales for the retail segment 
  suppliers will support electronic direct sales  increasing again price competition as well as price differentiation  and they will redefine customer processes  electronic ticketing  automated check-in  etc. . 
   this development leads to an evolution of the market best described as an ongoing interaction of concentration  e.g.  as in the us with the major travel sites like expedia  orbitz or travelocity  versus the simultaneous entering of new players. the related increased complexity  however  generates the need for new services such as providing transparent access or price comparisons. this enforces the design and deployment of more specialized services. such a process will quite naturally create new business opportunities  accelerating competition and putting even more emphasis on technical innovation. 
1 	the it scenario 
the described business scenario is based on flexible network configurations and the further integration of consumers into internal business processes. adding the tourist life cycle - taking into consideration the mobility aspect of travelers - one can draw the following simplified figure of linking tourists' life cycles with companies' business processes. 


figure 1: tourist life cycle and companies' processes - both suppliers and intermediaries 
1 	invited speakers 

obviously  processes cross company borders  leading to distributed b1c applications  requiring cooperation between companies  and supporting also mobile communication with the consumer. such a future business scenario is based on the assumption that technology - based on a common pervasive infrastructure - will become transparent  invisible for the consumer; information will be available at home  the work place and during travel. given such a  holistic  approach interleaving business and technology perspectives  what are specific requirements when looking at the user - machine interaction  what is the intelligence needed to support collaboration among companies within a networked industry  these questions lead to interesting considerations regarding system architectures. 
1 	user requirements 
one could look at the human-computer interaction as a variant of the famous turing test: as a competition between a human and an intelligent travel system.1 even if one thinks of it as an engineering task  and not as a cognitive science test  it poses hard questions: i  a simple problem like inquiring a flight from location a to b  with specific price and time constraints  complemented by a specific hotel  with similar constraints. in this case linking to a predefined database or to one of the crs/gds would be sufficient  if one ignores interoperability issues. this type of planning problem is already partially solved by existing online systems such as expedia or orbitz. but the need for more intelligent heuristics is obvious  when one thinks of the enormous number of scheduled flights and constraints such as different rates or different booking conditions within airline alliances  etc. ii  a complex problem which involves background knowledge of a specific traveler  e.g.  the problem of traveling to milan only when milan plays. this needs the modeling of knowledge about the italian city of milan  the inference that in this case milan refers to ac 
milan  a soccer club   the timing regarding soccer tournaments  normally at weekends . and other background knowledge might be needed such as specific weather conditions or cultural activities. in fact  the  leisure  domain might cover nearly all domains of daily life. and the information  stored in different bases with no common format and even unknown locations  needs to be extracted. here wrapping techniques  learning accurate extraction rules and also adapting to structural changes in sites  are needed  knoblock et al  1; kushmerick  1 . other nontrivial tasks within this context are 
  conversation with its semantic and pragmatic aspects  
  identification of problem domains  
  search and information retrieval with the related evaluation  
  negotiation including additional and even unsolicited offers  both having cooperative and opportunistic 
1  these ideas are based on discussions with w. grossmann  
university of vienna  o. stock  itc-irst  a. tjoa  tu vienna  and w. wahlster  dfk1. 
behavior. 
　however  these problem types assume that users are able to express their needs  which is normally not the case. systems have to  become active  and to provide advice  adapting to different travel decision processes as well as navigation styles  moutinho  1; ankomah et al.  1 . for example  grabler and zins  have identified  based on a study on 1 human - human and human - machine counseling sessions  1 different traveler groups such as highly pre-defined  recommendation oriented or geography oriented ones. these groups differ in the order in which information is searched  the type of information needed  the level of support required and the level of personal flexibility and knowledge. two groups of factors are identified: personal  i.e.  socioeconomic and psychological/cognitive factors  experience  personality  involvement   and travel features  i.e.  travel purpose  travel party size  the length of travel or the distance to the destination. 
an application example of such an approach is 
  ricci and werthner  1 . based on case based reasoning  cbr   it adapts its dialogue as it learns more about the user  supports product aggregation for a given travel  provides personalized recommendations based on previous system experience  and it applies query refinement methods helping to adjust queries according to the data available in a given product catalogues. thus  it integrates topical information and  good  examples of product bundling contained in previous travels built by a community of users. 

dietorecs  another example  extends this approach by integrating the iterative presentation and evaluation of alternative proposals  fesenmaier et al.  1 . it assumes that by presenting specific images  which implicitly represent the most discriminating offers within a given product catalogue  the evaluation of the user provides indications about his/her references. at the beginning the systems performs a cluster analysis of the offers within a given catalogue. the user's choice is the starting point of an iterative process of refocused clustering and presentation. at 

invited speakers 	1 

the end  either the user directly takes the chosen product  or the obtained criteria serve as input for a cbr process. 
　these examples show  that different decisions styles as well as the seamless switching between them have to be supported. but the choice on tourism products is not rational; these products are complex experience structures that involve cognitive and sensory stimulations. due to the multi-sensory nature of tourism products  textual ways of describing vacations are very limited to convey a complete picture that can be used to formulate product expectations serving as a basis for decision. 
　a possible approach is to look at product trails - these are sources of information for the formation of brand beliefs since they involve an experience of the product through multiple senses - describing leisure experiences and to draw conclusions on how to present tourism information and how to guide a user in a non rational navigation process. gretzel and fesenmaier  looked at 1 randomly selected persons who were asked to imagine a trip and to report the colors dominating their mental image  the scents they would like to smell  and the sounds they expect to hear. they identified a number of such sensory categories  which were clustered to experiences representing coherent bundles such as autumn or scenic / nature. these findings indicate that sensory domains and associations thereof exist and that these follow specific patterns. such bundles can be used to describe coherent experiences sought after by certain groups of travelers. these results can provide substantial input for interface design and user guidance. 
　finally  travelers need access to information whenever and wherever they want  making tourism a perfect application field for mobile computing. latest generations of mobile devices and wireless networks offer new opportunities  but mobile devices still suffer from restrictions compared to web based systems. moreover  the mobile context imposes a very different interaction style and decision model. but  on the other side  mobile applications could take advantage when linked to existing web sites and refer to already existing personal profiles and selected travel products. the mobile intelligent travel recommender  mitr  supports travelers to complement their product while traveling  ricci et al  1 . the objective of mitr is to improve iteratively the  fitness  of recommended products. but instead of asking the user for explicit input  mitr exploits the knowledge contained in the pre-travel plan to guess an initial set of candidate products. the user can provide critics to some of these products  such as  i like this feature of this product  or  i want something less expensive   which is used for further interaction. 
1 system features - intelligent networking 
system designed to support such applications should 
  allow users to access information whenever and wherever they want  
  guide the user in the decision and traveling process  and   allow the user to create product bundles. 
　business services for the traveler may use web services to be more easily integrated and bundled into new  ad-hoc products. web services provide an open  flexible  modular  layered architecture that can integrate multiple communication models. but these services do only facilitate the  manual  combination of components across different platforms. the vision is that this should be available  semi-  automatically  for example  allowing a customer to plan a trip in the city of vienna visiting restaurants with at least 1 gourmet points and some classical concerts. another enabling technology might be peer-to-peer  p1p  services to directly exploit resources present at other nodes without intervention of any central server  where nodes may join and be integrated in an ad- hoc manner. such services need to be described for the respective peer device and discovered in an ad-hoc manner in a decentralized scheme  without a centralized registry as this may be unavailable in a mobile environment; to be composed ad-hoc and to interact not only with servers  but also with other peers; and to be connectable to legacy systems. 
　however  when taking the supply side's point of view  the requirements become even more complicated: for instance  a middleman might search for 1 individual web services hosted by several individual  privately-owned hotels and with golf courses nearby in the tyrol within a diameter of 1kms in order to bundle them with flights into tourist packages. in this case functions are needed to   enable middlemen to create sets of bundled products  
  ease the participation of smes to larger networks  and 
  facilitate networking leading to virtual organizations. 
　in this context networked business operations could be defined as p1p enabled semantic web services that integrate business networks allowing for an n:m organization and communication between participating enterprises. this transfers the level from composing individual instances of services to composing sets of services; and from ad-hoc integration between two participants to an arbitrary number of cooperating enterprises. the orchestration of a large set of web services requires possibilities for business planning with more refined means. techniques of constraint reasoning  multi-value optimization and relaxation might be used to aggregate web services at the set level and to achieve specific business goals  e.g.  profit optimization or the equal distribution of income within a destination. 
　however  such a scenario is based on a non-existing assumption: there exists no agreed electronic standard to describe tourism services. those existing such as the ota  open travel alliance  specifications are just adopted by few players. given that the number of available tourism relevant information sites is huge  e.g.  out of the 1 mio european enterprises in this sector nearly 1% have already their web site  it can be foreseen that also future standardization initiatives will fail. 
one approach to this problem is the european project 
1 	invited speakers harmonise  creating an ontology based mediation and harmonization tool  dell'erba et al.  1 . the project puts emphasis on the combination of a social consensus process with the application of new technologies. the goal is to allow participating tourism organizations to keep their proprietary data format while cooperating with each other. 
specific tourism mediators are dedicated to the  translation  needs between these data sources. such a mediator looks at information from a higher conceptual semantic level using this level of abstraction for the mapping purpose. 

figure 1: the harmonise process 
the data model of a source document  assuming xml  is first lifted to a local conceptual schema  c-normalization  and then semantically mapped to the terminology specified by the shared ontology  which is built by domain experts. the output of the mapping process is a set of reconciliation rules  which are used in order to transform the local data and to code them according to the ontology content. harmonise is based on rdf s  as  language  for representing local conceptual schemata as well as the mediating ontology. but harmonise has several limitations: i  it does not solve the problem of ontology versioning  which is severe in a domain with constantly new products; ii  and harmonise  though mapping between different conceptual models  does not support ontology reasoning  or even more advanced concepts such as approximate reasoning  needed in a domain which is based not only on true axioms or facts. 
1 	conclusions 
the tourism business is changing. more specialized services  flexible network configurations and further consumer integration into internal business processes will lead to smart market places  integrating all stakeholders. the underlying it scenario  enabling as well as enforcing this development  shows that tourism is an interesting field of application. but it also demonstrates that this industry poses hard challenges  which offer interesting research opportunities. this has also been acknowledged by the european union  placing tourism as one of the preferred application fields of the european it research. 
