sensible agent technology improving coordination and communication in biosurveillance domains 
k. s. barber  d. faith  k. fuilam  t. graser  d. c. han  j. jeong  j. kim  d. lam  r. mckay  
m. pal  j. park  m. vanzin 
the laboratory for intelligent processes and systems 
electrical and computer engineering 
the university of texas at austin 
{barber  daniel  kfullam  graser  dhan  jeongjh  joonoo  dnlam  rmckay  monti  jisun  vanzin}  lips.utexas.edu 

protecting the population from chemical-biological attacks and outbreaks of infectious disease is a fundamental goal of government entities such as the center for disease control  cdc   as well as state and local health agencies. 
early warning is critical for saving lives and implementing an effective response  including characterizing disease sources  preventing proliferation  and treating patients. however  such biosurveillance activities are inherently challenging due to a number of complications: 
  coordinating participants and disseminating information: biosurveillance requires coordination between local  state  and federal authorities. local entities such as treatment facilities must collect information and disseminate to decision-making entities  constrained by communication costs as well as time. 
  determining the relevance and reliability of information: the ability of a treatment facility to offer a diagnosis with high confidence is in part a function of resources and expertise at their disposal. thus  entities receiving symptom and diagnosis information must determine information relevance qualified by source reliability. 
  drawing epidemiological conclusions from symptoms and diagnoses: significant expertise is required to analyze symptoms and diagnoses to assess public risk. such assessments consider an entire region  drawing together information from all contributing sources. often few epidemiologists are responsible for monitoring a large area  resulting in analysis and communication overload. 
　to support epidemiologists and increase the effectiveness of biosurveillance activities  the laboratory for intelligent processes and systems at the university of texas at austin  ut:lips  is applying its sensible agent 
 sa  multi-agent system  mas  technology to the biosurveillance domain. specific sa features and their applicability to the biosurveillance domain follow: 
l. evaluation of information and information soure 
transmitting that information to agents responsible for epidemiological analysis . 
1. adaptive decision-making organization formation  admf to establish collaborations among agents associated with epidemiologists  treatment facilities  pharmacies  schools  and other entities. admf capabilities involve searching for potential partner agents  evaluating those partners and ranking their capabilities  selecting one or more partners  and determining the  best  distribution of decision-making control and execution obligations among selected partners . 
1. coordinated planaing and executive among distributed decision-making agents  allowing them to share preferences and constraints during the planning process. for example  agents may coordinate interrogation of information sources  motivated by reduced overall communication cost. 
in texas  biosurveillance is conducted by the texas 
department of health  tdh  in cooperation with local and federal authorities. resident epidemiologists gather patient symptom and diagnostic information from hospitals  clinics  and other treatment facilities from throughout the state. tdh is currently a single point of contact  and has solicited approaches for other network configurations that allow them to reduce burden and provide more rapid response. ut.lips has suggested a variety of options for distributing decision-making and information monitoring using agent technology. 
　figure i depicts one configuration of agent roles suggested by ut:lips and characterized in this demonstration. the existing two-layer network is expanded to three layers  where an interim layer consists of sensible agents acting as  disease agents   each dedicated to the analysis of a particular disease being monitored. symptom and diagnosis data is sent from information sources  e.g.  hospitals and clinics  to disease agents  which evaluate the information and send appropriate epidemiological assessments to a centralized tdh agent. in making an assessment  disease agents incorporate source reliability and the confidence values associated with information assigned by those sources. disease agents may also collaborate in acquiring and 

intelligent systems demonstrations 	1 how information will ultimately be shared. 
preferences may involve agreements whereby one disease agent acquires information from selected case agents  while a collaborating agent acquires information from a second  disjoint set of case agents in exchange. in summary  we aim to demonstrate better 

the biosurveillance domain through various scenarios  each emphasizing one of the sa features described above. the testbed offers a suite of tools to assist in the experimental testing of multi-agent systems. tool facilities include execution visualization and configuration of repeatable experimental runs  allowing the user to specify what parameters to test and what data to record . 
　in one scenario  case agents consisting of local hospitals send patient case symptom and diagnosis information to disease agents. it should be noted that case agents are simple reactive agents responsible for period reporting and are not endowed with sensible agent capabilities such as trust evaluation and admf. the disease agent assigns an initial reputation to case agents based on the case agent's quality of facilities  available resources  e.g.  equipment and staff expertise  and history for providing reliable/unreliable data. disease agents collect information on a given patient from multiple case agents  generating a  net belief about patient symptoms and diagnoses  qualified by confidence values on respective data and the reputations of the case agents. the number of patients with a given disease is calculated from net beliefs and compared to a series of threshold values associated with standard degrees of epidemiological alarms: none  low  guarded  elevated  high  severe. generated alarms are passed to the tdh agent and reflected on a simulation visualization. 
　other scenarios involve collaboration between disease agents in acquiring and analyzing case information. motivation for collaboration is based on reducing communication costs  where collaborators can benefit by  i  sharing information acquired previously;  ii  leveraging lower communication costs such as time to communicate between selected disease agents and case agents; and  iii  applying economies of scale by  bundling  multiple queries  thereby amortizing the cost of query initiations across multiple requests. disease agents agree to establish collective decision-making frameworks that impact which agents will perform planning  i.e. plans to acquire and evaluate case data  on behalf of framework members and performance  i.e. quicker and more reliable  response in 
biosurveillance 	scenarios 	using 	sensible 	agent technology. 
acknowledgments 
this research is sponsored in part by the defense advanced research project agency  darpa  taskable agent software kit  task  program  agreement number 
f1-1. additionally  the research reported in this document/presentation was performed in connection with contract/cooperative agreement number daad1ol-d-1 with the u.s. army research laboratory. the views and conclusions contained in this document/presentation are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as presenting the official policies or position  either expressed or implied  of the u.s. army research laboratory or the u.s. government unless so designated by other authorized documents. 
