demonstration: liaison agents for distributed space operations 
d. schreckenghost  p. bonasso  d. kortenkamp  c. martin  t. milam  c. thronesbery 
nasa johnson space center 
texas robotics & automation laboratories  traclabs  
1 hercules  houston  tx ghost ieee.org 

1 research overview 
future manned space operations are expected to include a greater use of automation  cooke and hine  1  this automation will function without human intervention most of the time. however  humans will be required to supervise the automation  and they must be on-call to respond to anomalies or to perform related tasks that are not easily automated. in such an environment  humans perform other tasks most of the time  and their interaction with the automation may be remote and asynchronous. as automation becomes more prevalent  better support for such interaction is needed. the distributed collaboration and interaction  dci  environment  being developed at nasa  investigates the use of software agents to assist humans in this type of remote  distributed space operations. 
　the dci approach has been applied for use by control engineers at the johnson space center  jsc  who are investigating advanced technology for life support such as the water recovery system  or wrs  schreckenghost  et al  1 . the wrs recycles wastewater through biological and chemical processes to remove impurities and produce potable water. managed by an autonomous control program called 1t  bonasso  et al  1   the wrs ran unattended in a continuous 1 integrated test from january 1 through april 1  bonasso  et al.  1 . 
wrs control engineers periodically monitored for network  hardware  or power failures from remote locations  while spending the majority of their time carrying out their daily tasks on unrelated projects. the current prototype of the dci environment uses a simulation of the wrs 1t system for both demonstration and continuing development. the dci implementation creates an environment in which humans and the 1t control automation together form an integrated team to ensure efficient  effective operation of the wrs. 
1 approach: dci architecture 
the dci approach uses intermediate liaison agents called 
attentive remote interaction and execution liaison 
 ariel  agents to provide an interfacing layer between the human and the control automation. in the dci system  these liaison agents provide a variety of services  which together support  1  human supervision of automated control systems   1  direct human control of processes such as crew life support   1  activity tracking and coordination among humans and automated systems interacting with the same process  and  1  asynchronous information exchange among distributed  remote humans and automated systems. 
　in addition to liaison agents  dci provides augmenting software'. this software includes new capabilities used by all ariel agents  e.g.  software to detect events from a control agent  or dci tools used to integrate existing software into the dci environment  e.g.  an interface to a 
　centralized planner . in figure 1  the event detection assistant  eda  and the conversion assistant for planning  cap  are representative pieces of augmenting software. the eda monitors data produced by the control 
automation for data patterns that are of interest to humans supervising this system. the cap augments a centralized hierarchical task net  htn  planner   the prototype uses ap  elsaesser and sanborn  1    for interfacing to humans and their ariel agents. the entities with black backgrounds in figure 1  the human  the wrs system and its control software  and the centralized planner  participate in but are not part of the dci environment. 

copyright  c  1  american association for artificial intelligence  www.aaai.org . all rights reserved. intelligent systems demonstrations 	1 figure 1. dci architecture 
　ariel agents  as pictured in figure 1  provide the following services for and on-behalf-of their human users: 
  the state management service maintains a model of the user's current context  including task  role  and location; 
  the user interface service manages different modalities  such as display  pager  or email  to present information; 
  the notification service extends communication protocols to support distributed  assynchronous collaboration and to ensure the proper routing of information to users based on their roles  location  etc.; 
  the task status service tracks human activity and provides completion status to the automated planner; and 
  the location service provides human location information for use in tracking the completion status of user activities  determining how to notify the user of events  and customizing the presentation of information. three services included in the dci design have not yet implemented: 
  the command and authorization service will assist a human in commanding the automation by reconfiguring the automation when transitioning between manual and automated commanding and by detecting and resolving potential command conflicts among distributed users; 
  the interactive procedure service will allow a user to specify new operations by modifying an automated procedure and triggering the control automation to perform this procedure; and 
  the interactive event service allows a user to interactively define temporary or new operational events and to control automated monitoring for these events. ariel services work together to support an individual human's interaction with automation software and with other humans that are geographically and/or electronically distributed. 
1 	demonstration 
the dci demonstration shows the potential benefits of the 
dci system and ariel agents in the following typical scenario involving the wrs and its three control engineers: the  prime  engineer  who is the first called in for wrs problems  a  backup  engineer  and a 
 coordinator   who oversees the work of the other two. 
　1  a loss of controls communication in the wrs control software requires a human to reinitialize the software. 
　1  the prime engineer's ariel notifies him about the problem and the assignment of a new wrs repair task. 
　1  the prime engineer is offline and doesn't respond to the pager notification in a timely manner. 
　1  the prime engineer's ariel re-issues a task assignment acknowledgement request with increased urgency. 
　1  the prime engineer still does not respond  and his ariel indicates to the planner that the task assignment has not been acknowledged. the planner reassigns the repair task to the backup who is located off-site from jsc. 
　1  the backup engineer's ariel notifies him about the assignment of a new wrs repair task. 
　1  the backup engineer is online and responds to the request to acknowledge the change in his schedule. 
　1  the backup engineer travels on-site to jsc  to fix the problem in the wrs. 
　1  in the water processing facility  the backup engineer reviews a summary of the anomaly situation via a notice previously logged by his ariel. based on that review  he determines how to respond. 
　1  once the problem is fixed  the backup engineer's ariel notifies him when the water system has returned to normal and he leaves the lab. 
　1  when the prime logs into the dci environment later  he reviews his ariel's notifications about how the control team coordinated to resolve the situation and what if any impacts the problem had on his schedule. 
　1  throughout this interchange  the coordinator relies on his ariel to inform him of events in the wrs and the response of the control engineers on his team. 
　the dci demonstration showcases the potential to provide unprecedented support for distributed collaboration among humans and automation in the context of future manned space operations. the dci approach also holds future promise for extended application because similar increases in the use of automation can be seen in other domains ranging from process control to smart houses. 
acknowledgements 
we want to acknowledge the support of dr. michael 
shafto  the manager of human-centered computing in 
nasa's intelligent systems program  under which this work was done. 
