
although there are some research efforts toward resource allocation in multi-agent systems  mas   most of these work assume that each agent has complete information about other agents. this research investigates interactions among selfish  rational  and autonomous agents in resource allocation  each with incomplete information about other entities  and each seeking to maximize its expected utility. this paper presents a proportional resource allocation mechanism and gives a game theoretical analysis of the optimal strategies and the analysis shows the existence of equilibrium in the incomplete information setting. by augmenting the resource allocation mechanism with a deal optimization mechanism  trading agents can be programmed to optimize resource allocation results by updating beliefs and resubmitting bids. experimental results showed that by having a deal optimization stage  the resource allocation mechanism produced generally optimistic outcomes  close to market equilibrium .
1 introduction
in systems involving multiple autonomous agents  it is often necessary to decide how scarce resources should be allocated. the allocation of resources within a system of autonomous agents  is an exciting area of research at the interface of computer science and economics  johari et al.  1 . market mechanisms have been advocated as an effective method to control electronic resources and been used in resource allocation  clearwater and clearwater  1 . these resource allocation mechanisms which mostly rely on derived concepts from cooperative game theory often assume that agents share the same desires and have complete information about the world  clearwater and clearwater  1; maheswaran and bas ar  1; johari et al.  1; bredin et al.  1 . under such settings  there is much related work concerning issues in resource allocation like complexity  preference  procedure  etc  chevaleyre et al.  1; endriss et al.  1; endriss and maudet  1 .
모generally  agents are assumed to be self-interested and have incomplete information. the assumption of incomplete information is intuitive because in practice  agents have private information  and for strategic reasons  they do not reveal their strategies  constraints  or preferences  sim  1 . in  rosenschein and zlotkin  1  p.1   it was noted that the strategy of a trading agent corresponds to its internal program  and extracting the true internal decision process would be difficult. moreover  when selfish agents have competing interests  they may have incentive to deviate from protocols or to lie to other agents about their preferences.
모against this background  this paper studies resource allocation in multi-agent systems in which each agent 1  is selfish and 1  has incomplete information about the other entities in the world. we consider divisible or share auctions as a market mechanism to solve the resource allocation problem. inherent in the settings we are considering is the competition among agents attempting to gain access to limited resources  e.g.  sensor resources in distributed sensing networks . trading agents automatically select the appropriate strategies based on their beliefs about other entities and we give a gametheoretic analysis of selfish agents' optimal strategies.
모this paper also introduces a deal optimization mechanism in which agents can recursively updatetheir beliefs and resubmit bids. the result of resource allocation with incomplete information may be not as good as that with complete information. the intuition is that sometimes it may be prudent to look for and consider other more promising opportunities that may arise after a resource allocation game completes. to optimize deals  each agent updates its belief about other entities based on past interaction and resubmits a new bid. after getting the resource allocation result of the latest auction  an agent reports how much it loses or wins in the past auction and then the auctioneer reallocates utilities.
모the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. section 1 introduces the resource allocation problem. section 1 discusses trading agents' optimal actions in resource allocation. in section 1  the deal optimization mechanism will be presented and analyzed. section 1 examines the performance of the proposed mechanismthrough experimentation. section 1 summarizes related work. in the final section  some conclusions are presented and ideas for future work are outlined.
1 the resource allocation problem
this paper considers allocation of divisible resources  e.g.  sensor resource or network bandwidth  among selfish intelligent agents. we begin with n agents competing for a resource with a fixed finite capacity c. the resource is allocated using an auction mechanism  where the partitions depend on the relative signals or bids sent by the agents. we assume that each agent submits a signal si to the resource. then  s =  s1 s1 ... sn  represents all bids of competing agents. a divisible auction consists of two mappings. the first is from the bids  s  to a partition  x s   where xi s  뫍  1 c  is the resource share allocated to the ith bidding agent. the second is from the bids  s  to a cost vector  c s x  where ci s x  is the cost associated with the ith agent obtaining xi s .
모in our auction mechanism design  we want our allocations to be proportionally fair by weight. this holds if the allocation x  satisfies:

for any x where where si denote the weights.
this can be achieved by the following allocation rule:
		 1 
모in terms of cost of computation  we note that it takes o n  operations to perform the allocation presented in  1   which is the minimal cost for making variable allocations to n agents.
the cost for each agent is
	ci s x  = si	 1 
모in this auction mechanism  if the feedback from the resource is the sum of all bids  an agent can immediately verify if it has been given an accurate allocation. if an agent knows the received allocation xi and its own bid si  any bid total suggested by the auctioneer other than can be immediately identified as a signal of an inaccurate allocation or a lying auctioneer. furthermore  under this cost structure  each agent pays the same price per unit resource received.
모we assume that each agent has a valuation vi xi  for receiving an allocation xi. this valuation may be a characteri-
zation of the estimated performance as a function of a given share of the resource. each performance measure is translated to an equivalent value  money in this paper  that can be compared with cost. another derivation of the valuation could come from the estimated value of the sales that could be generated by obtaining a given share of the resource.
we also assume the valuation function vi xi  is concave
   strictly increasing  i.e. 
   and continuously differentiable 
with domain xi   1  xi 뫍  1 c . each agent's utility is the difference between the valuation and cost of its allocation:
		 1 
definition 1  resource allocation problem  given the centralized control of the system  a natural problem for the network manager  auctioneer  to try to solve is the following optimization problem:

under the constraints.
모even though the resource allocation is accomplished via an auction mechanism  we note that ultimately each agent pays the same price per unit resource obtained. the auction can then be interpreted as a resource sold at a uniformprice where the price is determined by the agents. the price per unit of the resource is 붿/c  where  and each agent receives an allocation in proportion to that price.
definition 1  demand function the demand function  di 붿   is defined as the quantity of resource that the agent would desire if the price was 붿. this is generated by an agent's unique optimal response in a way such that si = di 붿 붿 is the agent's reaction to. the demand function is expected to be differentiable decreasing function of its argument and the existence of one implies the existence of a well-defined inverse.
모we have a resource allocation mechanism where n users are bidding to obtain a portion of an offered resource. if the resulting allocation does not lie on the user's optimal demand curve  the user will change its bid. an immediate question is whether there exists a set of bids {si} that is a nash equilibrium  i.e.  a set of bids such that no single user wishes to deviate from its bid given that the bids of all the other users remain the same. to answer this question  we note that this is equivalent to asking whether there exists a value for the sum of total bids  붿  such that. this equivalence is valid because all of the offered capacity is partitioned among the users proportional to their bids and the optimal demand function represents a percentageof the offered capacity.
theorem 1  maheswaran and bas ar  1  given any set of continuous functions where  and
is true for i = 1 ... n  then there exists a unique value 붿  such that.
proof: let. then d 붿  is a continu-

ously decreasing function whose maximum value is d 붿  =
nc   c.	let .	we have d 붿max  =

1.	applying the intermediate value theorem for d 붿  on

 1 붿max   we know that there exists at least one 붿  such that
.	let us assume that there are

 at least two values of 붿 where d 붿  = c. let us choose two of these values  and. then  we have  which implies that . but we have  which is a contradiction and thus we can have only one 붿 where
.	
1 agents' optimal strategy with incomplete information
this work assumes that agents have incomplete information about the deadlines  reserve proposals  strategies  and time preferences of other agents. each agent has two parameters denoted as   ui si  . the outcome of resource allocation depends on each agent's two parameters. the information state  붮i  of an agent i is the information it has about the resource allocation parameters. an agent's own parameters are known to it  but the information it has about another agent is not complete. we define 붮i as: 붮i =  ui f i  
where ui is the agent i's utility function and f i is a probability distribution function that denotes the agent i's beliefs about the sum of other agents' bids. f i x  represents that the agent i's prior estimation of the probabilityof that the sum of other agents' bids is x. here we assume that agents have uncertain information about each other's bids. moreover  the agents do not know other trading partners' utility functions or strategies and  therefore  an agent and another agent may have different utility preferences.
모we describe how optimal bids are obtained for players that are utility maximizers. since utility is a function of values of allocated resource and bids  these strategies optimize both. without loss of generality  the discussion is from the perspective of the agent i  although the same analysis can be taken from the perspective of another agent .
모the outcome of resource allocation depends on all the agents' strategies. given the agent i's belief about other agents' bids  the expected utility it can gain with a bid si is given as:
		 1 
모the optimal strategy for the agent i is the bid that generates the highest expected utility for it. therefore  the optimal bid soi for the agent i is:
soi = arg maxsieui si 붮i 
definition 1  optimal response function  given the information state 붮i of the ith agent  we define the optimal response function 붞i 붮i  = soi = arg maxsieui si 붮i  as the ith agent's optimal bid. moreover  there is only one optimal bid for the agent i with its belief 붮i.
모in the same way  we can get the optimal bid for all the agents participating in resource allocation. it's been shown before that there is a unique nash equilibrium when agents have complete information about other entities. given the optimal strategies of all the agents with incomplete information  a natural question is whether there is still an allocation of the resource such that no single agent wishes to deviate from its bids given that the other agents remain the same.
theorem 1 given agents' belief set  붮1 붮1 ... 붮n   agents' optimal bids  constitute a unique
nash equilibrium if and only if  given other agents' bids
  any agent i's optimal bid is  in which
in which and.
algorithm: deal optimization mechanism

1. while t   tmax do
1. for all agents i do
1. update information state 붮ti
1. resubmit bid 붞ti 붮ti 
1. end for
1. auctioneer reports the auction result to all agents
1. for all agents i do
1. report the utility 뷈ti it would like to contribute or request
1. end for
1. if
1. auctioneer redistributes utilities
1. end if
1. t + +
1. end while

figure 1: the deal optimization mechanism algorithm.
given the other agents' bids   the agent i's optimal bid is . if the agent  it has incentive to violate the bid soi by proposing a new bid
. therefore  agents' optimal strategies converge to a
nash equilibrium if and only if.	
1 deal optimization mechanism
we have analyzed the convergence condition of selfish agents' optimal strategies. given agents' optimal strategies  the outcome  even the equilibrium result  of resource allocation may be not as good as the equilibrium result when agents' have complete information about one another. therefore  we try to optimize the auction based resource allocation mechanism in last section by continuing the auction. if a new allocation of resource is better  each agent's utility doesn't get worse  than the kept solution  replace the solution with the current one.
모the algorithmof deal optimization is given in fig. 1. tmax is the maximum round of optimization. t is initially set to 1. in each round of deal optimization  each agent i first updates its belief about the bids of the other agents using bayesian learning mechanism. then each agent re-submits its bid to the auctioneer and the auctioneer reports the resource allocation result to all agents. compared with the kept allocation of resource  some agents may have higher utilities with the new allocation and some may loose utilities. each rational agent will accept the new allocation if and only if its utility with the new allocation isn't worse than that with the kept allocation. thus each agent will report the utility 뷈ti that it would like to contribute  or request  to other agents in order to make every agent accept the new allocation. if  the auctioneer re-distributes all agents' utilities and the new allocation can replace the old allocation; otherwise  the new allocation cannot replace the old allocation. after re-distribution of agents' utilities  deal optimization proceeds to another round on the condition that t   tmax.
모1  belief update  step 1 : the agent i's information state  represents the agent i's belief about itself and other agents' bids at the tth round deal optimization. the utility function ui will be the same during deal optimization. but the probability distribution will evolve with the process of resource allocation. let the ith agent's belief about the other agents' bids before resource allocation be and let be agents' bids in resource allocation. let be agents' bids at round t.
모at round t   1  the ith agent updates its belief  at the t   1th round of deal optimization using the sum  of other agents' bids at the t   1th round of deal optimization. note that at round t = 1  the ith agent updates its belief  during resource allocation using the sum  of other agents' bids in resource allocation.
모this work utilizes a well known machine learning mechanism-bayesian learning mechanism. in classical statistics  bayesian theorem of continuous random variable has the form as follows:
		 1 
where 뷇 붿  is the prior distribution density function. 뷇 x|붿  is the conditional density of x when the random variable 붿 is given  i.e.  samples information. 뷇 붿|x  is the conditional distribution density function of 붿 when samples x =  x1 x1 ... xn  are given  i.e.  posterior distribution of 붿. we make use of bayesian learning mechanism for an agent to get the sum of the other agents' bids.
모the conjugate prior distribution of the mean of normal distribution  variance is known  is normal distribution. suppose x1 x1 ... xn are samples of normaldistributionn 붿 1   where 1 is known and 붿 is unknown. let another normaldistribution n 붿 뷉1  be the prior distribution of 붿.
. the posterior
distribution of 붿  i.e.  뷇 붿|x   calculated by bayesian theorem is n 뷃1 1   where
		 1 
	1 =  뷉1 + 뷉 1  1	 1 
모we can find that the posterior mean 뷃1 averages the prior mean and the mean of the samples weighted according to their precision. 1 is the variance of the mean of samples x  and 1 is the precision of the mean of samples x. 뷉1 is the variance of the prior distribution n 뷃 뷉1   and 뷉 1 is the precision of 뷃. the smaller 뷉1 is  the greater the proportion of the prior mean to the posterior mean is. on the other hand  the greater the number n of samples is  the smaller 1/n is  and the greater the proportion of x to the posterior mean is. especially if n increases infinitely  the proportion of the prior mean to the posterior mean is little.
모more reasonably  the posterior information combines the prior information and the samples' information. with the premise of conjugate priors  the posterior can be used as prior in successive combinations with new samples using the bayesian theorem. when the procedure is repeated  the impact of samples is more and more important and the posterior information is closer to fact with little noise of the samples.
모to learn the sum s i of the other agents' bids of an agent i using bayesian learning mechanism  we just need to let s i be 붿 and the sum of other agents' bids be x1 x1 ... xn. finally  the sum s i of the other agents' bids we gain is closer to the real value 붿.
   1  bid generation  step 1 : after updating its belief  an agent i submits its optimal bid 붞i 붮ti  =  to the auctioneer.
   1  allocation result report  step 1 : after agents report their bids. the auctioneer allocates the resource using the mechanism in  1  and reports the result  of allocation to all agents.
   1  agent response  step 1 : let the kept allocation of resource is skept and agents's utilities are  ukept1  ukept1  ... ukeptn  .1 each rational agent will agree to accept the new allocation  of resource if and only if ui st  + pti 뫟 ukepti  1 where pti is the payment the agent i receives in the tth round of optimization. here  pti   1 means that agent i pays the amount of  pti to other agents  while pti   1 means that it receives the amount of pti from other agents. it follows that . the sum of all payments is 1  i.e.  the overall amount of money present in the system does not change.
모after notified the new allocation xt in the tth round of optimization  an agent i should make a decision on how much  뷈ti   1 means that an agent want to receive money 뷈ti from other agents and 뷈ti   1 means that an agent want to pay money 뷈ti to other agents  it should ask for or contribute based on its utility of the kept allocation ukepti and the utility ui xt  of the current allocation. there are two scenarios: 1  ui st    ukepti   i.e.  the agent i's utility decreases once it accepts the new allocation without receiving money from other agents. therefore  the rational agent i should request money from the system to make up its loss in utility  i.e.  뷈ti 뫞 ui st  ukepti   1. with the decrease of 뷈ti  requests for more outside utility   the agent has to face higher possibility of failure of optimization; 1  ui st  뫟 ukepti   i.e.  the agent i's utility remains the same or increases if it accepts the new allocation without receiving  or paying  money from  or to  other agents. the ith agent can request money from other agents or pay to other agents to make every agent accept the new allocation and it also follows that 뷈ti 뫞 ui st    ukepti . similarly  the agent i has to face higher  especially when 뷈ti   1  possibility of failure of optimization with the decrease of 뷈ti.
모on the one hand  the increase of 뷈ti 뫞 ui st    ukepti will increase the ith agent's utility if the optimization at round t is successful; on the other hand  the increase of 뷈ti 뫞 ui st    ukepti will increase the possibility of the failure of the optimization. thus  the ith agent has to make a tradeoff between increasing its utility and lowering the failure probability of optimization. let 붽it 뷈ti  be the possibility of the failure of the optimization if the ith agent reports 뷈ti to the auctioneer and 뷍it 뷈ti  be the utility increase the ith agent gains if the optimization is successful while reporting 뷈ti to the auctioneer. we assume that the agent has knowledge of the values of 붽it 뷈ti  and 뷍it 뷈ti . then the agent will report the optimal value of 뷈ti to the auctioneer and it follows that:

   1  utility reallocation  step 1 :
모after all agents report the utilities they want to contribute or request  auctioneer decides to distribute the utilities among all the agents. let be sum of the money all agents intend to contribute andbe sum of the money all agents intend to request. if  i.e. 
   this round optimization fails due to the collected money cannot satisfy the needs of the agents that request for payment. the kept allocation and agents' utilities remain the same.
모if   the collected money can satisfy the needs of the agents that request for payment and this round of optimization is successful. the amount pti of utility the ith agent receives is defined as:
		 1 
모if  the allocation of resource at round t replaces the kept allocation and each agent has a new utility ui st  + pti.
theorem 1 the	deal	optimization	mechanism	is individually-rational.
모proof: a mechanism is individually rational if there is an incentive for agents to join it rather than opting out of it. for rational agents  we just need to prove that each agent's utility will not be decreased at any round of optimization.
모the statement is true for a round of unsuccessful optimization as each agent's utility remains the same. assume the deal optimization at round t is successful. the ith agent's utility before optimization is ukepti and its utility after optimization is ui st +pti. as it follows that 뷈ti 뫞 ui st  ukepti when the agent i reports it desire to the auctioneer. considering  1   it follows that

theorem 1 the social welfare will not be decreased at any round of optimization.
proof: we can gain the theorem directly from theorem 1.

1 experimentation
in order to perform empirical evaluations  we have developed a simulation testbed consists of a virtual e-marketplace  a society of trading agents and a controller  manager  was implemented. the controller generates agents  randomly determines their parameters  e.g.  their roles as auctioneers or bidders  initial beliefs  reserve bids   and simulates the entrance of agents to the virtual e-marketplace.
모to evaluate the performance of the proposed resource allocation mechanism in a wide variety of test environments  agents are subject to different market densities and different optimization deadlines. both market density and optimization deadline are generated randomly following a uniform distribution. market density depends on average number of agents generated per round. by experimental tuning  it was found that when the number of agents is higher than 1  there was little or no differencein performanceof resource allocation. therefore  the number of agents between the range of 1  respectively  1 and 1 is considered as sparse  respectively  moderate range and dense .
모the optimization deadline is randomly selected from  1 . the range of  1  for deadline is adopted based on experimental tuning and agents' behaviors. in current experimental setting  it was found that for optimization deadline   1  there was little or no difference in performance of resource allocation and the results of resource allocation are close to the optimal results.
모agents' beliefs about otheragents are affected by the above two input data and evolve with the process of resource allocation. for example  in a dense market  an agent will believe that the higher probability of the sum of other agents' bids is higher than that in a sparse market.
모we evaluate the efficiency of the mechanism in terms of maximizing the total utility of agents participating in resource allocation. the mean efficiency of the market  averaged over 1 independent resource allocation scenarios  in different environments and are shown in figs. 1  1  and 1. the resource allocation results without deal optimization are compared with that with deal optimization and the optimal allocation when agents have complete information.
모from experimental results in figs. 1  1  and 1  it can be found that  when agents are subject to different market densities  agents' utilities increase with the increase of the optimization deadline and the average utilities are close to the optimal allocation when the optimization deadline is longer than 1. for example  in fig. 1  when the optimization deadline is between 1 and 1  the average utilities are 1  which is close to the optimal utility 1 when agents have complete information. we can also find that agents' unities increase more and more slowly with the increase of the optimization deadline. in addition  with a same optimization deadline  agents' utilities in a dense market are better than that in a moderate or sparse market. the results correspond to the in-

figure 1: resource allocation in sparse market

figure 1: resource allocation in moderate market
tuition that social welfare will increase with more and more entities.
1 conclusion
this research investigates a market based mechanism for resource allocation. the main contributions of this research include: 1  unlike related work  e.g.   clearwater and clearwater  1; maheswaran and bas ar  1; johari et al.  1; bredin et al.  1   in which agents are assumed to have complete information this research investigates agents' rational strategies in resource allocation mechanism when agents have incomplete information; 1  we propose a deal optimization mechanism which can enhance the performance of resource allocation and trading agents can be programmed to optimize transaction deals by updating beliefs and resubmitting bids; 1  we evaluate the performance of the proposed approach by experimentation. experimental results showed that by having a deal optimization stage  the resource allocation produced generally optimistic outcomes close to the optimal outcome.
모finally  a future agenda of this work is considering other variables or constraints  for example  budget constraint  time constraint  into our mechanism.
1 acknowledgement
this research is partially supported by the project sponsored by the national grid office/a*star of singapore  grant

figure 1: resource allocation in dense market
number is 1 1 .
