
web search is a challenging task. previous research mainly exploits texts on the web pages or link information between the pages  while multimedia information is largely ignored. this paper proposes a new framework for web search  which exploits image contents to help improve the search performance. in this framework  candidate images are retrieved at first by considering their associated text information. then  images related to the query are identified by analyzing the density of the visual feature space. after that  an image-based rank of the web pages is generated  which is combined with the traditional keyword-based search result to produce the final search result. experiments demonstrate the promise of the proposed framework.
1 introduction
web has become the largest information repository over the world. due to its huge volume  users easily feel lost and difficult to achieve what they need from the repository. in consequence  research on web search has attracted more and more attention.
　earlier works on web search mainly focused on exploiting text information since most web pages contain abundant text contents. in general  each web page is treated as a text document and web is considered as a huge document collection. thus  techniques from conventional text retrieval  such as vector space model  vsm   raghavan and wong  1  and tfidf  salton and buckley  1   were employed to search for documents with text contents similar to the query. later  considering that web is a hyperlinked environmentand the links between web pages encode the importance of the pages to some extent  link information is utilized in many approaches  such as pagerank  brin and page  1  and hits  kleinberg  1   as a helpful evidence to make the pages which are relevant to the query stand out.
　it is noteworthy that in addition to text and link  other modalities of information  such as image  video and audio  also convey rich and important information about contents of web pages. in fact  web is a multimedia environment. when possible  the author of a web page would like to describe the topic using different information modalities with different advantages; a user would like to exploit the most convenientand prominent information modality to comprehend a web page. for example  an author has put a picture of tiger to the web page shown in figure 1; when a user browses this page  even without reading the texts on the page  he or she would quickly understand that the page is about the animal tiger  since the first impression of the page comes from a first glimpse at the vivid image. however  although the importance of information modalities other than text and link has been well recognized  only a few works  woodruff et al.  1; xue et al.  1  have tried to use them in web search. in particular  few works address the issue of exploiting visual contents of images to help improve web search performance.

figure 1: a web page on tiger.
　this paper is motivated by the fact that if a web page is judged to be relevant to a query in multiple information modalities simultaneously  then the page has bigger chance to be really relevant than another page which is judged to be relevant in only the text modality. for example  when a user searches for the animal tiger  a web page containing a tiger photo as well as the word 'tiger' would have a higher chance to satisfy the query than a page containing the word 'tiger' without a tiger picture. in other words  related images in web pages are regarded as additional evidence in judging the relevance of those pages in the search process.
in the proposed webseic  web search exploiting image contents  framework  candidate images are retrieved from web pages by considering the text information associated to them at first. then  by analyzing the visual contents of these images  some images which have a high chance to be relevant to the query are identified. based on these related images  an image-based rank of the web pages is generated  which is then merged with a traditional keyword-based rank of the web pages to produce the final search result.
　the rest of this paper is organized as follows. section 1 briefly introduces some related works. section 1 presents the webseic framework. section 1 reports on the experiments. finally  section 1 concludes.
1 related works
traditional web search is based on query term matching since queries are composed of textual keywords while web pages usually contain abundant texts. statistics such as term occurrence frequency are often calculated to examine the text contents of web pages and many techniques from text retrieval such as vsm  raghavan and wong  1  and tfidf  salton and buckley  1  have been utilized. several new techniques have been developed recently. considering that typical documents may contain multiple drifting topics and have varying lengths  cai et al.  took a block of a web page as a single semantic unit instead of the whole page and proposed a block-based web search strategy. ntoulas et al.  proposed a new web search engine called infocious which improves the web search through linguistic analysis to resolve the content ambiguity of web pages and to rate the quality of the retrieved web page.
　the links between web pages have also been utilized in web search. page et al.  indicated that web is a hyperlinked environment and the links between web pages encode the importance of the pages to some extent. based on this recognition  the pagerank  brin and page  1  algorithm has achieved great success. kleinberg  investigated the symmetric relationship between web pages and indicated that 'good' pages should have a lot of links coming from 'good' pages. based on this recognition  the hits algorithm  kleinberg  1  searches for 'good' pages recursively. silva et al.  have shown that web search performance can be improved by using both the text and link information simultaneously.
　multimedia information retrieval has been studied for many years. in particular  many researchers have investigated image retrieval from web  frankel et al.  1; smith and chang  1; sclaroff et al.  1; mukherjea et al.  1 . however  only a few works have been done in exploiting the image modality in web search. woodruff et al.  proposed to use an enhanced thumbnail to help the user quickly find the web pages he or she expects. this enhanced thumbnail is an image  where the whole web page is resized to fit into this image and important text is highlighted in order to be readable for the user. xue et al.  proposed to present image snippets along with text snippets to the user such that it is much easier and more accurate for the user to identify the web pages he or she expects and to reformulate the initial query. an image snippet of a web page is one of the images in the page that is both representative of the theme of the page and at the same time closely related to the query. note that those works mainly use the image modality to help present the search results  while few works have addressed the issue of exploiting visual contents of images in the web search process.
　as images and texts in the same web page are often related  there are usually some text information partially describing the image contents  such as image names or words around images  which can be regarded as natural descriptions for images in web pages  harmandas et al.  1 . many works have tried to exploit the relationship between texts and images in the same page to identify related images. coelho et al.  extended a bayesian network for this purpose. by combining distinct sources of textual descriptions associated with images  their method achieves better performance than using only a single source of textual descriptions. wang et al.  regarded web images as one type of objects and the surrounding texts as another type. by constructing the link structure and exploiting the mutual reinforcement between them  both visual content and text description are combined for identifying related web images.
1 the webseic framework
the webseic framework is shown in figure 1. given a query  webseic executes a typical keyword-based search 1 to obtain a traditional keyword-based rank of web pages. then  it retrieves candidate images from web pages. images having good chance to be relevant to the query are identified and used to generate an image-based rank of web pages. finally  the image-based and keyword-based ranks are combined to produce the final rank of the web pages.
　the basic process of webseic is similar to that of traditional web search except that some additional operations are required  as highlighted in the grey boxes in figure 1. the following subsections will describe how to realize these operations.
1 retrieving candidate images
several existing approaches can be used to retrieve the candidate related images. in this paper  the approach developed by coelho et al.  is employed. this approach attempts to retrieve images related to a query fromweb pages by combining distinct sources of textual descriptions  which generalizes a bayesian network-based text retrieval method presented by ribeiro-neto and muntz .
　let q =  wq1 wq1 ，，， wqt  denote the query which is represented as a t-dimensional textual vector  and ii  i = 1 ，，， n  denote the images for which the distinct pieces of evidence are combined through a disjunctive operator. let di  i = 1 ，，， n  denote the text evidences extracted from description tags including filenames  alt attribute of img tag and anchors  and si  i = 1 ，，， n  denote the figure 1: the webseic framework.
text evidences extracted using surrounding passages. di and si are all t-dimensional textual vectors  i.e. di =
 wdi 1 wdi 1 ，，， wdi t  and si =  wsi 1 wsi 1 ，，， wsi t .
　given q  the conditional probability of each source of evidence being observed can be computed according to eq. 1.
		 1 
where ej could be dj or sj  each representingthe corresponding source of text evidences associated with image ij. for convenience  denote these conditional probabilities by pdjq and psjq  respectively. then the conditional probability of image ij being observed  given q  can be calculated according to eq. 1  where η is a normalization factor.
	p ij|q  = η 〜  1    1   pdjq  1   psjq  	 1 
　in this paper  description tags associated with images and 1 surrounding words are used as sources of text evidences  as recommended by coelho et al. . for simplicity and efficiency  only the keywords in the query are considered. moreover  considering that tiny images are usually advertisements or tips  images whose height or width is less than 1 pixels are filtered out.
　note that in the original form of coelho et al.'s approach  text evidences extracted using metatags of web pages are also used. however  coelho et al.  found in experiments that combining description tags and surrounding passages only would gain higher precision than including metatags at the same time in web image retrieval. so  here we do not use metatags.
　it is evident that eq. 1 can be used to estimate the relevances of web images to the query. however  such an estimation is not very reliable since it only utilizes the text inforfigure 1: the top 1 web images retrieved for the query tiger animal after executing the process described in section 1.
mation while the contents of web pages are rather complex and the text descriptions are often ambiguous. for example  an image with the file name 'tiger' could be a photo of an animal  a mask like tiger face  a bottle of tiger-brand beer  or even a picture of a team named 'tiger'. figure 1 shows the top 1 images retrieved according to the above process for the query tiger animal. it can be seen that there are lots of irrelevant images. so  in the webseic framework  the above process is only used to retrieve candidates of related images.
1 identifying related images
given a query  a rank of web images can be generated by executing the process described in section 1. among the top-ranked images  such as the top 1 images  there should be some relevant images though as indicated above  they may not rank high due to the ambiguity of text descriptions and their complex relationship with images. at the same time  there are also many irrelevant images whose associated text descriptionslooks relevantto the textual query. since the rank is only generated by considering the text information  it is anticipated that further analysis on the visual contents of these images can help make the relevant images stand out. techniques from the area of content-based image retrieval  cbir   smeulders et al.  1  are helpful for this purpose.
　in cbir  each image is represented by a feature vector which can be regarded as a point in an image feature space. the query image can also be represented by a point in the space  which expresses the target concept required by the user. then  similarities between images and the query image can be measured  which yields a rank where the higher the rank  the more relevant the image to the target concept. however  in web search the query is not an image and therefore the point corresponding to the target concept is not known.
fortunately  considering that all the relevant images should

figure 1: the top 1 web images retrieved for the query tiger animal after executing the process described in section 1.
be related to the target concept while the irrelevant images may be related to different themes though some associated texts look similar  the distribution of the top-ranked images obtained by executing the process described in section 1 can be exploited. generally  since all the relevant images are related to the target concept  the feature vectors corresponding to them should be relatively close in the feature space; while the feature vectors corresponding to the irrelevant images should be relatively scattered since they are related to different themes. thus  looking for high density region in the image feature space could be helpful to identify related images.
　let c = {x1 x1 ，，， x|c|} denote the set of top-ranked candidate images each is represented by a d-dimensional feature vector  and z denotes a point in the feature space. this paperemploys a simple methodto estimate the density  fukunaga and hostetler  1   as shown in eq. 1.
		 1 
　in webseic  the density of every top-ranked candidate image is estimated according to eq. 1. then  the images are sorted according to their densities and half of the candidate images with lower densities are filtered out. this process is repeated until a specified number of images remain  and these images are regarded as relevant images.
　figure 1 shows the top 1 images retrieved for the query tiger animal after executing the process described in this section. here c contains the top-1 images generated through the process described in section 1. rgb color histogram is used as visual features and each top-ranked candidate image is represented as a feature vector with 1 〜 1 dimensions where 1 bins are used for each color. comparing figures 1 and 1 it can be found that after executing the process described in this section  the quality of the retrieved images have been apparently improved. greater improvements can be anticipated by using stronger features.
1 generating image-based rank
after obtaining d  a set of images with the highest densities  the center y can be derived by averaging the corresponding feature vectors  which is then regarded as the point corresponding to the target concept.
　on this basis  the visual contents of images in web pages can be exploited as information evidences for web search. for a page containing candidate image  the image-based relevance of the page to the query can be computed according to eq. 1  where x denotes the d-dimensional feature vector corresponding to the image  and σj denotes the standard deviation of the j-th dimension on d.
		 1 
　if a web page contains multiple candidate images  then its image-based relevance is the biggest imagerel value of those images; if a web page does not contain any image  then its image-based relevance is set to a default value. then  by ranking the web pages according to their image-based relevances  an image-based rank of the web pages is obtained.
1 producing final rank
now we have two ranks for the web pages  i.e. a keywordbased rank and an image-based rank. the smaller the rank  the higher the relevance. it is evident that since these ranks are generated using different information  the combination of them would be more accurate and reliable.
　let rk g  and ri g  denote the keyword-based rank and image-based rank of a web page g  respectively. then  the final rank of g can be computed according to eq. 1  where adark and adari are calculated according to eqs. 1 and 1  respectively.
		 1 


　the first terms at the right end of eqs. 1 and 1 are normalization terms. note that instead of directly combining the keyword-based and image-based ranks  αk and αi are used to tradeoff their relative contributions. the values of αk and αi can be determined empirically.
table 1: precisions of the compared techniques  b: baseline  w: webseic .
retrieved pagesjag
buar ai

wrcraft
improv.bjaguar an

wimal
improv.bpeafowl

wbird
improv.bpenguin

wshoe
improv.rose flowerbwimprov.top 1.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%top 1.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%top 1.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%top 1.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%top 1.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%.1.1.1%1 experiments
in the experiments  the google search engine  brin and page  1  is used as the baseline for comparison. moreover  it is used as the keyword-based search module in the webseic framework shown in figure 1. in other words  we want to see whether the powerful google search engine can be improved by exploiting image contents.
　fifteen queries are conducted  including albacore fish  apple computer  apple fruit  bongo shoe  dove chocolate  eagle bird  geneva watch  shark fish  sunset landscape  tiger animal  jaguar aircraft  jaguar animal  peafowl bird  penguin shoe  and rose flower. the former ten queries are used as training set on which the parameters αk and αi in eq. 1 are determined  while the last five queries are used as test set.
　for each test query the precision of the compared techniques are evaluated  which is the fraction of the number of retrieved related page to that of all the retrieved pages. whether a retrieved page is really related to the query or not is examined by a human volunteer. note that the conventional precision-recall graph is not used here since few users would be patient enough to browse more than the top 1 pages. the precisions on the top 1  1  1  1  and 1 retrieved web pages are tabulated in table 1. here 'improv.' denotes the improvement brought by exploiting image contents  which is computed by dividing the difference between the precisions of webseic and baseline by that of baseline.
　it can be seen from table 1 that exploiting image contents in the way of webseic can apparently improve the web search performance. in about 1% cases the improvement is bigger than 1%. considering that the comparison baseline is the powerful google search engine  such a result is quite impressive.
　figure 1 depicts the average test performance of the compared techniques. it can be found that for the top two retrieved web pages there is no difference between the precisions of webseic and baseline. this is easy to understand since the earliest retrieved web pages are the most relevant pages which can usually be easily identified by pure keyword-based search. it can be found from figure 1 that for later retrieved web pages  the precision of webseic is apparently higher than that of baseline  which verifies the helpfulness of the exploitation of image contents.
1 conclusion
in previousresearch on web search  the informationexploited were mainly the texts in the web pages and the link structure between the pages. considering that web is a multimedia

figure 1: the average test performance of webseic and baseline.
environment  this paper advocates to exploit multimedia information in the web search process. in particular  this paper proposes a new web search framework  in which the visual contents of images are exploited to help improve the search performance. experiments show that this direction is promising for designing powerful web search engines.
　since preparing the experimental data requires substantive human endeavors in determining whether the retrieved pages are really related to the query or not  in this paper the experiments are conducted on a limited number of queries. a large empirical study involving more human volunteers and more search queries will be executed in the future. comparing the proposed framework with other web search frameworks is also left for future work.
　note that all the operations in the webseic framework  such as retrieving candidate images  identifying related images  generating image-based rank and producing the final rank  can be realized in many forms other than those described in this paper. in fact  the main purpose of the paper is to show that exploiting image contents can bring gains to web search  and therefore the current operations have not been finely polished. for example  the current process for analyzing the images is not fast enough. another example is the lack of a mechanism to adaptively tradeoff the contributions of keyword-based and image-based ranks. so  it is evident that investigating effective and efficient realizations of webseic is an interesting issue for future work.
moreover  the current technique is less helpful on abstract concepts such as tiger economy than on concrete entities such as tiger because the former can hardly be presented as an image. improving the search performance on those abstract concepts using image information remains an open problem. furthermore  extending the idea of webseic to design web search frameworks which could exploit other information modalities  such as video and audio  is another interesting future issue.
acknowledgement
the authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. this work was supported by the national science foundation of china  1   the national science fund for distinguished young scholars of china  1   the jiangsu science foundation  bk1   and the foundationfor the author of national excellent doctoral dissertation of china  1 .
