
motivated by applications such as the spread of epidemics and the propagation of influence in social networks  we propose a formal model for analyzing the dynamics of such networks. our model is a stochastic version of discrete dynamical systems. using this model  we formulate and study the computational complexity of two fundamental problems  called reachability and predecessor existence problems  which arise in the context of social networks. we also point out the implications of our results on other computational models such as hopfield networks  communicating finite state machines and systolic arrays.
1 introduction and motivation
with the growing importance of social networks  analysis of the dynamics of these networks is attracting the attention of researchers. in this paper  we propose a multiagent-based formal model of social network dynamics and study two fundamental analysis problems arising in that context. we take an abstract view of social network dynamics. in our model  each individual  agent  in the social network is represented by a node in the underlying undirected graph. the edges of the graph model dependencies among the agents. depending on the context  an edge in the underlying graph may denote a  knows  relationship  a  can be infected by  relationship  a  lives close to  relationship  a  has common interests  relationship  etc. further  each node has a state and a stochastic transition function that it evaluates at each time step to compute the value of its state at the next time step. the inputs to the transition function at a node are the state of the node itself and those of its neighbors in the underlying graph.
¡¡the following two examples present the motivation for the problems considered in this paper.
example 1 consider the contact network for the population of a city  where the nodes represent individuals and edges represent contact between individuals; that is  there is an edge between two nodes if the corresponding individuals come into contact with each other during a certain period of time. we want to study the spread of epidemics in this population and how to best control it. a popular method of modeling the spread of epidemics is the sir model  eubank et al.  1   where the acronym stands for susceptible-infectedrecovered  the three possible states for each individual. assume for simplicity that the total population is fixed; that is  there are no births or deaths. at any time  a susceptible node may become infected with a certain probability  depending on the number of infected neighbors. at any given time step t  let s t  denote the fraction of susceptible individuals  i t  denote the fraction of infected individuals and r t  denote the fraction of recovered individuals. in this context  it is of interest to study questions of the following form: given positive numbers 1   ¦Á   1  1   ¦Â   1  1   p   1  and a positive integer ¦Ó  is the probability of the event  i t1+¦Ó    ¦Â  conditioned on the event  i t1    ¦Á  at least p  this question is an example of the reachability problem for the formal model considered in this paper.
example 1 as a second example  consider the social influence network  where an edge between individuals denotes that they can exert a certain degree of influence on each other. suppose a company wants to market a new product using word of mouth advertising  kempe et al.  1 . the company's goal is to identify a suitable initial subset of individuals to whom free samples should be sent so that with probability at least p the number of individuals to whom the idea will propagate in t steps is at least n.  it is reasonable to model this propagation as a stochastic process since individuals may use different criteria to decide whether or not to participate in the propagation.  this example represents a more general form of the predecessor existence problem studied in this paper.
¡¡formally  we modeldynamics of social networksusing discrete dynamical systems. we refer to our model as a stochastic synchronous dynamical system  ssyds . each ssyds s over a domain d is specified as a pair s =  g f . here  g v e  is an undirected graph with n nodes  with each node having a state value from the domain d. this graph represents the topological structure of the social network. the set f = {f1 f1 ... fn} is a collection of stochastic interaction functions in the system. here  fi denotes the stochastic local transition function associated with node vi  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü n. a configuration of an ssyds is an n-vector  b1 b1 ... bn   where bi ¡Ê d is the value of the state of node vi  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü n .
¡¡a single ssyds transition from one configuration to another is obtained by updating the state of each node synchronously using the corresponding local transition function. for 1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü n  the inputs to the function fi are the state values of node vi and those of the neighbors of vi. for each combination of inputs to fi and each element ¦È of d  the function fi specifies the probability that the next state value of vi is ¦È.  for each combination of inputs  the sum of the probabilities assigned by fi over the values ¦È ¡Ê d must be 1. 
¡¡to further clarify the notion of stochastic local transition functions used here  consider a node vi and let vi1  vi1  ...  vir represent the neighbors of vi in g. for any j and t  let stj denote the state of node vj at time t. the local transition function fi at node vi satisfies the following equation:
pr
	.	 1 
¡¡the generalized phase space ps of an ssyds s is a directed graph defined as follows. there is a node in ps for each configuration of s. there is a directed edge from the node representing configuration c to that representing configuration c if the probability that the system will reach c from c in one step is  strictly  greater than zero. more generally  the directed edge from may be associated with a positive number p  1   p ¡Ü 1  representing the probability of the one-step transition. with the probability value for directed each edge  the generalized phase space represents the markov chain for the dynamical system. note that for a dynamical system over the boolean domain with n nodes  the number of possible configurations is 1n. thus  the size of the markov chain is exponential in the size of the underlying dynamical system. for this reason  known results for markov chains cannot be directly used to obtain the results obtained in this paper.
¡¡in the generalized phase space  when there is a directed edge from  we say that c is a predecessor of configuration c. in general  a configuration in generalized phase space may have multiple predecessors.
¡¡the goal of an analysis problem is to determine whether a given ssyds has a specified property. we consider two analysis problems in the context of such dynamical systems  namely reachability and predecessor existence. as mentioned earlier  a study of such analysis problems is useful in obtaining an understanding of the dynamics of social networks. definitions of the problems considered in this paper are given below.
¡¡in the reachability problem  we are given a dynamical system s  two configurations i and b and a probability value p; the question is whether s starting from i can reach b with a probability of at least p. this is an abstract and general version of the problem mentioned in example 1. we use reachability to denote this problem. we also study a variant of this problem  called the t-reachability problem  where an integer t is also specified as part of the problem instance and the goal is to determine whether s starting from i can reach b in at most t steps with a probability of at least p.
¡¡in the predecessor existence problem  denoted by pre   we are given a dynamical system s  a configuration c and a probability value p; the question is whether there is a configuration c such that the system starting from c can reach c in one step with a probability of at least p. this is an abstract version of the problem discussed in example 1 above. while example 1 addresses t-step predecessors for some t ¡Ý 1  the pre problem is concerned with finding immediate
 i.e.  1-step  predecessors.
¡¡sequential dynamical systems  sdss  where nodes update their states in a given sequential order  rather than synchronously  have also been considered in the literature  see for example  barret et al.  1a  . a stochastic version of sdss  denoted by ssdss  can be defined in a manner similar that of ssydss. the results presented in this paper are applicable to ssdss as well.
1 summary of results
reachability in ssydss and ssdss
two versions of the reachability problem  denoted by
reachability and t-reachability  for ssydss were defined in the previous section. we show that both the versions are hard for the complexity class1 rspace n . the result is proven by showing how a stochastic dynamical system can efficiently simulate a linear space bounded probabilistic turing machine. moreover  the hardness results hold even when the underlying graph is a simple path. by a minor modification to this proof  the hardness result can also be shown to hold for ssdss  where nodes update their states sequentially . these results point out that  unless the complexity classes p and rspace n  coincide  there is no efficient way of predicting the behavior of a stochastic dynamical system.
¡¡in contrast to stochastic dynamical systems  where reachability problems are rspace n -hard  the corresponding reachability problems for deterministic discrete dynamical systems are complete for dspace n   barret et al.  1a . it is known that rspace n    dspace n1   saks and zhou  1 ; however  it is not known whether the exponent of n can be reduced to 1. thus  under reasonable complexity theoretic assumptions  reachability problems for stochastic systems are harder than the corresponding problems for deterministic systems.
predecessor existence in ssydss
we show that the predecessor existence  abbreviated as pre  problem for ssydss over any finite domain can be solved in polynomial time when the following conditions hold:  i  the treewidth1 and maximum node degree of the underlying graph are both bounded and  ii  the number of distinct probability values used in specifying the probability distributions for the local transition functions is bounded. the algorithm is based on dynamic programming. this result can also be extended to ssdss.
¡¡it should be noted that the pre problem remains npcomplete for deterministic dynamical systems  when either the treewidth or the maximum node degree is unbounded  barrett et al.  1b . as a consequence  the problem remains computationally intractable for such stochastic dynamical systems as well.
¡¡our results for reachability and predecessor existence problems also initiate the study of stochastic discrete dynamical systems on graphs of bounded treewidth. it is known that 1d-ca with radius r can be equivalently viewed as synchronous dynamical systems on graphs with treewidth o r   barrett et al.  1b . thus  ssydss on treewidth bounded graphs can be viewed as generalized stochastic ca.
applications to other computational models
ssydss can be viewed as stochastic analogs of systolic networks  kung  1 . since ssydss are closely related to stochastic ca  wolfram  1   they also serve as a formal model for studying problems in the context of multiagent systems  wooldridge  1 . in addition  ssydss are also related to other well known computational models including discrete recurrent hopfield networks  orponen  1  which are used in machine learning and pattern recognition and concurrent communicating finite state machines  harel et al.  1  which are used to model and verify distributed systems. the hardness results for the reachability problems for ssydss immediately imply analogous results for each of the above models.
1 complexity of reachability for ssydss and ssdss
in this section  we show that the reachability problems for ssydss and ssdss are hard for the complexity class rspace n . our proof also shows that the problem remains computationally intractable even for simple ssydss and ssdss  e.g. systems in which the underlying graph is a simple path .
¡¡as mentioned earlier  we establish this complexity result by showing that a given linear space bounded probabilistic turing machine  tm  can be simulated by an appropriate ssyds. we recall a few definitions related to probabilistic tms.
¡¡a probabilistic turing machine  papadimitriou  1  m is a tm consisting of a finite control and a read-write tape which initially contains the input string. the finite control has one accepting state  one rejecting state and a collection of coin tossing states. a configuration of the turing machine specifies the state of the finite control  description of the contents of the tape and the position of the head on the tape. a configuration is accepting  rejecting or coin-tossing if the state of the finite control is accepting  rejecting or coin tossing respectively. the transition relation of the turing machine is such that from any coin tossing configuration  there are exactly two possible next moves  each with probability 1. once the machine reaches an accepting or rejecting configuration  it halts.
¡¡given a probabilistic o n -space bounded turing machine m which always halts after 1o n  moves and input string x  we say that m accepts x if the probability of the event that m reaches an accepting configuration starting from the initial configuration on input x is at least 1. one way to view the computation of m on x is via a proof tree: the leaf nodes are labeled as either accepting or rejecting configurations  the root is the initial configuration and each internal node has exactly two children with the labels on the edges being 1  denoting the probability of transition to that configuration. thus the probability of reaching a leaf node  or a terminating configuration  l  denoted by pr l   is the product of weights of the edges on the unique path from the root to the leaf. the probability of accepting an input string is  where a is the set of leaves marked as accepting.
theorem 1 there exists a constant ¦Ì such that the t-
reachability and reachability problems for ssydss and ssdss are rspace n -hard  even when the following restrictions hold:  i  the underlying graph is a simple path  and thus has pathwidth and treewidth of 1 ; in particular  the degree of each node is at most two.  ii  the size of the domain of state values for each node is at most ¦Ì.  iii  the number of distinct local transition functions is at most three.
proof sketch: we sketch the proof for the t-reachability problem ssydss. the proof for reachability is similar.
¡¡let  denote a linear space bounded probabilistic turing machine where q is the  finite  set of states  ¦² is the tape alphabet   is the input alphabet  q1 ¡Ê q is the initial state  qf ¡Ê q is the final accepting state and f is the transition relation: given the current state and the current symbol scanned by the  read-write  head  f specifies the next state  the symbol to be written on the cell scanned by the head and the direction of head movement  left or right by one tape cell or stay on the same cell . the relation f specifies two moves  each with probability 1. let x = a1 ...an be the input string given to m with a1 = $ and being the end markers. a configuration or instantaneous description  id  of m consists of the current state  the contents of the tape cells and the position of the head. the machine starts at q1 with its head on the tape cell containing a1 = $. the id at time zero is
. we may assume without loss of
generality that if m accepts x  it replaces all the symbols on the tape cells between the end markers with the symbol   b  moves the head to the cell containing $  and halts in state qf. thus  the final id is. the id of
m at time ¦Ó will be denoted by id ¦Ó .
¡¡given m and input string x  we create an ssyds smx =  g f  whose set of configurations include those of m. smx is constructed so that for any t ¡Ý 1  if m starting from i reaches a configuration c in t steps with probability p  then smx starting from i reaches configuration c in 1t steps with probability p.
¡¡the underlying graph g v e  of smx is a simple path on n nodes  where n = |x|. node vi corresponds to the ith tape cell  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü n. node vi is adjacent only to nodes vi 1 and vi+1  with the exceptions that node v1 is adjacent only to node v1 and node vn is adjacent only to node vn 1. the state of each node vi takes a value from the domain ¦²¡È q¡Á¦² ¡È  q ¡Á ¦² ¡Á {1} .
¡¡for any ¦Ó ¡Ý 1  a step of m that transforms id ¦Ó  into id ¦Ó + 1  probabilistically  can be captured by the collection of local probabilistic transition functions f =  where fi is the function at node vi  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü n  as follows. the ssyds simulates each step of m in two steps. let. here 
 q cj  denotes that the current state is q  the content of tape cell j is cj and the head is currently scanning cell j. the node corresponding to cell j is vj. in the first step  all nodes except vj make a deterministic move; they copy their contents and do not change their state. node vj does a coin toss and modifies  q cj  to  q cj ¦Ò  where ¦Ò denotes the outcome of coin toss  which is either 1 or 1 . note that id ¦Ó + 1  is identical to id ¦Ó   except possibly for cj 1   q cj  and cj+1. let these three values be dj 1  dj and dj+1 with probability 1 and aj 1  aj  aj+1 with probability 1. note that the aj  dj values also encode the head location. correspondingly  in the next step  all nodes of the ssyds except vj 1  vj and vj+1 again copy their state; vj goes to dj or aj  vj 1 goes to dj 1 or aj 1 and vj+1 goes to dj+1 or aj+1  depending on the coin toss value ¦Ò. these moves again are deterministic. thus  the probability of reaching either of the configuration is 1 over the two steps.
¡¡it can be seen that smx reaches configuration b with probability at least 1 iff m accepts x with probability at least 1. the size of the domain of smx is a constant that depends only on ¦² and q.	
¡¡it is also possible to formulate reachability problems where a family of final configurations is specified and the question is whether the system can reach any of these configurationswith a given probability. an example of such a family consists of configurations in which at least k of the nodes have the state value 1. in the context of studying the spread of epidemics in social networks  such a family of configurations may represent situations where a large section of the population is infected. by slightly modifying the proof of the above theorem  it is possible to show that the corresponding reachability problem remains rspace n -hard.
1 results on predecessor existence
this section develops a polynomial time algorithm for the
pre problemfor restricted forms of stochastic dynamicalsystems. the main result of this section is the following.
theorem 1 consider the class of ssydss over the boolean domain satisfying the following conditions:  a  the degree of each node in the underlying graph is bounded.  b  the treewidth of the underlying graph is bounded.  c  the number of distinct probability values used in specifying all the stochastic node functions is bounded. the pre problem for such ssydss can be solved in polynomial time.
¡¡our proof of the above theorem is based on a known result for a restricted class of deterministic sydss. in a deterministic syds  each local transition function is deterministic; that is  for each combination of inputs to the function  the function produces only one output which becomes the next state of the corresponding node. we use syds to denote a deterministic synchronous dynamical system. reference  barrett et al.  1b  presents a polynomial time algorithm for the pre problem for sydss over the boolean domain  where the underlying graph is treewidth bounded and each node computes a symmetric1 function. since our algorithm relies on the approach used in  barrett et al.  1b   we begin with a sketch of the algorithm from that reference.
theorem 1  barrett et al.  1b  the pre problem for sydss over the boolean domain where the underlying graph is treewidth bounded and each node computes a symmetric function can be solved in polynomial time.
proof sketch: let s be the given syds whose underlying graph g v e  has a treewidth of k. it is well known that a tree decomposition  {xi | i ¡Ê i} t =  i f   of g can be constructed in time that is a polynomial in the size of g. moreover  this can be done so that t is a binary tree; that is  each node of t has at most two children  bodlaender  1 . for a given node i of the tree decomposition  the syds nodes in xi are referred to as explicit nodes of i. if a given explicit node of i is also an explicit node of the parent of i  that node is referred to as an inherited node of i; and if it does not occur in the parent of i  it is referred to as an originating node of i. the set of all explicit nodes occurring in the subtree of t rooted at i that are not explicit nodes of i are referred to as hidden nodes of i. without loss of generality  it can be assumed that the number of nodes of t with fewer than two children is at most n  the number of nodes in g.
¡¡let c be the configuration specified in the given instance of the pre problem for s. consider a given node i of the tree decomposition. suppose ¦Á is a given assignment of state values to the explicit nodes of i and ¦Â is a given assignment of state values to the hidden nodes of i. the combined assignment ¦Á ¡È ¦Â is said to be viable for i if for every hidden node w of i  the evaluation of the local transition function fw gives the value c w   using the value ¦Â w  for w and the value  ¦Á ¡È ¦Â  u  for every neighbor u of w. the combined assignment ¦Á ¡È ¦Â is said to be strongly viable for i if the above condition holds for every node w that is either a hidden node or an originating node of i.
¡¡for a given node i of the tree decomposition  and a given assignment ¦Â to the states of the hidden nodes of i  define a function h¦Â : xi  ¡ú n  where n is the set of natural numbers  as follows. for y ¡Ê xi  h¦Â y  is the number of hidden nodes w of i such that {w y} ¡Ê e and ¦Â w  = 1.
the value h¦Â y  is the number of hidden nodes w of i whose old value is an input parameter to the computation of the new value of y  and ¦Â w  = 1.
¡¡for a given node i of the tree decomposition  and a given assignment ¦Á to the states of the explicit nodes of i  define the set h¦Á to be the set of functions h from xi to n such that there exists an assignment ¦Â to the states of the hidden nodes of i satisfying the following two conditions: ¦Á ¡È ¦Â is viable for i and h is h¦Â.
¡¡let d be the maximum node degree of g. for any given ¦Â and y ¡Ê xi  the maximum possible value of h¦Â y  is d. the maximum possible value of |xi| is k + 1  where k is the treewidth . so  function h¦Â can be represented as a table with at most k + 1 entries  where each entry is an integer value in the range 1 through d. hence  an upper bound on |h¦Á| is  d + 1 k+1.
¡¡the pre problem for s can be solved by using bottom-up dynamic programming on the decomposition tree. for each node i of t  a table with an entry for each assignment ¦Á to the states of the explicit nodes of i is computed. the value of the entry for each such assignment ¦Á is the set h¦Á. let ji refer to the entire table for node i. since the treewidth k is a constant  the size of the table for each node of the decomposition tree is a polynomial in n  the number of nodes of the underlying graph g v e . using these facts  it can be shown that the bottom-up computation of the tables for all the nodes can be carried out in polynomial time. 
¡¡to obtain the polynomial time algorithm alluded to in the statement theorem 1  we need to extend the above dynamic programming algorithm to a more general class of symmetric functions  namely r-symmetric functions. a boolean function is r-symmetric if its inputs can be partitioned into at most r classes such that the value of the function depends only on the number of 1's in each class. note that every symmetric function is 1-symmetric. also  if the maximum node degree of the underlying graph of a syds is ¦¤  then each node function is  ¦¤ + 1 -symmetric. the following lemma shows that the result of theorem 1 can be extended to the case where each node computes an r-symmetric function. the corresponding algorithm is obtained by modifying the dynamic programming outline given in the proof of theorem 1.  the details are omitted because of space reasons. 
lemma 1 the pre problem for sydss over the boolean domain where the underlying graph is treewidth boundedand each node computes an r-symmetric function for some r ¡Ý 1 can be solved in polynomial time. 
¡¡we can now state the main idea behind the proof of theorem 1: the pre problem for ssydss satisfying the conditions of theorem 1 can be efficiently reduced to the pre problem for deterministic sydss over the boolean domain where each local transition function is r-symmetric  for some r ¡Ý 1  and the underlying graph has bounded treewidth. since the latter problem can be solved in polynomial time  lemma 1   theorem 1 would follow. we now sketch this reduction.
¡¡let s be an ssyds satisfying the conditions of theorem 1. let c denote the given configuration for which we need to determine whether there is a predecessor with probability at least p. let k and ¦¤  fixed values  denote the treewidth and the maximum node degree of the underlying graph g v e   with n denoting |v |. consider any node vi  and let ¦£i  also a fixed value  denote the total number of probability values used to specify the stochastic local transition function fi at vi.  note that if the distinct probability values used to specify fi are ¦Ñ1  ¦Ñ1  ...  ¦Ñt  then ¦£i represents the number of distinct values in the collection
{¦Ñ1  1   ¦Ñ1  ¦Ñ1  1   ¦Ñ1  ...  ¦Ñt  1   ¦Ñt}. 
¡¡we now show how to construct a deterministic syds s1 over the boolean domain from the stochastic syds s. the underlying graph g1 v1 e1  of s1 is constructed as follows. to begin with  g1 contains a copy of all the nodes and edges of g. next  for each node vi of g  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü n  we create q = ¦£i additional nodes. let vi1  vi1  ...  viq  denote these additional nodes  called the auxiliary nodes associated with vi.  thus  each auxiliary node of vi is associated with one probability value from the specification of the stochastic local transition function fi in s.  each of the nodes vij  1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü q  is adjacent to vi; further  if vi is adjacent to in g  then each of the nodes vij  1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü q  is adjacent to vi1 
. finally  g1 has one more node  denoted by x. there is an edge between x and each auxiliary node created above.
¡¡the local transition functions for the nodes of g1 are chosen as follows. for each node vi  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü n  the local transition function gi is the constant function which outputs 1 for every input. for each node vi  the local transition functions for the auxiliary nodes of vi are chosen as follows. let c vi  denote the state value of node vi in the specified  final  configuration for s. for each j  1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü q  consider the auxiliary node vij  and let ¦Ñj denote the probability associated with vij. let nij denote the set of all neighbors of vij  except x. the
 deterministic  local transition function gij at vij outputs 1 if and only if one of the following conditions holds.
¡¡ a  the initial value of vij is 1  and for the input combination formed by the values assigned to the nodes in nij and the transition of vi to c vi   the probability assigned by fi equals ¦Ñj.
¡¡ b  the initial value of vij is 1  and for the input combination formed by the values assigned to the nodes in nij and the transition of vi to c vi   the probability assigned by fi does not equal ¦Ñj.
¡¡the local transition function gx at node x is defined as follows. let nx denote the set of neighbors of x.  by our construction  nx is the set of all auxiliary nodes.  for any w ¡Ê nx  define the function ¦Ç w  as follows: if the state value of w is 1  then ¦Ç w  = 1; otherwise  ¦Ç w  is the probability value associated with the auxiliary nodew. the value of the function gx is equal to 1 if and only if ¦°w¡Ênx¦Ç w  ¡Ý p  where p is the probability threshold specified as part of the pre problem instance for the ssyds s.
¡¡the final configuration c1 for s1 has the value 1 for all the nodes of g1. this completes the reduction. it can be seen that the reduction can be carried out in polynomial time. the following lemma points out some properties of the above construction.
lemma 1  a  the graph g1 is treewidth bounded.  b  each of the local transition functions of s1 is r-symmetric for some r.  c  for the stochastic syds s and configuration c  there is a predecessor with probability at least p if and only if there is a predecessor for the configuration c1 for the deterministic syds s1.	
theorem 1 follows from lemmas 1 and 1.
¡¡it can also be shown that all the polynomial time results mentioned above hold when the underlying domain is finite  i.e.  of fixed size  instead of being boolean.
1 related work
many social scientists have studied stochastic transition functions similar to the ones considered in this paper; see for example  axelrod  1; epstein and axtell  1; macy and willer  1 . computational aspects of ca have been studied by a number of researchers; see for example  wolfram  1 . much of this work addresses decidability of properties for infinite ca. a stochastic version of 1dimensional ca has been studied from a formal language perspective in  mahajan  1 . a comprehensive survey by sarkar  sarkar  1  provides additional information regarding other known results for ca. questions concerning the existence of fixed points and garden of eden configurations  i.e.  configurations which don't have predecessors  in deterministic sdss are addressed in  barrett et al.  1b; tosic and agha  1 .
¡¡the predecessor existence problem has been studied in the context of ca  sutner  1; green 1  and other computational models  orponen  1 . the problem also arises naturally in other applications such as reverse engineering finite discrete dynamical systems from time series data  testing liveness properties of certain network protocols and detecting unreachable states in distributed systems; see  barrett et al.  1  and the references cited therein.
1 future work
there are several directions for further work. first  it will be useful to study the complexity of reachability problems when there are additional restrictions on the stochastic functions computed by the nodes. second  it is of interest to extend the results for the immediate predecessor problem to a more general version  namely finding t-step predecessors  for fixed t ¡Ý 1. a different research direction is to formulate and study other problems that arise in the context of social network dynamics as problems on stochastic dynamical systems.
acknowledgments: we thank the referees for providing helpful suggestions.
