
in many real-world collective decision problems  the set of alternatives is a cartesian product of finite value domains for each of a given set of variables. the prohibitive size of such domains makes it practically impossible to represent preference relations explicitly. now  ai has been developing languages for representing preferences on such domains in a succinct way  exploiting structural properties such as conditional preferential independence. here we reconsider voting and aggregation rules in the case where voters' preferences have a common preferential independence structure  and address the decompossition a voting rule or an aggregation function following a linear order over variables.
1 introduction
researchers in social choice have extensively studied the properties of voting rules and aggregation functions  up to an important detail: candidates are supposed to be listed explicitly  typically  they are individuals or lists of individuals   which assumes that they are not too numerous. in this paper  we consider the case where the set of candidates has a combinatorial structure  i.e.  is a cartesian product of finite value domains for each of a finite set of variables.
﹛since the number of possible alternatives is then exponential in the number of variables  it is not reasonable to ask voters to rank all alternatives explicitly. consider for example that voters have to agree on a common menu to be composed of a first course  a main course  a dessert and a wine  with a choice of 1 items for each. this makes 1 candidates. this would not be a problem if each of the four items to be chosen were independent from the other ones: in this case  this vote over a set of 1 candidates would come down to four independent votes over sets of 1 candidates each  and any standard voting rule could be applied without difficulty. things become more complicated if voters express dependencies between items  such as  if the main course is meat then i prefer red wine  otherwise i prefer white wine . indeed  as soon as variables are not preferentially independent  it is generally a bad idea to decompose a vote problem with p variables into a set of p smaller problems  each one bearing on a single variable:  multiple election paradoxes   brams et al.  1  show that such a decomposition leads to suboptimal choices  and give real-life examples of such paradoxes  including simultaneous referenda on related issues. they argue that the only way of avoiding the paradox would consist in  voting for combinations  of values    but they stress its practical difficulty without giving any hint for a practical solution.
﹛because the preference structure of each voter in such a case cannot reasonably be expressed by listing all candidates  what is needed is a compact preference representation language. such languages have been developed within the artificial intelligence community so as to escape the combinatorial blow up of explicit representations. many of these languages  including cp-nets and their extensions  are graphical: preferences are expressed locally  on small subsets of variables . the common feature of these languages is that they allow for a concise representation of the preference structure  while preserving a good readability  and hence a proximity with the way agents express their preferences in natural language .
﹛thus  ai gives a first answer to the problem pointed in  brams et al.  1 . however  another problem arises: once preferences have been elicited  and represented in some compact language  how is the voting rule computed  the prohibitive number of candidates makes it practically impossible to compute these rules in a straightforward way.
﹛when domains are not too large  it may still be reasonable to first generate the whole preference relations from their compact representations and then compute the outcome by a direct implementation of the voting rule. however  when domains become bigger  this naive method becomes too greedy and then we need to find a more sophisticated way of computing the outcome of the vote. two methods come to mind: either  1  give up optimality and compute an approximation of the voting or aggregation rule  or  1  assume that the voters' preferences enjoy specific structural properties that can be exploited so as to decompose the problem into smaller  local subproblems. here we address  1   and we focus on a specific restriction of preference profiles where all voters have a preference relation enjoying conditional preferential independencies compatible with a common acyclic graph g. after giving some background on preference relations over combinatorial domains and vote in section 1  we introduce and study sequential voting rules in section 1. section 1 then considers preference aggregation over combinatorial domains  and section 1 concludes.
1 background
1 preferences on combinatorial domains
let v = {x1 ... xp} be a set of variables. for each xi ﹋ v   di is the value domain of xi. a variable vi is binary if di = {xi xi}. note the difference between the variable xi and the value xi. if x = {xi1 ... xim}   v   with i1   ...   ip  then dx denotes di1 ℅ ... ℅ dim.
﹛x = d1 ℅ ... ℅ dp is the set of all alternatives  or candidates. elements of x are denoted by etc. and represented by concatenating the values of the variables: for instance  if v = {x1 x1 x1}  x1x1 assigns x1 to x1  x1 to x1 and x1 to x1. we allow concatenations of vectors of values: for instance  let v = {x1 x1 x1 x1 x1} 
  then
.
﹛a  strict  preference relation on x is a strict order  an irreflexive  asymmetric and transitive binary relation . a linear preference relation is a complete strict order  i.e.  for any x and  eitherholds. if r is a preference relation  we generally noteinstead of.
﹛let {x y z} be a partition of the set v of variables and  a linear preference relation over dv . x is  conditionally  preferentially independent of y given z  w.r.t.   if and only
if for all 

﹛unlike probabilistic independence  preferential independence is a directed notion: x may be independent of y given z without y being independent of x given z.
﹛a cp-net n  boutilier et al.  1  over v is a pair consisting of a directed graph g over v and a collection of conditional preference tables cpt xi  for each xi ﹋ v . each conditional preference table cpt xi  associates a total orwith each instanciation's parents pa xi  = u. for instance  let v = {x y z}  all three being binary  and assume that preference of a given agent over 1v can be defined by a cp-net whose structural part is the directed acyclic graph g = { x y   y z   x z }; this means that the agent's preference over the values of x is unconditional  preference over the values of y  resp. z  is fully determined given the value of x  resp. the values of x and y .
﹛the conditional preference statements contained in these tables are written with the usual notation  that is  x1 means that when x1 is true and x1 is false then x1 = x1 is preferred to x1 = x1. in this paper we make the classical assumption that g is acyclic. a cp-net n induces a preference ranking on iff there is a sequence of improving flips from  where an improving flip is the flip of a single variable xi  respecting  the preference table cpt xi   see  boutilier et al.  1  . note that the preference relation induced from a cp-net is generally not complete.
﹛let g be a directed graph over a linear preference relation.  is said to be compatible with g iff for each x ﹋ v   x is preferentially independent of v    {x} ﹍ par x   given par x . the following fact is obvious  but important:
observation 1 a linear preference relation  is compatible with g if and only if there exists a cp-net n whose associated graph is g and such that  extends n.
﹛let g be an acyclic graph over v and let o = x1   ...   xp be a linear order on v . g is said to follow o iff for every edge  xi xj  in g we have i   j. a linear preference relation  is said to follow o iff it is compatible with some acyclic graph g following follows o = x1   ...   xp if and only if for all i   p  xi is preferentially independent of {xi+1  ...  xp} given {x1  ...  xi 1} with respect to follows o then the projection on xi given  x1 ... xi 1  ﹋ d1 ℅ ... ℅ di 1  denoted by
  is the linear preference relation on di defined by: for all
 holds for
all  xi+1 ... xp  ﹋ di+1 ℅ ... ℅ dp.
﹛due to the fact that  follows o and that  is a linear order  is a well-defined linear order as well. note also that if 
...   xp and 
x考 k     ...   x考 p   then  and  coincide. in other words 
the local preference relation on xi depends only on the values of the variables that precede .
﹛lastly  for any acyclic graph g over v   we say that two linear preference relations r1 and r1 are g-equivalent  denoted by r1 ‵g r1  if and only if r1 and r1 are both compatible with g and for any we have.
 observation 1 for any linear preference relations   if and only if there exists a cp-net n whose asso-
ciated graph is g and such that both extend n.
example 1 let v = {x y z}  all three being binary. and  be the following linear preference relations:

let g the graph over v whose set of edges is { x z   y z }.
 are both compatible with g. moreover   since all local preference relations coincide:  and
; etc. the cp-net n such thatboth extend is defined by the following local conditional preferences: ;
.
1 voting rules and correspondences
let a = {1 ... n} be a finite set of voters and x a finite set of candidates. a  collective  preference profile w.r.t. a and
x is a collection of n individual linear preference relations  be the
set of all preference profiles for a and x.
preference profilea voting correspondencep of pa c into a nonempty subset: pa x ↙ 1x  { } maps eachc p  profilex p of pa x into a single candidate: pa xx ↙ x maps each preferencer p . a rule can be of . a voting rule r
obtained from a correspondence by prioritization over candidates  for more details see  brams and fishburn  1  .
﹛to give an example  consider the well-known family of positional scoring rules and correspondences. a positional scoring correspondence is defined from a scoring vector  that is  a vector of integers such that s1 ≡ s1 ... ≡ sm and s1   sm. let ranki x  be the rank of x in  if it is the favorite candidate for voter i  etc. . the score of x is defined by. the correspondence defined from s selects all candidates maximizing s. a positional voting rule is defined as a positional scoring correspondence plus a tie-breaking mechanism. well-known examples are the borda rule  given by sk = m   k for all k  and the plurality rule  by s1 = 1  and sk = 1 for all k.
we also recall the definition of a condorcet winner  cw .
given a profile   ...  is a condorcet winner iff it is preferred to any other candidate by a strict majority of voters  that is  for all. it is well-known that there are some profiles for which no cw exists. obviously  when a cw exists then it is unique.
1 sequential voting
given a combinatorial set of alternatives and a compact representation  in some preference representation language r  of the voters' preferences  how can we compute the  set of  winner s   the naive way consisting in  unfolding  the compactly expressed preferences  that is  generating the whole preference relations on d1 ℅ ... ℅ dp from the input   and then applying a given voting rule  is obviously unfeasible  except if the number of variables is really small. we can try to do better and design an algorithm for applying a given voting rule r on a succinctly described profile p without generating the preferences relations explicitly. however  we can't be too optimistic  because it is known that the latter problem is computationally hard  even for simple succinct representation languages and simple rules  see  lang  1  .
﹛a way of escaping this problem consists in restricting the set of admissible preference profiles in such a way that computationally simple voting rules can be applied. a very natural restriction  that we investigate in the next section  consists in assuming that preferences enjoy some specific structural properties such as conditional preferential independencies.
1 sequential voting rules and correspondences
now comes the central assumption to the sequential approach: there exists an acyclic graph g such that the linear preference relation of every voter is compatible with g. this assumption is not as restrictive as it may appear at first look: suppose indeed that the linear preference relations  are compatible with the acyclic graphs g1 ... gn  whose sets of edges are e1 ... en. then they are a fortiori compatible with the graph g  whose set of edges is e1 ﹍...﹍en. therefore  if g  is acyclic  then sequential voting will be applicable to   of course  this is no longer true if g  has cycles . moreover  in many real-life domains it may be deemed reasonable to assume that preferential dependencies between variables coincide for all agents.
﹛sequential voting consists then in applying  local  voting rules or correspondences on single variables  one after the other  in such an order that the local vote on a given variable can be performed only when the local votes on all its parents in the graph g have been performed.
we define compg as the set of all collective profiles p = such that each i is compatible with g.
definition 1 let g be an acyclic graph on v ; let p =  p1 ... pn  in compg  o = x1   ...   xp a linear order on v following g  and  r1 ... rp  a collection of deterministic voting rules  one for each variable xi . the sequential voting rule seq r1 ... rp  is defined as follows:
;
;
  ...
  x p = rp p1xp|x1=x 1 .. xp 1=x p 1 .. pnxp|x1=x1  .. xp 1=xp  1 
then.
example 1 let n = 1  v = {x y} with dom x  =
{x x‘} and dom y  = {y y‘}  and following 1-voter profile:

﹛all these linear preference relations are compatible with the graph g over {x y} whose single edge is  x y ; equivalently  they follow the order x   y. hence  p ﹋ compg.
the corresponding conditional preference tables are: voters 1 1	voters 1 1	voters 1 1	voters 1

﹛take rx and ry both equal to the majority rule  together with a tie-breaking mechanism which  in case of a tie between x and x‘  resp. between y and y‘   elects x  resp. y . the projection of p on x is composed of 1 votes for x and 1 for x‘  that is  pix is equal to and to for
1 ≒ i ≒ 1. therefore x  = rx p1x ... p1x   = x: the xwinner is x  = x. now  the projection of p on y given x = x is composed of 1 votes for y and 1 for y‘  therefore y  = y  and the sequential winner is now obtained by combining the x-winner and the conditional y-winner given x = x  = x  namely seqrx ry p  = xy.
﹛in addition to sequential voting rules  we also define sequential voting correspondences in a similar way: if for each i  ci is a correspondence on di  then seq c1 ... cp  p  is the set of all outcomes  x1 ... xp  such that   and for all i ≡ 1 
.
due to the lack of space  we give results for voting rules only.
﹛an important property of such sequential voting rules and correspondences is that the outcome does not depend on o  provided that g follows o. this can be expressed formally:
observation 1 let o =  x1   ...   xp  and  x考 1    ...   x考 p   be two linear orders on v such that g follows both and . then
     seq r1 ... rp  p  = seq r考 1  ... r考 p   p  and similarly for voting correspondences.
﹛note that when all variables are binary  all  reasonable  neutral voting rules  we have no space to comment on what  reasonable  means - and this has been debated extensively in the social choice literature  coincide with the majority rule when the number of candidates is 1  plus a tie-breaking mechanism . therefore  if all variables are binary and the number of voters is odd  in which case the tie-breaking mechanism is irrelevant   then the only  reasonable  sequential voting rule is seq r1 ... rn  where each ri is the majority rule.
﹛it is important to remark that  in order to compute seq r1 ... rp  p   we do not need to know the linear preference relations p1  ...  pn entirely: everything we need is the local preference relations: for instance  if v = {x y} and g contains the only edge  x y   then we need first the unconditional linear preference relations on x and then the linear preference relations on y conditioned by the value of x. in other words  if we know the conditional preference tables  for all voters  associated with the graph g  then we have enough information to determine the sequential winner for this profile  even though some of the preference relations induced from these tables are incomplete. this is expressed more formally by the following fact  a similar result holds for correspondences :
observation 1 let v = {x1 ... xp}  g an acyclic graph over v   and two complete preference profiles such that for all i = 1 ... n
we have. then  for any collection of local voting
rules
.
﹛this  together with observation 1  means that applying sequential voting to two collections of linear preference relations corresponding to the same collection of cp-nets gives the same result. this is illustrated on the following example.
example 1 everything is as in example 1  except that we don't know the voters' complete preference relations  but only their corresponding conditional preference tables. these conditional preferences contain strictly less information than p  because some of the preference relations they induce are not complete: for instance  the induced preference relation for the first 1 voters is  with xy‘ and xy‘ being incomparable. however  we have enough information to determine the sequential winner for this profile  even though some of the preference relations are incomplete. for instance  taking again the majority rule for rx and ry  the sequential winner is xy for any complete profile  extending the incomplete preference relations induced by the 1 conditional preference tables above.
1 sequential decomposability
we now consider the following question: given a voting rule r  is there a way of computing r sequentially when the linear preference relations enjoy common preferential independencies 
definition 1 a voting rule r on x = d1 ℅ ... ℅ dp is decomposable if and only if there exist n voting rules r1 ... rp on d1 ... dp such that for any linear order o = x1   ...   xp on v and for any preference profile p =  p1  ...  pn  such that each pi follows o  we have seq r1 ... rp  p  = r p . the definition is similar for correspondences.
﹛an interesting question is the following: for which voting rules r does the sequential winner  obtained by sequential applications of r  and the  direct  winner  obtained by a direct application of r  coincide  the following result shows that this fails for the whole family of scoring rules  and similarly for correspondences .
proposition 1 no positional scoring rule is decomposable.
proof sketch: we give a proof sketch for the case of two binary variables  this generalizes easily to more variables  as well as to non-binary variables . let r be a decomposable scoring rule on 1{x y}: there exist two local rules rx and ry such that whenever p follow x   y  we have seq rx ry  p  = r p . then we show that rx and ry are both the majority rule  this follows easily from the fact that some properties of r  including monotonicity  carry on to rx and ry.  now  consider the same preference profile p as in example 1. p follows the order x   y. now  let s1 ≡ s1 ≡ s1 ≡ s1 = 1  with s1   1  the weights defining r. the score of xy is 1 +1 +1; the score of xy‘ is 1 +1 +1  which is strictly larger than the score of xy  therefore xy cannot be the winner for r  whatever the values of s1 s1 s1. 
﹛such counterexamples can be found for many usual voting rules outside the family of scoring rules  we must omit the results due to the lack of space   including the whole family of voting rules based on the majority graph. positive results  on the other hand  seem very hard to get. obviously  dictatorial rules  electing the preferred candidate of some fixed voter  and constant rules  electing a fixed candidate whatever the voters' preferences  are decomposable. but the latter rules are of course not reasonable  and we conjecture that the answer to the above question is negative as soon as a few reasonable properties are required. .
﹛a particular case of preferential independence is when all variables are preferentially independent from each other  which corresponds to a dependency graph g with no edges. in this case  the preference profile follows any order on the set of variables  and the sequential winner is better called a parallel winner  since the local votes on the single variables can be performed in any order. we might then consider the following property of separability:
definition 1 a deterministic rule r is separable if and only if for any preference profile  such that the variables are pairwise conditionally preferentially independent  the parallel winner of r w.r.t. p is equal to r p .
﹛obviously  any decomposable rule is separable. are there any separable rules  focusing on positional scoring rules  we find a rather intriguing result  the proof of which is omitted :
proposition 1 let v = {x1 ... xp}  with p ≡ 1 .
  if p = 1 and both variables are binary  exactly one positional scoring rule is separable: the rule associated with the weights s1 = 1 = 1  and s1 = 1 .   in all other cases  p ≡ 1 or at least one variable has more than 1 possible values   then no positional scoring rule is separable.
1 sequential condorcet winners
we may now wonder whether a condorcet winner  cw   when there exists one  can be computed sequentially. sequential condorcet winners  scw  are defined similarly as for sequential winners for a given rule: the scw is the sequential combination of  local  condorcet winners.
definition 1 let g be an acyclic graph and  ... 
  a profile in compg. let o = x1   ...   xp be a linear order on is a sequential con-
dorcet winner for p if and only if
;
  for every 
#.
﹛this definition is well-founded because we obtain the same set of scws for any o following g. the question is now  do scws and cws coincide  clearly  the existence of a scw is no more guaranteed than that of a cw  and there cannot be more than one scw. we have the following positive result  whose proof  which we omit  does not present any difficulty:
proposition 1 let g be an acyclic graph and  ...   is a condorcet winner
for p  then it is a sequential condorcet winner for p.
﹛the following example shows that the converse fails: 1 voters have the preference relation
voter  and 1 voters
xy‘. x and y are mutually preferentially independent in all relations  therefore the scw is the combination of the locals cw for {x} and for {y}  provided they exist. since 1 voters unconditionally prefer x to x‘  x is the {x}-cw; similarly  1 voters unconditionally prefer y to y‘ and y is the {y}-cw. therefore  xy is the scw for the given profile; but xy is not a cw for this profile  because 1 voters prefer x‘y‘ to xy.
﹛note that proposition 1 extends to weak condorcet winners  where strict majority is replaced by weak majority .
﹛we now give a condition on the preference relations ensuring that scws and cws coincide. let o = x1  ...  xp be a linear order on v . we say that a linear preference relation  is conditionally lexicographic w.r.t. o if there exist p local conditional preference relations   such that 
if and only if there is a j ≒ p such that  a  for every k   j  xk = yk and  b . a profile  is conditionally lexicographic w.r.t. o if  is conditionally lexicographic w.r.t. o. such preference relations can be represented by tcp-nets  brafman et al.  1  or conditional preference theories  wilson  1 .
proposition 1 let o be a linear strict order over v . if p =  is conditionally lexicographic w.r.t. o  then x is a sequential condorcet winner for p if and only if it is a condorcet winner for p.
1 arrow's theorem and structured domains
we end this paper by considering decomposable domains from the point of view of preference aggregation. a preference aggregation function maps a profile to an aggregated profile representing the preference of the group. arrow's theorem  arrow  1  states that any aggregation function defined on the set of all profiles and satisfying unanimity and independence of irrelevant alternatives  iir  is dictatorial. an arrow-consistent domain d is a subset of p allowing for unanimous  iir and nondictatorial aggregation functions.
﹛it is easy to see that for any acyclic graph g  comp g  is arrow-consistent. indeed  consider the preference aggregation function defined as follows:
  reorder the variables in an order compatible with g  i.e.  w.l.o.g.  assume that there is no edge  xi xj  in g with i ≡ j. such an order exists because g is acyclic.   let h : v ↙ a be a non-constant mapping from variables to voters  such a mapping exists because |v | ≡ 1 and |a| ≡ 1 .
  for any.
  for any collective profile   define 
	 by:	for all 
  where.
proposition 1 fh is a nondictatorial aggregation function on comp g  satisfying unanimity and iir.
﹛thus  restricting the set of admissible profiles to comp p  is sufficient for escaping arrow's theorem: in other terms  comp g  is arrow-consistent1. fh is easier understood when it is turned into a voting rule: voter h x1  first chooses his preferred value for variable x1  then voter h x1  comes into play and chooses his preferred value for variable x1 given the value assigned to x1  and so forth. note that fh is truly nondictatorial  because no agent imposes her own preference to the group; however fh however has p local dictators  one for each variable   since voter h i  imposes his preference on the domain of xi. we now prove that there must exist such local dictators  provided that the following three properties are satisfies:
 p1  preservation of the independence structure f is a mapping from comp g n to comp g .
 p1  independence of irrelevant values and variables
for any  
 such that for every
 j and all  we have  if and only if.
 p1  local unanimity
	for any	  if
 .
﹛ p1  expresses that the preferential independencies expressed in the graph g should be transferred to the aggregated preference relation. therefore  under  p1   for any preference relationrelations in  compresulting from the aggregation of g  there exist p local conditional prefer-n preferences
ence relations.
﹛ p1  is a local version of independence of irrelevant alternatives: whether the society prefers a value xi to another value yi of xi given an assignment z of the parent variables of xi depends only on the voters' preferences between these two values given z  and not on their preferences on other values of xi nor on their preferences on other variables. 
﹛ p1  tells that if all voters have the same local preference relation over the values of a variable xi given a fixed value z of its parents  then the local collective preference on dxi given z should be equal to this local preference relation.
﹛importantly  note that the way  p1  and  p1  are written depends on the assumption that  p1  holds - otherwise we would not have been allowed to write.
proposition 1 let g be an acyclic graph over a set of variables v = {x1 ... xp} with domains d1 ... dp  with |di| ≡ 1 for each i. an aggregation function f on comp g  satisfies  p1    p1  and  p1  if and only if there exists a local dictator for each xi and each  such that for each t ﹋ d
.
proof sketch: the   direction is straightforward. for the   direction  let f satisfying  p1    p1  and  p1 .  p1  guarantees that for every xi and  is independent of v    dpar xi  ﹍ {xi}  given z  therefore there exists a local collective preference relation  such that for all  and for all.
 p1  implies thatis fully determined by voters' preferences on the values of xi given z. therefore  there exists a local aggregation functionsuch thatis easily shown to satisfy the conditions of arrow' theorem. applying arrow's theorem to each  enables us to conclude to the existence of a dictator for each xi and each  such that. now 
the fact that  allows us to conclude that    which in turn is equivalent to: for all and for all  where. 
﹛note that the local dictator for a given variable may depend on the values of its parents. for instance  with two variables x and y and a dependency graph with the edge  x y   we have a single dictator for xi and up to |dx| dictators for y.
corollary 1 let sep v   be the domain of fully separable linear preference relations on dv . an aggregation function f
on sep v   satisfies  p1    p1  and  p1  iff there exists local dictators	t ﹋ d  
.
﹛finally  note that knowing the local dictators does not fully determine f. for instance  let v = {x y}  and g with no edge. assume voter 1 prefers x1 to x1 and voter 1 prefers
to satisfies  but this does not tell whether.
1 conclusion
as far as we know  aggregating structured preferences on combinatorial domains exploiting preferential independence properties has never been considered neither in social choice nor in ai.  rossi et al.  1  define a multi-agent extension to cp-nets and propose various semantics for aggregating preferences; but they do not address computational issues.
﹛this paper contains several negative results. but one important question is left unanswered: what are the sequentially decomposable voting rules  answering this question  by finding a small set of properties implying that a rule cannot be decomposable  seems much more difficult than we thought  and this is of course an issue for further research.
﹛next  we identified a domain for which direct and sequential condorcet winners coincide. clearly  lexicographic preferences are very specific  so that we would like to find more reasonable restrictions for the latter property to hold.
﹛another important issue stems from the fact that in combinatorial domains with structural properties  independencies   direct  global  voting rules are generally not computable by a sequential application of local rules: so  what should we favor  global voting rules  which are well studied in social choice but which take no advantage of preferential independencies  or sequential local rules  which are based on the dependency graph  thereby being more intuitive and easier to compute  a theoretical comparison between global voting and sequential local voting is a highly promising issue.
acknowledgements
i wish to thank christophe gonzales  martin meier  patrice perny and lirong xia for many helpful discussions.
references
 arrow  1  k. arrow. social choice and individual values. wiley  1. 1nd edition.
 boutilier et al.  1  c. boutilier  r. brafman  c. domshlak  h. hoos  and d. poole. cp-nets: a tool for representing and reasoning with conditional ceteris paribus statements. jair  1-1  1.
 brafman et al.  1  r. brafman  c. domshlak  and e. shimony. on graphical modeling of preference and importance. jair  1-1  1.
 brams and fishburn  1  s. brams and p. fishburn. voting procedures. in handbook of social choice and welfare  chapter 1. elsevier  1.
 brams et al.  1  s. brams  d. kilgour  and w. zwicker. the paradox of multiple elections. social choice and welfare  1-1  1.
 lang  1  j. lang. logical preference representation and combinatorial vote. annals of mathematics and artificial intelligence  1 :1  1.
 rossi et al.  1  f. rossi  k. venable  and t. walsh. mcp-nets: representing and reasoning with preference of multiple agents. in proceedings of aaai-1  1.
 wilson  1  n. wilson. consistency and constrained optimisation for conditional p