
this paper deals with systems of parametric equations over the reals  in the framework of interval constraint programming. as parameters vary within intervals  the solution set of a problem may have a non null volume. in these cases  an inner box  i.e.  a box included in the solution set  instead of a single punctual solution is of particular interest  because it gives greater freedom for choosing a solution. our approach is able to build an inner box for the problem starting with a single point solution  by consistently extending the domain of every variable. the key point is a new method called generalized projection.
the requirements are that each parameter must occur only once in the system  variable domains must be bounded  and each variable must occur only once in each constraint. our extension is based on an extended algebraic structure of intervals called generalized intervals  where improper intervals are allowed  e.g.  1  .
1	introduction
the purpose of this paper will be illustrated on a simple example of signal relay positioning.
¡¡the situation is as follows. m units are deployed on an area  each of them being equippedwith a transceiver. because of the limited power of their transceivers  the units cannot communicate. the question is to position a relay such that all units get connected.
¡¡we denote  ai bi  the coordinates of the ith unit position  and di its distance from the relay. assume first that all ai bi and di are fixed. then  the model consists in m simple distance equations and is easily solved by any traditional algebraic or numerical technique. since the system is probably unfeasible  a least-square method can provide a point making each distance being as close as possible to the desired value di.
¡¡unfortunately  this model suffers from three serious limitations:
  distances should not be fixed. the distance di must be neither more than the transceiver range di  nor less than
a lower bound di  say  because of the damaging loop effect. hence  distances must rather be assigned intervals d1  ... dm.
  positions of units are not fixed neither. they usually patrol around their position and can move in a box ai ¡Á bi to pick up the signal.
  providing a single solution  x y  is often not realistic. e.g.  an antenna cannot be installed exactly at a precise position in presence of obstacles. therefore  one is rather interested by a box x¡Áy such that any position chosen in this box is appropriate. obviously  the wider the box  the better.
finally  our problem is defined as a set of constraints ci x y 
 1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü m   with ci x y  iff
  ai bi di  ¡Ê  ai¡Ábi¡Ádi   x   ai 1 +  y   bi 1 = di1.
a solution of our problem is a tuple  x y  such that for all i ¡Ê  1..n   ci x y  is true and our goal is to build a so-called inner box x ¡Á y  in which each point  x y  is a solution
 ward et al.  1 . classical interval analysis and constraint

figure 1: the relay positioning problem
programming over the reals provide well-known algorithms for handling systems of equations with continuum of solutions  benhamou and goualard  1; silaghi et al.  1; vu et al.  1 . nonetheless  they are not adapted for building inner boxes when the system involves existentially quantified parameters  especially when the system is not square
w.r.t. the parameters . some techniques either based on modal intervals  herrero et al.  1   or newton-like existence theorems  goldsztejn  1  can detect inner boxes in presence of parameters  but one needs to enforce a whole branch-and-boundprocess to get an answer. such a process is heavy and leads to disastrous computation time as the dimension n increases  merely because it tries to describe a  n-1 dimension frontier with very small boxes . worse  it is never sure that an inner box will be returned at the end.
¡¡we propose in this paper an original method for building an inner box around an initial solution of the parameter-free problem. this method starts with a degenerate box  a box reduced to a point  that can be obtained using a least-square method  for example  and tries successively to enlarge the dimensions of the box  while proving that the current box remains an inner box. domain extension has already been achieved in case of parameter-free inequalities by defining an univariate extrema function and computing its left most and right most solutions of a selected variable  using a newton like method  collavizza et al.  1 . our new extension algorithm works for parametric equations  thus subsuming inequalities and addressing more situations. it essentially extends one variable at a time and the resulting box depends on the order in which variables are selected. first of all  the functions we can handle are arithmetical functions.
definition 1  arithmetical function  f is said to be an arithmetical function  if the formal expression f x  matches the following recursive definition:
  f x  = xi  with i ¡Ê  1..n .
  f x  = c  where c is a constant in r.
  f x  = ¦Õ g x    where g is an arithmetical function  and ¦Õ is a  basic  function such as sqr  sqrt  sin  ...
 where g and h are arithmetical func-
tions  and  is a binary operator in {+   ¡Á /}.
¡¡the keystone of our domain extension is the generalized projection which will be introduced in the theoretical context of modal interval analysis. informally  our method uses an inner box characterized by a generalized inclusion as f x     1  1 . we know that  as long as f x     1   x is an inner box. hence  we  enlarge  x as much as we can by considering a right-hand side  enlarged  to  1 . we propagate this enlargement through the syntactic tree of f down to the leaf representing x.
1	modal interval analysis
the theory of modal intervals has been developed by spanish researchers since the 1's  garden es et al.  1; 1 . it is a nice framework to deal with quantifiers in interval computations.
¡¡a simpler widely-adopted formulation of this theory has recently been proposed  goldsztejn  1   and our next outline of modal intervals shall conform to this proposal.
¡¡first  let us define the general situation. given a function f of variables x =  x1 ... xn t and a set of parameters v =  v1 ... vp t  the solution set under study is
.
with classical interval arithmetics  evaluating a real-valued component fi with interval vector operands x and v yields an interval z satisfying
.
such a relation is not adequate for detecting an inner box. one would rather look for an interval z satisfying
 
thus 1 ¡Ê z implies that x is an inner box.
¡¡modal intervals analysis is an efficient tool for handling expressions built from intervals with associated quantifiers  paying special attention to the semantics behind the expression. the underlying structure of this theory is an extended set of intervals  called generalized intervals.
1	generalized intervals
a generalized interval  kaucher  1; shary  1  is any pair  a b  of reals  without imposing a ¡Ü b.
¡¡here are some examples of generalized intervals:  1    1     1    1  1    1 . if x is a generalized interval  a b   we denote x := a and x := b.
¡¡kr stands for the set of generalized intervals. it can be split into two subsets: the set ir of so-called proper intervals  those whose bounds are in increasing order  and the set of improper intervals  those whose bounds are in strictly decreasing order. hence  x is proper if x ¡Ü x and x is improper if x   x. it is convenient to swap the endpoints of a generalized interval. for this end  the dual operator has been introduced : dual  x
the pro operator for an interval is also defined to refer to its underlying set of reals  once the endpoints have been reordered properly .
pro  x  := 	¡Ê x	if x ir
	 dual x 	otherwise
finally  kr is equipped with the following inclusion order:
	x.	 1 
e.g.   1  1     1  1     1      1      1 .
¡¡kr is a complete lattice with respect to this inclusion. the meet and join of two intervals are respectively x x
¡¡a generalized interval arithmetic is defined in  kaucher  1 . every binary operator and basic function  see definition 1  is defined is such a way that it extends its counterpart in classical interval arithmetic. e.g.  the addition in kr is : x 
so that  1  +  1  =  1  matches the result of classical interval addition  and  1  +  1  =  1 . this extended arithmetic keeps the fundamental property of inclusion isotonicity  with the inclusion order  1  . furthermore  kr is a group for addition and multiplication of zero-free intervals. the opposite of x is   dual x   the inverse is  1/ dual x  . e.g.    1  +  1  1  =  1    1  ¡Á  1.1  =  1 .
1	main theorem
by chaining the basic arithmetic operators and functions  one can evaluate any expression with generalized intervals arguments. the theory of modal intervals has provided the following important interpretation  garden es et al.  1; goldsztejn  1 :
proposition 1 let ¦Õ : rn ¡Á rp ¡ú r such that each component of v has only one occurrence in ¦Õ x v . let x ¡Ê irn  v ¡Ê irp and z := f x dual  v  . if z is improper then pro  z .
¡¡up to now  this proposition was mainly used as a test for inner boxes  e.g.   grando¡änand goldsztejn  1  . we detail this test in the next subsection.
1	inner box test
consider a set of constraints ci  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü m   each constraint being a parametric equation fi x v  = 1 with fi : rn ¡Á rp. assume that every component vj  1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü p  only appears once in the whole system. to check if a given box x is inner  evaluate f x dual  v  . the result is a vector z ¡Ê krm. if z   1 then x is an inner box. indeed  for all i ¡Ê  1..m  
pro  z.
since zi   1    1 ¡Ê pro  zi  then
.
let us denote vi the vector of parameters involved in ci. then
 is true for all i ¡Ê  1..m   and this implies .
¡¡as a new result  we will show that proposition 1 can also be used as a constructive tool for inner boxes. our technique combines this modal interval analysis result with a constraint programming concept called projection. next section introduces the latter and expounds our contribution.
1	a generalized interval projection
let us first consider a real-valued arithmetical function f : rn ¡Á rp ¡ú r. we split variables into x ¡Ê r and y ¡Ê rn 1  while v ¡Ê rp is the vector of parameters. thus  with no loss of generality  we shall write f x y v .
¡¡this section gives a technique to enlarge the domain of a variable that has only one occurrence1 in the expression of the function1  with given domains for other variables and parameters. so we assume x has only one occurrence in f  and fix once for all y ¡Ê irn 1 and v ¡Ê irp.
¡¡this technique handles x  the domain of x  as a variable and tries to find a solution in kr to some interval relation. we work at the interval level  which must be sharply distinguished from the usual standpoint of interval analysis: instead of solving an equation of real variable/parameters and using intervals as a way to represent an infinite number of values  we solve an equation of interval variable and look for one interval solution.
¡¡to be applied  this technique requires that the variable x has a domain  i.e.  a lower bound and an upper bound  w.r.t. the inclusion order defined by  1 . so there must be intervals xl and xu such that xl ¡Á y is the initial inner box we want to enlarge  and xu is the domain of all possible values for x. most of the time  it is easy to provide such an upper bound. both bounds are proper. we can finally write
	xl   x   xu.	 1 
¡¡our goal is to find a maximal interval x ¡Ê kr  w.r.t. the inclusion defined by  1   such that  x satisfies  1  and f x y  dual v      1  
i.e.  such that x both satisfies the domain constraint and the inner test. if f is linear  some methods already tackle this problem  markov et al.  1; shary  1; 1; sainz et al.  1 . consider now the  slightly  more general problem of finding a maximal x such that x satisfies  1  and f x y  dual v     z   1 
with z ¡Ê kr such that f xl y  dual v     z   f xu y  dual v  .  1 
notice that a maximal interval satisfying  1  is not necessarily a maximal inner extension of xl in xu.
¡¡using definition 1  we can recursively solve  1  by isolating the subexpression containing x and applying one of the three  elementary  projections detailed below.
1	overview
the recursion consists in reducing  1  to a simpler relation x satisfies  1 	and	g x y  dual v    	 1 
where g is a subexpression of f  and z satisfies
	g xl y  dual v   dual v  .	 1 
relation  1  must be a sufficient condition to  1  in the sense that a maximal x ¡Ê kr satisfying  1  must also be a maximal x ¡Ê kr satisfying  1 .
¡¡given f  x  y  v and z  we detail now how to compute an appropriate z  dealing with three different cases. these cases are related to the syntactic decomposition of f given by definition 1. the base case is straightforward. the other cases lie on three concepts: theoretical projection  selection and filtering.
1	base case  f x y v  = x 
by hypothesis   1  holds  i.e.  xl   z   xu. hence  a maximal x such that x satisfies  1  and  x   z  is z itself.
1 basic function  f x y v  = ¦Õ g x y v      theoretical projection
for clarity  we replace g x y  dual v  by the symbol g. since every basic function ¦Õ is piecewise strictly monotonic  hence piecewise invertible  for any z ¡Ê kr  a disjunction of
inclusions
 g   z1  or  g   z1  or ...
can formally be derived from ¦Õ g    z  regardless of condition  1 . for example  exp g     1     g    1 log 1   
g1    1     g    1  or g    1  1 .
¡¡notice that if ¦Õ = sqr  pro  z  cannot include negative values  so that the square root is always well defined. indeed  by hypothesis   1  holds.1 if z is proper  then1 z   g xu y  dual v   and g xu y  dual v   ¡Ý 1 implies pro  z  ¡Ý 1. otherwise  g xl y 1 dual v  1   z  i.e.  pro  z    pro  g xl y  dual v     which again implies pro  z  ¡Ý 1. this symmetry in the domain of sqrt and the image of sqr is obviously valid for every basic function.
¡¡as soon as ¦Õ is trigonometric  the disjunction includes an infinity of terms  which justifies the  theoretical  qualifier : cos g     1 1     g    ¦Ð/1 ¦Ð/1  or ...
all intervals in the  possibly infinite  sequence share both the same proper/improper nature and the same diameter. furthermore  either their proper projections are all disjoint  i =j =  pro  zi ¡Épro  zj  =     either they all intersect. they cannot however overlap more than a bound. one may wonder if two overlapping intervals g1 and g1 can be merged  i.e.  if the condition  g   z1  or  g   z1  can be replaced by g    z1 ¡Å z1 . this is not allowed since g    z1 ¡Å z1  is only a necessary condition  as counter-example  g :=   1  satisfies g    1  ¡Å   1  =   1  but neither satisfies g    1  nor g     1  . in contrast  g    z1 ¡Ä z1  is a sufficient but stronger condition  and maximality is lost  no solution can even be found . thus  no merging of any kind can be done. summing up  solving  1  boils down to solving x satisfies  1  and g x y  dual v      zj  1  for one zj in the sequence. we can now avail ourselves of the constraint on the domain of x to select and filter a feasible interval in this sequence. selection means that we pick an interval zj such that a solutionx of  1  exists. filtering means that we find the largest z such that  1  is satisfied.   selection
relation  1  allows us to keep only a finite number of zj in the theoretical projection. by inclusion isotonicity of kaucher arithmetic  xl   x implies g xl y dual v    g x y dual v . so we can detect whether zj  j = 1 ...  is feasible or not by checking g xl y  dual v     zj. the number of feasible zj resulting from this test is necessarily finite  see example 1 . we can pick any one of them.
example 1 consider f x y v  =  x + v 1  xl =   1  1   xu =   1   v =   1  and z =  1 . then  we have ¦Õ = sqr  g x y v  = x + v and
x +  dual v   1  or x +  dual v      1  1 
 x+ dual v  1	 1 	 
but since xl +  dual v  =  1  1    1  is not feasible  because       1  is feasible
  1  1 	  1  1  .
¡¡for the sake of simplicity  we performed in the last example theoretical projection and selection consecutively  as two separate steps. with trigonometric functions  this is not possible as the number of theoretical projections is infinite. so  we rather use selection as a pre-selecting process. this is illustrated on the next example.
example 1 consider f x y v  = cos x + v   xl =  1   xu =  1   v =   1  and. then  we have ¦Õ = cos and g x y v  = x + v. we first compute gl := xl +  dual v  =  1  
it follows that pro  gl     1   which restricts the projection of cosinus to two half periods   ¦Ð 1¦Ð  and  1¦Ð 1¦Ð :
x +  dual v    1¦Ð + arccos  1 1   =  1 1  or
x +  dual v    1¦Ð   arccos  1 1   =  1 1 .   filtering
once zj was proven to be feasible  relation  1  can be used to make zj smaller and fulfill  1 . indeed  x   xu implies g x y dual v    g xu y dual v . hence we can substitute zj by zj ¡Ä g xu y  dual v  .
example 1 in example 1  we found out that interval   1  1 was feasible. but as xu+ dual v  =  1   we must actually have x +  dual v     1  ¡Ä   1  1  =  1  1 .
this condition is indeed stronger.
1	binary operator

put w := h y  dual v   and consider first the addition. the inclusion f x y  dual v     z turns to g x y  dual v   + w   z.
by adding  dual  w  to each side of the latter  we get g x y  dual v     z    dual w 
thanks to the group property of kaucher arithmetic. filtering can apply here to narrow  or possibly empty  z    dual w . the same idea applies to subtraction and division  by respectively adding and multiplying z by  dual w  .
multiplication however requires some precaution. if pro  w   then we can again divide z by  dual w . but if 1 ¡Ê pro  w   because kaucher arithmetic does not handle infinite bounds we need to hand-craft a special division. similar extensions of kaucher's division are proposedin  popova 1; goldsztejn  1 . a maximal g satisfying g ¡Á w   z is obtained with the next table.
z   1z   1   z z   1w1   w1
1	1	1
	1	1 
1. g =    no solution 
1. g =    no solution 
1. 
1. g =    no solution 
1. g     ¡Þ z/w  or g    z/w +¡Þ 
1. g     ¡Þ z/w  or g
1. g     ¡Þ +¡Þ 
1. g     ¡Þ min{z/w z/w}  or  max{z/w z/w} +¡Þ 
¡¡applying filtering on g  a consistent extension of  1  to intervals with infinite bounds is easy  immediately removes infinite bounds since g is necessarily proper. hence  infinite bounds are not propagated to subsequent computations  which would have led to undefined results . they only are a convenient way to represent arbitrarily large values when enforcing filtering.
example 1 consider f x y v  = x ¡Á v  xl =   1   xu =   1   v =   1  and z =   1 . then  we have
. thanks to the table  we get x     ¡Þ  1  or x    1 +¡Þ .
both contain xl  hence are feasible. applying  meet  operator with xu yields x     1  1  or x    1 .
remark 1 we have seen that the constraint on the domain is crucial in presence of trigonometric functions or multiplication with 1 in operands. in the other cases  by removing domain constraint  i.e.  condition  1    it can be easily proven that a maximal x satisfying f x y  dual v      1 
also satisfies	f x y  dual v   =  1 .
¡¡it is worth mentioning that functions need not be decomposed formally into subexpressions: projections are directly performed by an automatic projection algorithm  benhamou et al.  1   similar to automatic differentiation.
we detail now a trace of our extension algorithm.
1	trace
we instantiate our relay example with 1 units. according to the problem in section 1  the set of constraints are:
   ai bi di  ¡Ê  ai¡Ábi¡Ádi   x   ai 1 +  y   bi 1 = di1  and the domains of the parameters are:
a1 =  1 	b1 =  1 	d1 =  1  a1 =  1 	b1 =  1 	d1 =  1  a1 =  1  b1 =   1  1  d1 =  1  a1 =  1  b1 =  1 	d1 =  1 
a least-square solution obtained by fixing each parameter to the midpoint of its domain is  x  = 1 y  = 1 . we first check that this solution can be taken as the starting point of our domain extension. we compute for all i 
¡¡¡¡ x   dual  ai  1 +  y   dual  bi  1   dual  di 1 with x =  x   x   and y =  y   y  . we get the following image vector :
 1  1   1  1   1  1   1  1 .
as this vector is included in 1  then the initial degenerate box x ¡Á y is an inner box. we can now decide that the position  x y  should not be out of a bounding box xu ¡Á yu =  1  ¡Á  1 . the extension of x can start.
¡¡we detail the projection of c1 over x. our goal is to find the biggest x  x    x   xu  such that
 x    dual a1  1 +  y    dual b1  1    dual d1   1
	  apply case 1.	1
compute w :=  y    dual b1      dual d1  . we get w =  1    1  1    1 1 =  1  1 . then   x  dual a1  1+w   1    x  dual a1  1     dual w 
finally   x    dual a1  1     1 1 .
¡¡we apply domain restriction. we first compute  x     dual a1  1 =  1 1  and check that  1 1      1 1 . we also compute xu  
 dual a   1	=	 1  and filter   1 1  to
.
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡ x    dual a1  1    1.1    apply case 1.

 x    dual a1      1 ¡Ì1  =  1.1 
¡Å
 x    dual a
but  xl   dual a1   =  1 1  and  xu   dual a1   =  1 . so  by domain restriction    1  1  is discarded  and  1.1  is left intact.
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡x    dual a1     1.1    apply case 1.
x    1.1  + a1    x    1.1  .
  apply case 1: the answer is  1.1 .
¡¡we perform a generalized projection to compute consistent extension of x  w.r.t the other constraints and get three other intervals: x1 =  1.1   x1 =  1  and x1 =  1 1 .
the intersection of the four intervals   1 1   is inner w.r.t. the whole system  see section 1 . we can perform now a generalized projection to compute an extension over y of the new box  1 1  ¡Á y  and we get respectively for each constraint y1 =  1.1   y1 =  1 1   y1 =  1.1  and y1 =  1 1 . the intersection of these extensions is  1 1 . the final inner box  1 1 ¡Á  1 1  is shown in figure 1 a .
¡¡let us roll back this extension. if we start domain extension over the variable y at first  and then  over x  we obtain another box   1 1 ¡Á  1 1  shown in 1 b . we observe that the maximal extension obtained for the first variable we project overgenerally prevents the other variables from being extended. in order to obtain more balanced boxes  we introduce a heuristic of extension in two steps. first  we extend all variables but the last one to the middle point between the initial value and the bounds of the maximal extension. the last variable is extended to the maximal interval. for example  x will be extended to  1 1  instead of  1 1   and then y will be extended to  1 1 . second  we perform a maximal extension for all variables  if they can again be extended . figures 1 c  and 1 d  show the

	 a 	 b 

	 c 	 d 
figure 1:  a . inner box with maximal extension of x and  b  with maximal extension of y.  c . first step of heuristic starting with x.  d . first step of heuristic starting with y.
results obtained with the first step of the heuristic  starting with variable x and variable y  boxes  1 1 ¡Á 1 1  and  1 1  ¡Á  1 1    respectively. figure 1 c  shows a maximal inner box  while figure 1 d  can be extended again. step two will extend y to a maximal interval  which is  1 1 .
1	conclusion
this paper provides a new method for extending consistent domains with parametric equations over the reals. the key point is the generalized projection  a new operator that combines a constraint programming concept with theoretical results from modal interval analysis. this projection can be computed in linear time w.r.t. the number of operators and functions involved in the equations. this makes our approach cheap and efficient. furthermore  universally quantified parameters can also be included straightforwardly. some limitations remain: parameters must occur once in the whole system  and variables cannot appear more than once in a given equation. despite of these limitations  this is an original and promising approach to handle parametric equations  especially when existentially quantified parameters are involved  problems with uncertainties .
