
based on the study of a generalized form of representer theorem and a specific trick in constructing kernels  a generic learning model is proposed and applied to support vector machines. an algorithm is obtained which naturally generalizes the bias term of svm. unlike the solution of standard svm which consists of a linear expansion of kernel functions and a bias term  the generalized algorithm maps predefinedfeatures onto a hilbert space as well and takes them into special consideration by leaving part of the space unregularized when seeking a solution in the space. empirical evaluations have confirmed the effectiveness from the generalization in classification tasks.
1 introduction
support vector machines  svm  have been shown to perform well in many machine learning applications. based on vapnik's seminal work in statistical learning theory vapnik  1   the algorithm starts with the ideas of separating hyperplanes and margins. given the data  where xi ¡Ê rd and yi ¡Ê {+1  1}  one searches for the linear hyperplane that separates the positive and negative samples with the largest margin  the distance from the hyperplane to the nearest data point . in the nonseparable case  a soft margin method is used to choose a hyperplane that splits the examples as cleanly as possible. using a kernel
  a positive definite function  to extend
the algorithm to the nonlinear case  an optimal hyperplane is found which has a simple representation as a linear expansion of kernel functions and a constant
		 1 
where each ci is a real number and b is called a bias term.
¡¡in the case of nonseparability  some meanings of the margin motivation are lost.  girosi  1; evgeniou et al.  1; poggio and smale  1  suggest a different view of svm based on a framework championed by poggio and other researchers poggio and girosi  1a; 1b  which implicitly treats learning as an approximation problem and tries to find a solution to a regularized minimization problem
		 1 
in hk for some ¦Ã   1. this expression represents a tradeoff between the empirical error as calculated by the loss function v   and  smoothness  of the solution as represented by the norm of f in a reproducing kernel hilbert space  rkhs  hk which is induced by a kernel is also called a regularizer. svm can be partially derived from this framework with the choice of a hinge loss function v  y f  x   ¡Ô max 1   yf  x  1 . the only incompatibility comes from the bias term b  which makes the combined model  1  generally not in hk any more.
¡¡in this paper  we follow the regularization point of view. based on the study of a generalized regularizer which leaves part of the hypothesis space unregularized and a specific trick in constructing kernels  we propose a new learning scheme which allows user to predefine features  and uses these features and kernel expansions to derive a solution in the hypothesis space  instead of considering kernel expansions only as in existing kernel-based methods. when the idea is applied to svm  we obtain an algorithm which naturally generalizes the bias term of svm. the generalized term linearly combines the predefined features instead of being a constant only. different from the empirical results that the existence of the bias term does not make much significance in practice rifkin  1   we will show the term is not trivial any more when it is generalized  and appropriate choices of the term will improve the applicability of the algorithm.
¡¡the paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we investigate a generalized regularizer in the regularized learning framework and study its associated solution when it is applied to svm. in section 1  after introducing a kernel construction trick  with which predefined features are mapped onto an rkhs  we further clarify the mathematical details in deriving svm. a new algorithm is proposed in section 1 based on the previous discussions. empirical results are demonstrated in section 1. finally  section 1 presents our discussions and conclusions.
1 generalized regularized learning
suppose hk is the direct sum of two subspaces: hk = h1¨’
h1  where is spanned by
linearly independent features. we consider the generalized regularized learning by minimizing
		 1 
where p1f is the orthogonal projection of f onto h1 and  is called a generalized regularizer. when the model is applied to svm  we consider v as the hinge loss function mentioned above. by introducing slake variables ¦Îi corresponding to the empirical error at point xi  our problem becomes

satisfying
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡yif  xi 	¡Ý	1   ¦Îi ¦Îi	¡Ý	1 where denotes the inner product in hk. we derive the dual quadratic program by using the technique of lagrange multipliers:
 1 
.
we want to minimize l with respect to f and ¦Îi and maximize w.r.t. ¦Ái and ¦Æi  subject to the constraints of the primal problem and nonnegativity constraints on ¦Ái and ¦Æi. taking derivative w.r.t. ¦Îi and setting it to zero  we have
	.	 1 
substituting  1  into  1   we have

suppose f  is the minimizer to  1 . for any f ¡Ê hk  let f = f  + ¦Äg where ¦Ä ¡Ê r and g ¡Ê hk. we have

by taking derivative w.r.t. ¦Ä  we have
.
since f  is the minimizer  we have. then the problem becomes
.
the equation holds for all g ¡Ê hk. specifically  letting g = kx  ¡¤  gives

by the reproducing property of kernels. or 
.
f    p1f  is the orthogonal projection of f  onto h1  and hence it can be represented as. so we have 
		 1 
where.
¡¡the derived minimizer in  1  satisfies the reproduction property. suppose  comes from a model that is perfectly linearly related to  it is desirable to get back a solution independent of other features. as an evident result of  1   the property is satisfied. the parameters c1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ cm in  1  will all be zero  which makes the regularizer in  1  equal to zero. as will be shown in the experiments  this propertyoften has the effect of stabilizing the results fromdifferent choices of kernels and regularization parameters practically.
1 mapping predefined features onto rkhs
by decomposing a hypothesis space hk and studying a generalized regularizer  we have proposed a generalized regularized learning model and derived its associated solution which consists of a linear expansion of kernel functions and predefined features. in this section  we will introduce a kernel construction trick which maps kernel functions and predefined features simultaneously onto a hilbert space. then we will show the mathematical details in deriving svm with a generalized bias term.
1	a kernel construction trick
given features and a strictly positive definite function ¦µ  let us consider the following reproducing kernel
		 1 
where
		 1 
 
 defines a linear transformation of the predefined featuresw.r.t.:

and satisfies
	 .	 1 
¡¡this trick was studied in  light and wayne  1  to provide an alternative basis for radial basis functions and first used in a fast rbf interpolation algorithm beatson et al.  1 . a sketch of properties peripheral to our concerns includes
		 1 
		 1 
	hxp = 1	 1 
		 1 
		 1 
where   and . another useful property is that the matrix h  is strictly positive definite  which will be used in the following computations.
¡¡by property  1   we can see that predefined features  are explicitly mapped onto hk  which has a subspace. by property  1   also forms an orthonormal basis of h1.
1	computation
using the kernel defined in  1  and  1  and its properties in  1  and  1   the minimizer in  1  can be rewritten as:
		 1 
where parameters to be determined. furthermore  from the orthogonal property  1  between  we have
	.	 1 
by property  1   we have
h c
where  c. substituting it into  1   we ob-
tain in a matrix representation

where	 
 
y	y	 
e
is a vector of ones with appropriate size. taking derivative w.r.t.  ¦Ë  we obtain
	e1¦Á1 + e1¦Á1 = 1.	 1 
then  we have
	h c + 1t¦Á	 1 
taking derivative w.r.t.  c and setting it to zero  we have
1¦Ãh c  hy1¦Á1 = 1.
h is strictly positive definite and hence invertible. so we have
y ¦Á
	 c.	 1 
substituting it back into  1   we have

so  the problem becomes
	hy1¦Á1   1¦Ã1t¦Á	 1 
satisfying
.	 1  m
the first box constraint comes from  1  and the nonnegativity of ¦Á  requiring . the second equality constraint comes from  1 . y is a strictly positive definite matrix  and the problem becomes a standard quadratic program qp . comparing with svm's qp vapnik  1   the new problem requires  equality constraints instead of one equality constraint. this seems to burden the computations. actually  because the major computations in solving the qp come from the box constraint  these equality constraints will not affect the computations much.
¡¡the solution of cis obtained after ¦Á by  1 . then ¦Ë  comes from a linear program 
		 1 
satisfying
 
1 a generalized algorithm
1	algorithm
based on the discussions above  an algorithm which generalizes the bias term of svm is proposed as follows:
1. start with data .
1. for  predefined linearly independent features of the data  define according to equation  1 .
1. choose a symmetric  strictly positive definite function which is continuous on rd ¡Á rd. get hx according to equation  1 .
1. define f : rd ¡ú r by
	 	 1 
where the solution of  comes from a quadratic program  1  and equation  1   and  is obtained by solving a linear program  1 .
1	virtual samples
the new algorithm needs the construction of an orthonormal
basis  from predefined features 
w.r.t.  samples via a linear transformation. however  algorithms  which search for linear hyperplanes to separate the data  are often not invariant to linear transformations. to provide the invariance  we consider an alternative approach that avoids the transformation.
we introduce  virtual points x satisfying
 .
the label yvq of each virtual point xvq is defined to be 1. we study the following problem:
	min lv  f 	 1 
f¡Êhk
where
.
¡¡it can be easily seen that have formed an orthonormal basis of h1 w.r.t. the virtual points and there is no need to compute any more. the new regularized minimization problem in  1  is equivalent to the original one in  1  with a hinge loss. the introduction of the virtual points does not change the scope of the classification problem while having avoided the linear transformation to construct an orthonormal basis.

figure 1: image classification accuracies using coil1 dataset with different number of training images. twenty predefined features along with a gaussian kernel ¦µ are used by svmgb; ¦µ is also used by svm. the kernel and regularization parameters are selected via cross validation. one-versus-one strategy is used for multi-classification.
1 experiments
to evaluate the effectiveness brought by the generalized bias term  two groups of empirical results are reported. the first group of experiments focused on the reproduction property of the generalized bias term. it used columbia university image library  coil-1  dataset1 for image classification. the dataset has 1 images x1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ x1 evenly distributed in 1 classes. after preprocessing  each image was represented as a 1 ¡Á 1 = 1 dimensional vector with each component having a value between 1 and 1 indicating the gray level at each pixel. four experiments were performed. each experiment used the first 1  1  1 and 1 images respectively within each class for training and the rest for testing.
¡¡using recently developed nonlinear dimensionality reduction technqiues tenenbaum et al.  1; roweis and saul  1   we found that these images actually form a manifold with a much lower dimension than the original 1 dimensions. with the prior knowledge  twenty features  1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤  1 were predefined as follows:

where 1 ¡Ü p ¡Ü 1  1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü 1  1nn  x  defines the three nearest neighbors in geodesic distance to x  and trainp is the set of training images with class label p. the geodesic distance was computed by the graph shortest path algorithm as in  tenenbaumet al.  1 . defining features in this way  we implicitly used a knn classifier as a generalized bias term. similar ideas can be generalized to combining different approaches other than knn.
¡¡figure 1 compares classification accuracies among svm  knn  and the new algorithm  denoted by svm-gb . an insightful study of the results may find that the 1 predefined features have dominated the learned svm-gb solution due to the reproduction property  and made the performance of the algorithm similar to knn which shows better performance than standard svm on this dataset.

figure 1: image classification accuracies by fixing four groups of kernel and regularization parameters log-scale .
¡¡the reproduction property also helps to lessen the sensitivity of the algorithm to the choices of kernels and the regularization parameter ¦Ã. to illustrate the effect  another experiment was conducted using 1¡Á1 training images. instead of using cross validation for parameter selection  four groups of kernel and regularization parameters were fixed. figure 1 depicts the results. the generalized bias term makes svm-gb more stable to the variations of kernel and regularization parameters. this property is especially useful concerning the practical situations where arbitrariness exists in designing kernels for some applications.
¡¡to further study the performance of the new algorithm  the second group of experiments was conducted on text categorization tasks using 1-newsgroups dataset1. the dataset collects usenet postings into twenty newsgroupsand each group has about 1 messages. we experimented with its four major subsets. the first subset has five groups  comp.*   the second four groups  rec.*   the third four groups  sci.*  and the last four groups  talk.* .
¡¡for the dataset  we removed all but the 1 words with highest mutual information with the class variable by rainbow package mccallum  1 . each document was represented by bag-of-words  bow  which treats individual words as features. a linear kernel coupled with 1 predefined features  1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤  1  which were obtained by probabilistic latent semantic analysis  plsa   hofmann  1   was used as input for svm-gb. experiments were carried out with different number  1 1  of training documents for each subset. one experiment consisted of ten runs and the average accuracy was reported. in each run  the data were separated by the xval-prep utility accompanied in c1 package1.
¡¡as a comparison  svm was tested with a linear kernel  which is a commonly used method for text categorizations. for completeness  both bow and plsa representations of documents were experimented. as can been seen in figure 1  although svm with plsa representation performs well when the number of training samples is small  the approach loses its advantage when the training set increases to a moderate size. svm-gb reports the best performance when we have 1 training documents or more. it is also shown that svmgb has better results than svm in bow representation in all experiments  which gives us the belief that the embedding of plsa features improves the accuracy.
1 discussion and conclusion
the idea of regularized learning can be traced back to modern regularization theory tikhonov and arsenin  1; morozov  1   which states that the existence of a regularizer helps to provide a unique stable solution to ill-posed problems. in this paper  we have considered the usage of a generalized regularizer in kernel-based learning. one straightforward reason that part of the hypothesis space is left unregularized in the new regularizer is due to a well-accepted fact that finite dimensional problems are often well-posed bertero et al.  1; de vito et al.  1  and do not always need regularization  as in the case of learning problems defined in a subspace spanned by a number of predefined features. similar idea was explored in spline smoothing wahba  1  that leaves polynomial features unregularized. in kernel-based learning  the most similar to our work is the semiparametric svm model smola et al.  1   which combines a set of unregularized basis functions with svm. however  to our knowledge  few algorithms and applications have been investigated for machine learning tasks from a unified rkhs regularization viewpoint in a general way.
¡¡with the new regularizer and a specific trick in constructing kernels  predefined features are explicitly mapped onto a hilbert space and taken into special consideration during the learning  which differentiates our work from standard kernel-based approachesthat only consider kernel expansions and a constant in learning. for projecting predefined features onto an rkhs  the idea of a conditionally positive definite function micchelli  1  is lurking in the background  which goes beyond the discussion of this paper.
¡¡when applying the idea to svm  we have developed a new algorithm which can be regarded as having generalized the bias term of svm. with domain specific knowledge in predefining features  this generalization makes the bias term not trivial any more. as confirmed by the experimental results  correct choices of features help to improve the accuracy and make the algorithm more stable in terms of sensitivity to the selection of kernels and regularization parameters.
acknowledgments
this research was partially supported by rgc earmarked grant #1e and #1e of hong kong sar and rgc research grant direct allocation of the chinese university of hong kong.
