
we propose a novel approach to self-regenerating systems which require continuous operation  such as security surveillance. for that aim we introduce hades  a self-regenerating cooperative multi-agent system with local monitoring. when agents of hades find local failures they repair them. however  in extreme cases repair may not be possible and irregular aggressive agents will multiply. these irregular agents may use all of the system's resources and thus take over the system. to optimize system longevity  we identify protocols for killing these irregular agents. our primary contribution is a double communication protocol of alert and death signals among the agents  making the multi-agent system robust to failures and attacks.
1 introduction
continuously functioning systems have the desired property of being able to survive damage and regenerate as necessary. we propose a biologically-inspired  self-developing and regenerative system in which each agent contains the same protocols for behaving and decision making  but presents the possibility of having failures in its protocols. such failures may occur due to environmental effects or naturally during the regeneration process. agents that have acquired unrepaired failures and are no longer aiding the environment are considered irregular. if this malfunctioning escalates to the point that the irregular agents take over the system  it is beneficial for them to be taken away. our solution to this problem involves enticing agent death via communication. we develop such communication protocols and test their robustness with this system  called hades  healing and agent death encouraging stability . the purpose of hades is to examine the role of death in self-regenerative systems as means to achieve general longevity. typically  an agent's death is irreversible and causes functional shortcomings  klein et al.  1; dellarocas et al.  1 .
our work is applicable to various distributed systems.
since hades is based on a 1-dimensional structure  the systems of interest are not limited to 1-d. consider a distributed system of computer-camera pairs  the architecture of a distributed sensor network that acts in response to queries. queries can start at each node and send processes to the various computers to tune the cameras appropriately. if some of these processes start behaving irregularly they may choke the system  especially if the irregularity involves excessive querying. this may be initiated by a hostile environment or developed naturally with a series of untreated failures. removing the irregular processes quickly is best in either case  and regenerating will occur automatically to replace the missing agents. the protocol must assure that most agents killed are irregular and that healthy agents can regenerate after death in the system.
　aggressive treatment of this kind is also appropriate in the case of cooperative robots. an irregular robot may begin to attack the other robots  or damage resources needed to attain the system's goal. in this case the other robots must have a way to end the irregular behavior so that the system goal may still be achieved. if the robot is unable to recognize that its behavior is unacceptable  there must be a secondary mechanism of citizenship. the other robots could therefore convince the problematic robot to power itself off. due to the amount of damage the robot is capable of causing  the system is healthier without it. the assumption is that there are methods for outside help to repair the malfunctioning robot  or that the system goal is such that the other robots can still achieve it. death in this case is a crucial step to preventing irreversible system damage.
　these examples demonstrate the fine line required in the communication protocols  since irregular agents can also send death messages to healthy agents. irregular and healthy agents may compete in regenerating to replace killed agents as well. in the rest of this paper we outline a general framework and describe the citizenship and communication protocols necessary for achieving longevity via death.
1 previous work
for a multi-agent system to be working continuously it must adapt on-line to changes in the environment and internal failures. diagnosis of a problem is a key requirement  as well as having plans to react to problems  hamscher et al.  1 . various frameworks exist for diagnosis in multi-agent systems  including domain independent diagnosis  horling et al.  1 . diagnosis for pre- and post-failure analysis for causal tasks can allow the system to both prevent failure and recover from it  toyama and hager  1 . fault tolerance can allow a system to recover from agents that die  kumar et al.  1 . our system  is built on the principle of regenerative agents where all agents follow the same basic life protocol. hence  for hades diagnosis consists of four steps. the first is the agent's ability to determine whether its own life protocol has been damaged and then to restore the healthy one. the second step of diagnosis is for agents to note that their neighbors are irregular  which causes the third step of communication with neighboring agents. these messages are passed along and remain active for the relevant time period. the third step is designed for an agent that is so damaged that it cannot diagnose and repair itself. if this agent receives enough messages requesting it to die it must eventually do so to keep the system healthy. in the fourth step the irregular agent maintains some level of citizenship and therefore before killing itself communicates its decision via signaling  causing neighboring agents to raise their alert level.
　approaches currently exist to react to agent death in a multi-agent system following survivalist or citizen concepts  klein et al.  1; dellarocas et al.  1; smith  1 . both approaches are aimed at increasing the adaptability of the system to minimize the impact of agents' death on the overall functionality of the system. the citizen approach utilizes an external system that is alerted when an agent dies and it then reallocates tasks so that the overall system continues to function correctly  klein et al.  1 . the survivalist approach requires all agents to be capable of dealing with all problems internally  klein et al.  1; dellarocas et al.  1; smith  1 . each agent must therefore be built with a great deal of error handling for any problem that might occur  dellarocas et al.  1 . the survivalist concept is part of the basic framework of the cnet protocol  smith  1 . our system naturally combines principles of both the survivalist and the citizenship approaches  and adds the communication protocols to handle irregular agents in a novel manner.
　since our system is regenerative  agents will regenerate automatically; the external communication process to alert for irregular agents follows citizenship principles. regenerative systems have been investigated for at least the last 1 years  and include minimalist ideas on what is needed for a system to regrow  von neumann  1   the use of chemicals to control the differentiation and growth  miller  1   the ability to use gene structures for regeneration  meinhardt and gierer  1   and regenerative agents  fedoruk and deters  1   to mention the basics. our main addition to these systems is communication protocols as well.
　hades investigates removing malicious agents. as klein et al points out  killing a malicious agent may be difficult as agents usually are not given the ability to directly kill each other. however  it may be beneficial to the system overall for problematic agents to die  klein et al.  1 . we study the option in which messages sent to an agent can only convince it to die  thus alleviating the problem of agents directly killing others. this approach helps protect against irregular agents sending death messages to healthy ones as well.
1 the system
hades is a cooperative multi-agent system on a 1-d lattice. it is arbitrarily bounded to a size of 1x1  therefore the total number of functioning agents cannot exceed the healthy equilibrium point of 1. the system is created from a single agent that generates new agents until this equilibrium is reached. agents can replicate up to 1 generations before it is considered damaging  as each replication carries a possibility of damage to the agent. each agent has a goal to stay healthy  therefore it will not replicate after 1 generations. since the agents share a system goal of keeping the equilibrium  replication is a priority to all agents. these capabilities form the basis of the system's self-regenerating property.
　we consider each agent to have life protocols that control their actions and define their current state. the communication among agents occurs differently for each signal type. a signal is emitted into the environment to be diffused equally in all directions for presence signals. death signals travel a specific distance after being emitted  but do not diffuse.
1 application details
1 healthy agents
life protocols
there are four internal life protocols modeled in each healthy agent. they control both adherence to goals as well as actions taken. the first protocol is replication  which controls the frequency that an agent generates new agents and enables selftesting prior to replication. the second protocol called suppression controls the replication protocol by stopping replication if damage is sensed. repair is the third protocol  which fixes any damage in the individual agent. the last protocol enables an agent to induce self-death. details of these protocols will follow.
goals
healthy agents have multiple goals. the system level goal is to maintain the system equilibrium by replicating when necessary. personal goals include: maintaining space  maintaining self-health  maintaining system health  and maintaining the shortest possible distance between itself and the center of the system. each of these goals have specific motivations and interactions.

figure 1: 1d view of the system at its stable state. shading is used to make the rows more visible.
　a healthy agent maintains the shortest possible distance between itself and the center of the system so that the agents will form a cohesive unit. due to this goal  the system develops in a sphere and is only forced into a rectangle due to the tight boundaries on the system.
　healthy agents require empty space around them  as can be seen in figure 1. it is impossible for them to impede on another agent's space unless the other agent dies. if an agent appears in the space directly next to an agent  the agent will attempt to move away if it can do so without encroaching on another agent's space.
　agents maintain their own health by monitoring any damage that occurs to their protocols. if the repair mechanism continuously fails  the agent will recognize that it may not be functioning correctly and will kill itself so that it does not damage the system. the agent is therefore preserving the system health by preserving its own health.
　the agent also maintains system health by guaranteeing that it does not replicate too frequently. the replication protocol controls replication rate but if it is damaged this rate will increase  implying lack of self-testing prior to regenerating. an undamaged suppression protocol will halt this replication. an agent will also maintain system health by sending kill signals to irregular agents  as will be discussed later.
actions
after the initial development stage is completed the system keeps the equilibrium by replacing agents that die  unless irregular agents keep healthy agents from replicating by entering their natural surrounding space. in our simulation we have chosen for all healthy agents to make their decisions before the unhealthy agents  and while decisions are made sequentially  the actions take effect at once. at each step of the simulation  an agent performs one action based on the environment:
1. repair: occurs if the agent is damaged.
1. death: occurs by three mechanisms  and is self-induced.death can occur when an agent has been unable to repair its life protocols. it can also occur with a probability of 1 to include other causes of death such as age. the third mechanisms is via kill signals sent by surrounding agents.
1. replication: occurs with a probability of 1  if thereis available space and suppression is not activated.
1. movement: occurs if an agent cannot replicate but thereis an available adjacent space with a higher concentration of presence signals than its current spot  representing a space closer to the center of mass.
1 presence signals
agents emit a presence signal into the environment that is diffused equally in all directions for a specific radius and speed. if the signal is strong enough to last more than one unit away  it will move by one unit each time step until it has reached its limit. therefore  the closer areas have a stronger chemical presence as the previous signal will linger.
　presence signals are used by agents to determine their proximity to other agents  as well as the direction of the center of mass. if an agent moves or dies  the signal will slowly decrease toward the original spot at the same rate that it diffused out since it is no longer being emitted from that location. the change is therefore not immediately obvious to other agents.
1 irregular agents
if all four life protocols of a healthy agent have been damaged the agent cannot regulate itself  and will ignore all goals. the defective agent will continue to replicate  spreading its damaged life protocol to its daughters  creating a cluster of problematic agents. the probability of creating an irregular agent is incredibly low  since the processes have to be ruined in a particular order: repair damaged first  then death  then suppression  and last replication. the probability of each individual process being ruined is simulated as 1  and the choice of which protocol to damage is random. the probability of the damage occurring in the correct order is therefore extremely small. however  only one irregular agent is necessary for the system's behavior to change.

figure 1: irregular agents  shown in black  take over the system quickly by pushing the healthy agents out of the way and ignoring space.
　irregular agents replicate without respect to the amount of space available or the diffused signals. although the equilibrium of healthy agents is 1  if irregular agents completely take over the system they can grow to a size of 1  figure 1 . if there is no room in any adjacent spots when an irregular agent replicates  it  pushes  a neighboring healthy agent into one of its buffer spaces. if this push causes the healthy agent to be directly next to another agent  neither it nor the adjacent agent will be able to replicate. if the agent is instead pushed into another agent  it will be considered an intruder. as the irregular agents form a cluster  they will continue to exert this physical pressure on the same area. this process may continue until the system has no more healthy agents. we propose taking advantage of this style of growth to design a communication protocol that will inhibit the problematic agents and save the healthy agents.
1 controlling irregular growth via communication
our communication protocol allows agents to send signals to convince other agents to induce self-death. the initial signal is known as  please die   and is sent by a healthy agent that senses irregularity around itself. this irregularity is represented by an invasion of space  although other systems could incorporate different representations. the invading agent will either be an unhealthy agent  or a healthy agent that has been pushed by an unhealthy agent and therefore forced to move. this signal initiates the inter-agent communication  and therefore has a low strength that was tested and chosen for optimality. the original  please die  signal will only reach those agents in the original buffer space of the sending agent. there is therefore a high probability that this signal will originally only be intercepted by irregular agents.
although this mechanism allows the agent to eventually convince close problematic agents to die  it is not enough to save the entire system  figure 1 . we therefore propose a double signal system inspired by agent trust  ramchurn et al.  1 .

figure 1: if only the  please die  signal is used and not the  i died  signal  there is a slower exponential growth of irregular agents until they reach a total of 1. the number of healthy agents have already decreased to under 1 after only 1 steps  and after 1 steps is still slowly decreasing to under 1 agents. the same result occurs when the signal limit for  please die  signals is either 1  1  or 1. the final ratio of healthy to irregular agents is 1.
　the  i died  signal is sent by an agent when it is dying  to alert neighboring agents that they should consider dying as well. the signal is twice the strength of the  please die  signal  therefore affecting any agents within the buffer space or neighboring agents that are respecting the buffer space. since the structure of irregular agents is a close cluster  this type of signal is shown to be very effective in eliminating the majority of them due to their close proximity  while not affecting as many of the further apart healthy agents due to their spacing. recent descendants are likely to be close since irregular agents do not move  and they are therefore likely to have a high level of trust. irregular agents only send the  i died  signal  and therefore they only send one message during their lifetime. it is therefore impossible for a single irregular agent to flood its healthy neighbors with death signals.
　the propagation of these signals is different than the presence signals. as it is not diffusion  the signal is the same to each agent it meets as opposed to being stronger to the closer agent. we chose to represent the signal this way to facilitate more efficient signal passing  therefore equally encouraging all agents to die that receive the signal.
　an agent decides to die due to signals when the number of either type of signal it has received is above its limit. this limit can either be the same or different for each type of agent  can be different for each signal type  and can also change over time. the limit is determined by the trust an individual agent has toward the agents surrounding it. the higher the level of trust  the lower the limit will be. our results tested different levels of trust to determine the optimum.
1 results
eight main scenarios were tested with our communication protocol. we began by testing four scenarios to determine the optimum signal limit. these scenarios included using a limit of 1 for both signal types  a limit of 1 for both signal types  and limit of 1 for both signal types  and a limit of 1 for  please die  and a limit of 1 for  i died   figure 1 . the optimum was found to be a signal limit of 1 for each signal

figure 1: with a threat limit of 1 for both signal types  the number of irregular agents peak at 1  and after 1 ticks is at 1  1% of agents in system . there are 1 healthy agents in the system at this point  giving a ratio of 1 for healthy to irregular. with a limit of 1 for the  please die  signal and a signal limit of 1 for the  i died  signal  the highest irregular agent count is slightly lower than the previous one  at 1. the final number of irregular agents is 1  1% of agents   giving a ratio of 1 healthy agents to each irregular one. a threat limit of 1 for both signal types has a peak of 1 irregular agents. the number of irregular agents ends at 1  1% of agents   giving a final healthy to irregular ratio of 1. with an increased signal limit of 1 for both signal types  the irregular agents grow to 1  1% of agents   almost three times as large as they did with the other limits  with a final ratio of 1 after 1 ticks.
type  so all other tests utilized this limit. tests were done with no  i died  signal to verify its necessity  figure 1 . an increasing signal limit was used to represent decreasing trust among agents  where the limit for each signal separately starts at 1 and increases by 1 every 1 time steps  figure 1 . delayed signaling is a crucial property to test to examine how the protocols work if they are initiated late. signaling begins when a specific number of irregular agents exist  tested with delays of 1  1  1  and 1  figure 1 . a combined signal scenario where the two signals were regarded as the same message by the receiving agent was also tested; in this case  once 1 messages are received it dies even if each message is of a different type  figure 1 .
　all scenarios were run for 1 time ticks as a relative equilibrium had been reached by the best cases  and the poor cases were at a point of no possible improvement. the ratios of healthy to irregular agents were above 1 for all of the 1 scenarios with more healthy agents than irregular agents  which is not great. the best three  however  had ratios of over 1  giving the healthy agents a much better survival chance. for the worst three scenarios  the irregular agents have successfully comprised the system so that it cannot recover  with ratios around 1 healthy agents per each irregular agent. for the successful cases the ratio gives the healthy agents enough space to replicate away from the irregular agents since signaling is still occurring  and enables them to kill irregular agents quicker than originally. this quicker kill is possible because most irregular agents have already received some signals and are therefore closer to death.

figure 1: the ratio of healthy agents to irregular agents can change dramatically by scenario. a high ratio is ideal  as our goal is 1% healthy agents and 1% irregular agents.

figure 1: the  please die  signal can be stalled in the beginning so that it is not used until there are a certain number of irregular agents. the number of irregular agents before signaling starts only slightly affects the final amount of stable irregular agents for most delays  with around 1 irregular agents for a delay until 1 or 1 agents and 1 for a delay of 1  although they comprise different percentages of the total system  1% for 1  1% for 1  1% for 1 . for a delay of 1 problematic agents  we have an increase to 1 problematic agents  1% of agents  and much less stability. all increases in the amount of delay significantly affects the number of irregular agents in the beginning leap. the ratios of healthy to irregular agents for each delay type  in order  are: 1  1  1  1.
　for the majority of the scenarios  the ratio of healthy agents to irregular agents was higher at the end than it was during the peak of irregular agents. the obvious worst scenarios are when the ratio decreased  as with a signal limit of 1  signals delayed until 1 irregular agents exist  and signals delayed until 1 irregular agents exist  figure 1 . overall  the scenario of the combined limit performed the best  with a ratio of 1 at the peak and 1 at the end. the regular limit of 1 was the second best with a final ratio of 1  although its peak ratio was better at 1. the joint limit of 1 and 1 was third with the best peak ratio  1  and a final ratio of 1. an increasing limit took fourth with ratios of 1 and 1  the delay of 1 came in fifth with ratios of 1 and 1  and the delay of 1 came in sixth with ratios of 1 and 1. the best improvement in ratios from peak to end was the delay of 1.
examining the actual number of irregular and healthy

figure 1: when the signals are interpreted identically by the agents so that once the total number of signals reaches the limit it dies  the results for irregular agents are very similar to when there is a limit of 1 for either signal as in figure 1  except that there are more healthy agents in the end  1 . the final ratio of healthy to irregular is therefore much better  at 1.

figure 1: when the number of signals required for death increases over time for both signals by starting at 1 and increasing by 1 after every 1 steps  the irregular agent count slowly increases. after 1 steps it is at 1  1% of the system   with a healthy to irregular agent ratio of 1. the number of healthy agents stays around 1.
agents at the end of the run yields the same order of optimality. the best cases are the combined limit with a healthy agent count of 1 and irregular count of 1  1% of all agents  figure 1   followed by the limit of 1 with 1 healthy agents and 1 irregular agents  1% of all agents  figure 1 . the limit of 1 and 1 was again a close third with a healthy agent count of and an irregular agent count of 1  1% of agents  figure 1   followed by the increasing limit with 1 healthy agents and 1 irregular agents  1% of all agents  figure 1 . the limit of 1 had 1 healthy agents and 1 irregular agents  1% of agents  figure 1   the delay of 1 had 1 healthy agents and 1 irregular agents  1% of agents   and the delay of 1 had 1 healthy agents ad 1 irregular agents  1% of all agents  figure 1 . the worst three scenarios were the limit of 1 with 1 healthy agents and 1 irregular agents  1% of all agents  figure 1   a delay of 1 agents with 1 healthy agents and 1 irregular agents  1% of agents   and a delay of 1 agents with 1 healthy agents and 1 irregular agents  1% of agents  figure 1 .
　the obvious best case is the combined limit  as an agent can either get 1 of a specific type of signal before dying or it can receive 1 signal of each type. this scenario had the highest ratio at the end  1  as well as the highest number of healthy agents  1  and lowest number and percentage of irregular agents  1  1% . since the limit of 1 and the limit of 1 for  please die  and 1 for  i died  were the next best and the limit of 1 was one of the worst  figure 1   it is apparent that the key is to have a low limit overall. it is also important to start signaling as early as possible  as can be seen by the poor performance of the high delays  ratio of 1  figure 1 . the system cannot recover from the destruction caused by a large delay  as the signaling is not strong enough to kill over three times as many irregular agents at the beginning.
　the healthy agents do not return to their initial equilibrium due to a combination of random death  a low replication probability  and spacing.
1 conclusions
agent death has been shown to be useful in keeping the health of systems that are prone to damage when repair is unavailable. a novelty found in our simulation is that it is not enough that agents will send  please die  messages  but an agent that is going to die must announce its death to the environment as a way of transferring the alert for irregularity to its neighbors. only through this mechanism can the system rid itself of an entire cluster of irregular agents. our results have shown that although a low signal threshold for unhealthy agents is ideal  communication can still be successful even if there are increasing limits. however  a delay or relatively high starting limit will still compromise the healthy agents in the system despite the fact that they significantly decrease the number of irregular agents.
　our solution is designed for general multi-agent systems as long as citizenship and trust is introduced where the agents share the goal of keeping the system functioning. the mechanism used to determine that an irregular agent is being invasive will also change for different systems  as well as the specific limits for each signal. for example  if introduced with defective agents the distributed camera system mentioned previously may suffer from too many processes working incorrectly  as they will tie up resources. by having a way for other processes to communicate with the damaged processes to convince them to halt  the system may be able to correct itself. the robot case from the introduction will react similarly  with the irregular robots shutting down.
　this algorithm has shown success  but can be improved. the best case is great with a final of 1% irregular agents  as it shows that the healthy agents are in a high majority. only slight changes may be necessary to decrease it to the target of 1%. we therefore propose three techniques to improve this percentage that will be examined in future work  all of which will use the low signal limit and will change other aspects to find a better overall protocol. the first technique is to allow healthy agents to replicate approximately 1 to 1 times more frequently under specific conditions such as a low number of neighbors. this technique will combat the problem of healthy agents dying from random death too frequently when trying to rebuild. the second technique is to modify the decision to move so that healthy agents will spread out to about 1 times their current spacing when there are low numbers  allowing interior agents more opportunities to replicate. this technique may fail as irregular agents will be able to replicate 1 times as much before pushing a healthy agent and causing signaling. the third technique is to change the signal interpretation so that agents trust signals from specific agents more than others. this would give a lower limit in some cases  enabling possibly 1% more irregular agents to be killed in the same amount of time. a combination of these techniques may also be beneficial.
