
in the context of the semantic web  several approaches to the combination of ontologies  given in terms of theories of classical first-order logic  and rule bases have been proposed. they either cast rules into classical logic or limit the interaction between rules and ontologies. autoepistemic logic  ael  is an attractive formalismwhich allows to overcome these limitations  by serving as a uniform host language to embed ontologies and nonmonotonic logic programs into it. for the latter  so far only the propositional setting has been considered. in this paper  we present several embeddings of normal and disjunctive non-ground logic programs under the stable-model semantics into firstorder ael  and compare them in combination with classical theories  with respect to stable expansions and autoepistemic consequences. our results reveal differencesand correspondencesof the embeddings and providea useful guidancein the choice of a particular embedding for knowledge combination.
1 introduction
in the context of the ongoing discussion around combinations of rules and ontologies for the semantic web  there have been several proposals for integrating classical knowledge bases  ontologies and rule bases  logic programs . generally speaking  all these approaches try to define a reasonable semantics for a combined knowledge base consisting of a classical component and a rules component.
¡¡two trends are currently observable. on the one hand  approaches such as swrl  horrocks and patel-schneider  1  extend the ontology with horn formulas in a classical framework. this approach is straightforward  but prohibits nonmonotonic rules. on the other hand  existing approaches which do allow nonmonotonic rules either  a  distinguish between  classical  and  rules  predicates and limit the domain of interpretation  e.g.   rosati  1   or  b  restrict the interaction to ground entailment  e.g.   eiter et al.  1  . the main distinction between these approaches is the type of interaction between the classical knowledge base on the one hand and the rule base on the other  cf. de bruijn et al.  for an examination of this issue .
¡¡as for combination  a classical theory and a logic program should be viewed as complementary descriptions of the same domain. therefore  a syntactic separation between predicates defined in these two components should not be enforced. furthermore  it is desirable to neither restrict the interaction between the classical and the rules components nor impose any syntactic or semantic restrictions on the individual components. that is  the classical component may be an arbitrary theory ¦µ of some first-order language with equality  and the rules component may be an arbitrary non-ground normal or disjunctive logic program p  interpreted using  e.g.  the common stable-model semantics  gelfond and lifschitz  1 .
¡¡the goal is a combined theory  ¦É ¦µ p   in a uniform logical formalism. naturally  this theory should amount to ¦µ if p is empty  and to p if ¦µ is empty. therefore  such a combination must provide faithful embeddings ¦Ò ¦µ  and ¦Ó p  of ¦µ and p  respectively  in this formalism  given by ¦Ò ¦µ  = ¦É ¦µ    and ¦Ó p  = ¦É   p   respectively. in turn  knowledge combination may be carried out on top of such embeddings¦Ò ¡¤  and ¦Ó ¡¤   where in the simplest case one may choose ¦É ¦µ p  = ¦Ò ¦µ  ¡È ¦Ó p .
¡¡this raises the questions  a  which uniform formalism is suitable and  b  which embeddings are suitable and  furthermore  how do embeddings relate to each other and how do they behave under knowledge combination 
¡¡autoepistemic logic  ael   moore  1   which extends classical logic with a modal belief operator  is an attractive candidate for a uniform formalism. in fact  embedding a classical theory in ael is trivial  and several embeddings of logic programs in ael have been described  gelfond and lifschitz  1; marek and truszczyn¡äski  1; lifschitz and schwarz  1; chen  1; przymusinski  1 . however  all these embeddings have been developed for the propositional case only  whereas we need to deal with nonground theories and programs. this requires us to consider first-order autoepistemic logic  fo-ael   konolige  1; kaminski and rey  1; levesque and lakemeyer  1   and non-groundversionsof these embeddings. our main contributions are as follows.
we define several embeddings of non-ground logic programs into fo-ael  taking into account subtle issues of quantification in fo-ael. we show that these embeddings are faithful in the sense that the stable models of the program and the sets of objective ground atoms in the stable expansions of the embeddings are in a one-to-one correspondence. however  the embeddings behave differently on formulas beyond ground atoms  and when combined with classical theories  even when considering propositional formulas.
¡¡motivated by these differences  we compare the embeddings along two dimensions:
1. we determine correspondences between the stable expansions of different possible embeddings  with respect to various classes of formulas. this is done for the embeddings themselves  as well as for combinations with theories from different fragments of classical logic which are important in ontology representation.
1. we present inclusion relations between the sets of autoepistemic consequences of the embeddings.
¡¡compared to other well-known nonmonotonic formalisms like reiter's default logic  fo-ael offers a uniformlanguage in which  nonmonotonic  rules themselves can be expressed at the object level. this conforms with the idea of treating an ontology and a logic program together as a unified theory.
¡¡arguably  none of the embeddings can a priori be considered to be superior to the others. our results give useful insight into the properties of the different embeddings  both on its own right and for knowledge combination. they provide a helpful guidance for the selection of an embedding for a particular scenario.
¡¡proofs of all results are available in an extended version of this paper.
1 preliminaries
first-order logic a first-order  fo  language l consists of all formulas over a signature ¦² =  f p   where f and p are countable sets of function and predicate symbols  respectively. function symbols with arity 1 are called constants. v is a countably infinite set of variable symbols. terms and atomic formulas  atoms  are constructed as usual for first-order logic with equality. ground terms are also called names; n¦² is the set of names of a given signature ¦². complex formulas are constructed as usual using the symbols    ¡Ä  ¡Å             and  . a sentence is a formula with no free variables. the universal closure of a formula ¦Õ is denoted by  ¦Õ. lg is the restriction of l to ground formulas; lga is the restriction of lg to atomic formulas. an fo theory ¦µ   l is a set of sentences.
¡¡an interpretation of a language l is a tuple  where u is a nonempty set  called the domain  and ¡¤i is a mapping which assigns a function fi : un ¡ú u to every nary function symbol f ¡Ê f and a relation pi   un to every n-ary predicate symbol p ¡Ê p. a variable assignment b for w is a mapping which assigns an element xb ¡Ê u to every variable x ¡Ê v. the interpretation of a term t  denoted tw b  is defined as usual; if t is ground  we write tw instead of tw b. an individual k with at least one name t ¡Ê n such that tw = k is called a named individual  and unnamed otherwise.
in case names are interpreted distinctly  the unique-names assumption applies. if  additionally  every individual is named  the standard-names assumption applies.
¡¡a variable substitution ¦Â is a set {x1/t1 ... xk/tk}  where x1 ... xk are distinct variables and t1 ... tk are names. ¦Â is total if it contains some x/n for every variable x ¡Ê v. given variable assignment b and substitution ¦Â  if ¦Â = {x/t | x ¡Ê v  tw = xb  for some name t}  then ¦Â is associated with b. the application of a variable substitution ¦Â to some term  formula  or theory  denoted by appending ¦Â to it  is defined as syntactical replacement  as usual. clearly  if the uniquenames assumption applies  each variable assignment has a uniqueassociated substitution; if the standard-namesassumption applies  each associated substitution is total.
example 1. consider a language l with constants f = {a  b c}  and an interpretation with u = {k l m} such that aw = k  bw = l  and cw = l  and the variable assignment b: xb = k  yb = l  and zb = m. b has two associated variable substitutions  ¦Â1 = {x/a y/b} and ¦Â1 = {x/a y/c}  which are not total.
logic programs a disjunctive logic program p consists of rules of the form
   h1 | ... | hl ¡û b1  ...  bm  not c1  ...  not cn   1  where h1 ... hl b1 ... bm c1 ... cn are  equality-free  atoms. h r  = {h1 ... hl} is the set of head atoms of r  b+ r  = {b1 ... bm} is the set of positive body atoms of r  and b  r  = {c1 ... cn} is the set of negative body atoms of r. if l = 1  then r is normal. if b  r  =    then r is positive. if every variable in r occurs in b+ r   then r is safe. if every rule r ¡Ê p is normal  resp.  positive  safe   then p is normal  resp.  positive  safe .
¡¡by a first-order signature  ¦²p  we understand a superset of the function and predicate symbols which occur in p. let lp denote the first-order language based on ¦²p. we assume that ¦²p contains at least one 1-ary function symbol or only 1-ary predicate symbols. the herbrand base  bh  of lp is the set of ground atomic formulas of lp. subsets of bh are called herbrand interpretations.
¡¡the grounding of a logic program p  denoted gr p   is the union of all possible ground instantiations of p  obtained by replacing each variable in a rule r with a name in n¦²p   for each rule r ¡Ê p.
¡¡let p be a positive program. a herbrand interpretation m of p is a model of p if  for every rule r ¡Ê gr p   b+ r    m implies . a herbrand model m is minimal iff for every model m such that.
¡¡following gelfond and lifschitz   the reduct of a logic program p with respect to an interpretation m  denoted
pm  is obtained from gr p  by deleting  i  each rule r with
b   and  ii  not c from the body of every remaining rule r with c ¡Ê b  r . if m is a minimal herbrand model of pm  then m is a stable model of p.
1 first-order autoepistemic logic
we adopt the definition of first-order autoepistemic logic  fo-ael  under the any- and all-name semantics following konolige   using a novel characterization with associated variable substitutions. the benefit of these semantics is that they allow quantification over arbitrary domains and generalize classical first-order logic with equality  thereby allowing a trivial embedding of first-order theories. other approaches  kaminski and rey  1; levesque and lakemeyer  1  restrict the domains of interpretations to unique or standard names and therefore do not allow such direct embeddings.
¡¡an fo-ael language ll is defined relative to a first-order language l:  i  any atomic formula in l is a formula in ll;  ii  if ¦Õ is a formula in ll  then l¦Õ  called a modal atom 1 is a formula in ll; and  iii  complex formulas are constructed as in first-order logic. a formula without modal atoms is an objective formula. standard autoepistemic logic is fo-ael without variables.
¡¡an autoepistemic interpretation is a pair   where  is a first-order interpretation and ¦£   ll is a set of sentences  called the belief set. satisfaction of objective atomic formulas in w is as in first-order logic.
¡¡satisfaction of a formula l¦Õ in an interpretation with respect to a variable assignment b under the any-name semantics  resp.  all-name semantics  is defined as follows:
w b |=¦£ l¦Õ iff  for some  resp.  all  variable substitution s  ¦Â  associated with b  ¦Õ¦Â is closed and ¦Õ¦Â ¡Ê ¦£.
this extends to complex formulas in the usual way. notice that in case the unique-names assumption applies  the anyand all-name semantics coincide.
¡¡ is a model of ¦Õ  denoted w |=¦£ ¦Õ  if w b |=¦£ ¦Õ for every variable assignment b of w. this extends to sets of formulas in the usual way. a set a   ll of formulas entails a sentence ¦Õ with respect to a belief set ¦£  denoted a |=¦£ ¦Õ  if for every interpretation w such that w |=¦£ a  w |=¦£ ¦Õ.
example 1. consider a language with constant symbols a b and unary predicate symbol p  and an interpretation 
with. under the any-name semantics  w |=¦£  x.lp x ; under the all-name semantics    because bw = aw = k  but p b  ¡Ê/ ¦£.
we deem this behavior of the all-name semantics counterintuitive; so  following konolige   we use the any-name semantics in what follows  unless stated otherwise.
example 1. consider the formula ¦Õ =  x p x    lp x   and some interpretation. then: w |=¦£ ¦Õ iff for every variable assignment
p x  or w b |=¦£ lp x . now  w b |=¦£ lp x   with xb = k  iff for some t ¡Ê n¦²  tw = k  and p t  ¡Ê ¦£. thus  ¦Õ is false in any interpretation where pi contains unnamed individuals.
¡¡a belief set t   ll is a stable expansion of a base set a   ll iff t = {¦Õ | a |=t ¦Õ}. we use the following notation in the remainder: to = t ¡É l  tog = t ¡É lg  and
toga = t ¡É lga.
¡¡a formula ¦Õ is an autoepistemic consequence of a if ¦Õ is included in every stable expansion of a. cons a  denotes the set of all autoepistemic consequences of a. conso a  denotes the restriction of cons a  to objective formulas.
¡¡every stable expansion t fulfills the following properties:  a  t is closed under first-order entailment   b  if ¦Õ ¡Ê t then l¦Õ ¡Ê t  and  c  if ¦Õ /¡Ê t then  l¦Õ ¡Ê t. if t is consistent  the converses of  b  and  c  also hold.
¡¡konolige  shows that a stable expansion t of a base set a is determined by its objective subset to  called the kernel of t. if a does not have nested modal operators  then  additionally  to = {¦Õ ¡Ê l | a |=to ¦Õ} iff to is the kernel of a stable expansion t of a. we extend this result as follows:
proposition 1. given a base set a   ll with only objective atomic formulas in the context of modal atoms  and a set of objective formulas ¦£o   l  with ¦£ga = ¦£o ¡É lga  then ¦£o = {¦Õ ¡Ê l | a |=¦£ga ¦Õ} iff ¦£o = t ¡É l for some stable expansion t of a.
1 embedding non-ground logic programs
we define an embedding as a function which takes a logic program p as its argument and returns a set of sentences in the fo-ael language obtained from ¦²p.
¡¡since the unique-names assumption does not hold in foael in general  it is necessary to axiomatize default uniqueness of names  as introduced by konolige  . by una¦² we denote the set of axioms
	 	for all distinct t1 t1 ¡Ê n¦².
1 embedding normal logic programs
the first embedding we consider is an extension of the one which originally led gelfond and lifschitz to the discovery of the stable model semantics  gelfond and lifschitz  1 . the second and third embeddingare extensions of the embeddings due to marek and truszczyn¡äski . the third was independently developed by lifschitz and schwarz   and chen . the original motivation for the second and third embedding was the possibility to directly embed programs with strong negation and disjunctive programs.
definition 1. let r be a rule of form  1  with l = 1. then:
;
;

for a normal logic program p  we define: ¦Óx p  = {¦Óx r  | r ¡Ê p} ¡È una¦²p  x ¡Ê {hp eb eh}.
¡¡in the above embeddings   hp  stands for  horn for positive rules   positive rules are translated to objective horn clauses ;  eb  stands for  epistemic rule bodies   the body of a rule can only become true if it is known to be true ; and  eh  stands for  epistemic rule heads   if the body of a rule is true  the head is known to be true . for all three embeddings  we assume ¦²¦Óx p  = ¦²p  here and henceforth we use  x  as a meta-variable to range over hp  eb  and eh . furthermore  by ¦Óx  we denote the embedding ¦Óx without the una axioms. in the examples of embeddings in the remainder of the paper  we do not write the una axioms explicitly.
¡¡a notable distinction between the embedding ¦Óhp on the one hand and the embeddings ¦Óeb ¦Óeh on the other is that the contrapositive of the rules in p is included in stable expansions of ¦Óhp  but not in stable expansions of ¦Óeb ¦Óeh:
example 1. consider p = {p ¡û q}. the stable expansion of ¦Óhp p  = {p   q} includes  q    p; the expansion of ¦Óeb p  = {p ¡Ä lp   q} includes  q    lp ¡Å  p  but not  q    p  and neither does ¦Óeh p .
¡¡for the case of standard autoepistemic logic and ground logic programs  the following correspondence result holds:
proposition 1   gelfond and lifschitz  1; marek and truszczynski  1¡ä   . a herbrand interpretation m is a stable model of a ground normal logic program p iff there is a consistent stable expansion in standard autoepistemic logic such that m = t ¡É lga.
¡¡now consider the case of non-ground programs. the following example illustrates the embeddings:
example 1. consider p = {q a ; p x ; r x  ¡û not s x   p x }  having a single stable model m = {q a  p a  r a }.
likewise  each of the embeddings ¦Óhp p   ¦Óeb p   and ¦Óeh p  has a single consistent stable expansion:
thp = {q a  p a  lp a   ls a  r a  
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡ x  p x     q x    l x lp x   ...}  teb = {q a  p a  lp a   ls a  r a   l x lp x   ...}  teh = {q a  p a  lp a   ls a  r a   x lp x  ...}.
¡¡the stable expansions in example 1 agree on objective ground atoms  but not on arbitrary formulas. we now extend proposition 1 to the non-ground case.
lemma 1. given a set a   lga of objective ground atoms  there exists a stable expansion t of ¦Óx p  under the any- or all-name semantics with toga = a iff there exists a stable expansion with. moreover  the same result holds for ¦Óhp  under the all-name semantics.
theorem 1. a herbrand interpretation m of a normal logic program p is a stable model of p iff there is a consistent stable expansion t of ¦Óx p  under the any- or all-name semantics such that m = t ¡É lga. moreover  the same result holds for ¦Óhp  under the all-name semantics.
¡¡note that this result does not hold for  under the any-name semantics. consider p = {p n1 ;r n1 ;q ¡û not p x } such that ¦²p has only two names  n1 and n1. p has one stable model 
{p n1 ;r n1 ; x  lp x    q } has one stable expansion  t = {p n1  r n1  lp n1  lr n1   lp n1  ...}. t does not include q. to see this  consider an interpretation w with only one individual k. lp x  is trivially true under the anyname semantics  because there is some name for k such that p t  ¡Ê t  viz. t = n1 . in the all-name semantics  this situation does not occur  because for lp x  to be true  p t  must be included in t for every name  t = n1 and t = n1  for k. one can similarly verify that the result does not apply to the embeddings ¦Óeb  and ¦Óeh  under the all-name semantics  by the positive modal atoms in the antecedents.
1 embedding disjunctive logic programs
the embeddings ¦Óhp and ¦Óeb cannot be straightforwardly extended to disjunctive logic programs  even in the propositional case. consider the program p = {a | b ¡û}. p has two stable models: m1 = {a} and m1 = {b}. however  a straightforward extension of ¦Óhp  ¦Óhp¡Å  p  = {a ¡Å b}  has one stable expansion t = {a ¡Å b l a ¡Å b   la  lb ...}. in contrast  ¦Óeh can be straightforwardly extended because of the modal atoms in the consequent of the implication:
1	.
¡¡the so-called positive introspection axioms  pias   przymusinski  1  remedy this situation for ¦Óhp¡Å and ¦Óeb¡Å . let
pia¦² be the set of axioms ¦Á   l¦Á 	for every objective ground atom ¦Á of ¦².
the pia ¦Á   l¦Á ensures that every consistent stable expansion contains either ¦Á or  ¦Á.
¡¡it would have been possible to define the pias in a different way:  ¦Õ   l¦Õ for any objective atomic formula ¦Õ. this would  however  effectively close the domain of the predicates in ¦²  see example 1 . we deem this aspect undesirable in combinations with fo theories. definition 1. let r be a rule of form  1 . then:
;
; .
for a disjunctive logic program p  we define:
¦Óhp¡Å  p  = {¦Óhp¡Å  r  | r ¡Ê p} ¡È pia¦²p ¡È una¦²p; pia¦²p ¡È una¦²p;
¦Óeh¡Å  p  = {¦Óeh¡Å  r  | r ¡Ê p} ¡È una¦²p.
as before  by we denote the embedding without the una part. we do not write the una and pia parts explicitly in the examples below.
¡¡for the case of standard autoepistemic logic and ground disjunctive logic programs  the correspondence between the stable expansions of the embeddings ¦Óhp¡Å  p  and ¦Óeh¡Å  p  and the stable models of p is known:
proposition 1   przymusinski  1; marek and truszczynski  1¡ä   . a herbrand interpretation m of a ground disjunctive logic program p is a stable model of p iff there is a consistent stable expansion  resp.  in standard autoepistemic logic such that m = t ¡É lga.
¡¡we generalize this result to the case of fo-ael and nonground programs  and additionally for:
theorem 1. a herbrand interpretation m of a disjunctive logic program p is a stable model of p iff there is a consistent stable expansion under the any- or all-name semantics such that m = t ¡Élga. moreover  the same result holds for ¦Óhp  under the all-name semantics.
¡¡a notable distinction between the embeddings  and ¦Óeb¡Å on the one hand and ¦Óeh¡Å on the other is the presence and absence of the pias  respectively:
example 1. consider
pia¦²p   and ¦Óeh¡Å  p  = { p ¡Ä lp  ¡Å  q ¡Ä lq }. the stable expansions of ¦Óhp¡Å  p  are thp = {p  q lp  lq ...} and ; the expansions of ¦Óeh¡Å  p  are
. the
expansions include neither  q nor  p.
¦µ pprgsafegrndthr¦Éeh ¡Ô ¦Éeh¡Å¦Éeb ¡Ô ¦Éeh¦É¡Åhp ¡Ô ¦É¡Åebuni¦Éeb ¡Ôg ¦Éehghorn¦Éhp ¡Ôga ¦Éebhorn¦Éhp ¡Ôga ¦Éebprop¦É¡Åhp ¡Ôg ¦É¡Åeb{ }¦Éhp ¡Ôga ¦Éeb ¡Ôga
¦Éeh ¡Ôga ¦Éhp¡Å ¡Ôga ¦Éeb¡Å ¡Ôga ¦Éeh¡Åtable 1: correspondence between expansions of combinations; is short for.
1 relations between the embeddings
in this section  we explore correspondences between the embeddings presented in the previous section in combinations with fo theories. in our simple setting  we define the combination of a program p and an fo theory ¦µ as ¦É x¡Å  ¦µ p  = ¦µ ¡È ¦Óx ¡Å  p    ll 1
where ¦²ll is the union of the signatures ¦²¦µ and ¦²p. recall that we consider the any-name semantics  because of its more intuitive behavior  cf. 1 .
¡¡in the following  we compare  i  the stable expansions of such combinations and  ii  the sets of autoepistemic consequences of the individual embeddings. to this end  we introduce the following notation:
¡¡let a1 and a1 be fo-ael theories. we write a1 ¡Ô a1 iff a1 and a1 have the same stable expansions. moreover  for ¦Á ¡Ê {g ga}  we write a1 ¡Ô¦Á a1 iff
{t ¡É l¦Á | t is a stable expansion of a1} =
is a stable expansion of a1}.
note that  by definition  a1 ¡Ô a1 implies a1 ¡Ôg a1  and
a1 ¡Ôg a1 implies a1 ¡Ôga a1.
¡¡in our analysis  we furthermore use the following classes of programs and theories:
  the classes prg  safe  and grnd of arbitrary  safe  and ground logic programs  respectively; and
  the classes thr  uni  ghorn  horn  prop  and { } of arbitrary  universal  generalized horn 1 horn  propositional  and empty fo theories.
observe the following inclusions:
prop   uni
grnd   safe   prg;	{ }  horn   uni  thr. horn   ghorn
theorem 1. let p be a normal  disjunctive  resp.  logic program and ¦µ be a first-order theory. then  the relations depicted in table 1  with the respective provisos  hold  providing p and ¦µ belong to the classes listed there.
	ceb¡Å	 chp¡Å
	 		
	   		
		
	ceh¡Å				 chp
figure 1: relationships between sets of consequences; cx ¡Å  stands forstands for    and  stands for   in case p is safe.
¡¡consider the logic program p from example 1. p is neither safe nor ground: to determine correspondence between embeddings  we need to use the first column of table 1. since p is normal  all equations in this column are applicable. we have that ¦Óeb p  ¡Ôg ¦Óeh p  and ¦Óhp¡Å  p  ¡Ôg ¦Óeb¡Å  p . let ¦µ be a horn theory  then ¦Éhp ¦µ p  ¡Ôga ¦Éeh ¦µ p  ¡Ôga ¦Éeb ¦µ p  and ¦Éeh ¦µ p  ¡Ô ¦É¡Åeh ¦µ p .
¡¡additionally  since autoepistemic consequence is defined through the intersection of all stable expansions  we can conclude that ¦Óeb p  and ¦Óeh p   and also and ¦Óeb¡Å  p   agree on objective ground autoepistemic consequence and that ¦Éhp ¦µ p   ¦Éeh ¦µ p   and ¦Éeb ¦µ p  agree on objective ground atomic autoepistemic consequence.
¡¡we now consider the relative behavior of the embeddings with respect to autoepistemic consequences.
theorem 1. let p be a  safe  normal  disjunctive  resp.  logic program  and let  and be embedding functions  for x y ¡Ê {hp eb eh}. then  relations
conso ¦Óx ¡Å  p     conso ¦Óy ¡Å  p   hold as depicted in figure 1  with the respective provisos .
¡¡most of the relations given in figure 1 do not hold for combinations with fo theories. consider  e.g.  p = {r ¡û not p not q} and ¦µ = {p ¡Å q}. then  ¦Óhp p  = { lp ¡Ä
 l
both have one stable expansion  each containing  lp   lq  and r. the combination ¦Óhp p  ¡È ¦µ has one stable expansion which includes  lp   lq  and r; ¦Óhp¡Å  p  ¡È ¦µ has two stable expansions {p lp  lq ...} and {q lq  lp ...}  neither of which includes r. thus  r is an autoepistemic con-
                         ¦É¡Å  ¦µ p . therefore  o ¦Éhp ¦µ      o ¦Éhp ¦µ   .
¡¡using the results in this section  we can make a number of observations about the embeddings:
 1  few correspondencesbetween embeddingswith pias and those without hold. however  we can note that the former are stronger in terms of the number of objective autoepistemic consequences  cf. figure 1 and example 1 .
 1  the embeddings ¦Óhp and ¦Óhp¡Å are generally the strongest in terms of consequences  see figure 1 . they allow to derive the contrapositive of rules  cf. example 1  and the bodies of rules are applicable to unnamed individuals  whereas the antecedents of the axioms in the other embeddings are only applicable to named individuals  because of the positive modal atoms in the bodies.
 1  for unsafe programs  the embeddings ¦Óeh and are generally not comparable with the others; embeddings of unsafe rules result in axioms of form  xlp x   cf. example 1   which require all individuals to be named.
 1  in case the programs are safe  or one assumes that all individuals are named  ¦Óeb and ¦Óeh coincide.
¡¡we conclude this section with an example which demonstrates possibly unexpected effects of the una axioms in their interaction with an fo theory.
example 1. consider p = {p a ;p b } and r}. then  r is included in any stable expansion of ¦µ¡È¦Óx p   for any ¦Óx  in view of the una axioms.
1 related and future work
in this paper  we have studied the combination of logic programs and ontologies  fo theories  using embeddings in a unifying formalism  fo-ael . one could imagine  in contrast  extensions of semantics for logic programs or ontologies to incorporate  parts of  the other formalism. one such extension of logic programming semantics is that of open domains  gelfond and przymusinska  1; van belleghem et al.  1; heymans et al.  1 . such extended semantics can be used to accommodate incomplete knowledge  an important aspect of ontology languages. nonmonotonic extensions of description logics  an fo-based formalism suitable for ontologies  have been presented in the literature  baader and hollunder  1; donini et al.  1; bonatti et al.  1 . such approaches might be extended to accommodate logic programs.
¡¡we have investigated basic correspondences between different embeddings of non-ground programs in fo-ael  and simple combinations with fo theories. choosing different embeddings for logic programs  but also possibly different embeddings for first-order theories  will give rise to different properties of such combinations  de bruijn et al.  1 . in future work  we will investigate these properties  as well as the relationship with existing approaches to combine logic programs and classical theories  horrocks and patelschneider  1; eiter et al.  1; rosati  1 .
¡¡so far  we have only considered equality-free logic programs. we conjecture that equality in rule bodies poses no problems  since still only the trivial equalities are derivable. allowing equality in rule heads is a topic for further research.
¡¡we expect that the proposed combinations of rules and ontologies based on fo-ael will give rise to the definition of novel decidable fragmentsand for sound  but possibly incomplete  algorithms for specific reasoning tasks for such combinations. additionally  we will consider other nonmonotonic logics  e.g.  default logic and circumscription  as formalisms for combining logic programs and classical knowledge bases.
