
consistency-based diagnosis concerns using a model of the structure and behaviour of a system in order to analyse whether or not the system is malfunctioning. a well-known limitation of consistency-based diagnosis is that it is unable to cope with uncertainty. uncertainty reasoning is nowadays done using bayesian networks. in this field  a conflict measure has been introduced to detect conflicts between a given probability distribution and associated data.
in this paper  we use a probabilistic theory to represent logical diagnostic systems and show that in this theory we are able to determine consistent and inconsistent states as traditionally done in consistency-based diagnosis. furthermore  we analyse how the conflict measure in this theory offers a way to favour particular diagnoses above others. this enables us to add uncertainty reasoning to consistency-based diagnosis in a seamless fashion.
1 introduction
model-based diagnostic reasoning is concerned with the diagnosis of malfunctioning of systems  based on an explicit model of the structure and behaviour of these systems  reiter  1 . in the last two decades  model-based diagnosis has become an important area of research with applications in various fields  such as software engineering  ko“b and wotawa  1  and the automotive industry  struss and price  1 .
﹛basically  two types of model-based diagnosis are being distinguished in literature:  i  consistency-based diagnosis  reiter  1   and  ii  abductive diagnosis  console et al.  1 . in this paper  we only deal with consistency-based diagnosis.
﹛consistency-based diagnosis generates diagnoses by comparing the predictions made by a model of structure and behaviour with the observations; it determines the behavioural assumptions under which predictions and observations are consistent. it is typically used for trouble shooting of devices that are based on a design  genesereth  1 .
﹛a limitation of consistency-baseddiagnosis is that it is only capable of handling qualitative knowledge and unable to cope with the uncertainty that comes with many problem domains. this implies that an important feature of diagnostic problem solvingis not capturedin the theory. to solve this problem  de kleer has proposed adding uncertainty to consistency-based diagnosis by specifying a joint probability distribution on all possible behavioural assumptions  taking these to be mutually independent  de kleer  1 . one step further is a proposal by kohlas et al. to adjust the probability distribution by excluding diagnoses that are inconsistent  kohlas et al.  1 . in both cases  consistency-based diagnosis and uncertainty reasoning are kept separate.
﹛there have also been proposals to utilise bayesian networks as a probabilistic framework for model-based diagnosis  pearl  1 . poole has proposed using consistencybased diagnosis to speed up reasoning in a bayesian network  poole  1 . lucas has proposed a method to integrate consistency-based diagnosis into bayesian network reasoning  lucas  1 .
﹛none of the approaches above suggest determining and ordering diagnoses in a probabilistic manner  yet in a way similar to consistency-based diagnosis.
﹛in this paper  we explore a probabilistic framework that models the structure and behaviour of logical diagnostic systems. the two major aims of our research were to develop a new probabilistic framework that
1. is capable of distinguishing between consistent and inconsistent states of a system and  therefore  allows determining diagnoses;
1. offers a way to favour particular diagnoses above othersby means of a statistical measure.
﹛the first aim is achieved by defining consistency and inconsistency probabilistically; the second aim is fulfilled by using the conflict measure from bayesian network as such a statistical measure  jensen  1 .
﹛the paper is organised as follows. in section 1  the necessary basic concepts are defined. subsequently  in section 1  the definition of bayesian diagnostic problems is given together with probabilistic definitions of consistency and inconsistency. section 1 shows that the conflict measure is capable of ordering diagnoses. finally  in section 1 the results of this paper are summarised.

figure 1: example of a circuit.
1 preliminaries
in this section  we provide a brief summary of the theories of consistency-based diagnosis and bayesian networks.
1 consistency-based diagnosis
in the theory of consistency-based diagnosis  reiter  1   the structure and behaviour of a system is represented by a logical diagnostic system sl =  sd cmp   where
  sd denotes the system description  which is a finite set of logical formulae  specifying structure and behaviour;
  cmp is a finite set of constants  corresponding to the components of the system; these components can be faulty.
the system description consists of behaviour descriptions  and connections. a behaviouraldescription is a formulaspecifying normal and abnormal  faulty  functionalities of the components. these normal and abnormal functionalities are indicated by abnormality literals. a connection is a formula of the form  where ic and denote the input and output of components.
﹛a logical diagnostic problem is defined as a pair pl =  sl obs   where sl is a logical diagnostic system and obs is a finite set of logical formulae  representing observations.
﹛adopting the definition from  de kleer et al.  1   a diagnosis in the theory of consistency-based diagnosis is defined as follows. let 忖 be the assignment of either a normal or an abnormal behavioural assumption to each component. then  忖 is a consistency-based diagnosis of the logical diagnostic problem pl iff the observations are consistent with both the system description and the diagnosis:
sd ﹍ 忖 ﹍ obs.
here   stands for the negation of the logical entailment relation  and ﹠ represents a contradiction.
example 1 consider figure 1  which depicts an electronic circuit with one and gate and two or gates. now  the output of the system differs from the one expected according to the simulation model  thus it gives rise to an inconsistency. one of the diagnoses  resolving the inconsistency  is to assume that the and gate is functioning abnormally.
1 bayesian networks and data conflict
let p xv   denote a joint probability distribution of the set of discrete random variables xv with finite set of indices v . let u w z   v be mutually disjoint sets of indices. then 

figure 1: example of a bayesian network.
the set of random variables xu is said to be conditionally independent of xw given xz  if
	p xu | xw xz  = p xu | xz .	 1 
a bayesian network is a pair b =  g p   where all independencies in the acyclic directed graph g are also contained in p  and p is factorised according to g as
	 	 1 
where 羽v denotes the random variables associated with the parent set of vertex v in the graph. in this paper  we assume that all random variables are binary; xv stands for a positive value of xv  whereas x‘v denotes a negative value.
﹛bayesian networks specify particular probabilistic patterns that must be fulfilled by observations. observations are random variables that obtain a value through an intervention  such as a diagnostic test. the set of observations is denoted by 次. the conflict measure has been proposed as a tool for the detection of potential conflicts between observations and a given bayesian network  jensen  1   and is defined as:
conf 次  = log p 次1 p 次1 ﹞﹞﹞p 次m  	 1  p 次 
with 次 = 次1 ﹍ 次1 ﹍ ﹞﹞﹞ ﹍ 次m.
﹛the interpretation of the conflict measure is as follows. a zero or negative conflict measure means that the denominator is equally likely or more likely than the numerator. this is interpreted as that the joint occurrence of the observations is in accordance with the probabilistic patterns in p. a positive conflict measure  however  implies negative correlation between the observations and p indicating that the observations do not match p very well.
﹛the interpretation of the conflict measure is illustrated by example 1.
example 1 consider the bayesian network shown in figure 1  which describes that stomach ulcer  u  may give rise to both vomiting  v  and nausea  n .
﹛now  suppose that a patient comes in with the symptoms of vomiting and nausea. the conflict measure then has the following value:
conf .
as the conflict measure assumes a negative value  there is no conflict between the two observations. this is consistent with medical knowledge  as we do expect that a patient with stomach ulcer displays symptoms of both vomiting and nausea.
﹛as a second example suppose that a patient has only symptoms of vomiting. the conflict measure now obtains the following value:
conf .
as the conflict measure is positive  there is a conflict between the two observations  which is again in accordance to medical expectations.
1 probabilistic diagnosis
the main aim of this section is to define a probabilistic theory that is related to consistency-based diagnosis.
﹛in section 1  the system description and the components of a logical diagnostic system are mapped to a probabilistic representation  defined along the lines of  pearl  1  and  poole  1 . this representation is called a bayesian diagnostic system  which  together with the observations 次  yield a bayesian diagnostic problem. in section 1  consistency and inconsistency are defined for bayesian diagnostic problems.
1 bayesian diagnostic problems
to start  we introduce some necessary notation. in the remaining part of this paper  the set cmp acts as the set of indices to the components of a diagnostic system. in this context  c denotes a subset of these components  whereas c indicates an individual component.
﹛we are now in a position to define bayesian diagnostic systems. in this formalism  the relations between the components are defined qualitatively by a graph and quantitatively by a probability distribution.
﹛a bayesian diagnostic system  defined as a pair sb =  b cmp   is obtained as the image of a logical diagnostic system sl  where:  i  b =  g p  is a bayesian network with acyclic directed graph g and joint probability distribution p of the set of random variables xv ;  ii  the acyclic directed graph g =  v e  is the image of the system description  with v = o﹍i ﹍a; o are the output vertices corresponding to the outputs of components  i are input vertices corresponding to the inputs of components and a are abnormality vertices corresponding to abnormality literals. the set of arcs e results from the mapping of connections in sd.
﹛according to the definition above  the set of random variables corresponds one-to-one to the set of vertices  thus xv   v . figure 1 shows the graphical representation of the bayesian diagnostic system corresponding to the circuit in figure 1.
﹛as we have already mentioned  we also need to add observations  thus inputs and outputs  to bayesian diagnostic systems. it is generally not the case that the entire set of inputs and outputs of a system is observed. we  therefore  make the following distinction: observed system inputs and outputs will be denoted by is and os  whereas the remaining
 non-observed inputs and outputs are denoted by ir and or. clearly  i = is ﹍ ir and o = os ﹍ or.
﹛now  we are ready to define the notion of bayesian diagnostic problem.

figure 1: bayesian diagnostic system corresponding to the circuit in figure 1.
definition 1  bayesian diagnostic problem  a bayesian diagnostic problem  denoted by pb  is defined as a pair pb =  sb 次   where sb is a bayesian diagnostic system and 次 = is ﹍ os denotes the set of observations.
1 p-consistency and p-inconsistency
in this section  we analyse how diagnoses can be expressed in the context of bayesian diagnostic problems.
﹛recall that in the consistency-based theory of diagnosis  a diagnosis is a prediction  which  i  assumes either normal or abnormal behaviour of each component in the system  that  ii  satisfies the consistency condition.
﹛thus  according to the first requirement  a diagnosis in a bayesian diagnostic system concerns the entire set of behavioural assumptions. to facilitate the establishment of a connection between consistency-based diagnosis and diagnosis of a bayesian diagnostic problem  the set of behavioural assumption for each component is denoted by 忖. by the notations ac and a‘c are meant that component c is assumed to function abnormally and normally  respectively. clearly  忖 can then be written as
忖 = {ac | c ﹋ c} ﹍ {a‘c | c ﹋  cmp   c }.
﹛the second requirement above states that a consistencybased diagnosis has to be consistent with the observations. note that this consistency condition implies that a diagnosis makes the observations possible. translating this to our probabilistic diagnostic theory  the consistency condition requires that the probability of the occurrence of the observations given the diagnosis is non-zero; if this probability is equal to 1  it implies inconsistency.
these issues are embodied in the following definition.
definition 1  p-inconsistency and p-consistency  let pb =  sb 次  be a bayesian diagnostic problem  then
  if p 次 | 忖  = 1  pb is called p-inconsistent 
  otherwise  if is called p-consistent.
the concepts of p-consistency and p-inconsistency allows us to establish a link to consistency-based diagnosis  shown in the following theorem.
theorem 1 let pl =  sl obs  be a logical diagnostic problem  let pb =  sb 次  be a bayesian diagnosticproblem corresponding to this logical diagnostic problem. let 忖 be a set of behavioural assumptions. then 
	obs  	 1 
thus  the existence of a consistency-based diagnosis corresponds to p-consistency and vice versa.
proof:  i. flesch et al.  1 .	
﹛finally  we define p-consistent diagnosis  which enables us to obtain diagnosis in a probabilistic way.
definition 1  p-consistent diagnosis  let pb =  sb 次  be a bayesian diagnostic problem. then  忖 is a p-consistent diagnosis of.
we would like to emphasise that the notion of p-consistent diagnosis provides the basis for conflict-based diagnosis elaborated in the remainder of this paper.
1 conflict measure for diagnosis
in the previous section  a bayesian diagnostic problem was defined as a probabilistic framework that represents both qualitative and quantitative relations of a corresponding logical diagnostic problem.
﹛the aim of this section is to show that the conflict measure can be used to distinguish between various diagnoses of a problem. in section 1  we give the basic definition of the conflict measure for bayesian diagnostic problems  which is made more specific in section 1. in section 1  we investigate the capability of the conflict measure to distinguish amongst various diagnoses. finally  in section 1  we derive a rational form for the conflict measure that is computationally simpler.
1 basic definition of the conflict measure
in this section  we define the conflict measure for bayesian diagnostic problems  which is used as a basis for conflictbased diagnosis.
﹛intuitively  the conflict measure compares the probability of observing the inputs and outputs in case these observations are independent versus the case where they are dependent. if dependence between the observations is more likely than independence given a diagnosis  the conflict measure implies that there is no conflict. by definition 1  however  observations of a bayesian diagnostic problem need to be pconsistent with the problem for a given diagnosis. this implies that the definition of the conflict measure only concerns situations where the set of behavioural assumptions is equal to a diagnosis  that is  p-consistency holds. this is expressed in the following way.
definition 1  conflict measure for a bayesian diagnostic problem  let pb =  sb 次  be a bayesian diagnostic problem. then  if  then the conflict measure  denoted by conf忖 ﹞   is defined as:
	conf  	 1 
with observations 次 = is ﹍ os.
we compute p is os | 忖  instead of p 忖 | is os   as in consistency-based diagnosis  after which conflict-based diagnosis will be modelled  a diagnosis is a hypothesis that is checked. in contrast  in probabilistic abductive diagnosis one computes p 忖 | is os   and 忖 is a conclusion  not a hypothesis. in this paper  we are only dealing with consistencybased diagnosis.
1 computation of the conflict measure
in this section  we derive formulae to compute the conflict measure for bayesian diagnostic problems.
﹛in order to derive the formulae for the conflict measure  the following assumptions are adopted. normal behaviour is simulated in the probabilistic setting by the assumption that a normally functioning component takes an output value with probability of either 1 or 1  thus  if a‘c holds  then p oc | 羽oc  ﹋ {1}. furthermore  the set of inputs and the set of abnormality components are  marginally  independent of each other.
﹛from now on  we assume that the inputs are conditionally independent of the output of an abnormally functioning component  i.e. p oc | 羽oc  = p oc | ac  if ac ﹋ 羽oc. we also assume that it holds that p oc | ac  = 汐  i.e.  a constant probability is adopted for a given outputoc if the componentc is functioning abnormally. this is a reasonable assumption in applications usually tackled by consistency-based diagnosis. here  there is little to no knowledge of abnormal behaviour. thus  it will be impossible to assess p oc | ac  for every component; that can be resolved by assuming them all to be equal. this approach is thus in line with previous research in consistency-based diagnosis.
﹛as a matter of notation  xv = x v   or simply x v   will indicate in the following that the set of random variables xv has observed values x v . a partial assignment of values to variables xv is written as xv = x v   or simply x v   and includes observed and non-observed values.
﹛now  we are in the position to derive the necessary formulae for the conflict measure as given in definition 1. the three factors of this formulae can be obtained by the application of bayes' rule and the factorisation principle of equation  1 :
1.
1.
1..
note that in the summation we handle both observed and remaining outputs in o c  that is  some values of the taken variables are fixed and some values are non-fixed. based on the equations above  we obtain conf
	or	c﹋	  c	oc 
example 1 consider figure 1  which models the logical diagnostic system in figure 1. let os = {o‘＿ oˍ1}. the values of the conflict measure for different diagnoses and inputs are shown in table 1. here  we can see that the diagnosis {a‘＿ a‘ˍ1 a‘ˍ1}  which assumes that all components are 次
                         conflict-based diagnosis figure 1: framework of conflict-based diagnosis.
functioning normally  implies either p-inconsistency or pconsistency depending on the value of input i1. moreover  for the p-consistent diagnoses  we obtain negative  zero and positive conflict measures  indicating different relations between the observations and the patterns in the joint probability distribution. the interpretation of these results is given in example 1.
1 ordering conflict-based diagnoses
in this section  we show that a meaningful subset of pconsistent diagnoses can be selected based on the conflict measure; this subset of diagnoses is called conflict-based. subsequently  we also show how the conflict measure can be used to order conflict-based diagnoses resulting in minimal conflict-based diagnoses.
﹛we start by introducing the various bayesian diagnostic interpretations of the conflict measure. in example 1  it has been shown that the conflict measure can take negative  zero and positive values. recall that in the case of a negative or zero conflict measure the joint occurrence of the observations is in accordance with the patterns in p. therefore  in these cases  a diagnosis is called strongly p-consistent. a positive conflict measure is interpreted the other way around  and as it implies the existence of conflicts between the observations and p  the associated diagnoses are called weakly pconsistent.
﹛the bayesian diagnostic interpretation of the conflict measure implies that the less the value of the conflict measure the stronger p-consistent the diagnosis is  which can be understood as follows. the conflict measure favours one diagnosis above another if the behavioural assumptions of this diagnosis provide more support for the observed output than the behavioural assumptions of the other diagnosis. since the probability汐 expresses the likelihood of positive output given abnormality  the conflict measure of a diagnosis may depend on 汐.
﹛this interpretation gives rise to the following definitions and is subsequently illustrated by an example.
definition 1  conflict-based diagnosis  let pb =  sb 次  be a bayesian diagnosticproblem and let 忖 be a p-consistent minimal conflict-based	p-consistent conflict-based	 	 
                   diagnosis	diagnosis diagnosis
figure 1: set-inclusion relation between notions of diagnosis.
diagnosis of pb. then  忖 is called a conflict-based diagnosis if it is strongly p-consistent  i.e. conf忖 次  ≒ 1.
definition 1  minimal conflict-based diagnosis  let 忖 be a conflict-based diagnosis of pb. then  忖 is called minimal  if for each conflict-based diagnosis 忖 it holds that conf忖 次  ≒ conf.
a summary of the framework conflict-based diagnosis is given in figure 1  where the edges indicate how concepts are combined in defining conflict-based diagnosis.
example 1 we reconsider table 1 in example 1.
﹛to start  we analyse the situation when 汐 = 1. diagnosis 忖 = {a‘＿ aˍ1 aˍ1} is a weakly p-consistent diagnosis for the inputs {i1 i1 i1} with value 1 and a strongly p-consistent  also conflict-based  diagnosis for inputs {i1 ‘ 1 i1} with  1. these results can be explained as follows. for both sets of inputs  with associated outputs {o‘＿ oˍ1}  忖 is a possible diagnostic hypothesis according to the associated probability distribution. however  under the assumption that the and gate is functioning normally  the input ‘ 1 among the inputs {i1 ‘ 1 i1}  offers a good match to the observed output o‘＿  whereas the match is bad for the input i1 among the inputs {i1 i1 i1}. thus  for 次 = {i1 ‘ 1 i1 o‘＿ oˍ1} the diagnosis 忖 is a conflictbased diagnosis  whereas it is not a conflict-based diagnosis for .
﹛the conflict measure for the diagnosis   a‘ˍ1} remains unchanged for variation in input  because of the following reason. since the output of the abnormally functioning and component is observed  the conflict measure establishes which inputs are consistent with the normally functioning or1 and then uniformly distributes the probability over all possible inputs. there are 1 inputs that are possible of the total of 1 inputs  hence log1 =  1.
﹛let 汐 = 1. then  for 次 = {i1 ‘ 1 i1 o‘＿ oˍ1} there are three p-consistent diagnoses mentioned in table 1  all of them conflict-based. the minimal conflict-based diagnosis in this case is 忖 = {a‘＿ aˍ1 aˍ1}.
﹛finally  we compare conflict measure values for different values of 汐. when the value of 汐 decreases from 1 to
1  忖 = {a‘＿ aˍ1 aˍ1} offers increased support for the
o‘＿ oˍ1汐a‘＿ a‘ˍ1 a‘ˍ1a＿ a‘ˍ1 a‘ˍ1a‘＿ aˍ1 aˍ1i1 i1 i1 i1 ‘ 1 i1any any 
 1 1
 1log 1 1/汐1汐
1
log汐 1汐i1 i1 i1.1  11i1 ‘ 1 i1.1 1 1 1i1 i1 i1.1  11i1 ‘ 1 i1.1 1 1 1table 1: examples of the results of the conflict measure. observed outputs o‘＿ and oˍ1  reflected by the values 1 and 1  and  1 and  1. the conflict measure takes into account the likelihood of the output values of abnormally functioning components. therefore  for the observed output o‘＿ more support is obtained if its inputs are negative  thus the output of component or1 takes on value o‘ˍ1. since the or1 gate is assumed to malfunction  this has probability 1   汐. but then  this probability becomes larger if the value of 汐 decreases.
﹛figure 1 offers a summary of the set-inclusion relations between various notions of diagnosis defined in this paper.
1 a rational form
in this section  we show that the conflict measure can also be written in rational form  that is easier for computational purposes.
﹛to start  we distinguish between several types of components. the sets of normally and abnormally functioning components will be denoted by ca‘ and ca  respectively. these sets are separated into mutually disjoint sets of components  related to observed and remaining outputs  yielding sets 
cra‘   csa and cra.
﹛the relation between the abnormally functioning system components and the value 汐 is as follows.
lemma 1 the joint probability distribution of the output of the abnormally functioning system components is equal to:
 
where l and m are the total number of components in csa for which the observed output is positive or negative  respectively.
proof: see  i. flesch et al.  1 .	
the conflict measure can be expressed in rational form.
theorem 1 let pb =  sb 次  be a bayesian diagnostic problem. then  the conflict measure  1  is equal to:
conf  
with p oc | ac  = 汐  次 = is ﹍ os  q = |cra| and positive constants dk ek.
proof: consider the numerator of the conflict measure:

with 朵 ﹞ ﹞  and 朴 ﹞ ﹞  boolean functions. the derivation for the denominator is similar. see  i. flesch et al.  1  for a full proof.	
1 conclusions
in this paper  we proposed a new notion of model-based diagnosis  where ideas from consistency-based diagnosis and data conflict detection in statistics have been merged into one coherent framework. the result is a theory of modelbased diagnosis offering features similar to those offered by consistency-based diagnosis and more  as diagnoses can be distinguished from each other using probabilistic information. we also showed that conflict-based diagnoses can be computed using a rational form.
acknowledgements. this work has been partially funded by nwo  probayes project  number 1.1 .
