
this paper introduces a novel approach to model warrant computation in a skeptical abstract argumentation framework. we show that such search space can be defined as a lattice  and illustrate how the so-called dialectical constraints can play a role for guiding the efficient computation of warranted arguments.
1	introduction and motivations
abstract argumentation frameworks have played a major role as a way of understanding argument-based inference  resulting in different argument-based semantics. in order to compute such semantics  efficient argument-based proof procedures are required for determining when a given argument a is warranted. this involves the analysis of a potentially large search space of candidate arguments related to a by means of an attack relationship.
¡¡this paper presents a novel approach to model such search space for warrant computation in a skeptical abstract argumentation framework. we show that the above search space can be defined as a lattice  and illustrate how some constraints  called dialectical constraints  can play a role for guiding the efficient computation of warranted arguments. the rest of this paper is structured as follows. section 1 presents the basic ideas of an abstract argumentation framework with dialectical constraints. section 1 shows how so-called dialectical trees can be used to analyze the search space for computing warrants  representing it as a lattice. in section 1 we analyze different criteria which can lead to compute warrant more efficiently on the basis of this lattice characterization. finally  in sections 1 and 1 we discuss some related work and present the main conclusions that have been obtained.
1	an abstract argumentation framework with dialectical constraints
in this paper we are concerned with the study of warrant computation in argumentation systems  with focus on skeptical semantics for argumentation. as a basis for our analysis we will use an abstract argumentation framework  following dung's seminal approach to abstract argumentation  dung  1   enriched with the notion of dialectical constraint.
definition 1  dung  1  an argumentation framework ¦µ is a pair  where args is a finite set of arguments and r is a binary relation r   args ¡Á args. the notation  a b  ¡Ê r  or equivalently arb  means that a attacks b.
¡¡a dialectical constraint imposes a restriction characterizing when a given argument sequence ¦Ë is valid in a framework ¦µ. an argumentation theory is defined by combining an argumentation framework with a particular set of dialectical constraints. formally:
definition 1 let  be an argumentation framework.
a dialectical constraint c in the context of ¦µ is any function c : lines¦µ ¡ú {true false}  where lines¦µ denotes the set of all possible sequences of arguments  a1 a1 a1 ... ak  in ¦µ where for any pair of arguments ai  ai+1 it holds that ai+1 r ai.
definition 1 an argumentation theory t  or just a theory t  is a pair  ¦µ dc   where ¦µ is an argumentation framework  and dc = {c1 c1 ... ck} is a finite  possibly empty  set of dialectical constraints.
¡¡given a theory t =  ¦µ dc   the intended role of dc is to avoid fallacious reasoning  hamblin  1; rescher  1  by imposing appropriate constraints on argumentation lines to be considered rationally acceptable. it must be noted that a full formalization for dialectical constraints is outside the scope of this work. we do not claim to be able to identify every one of such constraints either  as they may vary from one particular argumentation framework to another; that is the reason why dc is included as a parameter in t.
¡¡argument games provide a useful form to characterize proof procedures for skeptical semantics in argumentation.1such games model defeasible reasoning as a dispute between two parties  proponent and opponent of a claim   who exchange arguments and counterarguments  generating dialogues. a proposition q is provably justified on the basis of a set of arguments if its proponent has a winning strategy for an argument supporting q  i.e.  every counterargument  defeater  advanced by the opponent can be ultimately defeated by the proponent. dialogues in such argument games have been given different names  dialogue lines  argumentation lines  dispute lines  etc. . the set of all possible dialogues can also be suitably defined as a tree structure  called dialectical tree or argument tree .1 in the next subsection we extend such definitions in the context of an argumentation theory.
1	argumentation line. bundle set
definition 1 let t =  ¦µ dc  be an argumentation theory. an argumentation line ¦Ë in t is any finite sequence of arguments  a1  a1  ...  an  in lines¦µ. a subsequence  a1 a1 a1 ... ak   k ¡Ü n  will be called an initial argumentation segment  or just initial segment  in ¦Ë of length k  denoted . when k   n we say that proper initial segment in ¦Ë.
¡¡we will say that ¦Ë is rooted in a1  writing | ¦Ë | = s to denote that ¦Ë has s arguments. we will also write linesa to denote the set of all argumentation lines rooted in a in the theory t.
example 1 consider a theory t =  ¦µ dc   with dc =    where the set args is {a1  a1  a1  a1  a1 }  and assume that the following relationships hold: a1 defeats a1  a1 defeats a1  a1 defeats a1  a1 defeats a1. three different argumentation lines rooted in a1 can be obtained  namely ¦Ë1 =  a1 a1 a1   ¦Ë1 =  a1 a1 a1   and ¦Ë1 =  a1 a1 . in particular  is an initial argumentation segment in ¦Ë1.
example 1 consider a theory where the set args is {a1  a1 }  and assume that the following relationships hold: a1 defeats a1  and a1 defeats a1. an infinite number of argumentation lines rooted in a1 can be obtained  e.g.  ¦Ë1 =  a1   ¦Ë1 =  a1 a1   ¦Ë1 =  a1 a1 a1   ¦Ë1 =  a1 a1 a1 a1   etc. .
remark 1 note that from def. 1  given an argumentation line  a1  a1  a1  ...  an  every subsequence  ai ai+1 ...ai+k  with 1 ¡Ü i  i+k ¡Ü n is also an argumentation line. in particular  every initial argumentation segment is also an argumentation line.
¡¡intuitively  an argumentation line ¦Ë is acceptable iff it satisfies every dialectical constraint of the theory it belongs to. formally:
definition 1 an argumentation line ¦Ë is acceptable wrt t =  ¦µ dc  iff ci ¦Ë  = true  for every ci in dc.
¡¡in what follows  we will assume that the notion of acceptability imposed by dialectical constraints is such that if ¦Ë is acceptable wrt a theory t =  ¦µ dc   then any subsequence of ¦Ë is also acceptable.
example 1 consider the theory t in ex. 1  and assume that dc={c1}  with c1 = {repetition of arguments is not allowed }.1 then ¦Ë1 and ¦Ë1 are acceptable argumentation lines in and ¦Ë1 are not.
definition 1 let t be an argumentation theory  and let be two acceptable argumentation lines in t. we will say that ¦Ë extends  for someextends ¦Ë iff ¦Ë is a proper initial argumentation segment of
we will say that ¦Ë is exhaustive if there is no acceptable argumenta-
tion line such that	  and for some
 i.e.  there is no ¦Ë that extends ¦Ë in t . non-exhaustive argumentation lines will be referred to as partial argumentation lines.
example 1 consider the theory t presented in ex. 1. then ¦Ë1  ¦Ë1 and ¦Ë1 are exhaustive argumentation lines whereas is a partial argumentation line. in the case of the theory t in ex. 1  the argumentation line ¦Ë1 extends ¦Ë1. argumentation line ¦Ë1 is exhaustive  as it cannot be further extended on the basis of t with the dialectical constraint introduced in ex. 1.
¡¡we will distinguish the set s = {¦Ë1 ¦Ë1 ... ¦Ëk} of all argumentation lines rooted in the same initial argument and with the property of not containing lines that are initial subsequences of other lines in the set.
definition 1 given a theory t  a set s = {¦Ë1  ¦Ë1  ...  ¦Ën} of argumentation lines rooted in a given argument a  denoted s   is
a
a bundle set wrt t iff there is no ¦Ëi ¦Ëj ¡Ê sa such that ¦Ëi extends ¦Ëj.
example 1 consider the theory t =  ¦µ dc  from ex. 1  and the argumentation lines ¦Ë1  ¦Ë1  and ¦Ë1. then sa1 = {¦Ë1 ¦Ë1 ¦Ë1} is a bundle set of argumentation lines wrt t.
1	dialectical trees
a bundle set sa is a set of argumentation lines rooted in a given argument a. such set can be thought of as a tree structure  where every line corresponds to a branch in the tree. formally:
definition 1 let t be a theory  and let a be an argument in t  and let sa = {a¦Ë1. then  the  ¦Ë1  ...  ¦Ëdialectical treen} be a bundle set of argumentationrooted in a based on lines rooted in
s   denoted t   is a tree structure defined as follows:
a	a
1  the root node of t	is a;
a
1  let f={tail ¦Ë   for every ¦Ë ¡Ê s }  and h={head ¦Ë   for every
	1	a
¦Ë ¡Ê f}. if h =   then t has no subtrees. otherwise  if h = {b  ... bk}  then for everyabi ¡Ê h  we define getbundle bi  =
1
{¦Ë ¡Ê f | head ¦Ë  = bi}. we put tbi as an immediate subtree of a  where tbi is a dialectical tree based on getbundle bi . we will write tree to denote the family of all possible dialectical trees based on a. we will represent asa treet the family of all possible dialectical trees in the theory t.
example 1 consider the theory t =  ¦µ dc  from ex. 1. in that theory it holds that sa1 = {¦Ë1 ¦Ë1 ¦Ë1} is a bundle set. fig. 1 a  shows an associated dialectical tree ta1.
¡¡clearly  definition 1 induces an equivalence relation on the set of all tree . formally: a
definition 1 let t be a theory  and let tree be the set of all possible dialectical trees rooted in an argumentaa in t. we will say that t is equivalent to  denoted iff they are obtained from the same bundle seta	s .
a

figure 1:  a exhaustive dialectical tree ta1 for ex. 1;  b resulting tree after applying and-or marking  def.1 ; c - d  two other exhaustive dialectical trees belonging to the equivalence class ta1
¡¡given an argument a  there is a one-to-one correspondence between a bundle set sa of argumentation lines rooted in a and the corresponding equivalence class of dialectical trees that share the same bundle set as their origin  as specified in def. 1 . each member of an equivalence class represents a different way in which a tree could be built. each particular computational method used to generate the dialectical tree from the bundle set will produce a particular member of the equivalence class.
definition 1 let t be an argumentative theory  and let sa be a bundle set of argumentation lines rooted in an argument a of t. we define the mapping t :   linesa    { } ¡ú treea as t sa  =def
ta  where treea is the quotient set of treea by ¡Ô¦Ó  and ta denotes the equivalence class of ta.
proposition 1 for any argument a in an argumentative theory t  the mapping t is a bijection.1
¡¡as the mapping t is a bijection  we can also define the inverse mapping s =def t 1. in what follows  we will use indistinctly a set notation  a bundle set of argumentation lines rooted in an argument a  or a tree notation  a dialectical tree rooted in a   as the former mappings s and t allow us to go from any of these notations to the other.
proposition 1then it holds that any subtreelet t be a theory  and ta  rooted ina dialectical tree ina  is also at. dialectical tree wrt t.
1	acceptable dialectical trees
definition 1 let t be a theory. a dialectical tree ta in t is acceptable iff every argumentation line in the associated bundle set s ta  is acceptable. we will distinguish the subset atreea  resp. atreet  of all acceptable dialectical trees in treea  resp. treet .
¡¡as acceptable dialectical trees are a subclass of dialectical trees  all the properties previously shown apply also to them. in the sequel  we will just write  dialectical trees  to refer to acceptable dialectical trees  unless stated otherwise.
definition 1is constructed from the seta dialectical trees ta will be called exhaustive iff it of all possible exhaustive argumen-
tation lines rooted in a  otherwisea	ta will be called partial.
¡¡the exhaustive dialectical tree for any argument a can be proven to be unique.
proposition 1 let t be a theory  and let a be an argument in t. then there exists a unique exhaustive dialectical tree ta in t  up to an equivalence wrt ¡Ô¦Ó as given in def. 1 
¡¡acceptable dialectical trees allow to determine whether the root node of the tree is to be accepted  ultimately undefeated  or rejected  ultimately defeated . a marking function provides a definition of such acceptance criterion. formally:
definition 1 let t be a theory. a marking criterion for t is a function mark : treet ¡ú {d u}. we will write markis marked ti  = u  resp. mark ti  = d  to denote that the root node of ti as u-node  resp. d-node .
several marking criteria can be defined for capturing skeptical semantics for argumentation. a particular criterion  which we will later use in our analysis for strategies for computing warrant  is the and-or marking of a dialectical tree  which corresponds to dung's grounded semantics  dung  1 .
definition 1the and-or marking of1  ifsuch thatiftta has no subtrees  thenlet t be a theory  and letta is defined as follows:mark ta  =tamarkube a dialectical tree..	 ta  =  =duiffiff 
a has subtrees t1  ...  tk then a 
tmarki	 ti  =markd  for all ti  =iu= 1  for some...k. b i = 1mark...k. ta
proposition 1the and-or markinletg defined in def. 1 assigns the same mark to allt be a theory  and let ta be a dialectical tree. the members of ta.
definition 1 let t be an argumentative theory and mark a
 marking criterion foror just a warrant  in ttiff the exhaustive dialectical tree. an argument a is a warranted argumentta is such that mark ta  = u.
shown in fig. 1 a . fig. 1 b  shows the corresponding marking byexample 1 consider the exhaustive dialectical tree ta1 in ex. 1 applying def. 1  showing that a 1t-the root ofa1  = d.to mahence1arked dialectical- is an ultimatelya1 is not a defeated argument  i.e.  mark warranted argument. fig. 1 c - d  shows tw trees belonging to the same equivalence class ta1.
1	warrant computation via dialectical trees
our main concern is to model warrant computation in skeptical argumentation frameworks  and in such a case tree structures lend themselves naturally to implementation. in fact  some implementations of skeptical argumentation systems  e.g.  delp  garc¡ä a and simari  1   rely on tree structures  such as dialectical trees  which can be computed by performing backward chaining at two levels. on the one hand  arguments are computed by backward chaining from a query  goal  using a logic programming approach  e.g.  sld resolution . on the other hand  dialectical trees can be computed by recursively analyzing defeaters for a given argument  defeaters for those defeaters  and so on. in particular  in more complex and general settings  such as admissibility semantics  dialectical proof procedures have been developed  dung et al.  1  using a similar strategy to compute warranted belief.
¡¡in our abstract model the process of building an arbitrary dialectical tree ta1 can be thought of as a computation starting from an initial tree  consisting of a single node  and evolving into more complex trees by adding new arguments  nodes  stepwise. elementary steps in this computation can be related via a precedence relationship    among trees:
definition 1 let t be a theory  and let be acceptable dialectical trees rooted in an argument a. we define a relationshipwhenever
. we will write be obtained from ta by extending some argumentation line ¦Ë in ta by exactly one argument. as usual  we write
or. we will also writeiff there exists a  possibly empty  sequence.
¡¡every dialectical tree ti can be seen as a 'snapshot' of the status of a disputation between two parties  proponent and opponent   and the relationship    allows to capture all possible evolutions of a given disputation.1 in particular  note that for any argumentative theory t  given an argument a the ordered set  is a poset  where the least element is
a and the greatest element is the exhaustive dialectical tree ta. from def. 1 the notion of exhaustive dialectical tree can be recast as follows: a dialectical tree ti is exhaustive iff there is no such that.
¡¡we are now concerned with the following question: can we enumerate all possible ways of computing the exhaustive dialectical tree ta rooted in a given initial argument a  the answer is yes. in fact  as we will see in the next definitions  we can provide a lattice characterization for the space of all possible dialectical trees rooted in a given argument a on the basis of join of dialectical trees  ¡Å   resulting in a new tree corresponding to the 'union  of t1 and t1  and meet of dialectical trees  ¡Ä   resulting in a new tree corresponding to the  intersection  of t1 and t1 . formally:
tdefinition 1 andbe dialectical trees rooted int1   writtenlettt1 ¡Ä tbe an argumentative theory  and let1 and ta1. we define the¡Å t1  as followsmeet:	andtjoin1   forandof
 some¦Ë is an argumentation line ink   1 such that ¦Ë1 ¡Ê t1 and ¦Ë1 ¡Ê t1 and there is no ¦Ë that extends ¦Ë satisfying this situation.
  ¦Ë is an argumentation line insuch thatsuch that¦Ë extends¦Ë extends¦Ë.t1¦Ë¡Å t  or 1 iff 1 ¦Ë ¡Ê t¦Ë ¡Ê t1 and there is no1 and there is 	
¡¡for any argumentation theory t the set of all possible acceptable dialectical trees rooted in an argument a ¡Ê t can be conceptualized as a lattice. formally:
 lemma 1atree letbe the associated poset. thena be an argument in a theory atreeat   and let¡Å ¡Ä  is a lattice.
note the bottom element of the lattice  given the lattice  atreea ¡Å ¡Ä   we will writei.e.  the dialectical treeta¡Í to deinvolving only a as root node  and to denote the top element of the lattice  i.e.  the exhaustive dialectical tree .

figure 1: lattice for all possible dialectical trees rooted in an argument a1  example 1   top  and search space for computing dialectical trees rooted in a  bottom 
example 1 consider the theory t from ex. 1  and the exhaustive dialectical tree rooted inassociated with a1 is shown in fig. 1.a1 shown in ex. 1. the complete lattice
1	computing warrant efficiently
we have shown that given an argumentative theory t  for any argument a in t there is a lattice  atreea ¡Å ¡Ä  whose bottom element is a dialectical tree with a single node  the argument a itself  and whose top element is the exhaustive dialectical tree ta. in that lattice  whenever tk = ti¡Åtj it is the case that.
¡¡in fig. 1 top  corresponding to example 1 we can see that for dialectical trees t1 and t1  it holds that mark t1  = mark t1  = d  assuming that mark is defined as in
def. 1 . clearly  it is the case that any tree ti where
or  satisfies that mark ti  = d. in other words  whichever is the way the tree t1  or t1  evolves into a new tree in  atreea1 ¡Å ¡Ä  it turns out that the associated marking remains unchanged. we formalize that situation as follows:
definition 1 let t be an argumentation theory  and let ta be a dialectical tree  such that for every evolving from ta  i.e.  settled dialectical tree  it holds thatin t.	. then ta is a
now we have a natural  alternative way of characterizing warrant.
proposition 1 let t be a theory  and let a  =be an argument inu  where ta is at.
then a is a warrant wrt t iff mark ta settled dialectical tree.
clearly  computing settled dialectical trees is less expen-
sive than computing exhaustive dialectical trees  as fewer nodes  arguments  are involved in the former case. following hunter's approach  hunter  1   in what follows we will formalize the cost of computing a dialectical tree as a function . as explained in  hunter  1   several issues can be considered when computing such cost. for simplicity  in our formalization we will assume that cost is linearly related to the number of nodes in a dialectical tree  such that cost t  = c   nodes t   where c   1 is a constant and nodes ¡¤  stands for the number of nodes in a tree.
¡¡the next definition refines the class of settled dialectical trees by distinguishing those trees involving as few arguments as possible in order to determine whether the root of the tree is ultimately a warranted argument according to the marking procedure. from the many possible minimally settled dialectical trees rooted in a given argument a  a dialectical tree t is optimally settled if that is less expensive than t.
definition 1 a dialectical tree t is a minimally settled dialectical tree iff there is no such that t  is a settled dialectical tree. a dialectical tree t is an optimally settled dialectical  cost    is minimally settled  and for any other settled treecost   .	t
example 1 consider the theory t from ex. 1  and the complete lattice  atreea1 ¡Å ¡Ä  shown in fig. 1  top . then t1 and t1 are minimally settled dialectical trees.
all settled  minimally settled and optimally settled dialecti-let settleda  minimala and optimala be the sets of cal trees for an argument a  resp. clearly  it holds that
optimallatticesettled atreea  minimal  aminimal ¡Å ¡Äa and  as shown in fig. 1  bottom . the bor-a  optimalsettledaacan be identified in any  atreea. the sets
a
derline on top of the lattice denotes all possible minimally settled dialectical trees t1  ...  tk rooted in a. some of such trees in that set may be optimal. any dialectical tree that evolves from settled dialectical trees t1  ...  tk will be also a settled dialectical tree. in particular  the exhaustive dialectical tree is also settled.
1	dialectical constraints  revisited 
as we have analyzed previously  the lattice associated with any argument a accounts for the whole search space for detecting if a is warranted. to do so it is not necessary to compute the exhaustive dialectical tree rooted in a; rather  it suffices to focus search on settled dialectical trees  as they involve less nodes and are consequently more efficient. when determining whether a conclusion is warranted  argumentbased inference engines are supposed to compute a sequence of dialectical trees t1  t1  ...  tk such that tk is a settled dialectical tree. for skeptical argumentation semantics  inference engines like delp  garc¡ä a and simari  1  use depthfirst search to generate dialectical trees for queries and determine if a given literal is warranted. such search can be improved by applying ¦Á   ¦Â pruning  so that not every node  argument  is computed. in other words  depth-first search naturally favors the computation of settled dialectical trees.
example 1 consider the marked dialectical trees in fig. 1 right 

belonging to the same equivalence class ta1  ex. 1 . then depthfirst computation using ¦Á ¦Â pruning will perform better on the tree in fig. 1 d  than on the tree in fig. 1 c   as in the first case  only two nodes need to be explored to obtain the final marking of the tree  a1 and a1   whereas in the second case four nodes  a1  a1  a1 and a1  need to be traversed.
¡¡the natural question that arises next is how to compute minimally settled trees. given a theory t =  ¦µ dc   it turns out that the set of dialectical constraints dc can help to provide a way of approximating such minimally settled trees  based on the fact that in depth-first search the order in which branches are generated is important: should shorter branches be computed before longer ones  then the resulting search space can be proven to be smaller on an average search tree  chesnevar  et al.  1 . usually heuristics are required to anticipate which branches are likely to be shorter than the average. constraints in dc can help provide such kind of heuristics. in this setting  heuristics for efficient computation of dialectical trees can be understood as functions which improve the associated dialectical proof procedure by tending to approximate optimally settled trees.
example 1 in delp the set dc includes as a constraint that arguments advanced by the proponent  resp. opponent  should not be contradictory in any argumentation line. the following heuristics  chesnevar  et al.  1  can be shown to favor the computation of shorter argumentation lines when applying depth-first search in the context of delp: if the current argument a1 is a leaf node in a dialectical tree t  and has different candidate defeaters a1  a1  ...  ak  then the ai which shares as many literals as possible with a1 should be chosen when performing the depth-first computation ofvors naturally the construction of minimally settled dialectical trees ta1. thus  while depth-first computation of dialectical trees faby applying this heuristics an approximation to optimally settled dialectical trees is obtained.
1	relevance in dialectical trees
in  prakken  1  the notion of relevance was introduced in the context of argument games and the characterization of protocols for liberal disputes. according to  prakken  1   a move is relevant in a dispute d iff it changes the disputational status of d's initial move.1 in our context  dialectical trees correspond to such disputes. in the setting presented in  prakken  1   moves are performed by both parties involved in a dispute  proponent and opponent .
¡¡interestingly  there is a clear relation between minimally settled dialectical trees and this notion of relevance  as the notion of extending an argumentation line by one argument  as introduced in def. 1  can be recast as performing a move.
definition 1 let t =  ¦µ dc  be an argumentation theory  and let be acceptable dialectical trees. we will say that there is a move  denoted as move.
it must be remarked that a proper conceptualization of move in argumentation demands more parameters  such as identifying the argumentation line in which a argument is introduced  who is the player  proponent or opponent  making the move  etc. such an approach has been formalized by  prakken  1; 1 . our approach in this case is intentionally oversimplified  as it just aims to relate the notion of relevance and the notion of minimally settled dialectical trees. in fact  note that def. 1 allows us to formalize the computation of an acceptable dialectical tree tk rooted in a1 as a sequence of moves move t1 t1   move t1 t1   ...  move tk 1 tk   where t1 is a dialectical tree with a single node. in fact 
prakken's notion of relevant move can be stated in our set-
 move is relevant iff
¡¡the following proposition shows that minimally settled trees are only those obtained by performing a sequence of relevant moves ending in a settled dialectical tree.
proposition 1 let t be an argumentation theory  and let ta be a dialectical tree. then ta is minimally settled iff there is a sequence of moves m1  m1  ...  mk such that every move mi is relevant  and mk results in a settled dialectical tree.
1	related work
dialectical constraints have motivated research in argumentation theory in different directions. in our proposal dialectical constraints are left as a particular parameter to be included in the argumentation theory. different argument-based proof procedures have included particular dialectical constraints as part of their specification. in  besnard and hunter  1  the authors present a logic of argumentation which disallows repetition of arguments in argument trees  besnard and hunter  1  p.1  other approaches for computing wellfounded semantics via trees  e.g.   kakas and toni  1   defense nodes  which account for proponent's argument in an argumentation line  cannot attack any other defense node in the tree. similarly  in  dung et al.  1   for computing assumption-based admissible semantics there is a further requirement in the proof procedure that  the proponent does not attack itself . such kind of restrictions can be seen as particular dialectical constraints in the context of our proposal.
¡¡recently there have been other research oriented towards formalizing dialectical proof procedures for argumentation. to the best of our knowledge  none of such works formalizes the dialectical search space through a lattice as presented in this paper. our work complements previous research concerning the dynamics of argumentation  notably  prakken  1  and  brewka  1 . although prakken develops a very comprehensive general framework  some important computational issues  e.g.  search space considerations  are not taken into account.
1	conclusions. future work
in this paper we have presented a novel approach to model the search space associated with warrant computation in an abstract argumentation framework. we have shown how the notion of dialectical tree can be used constructively to model different stages in the process of computing warranted arguments. we have also shown how the process of computing warrant can be recast into computing dialectical trees within a lattice  illustrating how dialectical constraints can play a role for guiding an efficient computation of warranted literals. part of our future work is related to studying theoretical properties of the proposed framework  analyzing their incidence for developing efficient argument-based inference engines. research in this direction is currently being pursued. acknowledgements
we thank anonymous reviewers for comments which helped to improve the final version of this paper. this research was partially supported by the dept. of computer science and eng.  secyt  u.n.sur  conicet  and anpcyt  pict 1  1  pav1   argentina. partial research support was also obtained from project tin1-
1-c1/1 and ramon y cajal program  mcyt  spain .¡ä
