
animated text is an appealing field of creative graphical design. manually designed text animation is largely employed in advertising  movie titles and web pages. in this paper we propose to link  through state of the art nlp techniques  the affective content detection of a piece of text to the animation of the words in the text itself. this methodology allows us to automatically generate affective text animation and opens some new perspectives for advertising  internet applications and intelligent interfaces.
1 introduction
an actor reads a script. he reads those words with the intention of transforming cold print into living speech. vocal inflections  tone of voice  gestures and facial expressions are all part of the actor's contribution to the play. with the body's subtle vibrations and frequencies  he expresses the hidden emotional meaning. we can say that  through his interpretation  he brings the script to life.
모in this paper we will show that through automatic detection of the affective meaning of texts using state of the art nlp techniques  we can consequently animate the words that compose them. in automated text animation the text itself is capable of augmenting its expressivity and of moving in an autonomous way.
모animated text is widely employed in creative graphical design. manually designed text animation has been employed for a long time in movie titles  television advertisements  and web pages. nevertheless there are applied contexts in which automated text animation would be very useful  e.g. smart presentation of newspaper headlines or advertising slogans . as far as we know  there are no tools for the automated animation of texts.
모in this paper  we approach the automated creation of text animation  linking it to the lexical semantic content  in particular  to affective meaning . once the affective load of a sentence is detected  we check for words that are most semantically similar to emotional concepts and then we emphasize the affective meaning through an appropriate animation  i.e. different emotions have different animations . this semantic similarity function is acquired automatically in an unsupervised way from a large corpus of texts  and it allows us to put into relation concepts and emotional categories.
모we suppose that  if text animation is semantically consistent with text content  the communication of the affective meaning is more effective. specifically  we want to pay attention to the memorizability of text and how it increases with a consistent animation. we believe that  beyond the pleasantness  affective animations can increase the memorizability of text and  in particular  the semantic consistency between words and animations has a significant role in the memorization of headlines.
모the paper is structured as follows. section 1 presents resources and functionalities for the recognition of affective terms. an affective hierarchy as an extension of the wordnet-affect lexical database was developed in the first place. the next phase is the development of a semantic similarity function  acquired automatically in an unsupervised way from a large corpus of texts  which allows us to put into relation words and emotional categories. section 1 introduces text animation  i.e. kinetic typography  and the development of a flexible scripting language to describe and dynamically generate text animation. section 1 shows an evaluation and section 1 discusses some conclusive remarks.
1 affective semantic similarity
all words can potentially convey affective meaning. each of them  even those more apparently neutral  can evoke pleasant or painful experiences  because of their semantic relation with emotional concepts. while some words have emotional meaning with respect to the individual story  for many others the affective power is part of the collective imagination  e.g. words  mum    ghost    war  etc. .
모we are interested in this second group  because their affective meaning is part of common sense knowledge and can be detected in the linguistic usage. for this reason  we studied the use of words in textual productions  and in particular their co-occurrences with the words in which the affective meaning is explicit. as claimed by ortony et al.  ortony et al.  1   we have to distinguish between words directly referring to emotional states  e.g.  fear    cheerful   and those having only an indirect reference that depends on the context  e.g. words that indicate possible emotional causes as  killer 
a-labelsvalenceexamples of word sensesjoypositivenoun joy#1  adjective elated#1  verb gladden#1  adverb gleefully#1lovepositivenoun love#1  adjective loving#1  verb love#1  adverb fondly#1apprehensionnegativenoun apprehension#1  adjective apprehensive#1  adverb anxiously#1sadnessnegativenoun sadness#1  adjective unhappy#1  verb sadden#1  adverb deplorably#1surpriseambiguousnoun surprise#1  adjective surprised#1  verb surprise#1apathyneutralnoun apathy#1  adjective apathetic#1  adverb apathetically#1negative-fearnegativenoun scare#1  adjective afraid#1  verb frighten#1  adverb horryfyingly#1positive-fearpositivenoun frisson#1positive-expectationpositivenoun anticipation#1  adjective cliff-hanging#1  verb anticipate#1
table 1: some of emotional categories in wordnet-affect and some corresponding word sensesor emotional responses as  cry  . we call the former direct affective words and the latter indirect affective words  strapparava et al.  1 .
모in order to manage affective lexical meaning  we  i  organized the direct affective words and synsets inside wordnet-affect  an affective lexical resource based on an extension of wordnet  and  ii  implemented a selection function  named affective weight  based on a semantic similarity mechanism automatically acquired in an unsupervised way from a large corpus of texts  1 millions of words   in order to individuate the indirect affective lexicon.
모applied to a concept  e.g. a wordnet synset  and an emotional category  this function returns a value representing the semantic affinity with that emotion. in this way it is possible to assign a value to the concept with respect to each emotional category  and eventually select the emotion with the highest value. applied to a set of concepts that are semantically similar  this function selects subsets characterized by some given affective constraints  e.g. referring to a particular emotional category or valence .
모as we will see  we are able to focus selectively on positive  negative  ambiguous or neutral types of emotions. for example  given  difficulty  as input term  the system suggests as related emotions: identification  negative-concern  ambiguous-expectation  apathy. moreover  given an input word  e.g.  university   and the indication of an emotional valence  e.g. positive   the system suggests a set of related words through some positive emotional category  e.g.  professor   scholarship   achievement   found through the emotions enthusiasm  sympathy  devotion  encour-
agement.
모this fine-grained affective lexicon selection can open up new possibilities in many applications that exploit verbal communication of emotions. for example   valitutti et al.  1  exploited the semantic connection between a generic word and an emotion for the generation of affective evaluative predicates and sentences.
1 wordnet-affect and the emotional categories
wordnet-affect is an extension of the wordnet database  fellbaum  1   including a subset of synsets suitable to represent affective concepts. similarly to what was done for domain labels  magnini and cavaglia  1`    one or more affective labels  a-labels  are assigned to a number of wordnet synsets. in particular  the affective concepts representing an emotional state are individuated by synsets marked with the a-label emotion. there are also other a-labels for those concepts representing moods  situations eliciting emotions  or emotional responses. wordnet-affect is freely available for research purpose at http://wndomains.itc.it. see  strapparava and valitutti  1  for a complete description of the resource.
# synsets# words# sensesnouns11adjectives11verbs11adverbs11total11
table 1: number of elements in the emotional hierarchy.
모recently  we extended wordnet-affect with a set of additional a-labels  i.e. the emotional categories   hierarchically organized  in order to specialize synsets with a-label emotion. in a second stage  we introduced some modifications  in order to distinguish synsets according to emotional valence. we defined four additional a-labels: positive  negative  ambiguous  neutral. the first one corresponds to  positive emotions   defined as emotional states characterized by the presence of positive edonic signals  or pleasure . it includes synsets such as joy#1 or enthusiasm#1. similarly the negative a-label identifies  negative emotions  characterized by negative edonic signals  or pain   for example anger#1 or sadness#1. synsets representing affective states whose valence depends on semantic context  e.g. surprise#1  were marked with the tag ambiguous. finally  synsets referring to mental states that are generally considered affective but are not characterized by valence  were marked with the tag neutral.
1 computing lexical affective semantic similarity
there is an active research direction in the nlp field about sentiment analysis and recognition of semantic orientation from texts  e.g.  turney and littman  1; liu et al.  1; mihalcea and liu  1  . in our opinion  a crucial issue is to have a mechanism for evaluating the semantic similarity among generic terms and affective lexical concepts. to this aim we estimated term similarity from a large scale corpus. in particular we implemented a variation of latent semantic analysis  lsa  in order to obtain a vector representation for words  texts and synsets.
모in lsa  deerwester et al.  1   second order relations among terms and documents of the corpus are captured by means of a dimensionality reduction operated by a singular value decomposition  svd  on the term-by-document matrix. for the experiments reported in this paper  we run the svd operation on the full british national corpus1.
모svd is a well-known operation in linear algebra  which can be applied to any rectangular matrix in order to find correlations among its rows and columns. svd decomposes the term-by-document matrix t into three matrices t = u쑒vt where 쑒 is the diagonal k 뫄 k matrix containing the k singular values of t  1 뫟 1 뫟 ... 뫟 횲  and u and v are column-orthogonal matrices. when the three matrices are multiplied together the original term-by-document matrix is re-composed. typically we can chooseobtaining the approximation tu. more specifically  in the experiments for this paper we use the matrix t = u쑒  whose rows represent the term vectors in the reduced space  taking into account the first 1 dimensions  i.e.
모lsa can be viewed as a way to overcome some of the drawbacks of the standard vector space model  sparseness and high dimensionality . in fact  the lsa similarity is computed in a lower dimensional space  in which second-order relations among terms and texts are exploited. the similarity in the resulting vector space can be measured with the standard cosine similarity. note also that lsa yields a vector space model that allows for a homogeneous representation  and hence comparison  of words  word sets  sentences and texts.
모for representing word sets and texts by means of a lsa vector  we used a variation of the pseudo-document methodology described in  berry  1 . this variation takes into account also a tf-idf weighting schema  see  gliozzo and strapparava  1  for more details . in practice  each document can be represented in the lsa space by summing up the normalized lsa vectors of all the terms contained in it. also a synset in wordnet  and then an emotional category  can be represented in the lsa space  performing the pseudodocument technique on all the words contained in the synset. thus it is possible to have a vectorial representation of each emotional category in the lsa space  i.e. the emotional vectors   and consequently we can compute a similarity measure among terms and affective categories. we defined the affective weight as the similarity value between an emotional vector and an input term vector  e.g. we can check how a generic term is similar to a given emotion .
모for example  the noun  gift  is highly related to the emotional categories: love  with positive valence   compassion  with negative valence   surprise  with ambiguous valence   and indifference  with neutral valence .
in summary  the vectorial representation in the latent semantic space allows us to represent  in a uniform way  emotional categories  generic terms and concepts  synsets   and eventually full sentences. see  strapparava et al.  1  for more details.
모for example  table 1 displays some news titles  taken from the cnn and google news sites   the respective more similar affective category  the affective weight  and the word in the title most similar to that category. in the next section we will see that this functionality is the basis for indicating which words to animate and in which way.
1 text animation
kinetic typography is the technology of text animation  i.e.
text that uses movement or other changes over time.
모the advantage of kinetic typography consists in a further communicative dimension  combining verbal and visual communication  and providing opportunities to enrich the expressiveness of static texts. according to  lee et al.  1   kinetic typography can be used for three different communicative goals: capturing and directing attention of recipients  creating characters  and expressing emotions. a possible way of animating a text is mimicking the typical movement of humans when they express the content of the text  e.g.  hi  with a jumping motion mimics exaggerated body motion of humans when they are really glad .
모we explore the idea to have a link between lexical semantics of texts  automatically discerned through nlp techniques  and some kinetic properties exploited for animating the words. in this paper  we consider affective connotation of texts by exploiting the affective semantic similarity introduced above. this holds particularly for  indirect affective words   strapparava et al.  1 . for example  these words may indicate possible emotional causes  e.g.  monster   or emotional responses  e.g.  cry  . thus kinetic typography allows us to make the indirect affective meaning explicit in order to automatically augment the affective expressivity of texts.
모a first step was the individuation of an appropriate tool for the authoring and visualization of text animations. in particular  we wanted to act in an environment that allows us to realize animations in a very simple manner and to represent them in a easily exportable format. functionalities for the automated composition of animations were our specific concern. to this aim we considered the kinetic typography engine  kte   a java package developed at the design school of carnegie mellon university  lee et al.  1 . it allows us to create a potentially wide range of animations. taking this engine as a starting point  we first realized a development environment for the creation and the visualization of text animations. our model for the animation representation is a bit simpler than the kte model. the central assumption consists of the representation of the animation as a composition of elementary animations  e.g. linear  sinusoidal or exponential variation . in particular  we consider only one operator for the identification of elementary animations  k-base  and
three composition operators: kinetic addition  k-add   kinetic concatenation  k-join   and kinetic loop  k-loop .
news titleemotional categoryaffective weightword with highest affective weightreview: 'king kong' a giant pleasurejoy1pleasure#nromania: helicopter crash kills four peoplefear1crash#vrecord sales suffer steep declinesadness1suffer#vdead whale in greenpeace protestanger1protest#vtable 1: some news titles and the respective emotional categoriesthe k-base operator selects an elementary animation  named elementary kinetic behavior  as a temporal variation of some kinetic property. elementary kinetic behaviors correspond to a subset of dynamic variations implemented in kte  for example linear variation  linear   sinusoidal variation  oscillate   and exponential variation  exponential .

linearlinear variationoscillatesinusoidal variationpulseimpulsejittersort of  chaotic  vibrationcurveparabolic variationhopparabolic variation with small impulses at the endpointshop-secondaryderivative of hop  used as secondary effect to simulate elastic movements
table 1: some elementary kinetic behaviors
모the kinetic addition  k-add  of two animations with the same start time is obtained by adding  for each kinetic property of text  the corresponding dynamical variation of each single animation. the kinetic concatenation  k-join  consists in the temporal shifting of the second animation  so that the ending time of the first is the starting time of the second. the kinetic loop  k-loop  concatenates an animation with itself a fixed number of times. in the development environment it is possible to freely apply these operators for the real time building of new animations. compositional structure of animations can be represented in xml format and then easily exported. finally  an interpreter allows us to generate in real time the animation starting from its structural representation.

figure 1: jittering anger
1 affective animation
after building the development tool  we selected a set of emotional categories and  for each of them  we created the corresponding text animations.
모in particular  we focused on five emotional categories: joy  fear  surprise  anger  sadness  i.e. a subset of ekman emotions  ekman  1  .
모the kinetic animation to associate to a fixed emotion can be realized imitating either emotional and physiological rensponses  analogous motion technique   or tone of voice. we consider only animations of the first type  i.e. we represent each emotion with an animation that simulates a particular emotional behavior. in particular  joy is represented with a sequence of hops  fear with palpitations  anger with a strong tremble and blush  surprise with a sudden swelling of text  and finally sadness with text deflaction and getting squashed. thus we annotated the corresponding emotional categories in wordnet-affect with these kinematic properties.
모figure 1 displays in detail the behavior of the anger emotion  showing the time-dependent composition graph of the basic animations. the string appears  1  and disappears  1  with a linear variation of the alpha property  that defines the transparency of a color and can be represented by a float value . the animation is contained between these two intervals and its duration is 1 ms. the first component is a tiny random variation of the position  1   1   represented by x and y kinetic properties  with jitter behavior. the second component consists of an expansion of the string  1  and a subsequent compression  1 . the third component is given by a slow rise up  1 . the last component  before disappearing  is a color change to red  1 . the whole behavior is then described and implemented using the scripting language introduced above.
모in addition to affective animations  we also realized a set of neutral ones  in order to visualize the part of text that is not related to emotions  for example to realize transition effects.
1 automated generation of animations
emotional and neutral animations are the results of creative design and constitute the basic ingredients for the automatic building of more complex animations. this process can be regarded as an operation of script assembling. here  the key idea is to automatize the composition of text animation through the automated recognition of the affective connotation and its representation via kinetic typography.

figure 1: kinetic behavior description for  anger  emotion모the animation algorithm is based on two steps: the automated recognition of the emotion and the representation of emotion by text animation. this is realized with the selection of the text fragments to animate  the association of the corresponding animations  and eventually the concatenation of component animations in a fully integrated one. part of automatization depends on text form  in particular  length and punctuation   while another part  the main one  depends on the lexical semantics of the text  e.g. the individuation of the most affectively relevant words .
모in sum  the algorithm we follow in the case of headlines is1:
1. given a headline  using the lexical affective semanticsimilarity technique  check for the most similar emotional category  see table 1 ;
1. mark the words in the headline that are closer to thatemotional category;
1. assign to each word in the headline a neutral or an affective animation  corresponding to the affective weight of the word;
1. assemble a comprehensive animation script  and displaythe animated title.
모figure 1 shows a frozen image during a news title animation. as it is difficult to enjoy the animations on static paper  please visit the web page http://tcc.itc.it/people/strapparava/dw-ijcai where some downloadable short movies are available.

figure 1: a frozen moment during a title animation
1 evaluation
we conducted an exploratory evaluation of memorization  affective coherence and pleasantness of the animated headlines. we involved ten people. the experiments were organized as follows.
  we showed to each person five static headlines in a serial manner  with an interval of 1 seconds between each. after a pause of a couple of minutes we asked the subject to recognize the five headlines among a list of 1 news titles. afterwards we repeated this experiment with five animated headlines  of course with a different set of news titles . all the users were able to recognize the animated headlines faster  with a mean of 1% less time in finding the animated headlines.   we asked the users to annotate a set of generated animations choosing from the following emotional labels: joy  fear  anger  sadness  surprise  and possibly no-label. the agreement with the automatic annotation was about 1%.
  1% of the users declared they really appreciated the animated titles.
모in addition  we created a set of  inconsistent  animations  e.g. some titles animated with a kinetic script not related to the respective emotional category . we repeated the first experiment. it is interesting to note that in this case the users performance in finding the headlines among a list of 1 news titles was even worse than the case of static headlines1.
1 conclusions and future work
this work has been about  giving life  to texts  automatically. the idea is that we can combine two main elements:  i  automatic recognition of the emotion evoked by a text and by specific lexical entries;  ii  an automatic way to produce animation with kinetic typography  given the text and the entries specifically marked in the first phase. each emotion in wordnet-affect  an extension of wordnet with affective labels on synsets  is annotated with some kinematic properties that simulate a particular emotional behavior. the mechanism involves a lsa-based similarity processing so that an emotion can be attributed to the text and to individual words. the realization of the animation is done through an underlying package for kinetic typography  so that the process develops automatically. of course the first phase can be coupled with a different expressive mechanism  such as an embodied conversational agent with good prosody in its textto-speech component and appropriate facial expression  but we think that the role of the written text is very important and we want to exploit its potential. many things can be improved. for instance  a more thorough analysis of the text can lead to more elaborated structuring of the animation. or personalisation can be brought in: for instance named entities can have a personalised valence that influences the analysis and animation. or we can aim at recognizing irony in the text  for some preliminary work on recognizing humorous text  see  mihalcea and strapparava  1   and express it appropriately. basically  the presented work is meant to automatically produce what human graphic designers sometimes do for tv presentation of certain types of headlines  as in the examples of application of our work in this paper; or what is done on a much larger scale in the world of advertising. to emphasize the potential relevance of a system of this kind  it should be noted that internet advertising was evaluated at $1 billion  1 million euro  in 1 according to kagan research llc. and growth is very fast: google advertisement revenues went from 1 to 1 million euro in five years according to business week. this scenario calls for a strong role for computer-based intelligent technology for automatically producing novel appropriate advertisements. future advertisements need to be flexible  and possibly depend on variable input  such as new  not previously processed text.
acknowledgments
this work was developed in the context of humaine network of excellence.
