
the paper presents and discusses a method for rank-ordering alternatives on the basis of constraints induced by generic principles  expressing for instance the relative importance of criteria   or by examples of orderings between particular alternatives  without resorting to the use of an aggregation operation for evaluating the alternatives. the approach  which remains qualitative  is based on the minimal specificity principle of possibility theory in order to complete the constraints. it is compared on an illustrative example to an aggregationbased approach using choquet integral. the way constraints expressed in the choquet integral setting translate into constraints in the proposed approach is discussed.
1 introduction
a classical way for comparing alternatives is to use multiple criteria for evaluating them in an absolute manner  using linearly ordered scales. these scales are often numerical  and underthe hypothesisthat are commensurable differentaggregation procedures that reflect various combination attitudes can be applied in order to build a complete preorder for rankordering the alternatives on the basis of the global evaluations that are obtained. however  in many practical problems  such as multiple criteria analysis  flexible constraints satisfaction problems   a numerical scale  such as  1  is too rich for being used  and more qualitative scales having a finite number of levels have to be preferred. but  the internal operationsthat can be defined on these latter scales  e.g.   mas et al.  1; fodor  1   have a limited discriminating power since they take values on a finite range.
¡¡the problem thus amounts to compare alternatives represented by vectors of qualitative criteria evaluations without aggregating them. apart from the pareto partial preorder that should constrain any complete preorder between alternatives  one may have some generic rules that further constrain these complete preorders. for instance  one may state that some criterion is more important than  or equally important as  other criteria  maybe in a limited context . one may also have at our disposal some examples of preferences between fully specified alternatives. the problem addressed here  is then to complete the pareto partial preorder in agreement with the constraints in a way that is as little arbitrary as possible.
¡¡the paper is organized as follows. the next section introduces the problem formally  while section 1 provides a short background on a general family of aggregation functions that can be defined under the form of a choquet integral  which will be used in the paper as a comparisonlandmark. section 1 describes the proposed approach that uses a minimal commitment principle for building a complete preorder in agreement with the constraints. this principle expresses that an alternative is good as much as there is no other alternative that are considered to be better. section 1 applies this approach to constraints that directly mirror the way the comparative importance of criteria is stated when using a choquet integral aggregation. this enables a comparison between the two approaches. section 1 reviews related works  and points out the new features of the proposed approach.
1 framework
it is assumed that objects to be rank-ordered are vectors of satisfaction levels belonging to a linearly ordered scale s = {s1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ sh} with s1   ¡¤¡¤¡¤   sh  each vector component referring to a particular criterion. thus  it is supposed that there exists a unique scale s on which all the criteria can be estimated  commensurateness hypothesis .
¡¡preferences are expressed through comparisons of such vectors   written  for short   where aij ¡Ê s  under the form of constraints
expressing thatis preferred to  or is more satisfactory than .
   let u be the set of all possible vectors u = a1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤an  called also alternatives  such that aj ¡Ê s for allis a pre-order on u if and only if it is a reflexive and transitive relation.  means that holds but not.  means that both hold  i.e. u  are equally preferred  and means that neither  hold  i.e.	and	are incomparable.  is said to be complete  or total  if all pairs of alternatives are comparable.
¡¡some components may remain unspecified when comparing alternatives. they are replaced by a variable xj if the jth component is free to take any value in the scale. this allows to express generic preferences as for example pareto ordering written as
.
in any case  pareto ordering is always assumed to hold. besides  other generic constraints of particular interest include those pertaining to the expression of the relative importance of criteria. the greater importance of criterion j with respect to criterion k can be expressed under different forms. one way to state it is by exchanging xj and xk and writing
when xj   xk.
one may think of other ways of expressing that j is more important than k. for instance  one may restrict the above preferences to extreme values of s for the xi's such that and  since weights of importance in conjunctive aggregation can be obtained in this way for a large family of operators  e.g.   dubois et al.  1  . a more drastic way for expressing relative importance would be to use a lexicographic ordering of the vector evaluations based on a linear order of the levels of importance for the criteria. then  the problem of ordering the vectors is straightforward.
note that the first above view of relative importance  which is used in the following  is a ceteris paribus preference of subvector  xj xk  with respect to  xk xj  for xj   xk  where the first  resp. second  component refers to criterion j  resp. k   which expresses preferential independence.
¡¡another way to relate criteria is to express an equal importance between them. it can be expressed by stating that any two vectors where xj and xk are exchanged  and otherwise identical  have the same levels of satisfaction. formally  x1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤xj ¡¤¡¤¡¤xk ¡¤¡¤¡¤xn = x1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤xk ¡¤¡¤¡¤xj ¡¤¡¤¡¤xn.
it is worth noticing that transitivity is required between alternatives only and not between generic constraints. more precisely if it holds thatwith respect to some generic constraints then we necessarily have.
however if we have two generic constraints and
  where x y and z are three criteria  representing that x  resp. y   is more important than y  resp. z  then we do not necessarily have . to illustrate this  let x y and z be evaluated on a scale {a b c} with a   b   c.  are relative importance constraints de-
fined by respectively. let us now check whether we havei.e.
. we haveobtained by transitivity from w.r.t. 
  and w.r.t.  . however acb is not preferred to bca since we cannot reach bca from acb by transitivity using the generic constraints. indeed generic constraints require to explicitly express each constraint that we want to have  i.e.in the above example.
definition of the problem
the problem of rank-ordering the alternatives is decribed as follows. given a set of constraints c of the form 
  where are instantiated on s  our aim is to compute a complete pre-order  over u that satisfies all constraints of c. such a pre-order should not add any additional constraint. one may wonder why we compute a complete pre-order from the set c of partially specified preferences. this is a debatable question and we really believe that the answer depends on the application. if c describes preferences over cars then we may permit that two cars are incomparable. however if c describes preferences over students' grades  as it is the case in our running examples  it is natural to have a complete pre-order over students. the set c may contain generic constraints as described previously but also particular examples of preferences. note that some pre-orders  such as those induced by the minimum aggregation operator  are excluded as soon as pareto constraints are considered.
1 numerical aggregation by choquet integral
aggregation of object attribute values in the presence of interaction between criteria is essential in many decision making problems. choquet integrals are very popular aggregation operators as they allow to model such interactions and thus to represent preferences that cannot be captured by a simple weighted arithmetic mean  grabisch  1; 1 . using a particular measure  they aggregate valued attributes describing alternatives into a unique value. a choquet integral is based on a fuzzy measure defined by:
definition 1 let a be the set of attributes and i a  be the set of all possible subsets of a. a fuzzy measure is a function ¦Ì from i a  to  1  such that:
   x y ¡Ê i a  if x   y then ¦Ì x  ¡Ü ¦Ì y  .
  ¦Ì    = 1  ¦Ì a  = 1.
a discrete choquet integral with respect to a fuzzy measure ¦Ì is defined as follows:
definition 1 let ¦Ì be a fuzzy measure on a = {a1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ an}. the discrete choquet integral w.r.t. ¦Ì is defined by:
 
where a i  indicates that the indices have been permuted so that 1 ¡Ü a 1  ¡Ü ¡¤¡¤¡¤ ¡Ü a n   and a i  = {a i  ¡¤¡¤¡¤ a n } with a 1  = 1.
example 1   grabisch  1; 1; marichal  1   let a b and c be three students evaluated with respect to three subjects: mathematics  m   physics  p  and literature  l . students' grades are summarized in table 1. using choquet
studentmpla11b11c11table 1: students' grades.
integral with a fuzzy measure ¦Ì  the global grade for each student is computed as follows:
  student a: ch¦Ì a  = ch¦Ì 1 1  = 1 ¦Ìmpl +  1   1    ¦Ìmp +  1   1    ¦Ìm 
  student b: ch¦Ì b  = ch¦Ì 1 1  = 1 ¦Ìmpl +  1   1    ¦Ìpl +  1   1    ¦Ìl 
  student c: ch¦Ì c  = ch¦Ì 1 1  = 1 ¦Ìmpl+
¡¡¡¡ 1   1    ¦Ìpl  where ¦Ìx  ¦Ìxy and ¦Ìxy z with x y z ¡Ê {m p l} denote the values of the fuzzy measure ¦Ì for the corresponding set of subjects.
the school is more scientifically than literary oriented and it gives the same importance to mathematics and physics. moreover the school wants to favor well equilibrated students without weak grades so we should have: c preferred to a and a preferred to b  i.e. . as indicated before  the fuzzy measure ¦Ì models interaction between subjects. since mathematics and physics have the same importance and they are more important than literature we have ¦Ìm = ¦Ìp  ¦Ìm   ¦Ìl and ¦Ìp   ¦Ìl. moreover both mathematics and physics are scientific subjects  and thus are considered close  while literature is not. so the interaction between mathematics  resp. physics  and literature is higher than the interaction between mathematics and physics. thus ¦Ìml = ¦Ìpl   ¦Ìmp. this gives the following set of constraints on ¦Ì: {¦Ìm = ¦Ìp ¦Ìm   ¦Ìl ¦Ìp   ¦Ìl ¦Ìml = ¦Ìpl ¦Ìml   ¦Ìmp ¦Ìpl   ¦Ìmp}.
in addition we consider the constraints ch¦Ì c    ch¦Ì a  and ch¦Ì a    ch¦Ì b  corresponding to the preference order between students a  b and c. table 1 gives an example of measure ¦Ì satisfying all these constraints  marichal  1 . using the discrete choquet integral w.r.t. ¦Ì given
¦Ìm¦Ìp¦Ìl¦Ìmp¦Ìml¦Ìpl¦Ìmpl1111111table 1: fuzzy measure.
 and
let us consider another student d having 1 in physics  1 is mathematics and 1 in literature. using discrete choquet integral with respect to ¦Ì given in table 1 we get
ch¦Ì d  = 1.	then we have the following ordering
. let us now use another fuzzy mea-
sure ¦Ì which is equal to ¦Ì except for ¦Ìpl and ¦Ìml. instead we have. we can check that ¦Ì satisfies the set of constraints on ¦Ì. using discrete choquet integral with respect to ¦Ì we have. so we still havebut the ordering over b and d is reversed.
this shows that choquet integral is sensitive with respect to the fuzzy measure ¦Ì and may give arbitrary order over alternatives that are not explicitly stated in the set of constraints.
1 a qualitative ranking approach
since a scale more refined than s is needed to rank-order the alternatives  we use the interval  1  to encode this ordering. indeed s would only offer a finite number of levels for discriminating alternatives. for this purpose  we write our constraints in terms of a possibility distribution ¦Ð  which is a function from the set of alternatives u to  1   and provides a complete pre-order between alternatives on the basis of their possibility degrees.
1 general principle
in the possibility theory framework an elementary preference between alternatives  is encoded by the constraint
. generally those constraints induce partial pre-orders on the set of interpretations. our aim is to combine all these partial pre-orders and compute a total pre-order consistent with the set of constraints. in possibility theory we distinguish two completion principles called minimal and maximal specificity principles that respectively generate the largest and the smallest possibility distributions which satisfies the set of constraints. the following defines the notion of specificity between possibility distributions:
definition 1  minimal/maximal specificity principle  let ¦Ð1 and ¦Ð1 be two possibility distributions over u. ¦Ð1 is less specific than ¦Ð1  denoted ¦Ð1 ¡Ý ¦Ð1  iff
 u ¡Ê u ¦Ð1 u  ¡Ý ¦Ð1 u .
 ¦Ð belongs to the set of the least  resp. most  specific possibility distributions among a set of possibility distributions p if there is no ¦Ð in p such that  resp.    i.e. holds but does not  resp. holds but does not .
indeed the minimal specificity principle gives the highest possible degree to alternatives  while the maximal specificity principle gives the lowest possible degree to alternatives. the choice of using minimal or maximal specificity principle depends on the application. the minimal specificity principle used in the following amounts to consider that an alternative is as good as permitted by the constraints. thus  an unconstrained alternative is good by default.
¡¡before we present our approach it is worth noticing that possibility distributions are purely qualitative here  although they are encoded on the interval  1   and can be represented by a well ordered partition  e1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ ek  on u such that:
  e1 ¡È ¡¤¡¤¡¤ ¡È ek = u with 
 
 with i   j then
1 minimal specificity principle-based algorithm
an elementary preference has generally the following form:
	.	 1 
for example given three criteria x  y and z  a relative importance constraint of x over y is written as:
¦Ð xyz1    ¦Ð yxz1  for x   y  z1.
a set of constraints of the form  1  can be written in a compact form as a set of the following constraints:
	 	 1 
where u1 and u1 are subsets of u.
we may also have equality constraints i.e.
	.	 1 
for example given three criteria x  y   and z  stating that x and y have the same importance is written as:
¦Ð xyz1  = ¦Ð yxz1   z1.
algorithm 1 computes the unique least specific possibility distribution satisfying a set of constraints c of the form  1   constraints  1  being a special case of constraints  1   and  1  obtained from generic constraints and/or examples.
let c = {ci : i = 1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ m}. from c we define
lc = { l ci  r ci   : ci ¡Ê c} 
1 . let eq = {¦Ð uj  = ¦Ð ul }.
algorithm 1  benferhat et al.  1  is a generalization of
algorithm 1: the least specific possibility distribution. begin
while u is not empty do k
;
¦Á = true while ¦Á = true do
¦Á = false; for ¦Ð uj  = ¦Ð ul  in eq such that ¦Á = true  ek = ek {uj ul}
then stop  inconsistent statements ;
- u = u ek ;
- from c remove l ci  r ci   such that l ci ¡É
;
- from eq remove ¦Ð uj  = ¦Ð ul  s.t. uj ¡Ê ek.
end return ¦Ð =  e1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ ek 
the possibilistic counterpart of pearl's algorithm for system z  pearl  1 .
example 1 let us consider two subjects  mathematics  and  literature  that are evaluated on a scale a   b   c with  a  for good   b  for medium and  c  for bad. thus a student having  ac  is good in mathematics and bad in literature. pareto ordering forces to have
as soon as  ranging in {a b c}. pareto principle generates
the following set of constraints:
c = {min{¦Ð aa }   max{¦Ð ab  ¦Ð ba  ¦Ð ca }  min{¦Ð aa  ¦Ð ab }   max{¦Ð ac  ¦Ð bb  ¦Ð bc  ¦Ð cb  ¦Ð cc }  min{¦Ð ac  ¦Ð ba }   max{¦Ð bc  ¦Ð cc }  min{¦Ð bb }   max{¦Ð cb  ¦Ð cc  ¦Ð bc }  min{¦Ð ba }   max{¦Ð ca  ¦Ð bb  ¦Ð cb }  min{¦Ð bc  ¦Ð cb  ¦Ð ca }   max{¦Ð cc } 
min{¦Ð ca }   max{¦Ð cb }}.
the application of the minimal specificity principle leads to ¦Ð =   aa   ab ba   ac bb ca   bc cb   cc  .
note that letting or the converse would lead to express more constraints than what is only specified by pareto constraints. in fact  it may look a little surprising to get ¦Ð ac  = ¦Ð bb  = ¦Ð ca . however this is justified by the fact that the minimal specificity principle gives to each alternative the highest possible rank  i.e.  possibility degree . the alternatives ac bb and ca cannot have the highest possibility degree since following pareto ordering  they are strictly less preferred than aa ab and ba respectively. to ensure that we associate the highest possibility degree to these alternatives  the minimal specificity principle keeps the three pairs of evaluations at the same level  and they are ranked immediately below ab and ba.
the following example extends example 1 with relative importance constraints:
example 1  example 1 continued 
suppose that mathematics is more important than literature. this is translated by the following relative importance constraint: ¦Ð xy    ¦Ð yx  for x   y. the instantiation of this constraint provides a new set of constraints:
.
.
1 ordering queries
 we may need to compare specific alternatives without computing the whole complete pre-order generated by algo. 1. an ordering query over two distinct alternatives u1 and u1 consists in checking whether  or not  given a set of generic constraints and examples. algo. 1 gives a way to answer such queries. the idea is to compute the set of alternatives that are less preferred to u1 w.r.t. generic constraints and examples. then we compute the deductive closure of this set w.r.t. generic constraints and examples. if u1 belongs to this set or some alternative in this set is preferred to u1 following pareto principle then. let  stand for u is preferred to u following pareto principle  and c be the set of generic constraints and examples.
example 1  example 1 continued  let us compare the alternatives ac and cb. we have u1 = {ac} and u1 = {ca}. we haveis strictly preferred to cb.
note that algorithm 1 returns that ac and bb are incomparable whilew.r.t. algorithm 1. indeed  ac is put in the same stratum as ba  that dominates bb in the sense of pareto . this is the effect of minimal specifity principle that puts any alternatives as high as possible. thus  using algorithm 1  one can distinguish the alternatives that are ranked only by virtue of the constraints  from those that also require the application of a default principle  here the minimal specificity principle  to be rank-ordered by application of algorithm 1. note that if we are only interested in comparing two alternatives  we may stop algorithm 1 as soon as the two alternatives are ranked  without in general computing the whole pre-order . note
algorithm 1: ordering queries begin return return
- u1 = {u1} ¡È {u|u1 = u is derived from eq} if u1 ¡Ê u1 then return u1 = u1
is derived from c ¡È eq}
	while	do
-
is derived from c ¡Èeq}
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡then - u1 = {u1} ¡È {u|u1 = u is derived from eq} if u1 ¡Ê u1 then u1 = u1
is derived from c ¡È eq}
	while	do
-
is derived from c ¡Èeq}
then return
   if neither   nor   nor u1 = u1 hold then u1 and u1 are incomparable. end
also that any strict preference or equality returned by algorithm 1 is consistent with algorithm 1.
1 comparison with choquet integral
in contrast to choquet integral  which is sensitive to the numerical values of criteria and coefficients of the fuzzy measure whose adjustment is not obvious  our approach relies on qualitative values of criteria. this qualitative aspect makes that the approach is general  i.e. independent of the values of criteria  which providesmore robust results comparedto choquet integral. in fact  constraints over coefficients in a choquet integral  as well as ranking over specific alternatives can be encoded in our framework by means of generic constraints and examples respectively. then the application of algorithm 1 gives a complete pre-order on u which satisfies all generic constraints and examples. in order to make the comparison precise  we encode each inequality between fuzzy measure coefficients in terms of relative importance constraints. recall that choquet integral expression writes:
¡¡c¦Ì a1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤an  = a1 ¡Á ¦Ìx1 + ¡¤¡¤¡¤ +  an   an 1  ¡Á ¦Ìx with xn   ¡¤¡¤¡¤   x1 and a1 ¡Ü ¡¤¡¤¡¤ ¡Ü an. moreover is associated to criterion xi xi+1  xn+1 =  . let us consider example 1  and use a qualitative scale s =
{a b c d e f}  with a   b   c   d   e   f  to encode students' grades 1 1 1 and 1 respectively given in table 1. let x y z be students' grades in mathematics  physics and literature respectively so x y z ¡Ê {a b c d e f}. we encode the constraints on ¦Ì namely ¦Ìm   ¦Ìl  ¦Ìp   ¦Ìl  ¦Ìml   ¦Ìmp  ¦Ìpl   ¦Ìmp and ¦Ìp = ¦Ìm by means of generic constraints on ¦Ð.
i  m is more important than l:
at first sight we encode this constraint by:
	¦Ð xyz    ¦Ð zyx  for x   z  y.	 1 
however this encoding  apparently natural  is not adequate here since it doesn't recover the ranking on u induced by choquet integral. let us consider the following alternatives dfe efd ead and dae. following equation  1  we have ¦Ð dfe    ¦Ð efd  and ¦Ð dae    ¦Ð ead . however following choquet integral we have ch¦Ì dfe  = 1  ch¦Ì efd  = 1  ch¦Ì dae  = 1 and ch¦Ì ead  = 1. so we have well dfe preferred to efd but dae is not preferred to ead. this means that constraint  1  is too weak to encode ¦Ìm   ¦Ìl. the reason is that the constraint ¦Ìm   ¦Ìl is more requirying than what it appears. thus y should be constrained rather than to take any value in s.
 let mpl and  two vectors. note that ¦Ìm   ¦Ìl
this supposes. we put
. thus
¦Ìm   ¦Ìl is encoded in our framework by:
	¦Ð xyz    ¦Ð zyx  for x   z ¡Ý y.	 1 
ii  p is more important than l:
the same reasoning can be made for ¦Ìp   ¦Ìl. it is encoded by:
	¦Ð xyz    ¦Ð xzy  for y   z ¡Ý x.	 1 
iii  the interaction between m and l is higher than the interaction between p and m:
the inequality ¦Ìml   ¦Ìmp is equivalent to the following inequality between the two choquet integrals

this supposes. letting  then ¦Ìml   ¦Ìmp is encoded by: ¦Ð xyz    ¦Ð xzy  for x ¡Ý z   y.	 1 
iv  the interaction between p and l is higher than the interaction between p and m:
similarily ¦Ìpl   ¦Ìmp is encoded by:
	¦Ð xyz    ¦Ð zyx  for y ¡Ý z   x.	 1 
v  m and p have the same importance:
	¦Ð xyz  = ¦Ð yxz  for all x y z.	 1 
vi  as previously said  we suppose that pareto orderingholds. namely
		 1 
¡¡¡¡for. vii  lastly is encoded by: ¦Ð dcc    ¦Ð abf    ¦Ð fea 	 1 
¡¡in sum we have the following set of generic constraints and examples:
   ¦Ð xyz    ¦Ð zyx 	for x   z ¡Ý y       ¦Ð xyz    ¦Ð xzy 	for y   z ¡Ý x
 

applying algorithm 1 on c gives a possibility distribution with 1 strata ¦Ð =  e1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ e1  with e1 = {aaa}  e1 = {baa aba}  e1 = {caa aca aab}  ¡¤¡¤¡¤  e1 = {fff}. the alternatives dcc  abf and fea belong to e1  e1 and e1 respectively. using choquet integral we get 1 different levels: ch¦Ì aaa  = 1  ch¦Ì aba  = ch¦Ì baa  = 1  ch¦Ì aca  = ch¦Ì caa  = ch¦Ì fea  = 1  ¡¤¡¤¡¤  ch¦Ì fff  = 1. note also that in our approach  cce belongs to e1  i.e. we have.
1 related works
this work is based on an idea first presented in  dubois et al.  1 . this proposal has been extended in two main directions. first  an algorithm is proposed that directly provides the ranking between any two alternatives  without having to compute the whole complete preorder on the set of all the alternatives . besides  a comparative discussion on an example suggests that the proposed approach may be more robust  more flexible  and is more transparent to the user  who can control precisely what is expressed by means of the constraints  than an aggregation-based method  which moreover requires the use of a numerical scale in order to have a sufficiently discriminative scale.
¡¡our approach focussed on the particular case where examples and generic constraints are consistent together in order to perform the comparison with the choquet integral example  which is also based on this hypothesis. however we can deal as well with examples that contradict generic constraints. an algorithm has been proposed in  dubois et al.  1  where examples are considered as exceptions. this algorithm computes the complete pre-order associated to generic constraints  which is then modified in order to satisfy the examples provided that pareto principle is not violated.
¡¡the proposed approach may look a bit similar to a topological sorting procedure that computes a linear ordering of the nodes of a directed acyclic graph  dag . an edge from a node a to a node b means that a should be strictly preferred to b. then several complete strict orders are generated satisfying all constraints given in the graph. using our approach on such constraints we generate a complete pre-order that is such that if we would change equalities between alternatives into strict preferences then we would obtain one of the strict orders agreeing with the topological sort.
¡¡the recent years have seen the development of important works in artificial intelligence on the representations of preferences  e.g.   wilson  1  . however  they start with a set of local conditional preferences and apply a ceteris paribus principle for completing the specifications. in our case  constraints are of a differentnature. indeed they refer to complete specifications of alternatives either in a generic way or by referring to particular situations.
1 conclusion
starting from possibility theory as a framework for representing constraints satisfaction  a qualitative method has been proposed for building a complete preorder that agrees with a set of constraints in a qualitative way. the approach is fairly general  and agrees with the way humans state their preferences in a granular manner  either in terms of generic rules or by means of examples. this is an extrapolation task not to be confused with learning. it would amount to e.g. learn importance relations between criteria from a sufficient number of examples of preferences between complete alternatives.
¡¡a topic of interest for further research would be to make a general comparison of the approach with multiple criteria aggregation techniques such as choquet or sugeno integrals  and to study to what extent it is possible to extract constraints underlying the way these aggregations handle the assessment of the relative importance of criteria.
references
 benferhat et al.  1  s. benferhat  d. dubois  and h. prade. towards a possibilistic logic handling of preferences. applied intelligence  1 :1  1.
 dubois et al.  1  d. dubois  j.-l. marichal  h. prade  m. roubens  and r. sabbadin. the use of the discrete sugeno integral in decision-making: a survey. international journal of uncertainty  fuzziness and knowledgebased systems  1-1  1.
 dubois et al.  1  d. dubois  s. kaci  and h. prade. expressing p