
planning for temporally extended goals  tegs  expressed as formulae of linear-time temporal logic  ltl  is a proper generalization of classical planning  not only allowing to specify properties of a goal state but of the whole plan execution. additionally  ltl formulae can be used to represent domain-specific control knowledge to speed up planning. in this paper we extend satbased planning for ltl goals  akin to boundedltl model-checking in verification  to partially ordered plans  thus significantly increasing planning efficiency compared to purely sequential sat planning. we consider a very relaxed notion of partial ordering and show how planning for ltl goals  without the next-time operator  can be translated into a sat problem and solved very efficiently. the results extend the practical applicability of satbased planning to a wider class of planning problems. in addition  they could be applied to solving problemsin boundedltl model-checkingmore efficiently.
1 introduction
in classical planning  a goal that an agent has to achieve is simply a property of a goal state to reach. tegs are specifications not only stating desired properties of a final state but of a sequence of states  namely the execution of a plan satisfying the specification. expressing these goals as formulae of an adequate temporal logic  one can impose more precise constraints on plans than one could with classical reachability goals. so for instance it is possible to specify maintenance goals  some property must be maintained indefinitely   goals stating how the agent should react to some environmental condition  and safety goals that impose a restriction on the agent's behavior not to change certain properties of the world state while trying to achieve a reachability goal.
모in planning  temporal specifications are usually either regarded as extended goals or as a means of encoding domainspecific search control knowledge used to guide the planner. different formalisms have been used  e. g. temporal action logics  tal  in talplanner  doherty and kvarnstro몮m  1   and metric interval temporal logic  mitl  and linear temporal logic  ltl  in tlplan  bacchus and kabanza  1; 1 . recently  the planning domain definition language  pddl  has been extended to express state trajectory constraints  gerevini and long  1 . both talplanner and tlplan are forward-chaining planners  pruning the search space by progressing the temporal formula. other approaches include compiling tasks including ltl goals into classical tasks  cresswell and coddington  1; baier and mcilraith  1  before solving them by using a classical planner.
모boundedmodel-checking biere et al.  1;latvala et al.  1   which is an extension of the planning as satisfiability approach  kautz and selman  1   can be viewed as a sat-based technique for planning with tegs. since the efficiency of sat-based planning techniques is often strongly dependent on the notion of partially ordered or parallel plans  kautz and selman  1; rintanen et al.  1   extending the sat-based ltl model-checking/planningapproachto parallel plans may in some cases be very critical to obtain efficient planning. the contribution of this paper is an encoding of constraints that preserve the semantics of ltl formulae under parallel plans.
모in section 1 we give a formal description of the problem to be solved. in section 1 we present the propositional encoding  in which we use the base encoding of planning as satisfiability  kautz and selman  1  reproduced in section 1 and the translation of ltl formulae to propositional logic  latvala et al.  1  reproduced in section 1. section 1 shows our adaption of the encoding of parallelism constraints given in  rintanen et al.  1  to tasks with tegs. our experiments are described in section 1.
1 planning for temporally extended goals as propositional satisfiability
1 problem description
notation
let a be a set of propositional variables and 붯 a propositional or temporal formula. we write lit a  as a shorthand for a 뫋 { a | a 뫍 a} and lit 붯  instead of lit var 붯    where var 붯  is the set of variables in 붯. if lit is a set of literals  we write lit붯 := lit 뫌 lit 붯 . if 붯 is a propositional formula  then a occurs positively  negatively  in 붯 iff there is an occurrence of a in 붯 nested within an even  odd  number of negation signs. a negative literal  a occurs positively  negatively  in 붯 iff a occurs negatively  positively  in 붯. a literal  occurs in 붯 if it occurs positively or negatively in 붯. we write pos  붯   neg  붯   and occ  붯   respectively.
linear temporal logic
in order to specify tegs  we have to choose a specification language. here we use propositional ltl  emerson  1  without next-time operator because it has a simple and welldefined semantics and it is sufficiently expressive for many qualitative tegs.
모the set of well-formed ltl x formulae in negation normal form over a set a of propositional variables  ltl x formulae for short  is inductively defined as follows: for all a 뫍 a  a and  a are ltl x formulae. if     1  and  1 are ltl x formulae  so are  1 뫇  1   1 뫈  1  f    eventually      g    always       1u 1    1 until  1   and  1r 1    1 releases  1  .
모an ltl x formula   over a is evaluated along an infinite path in a state space over a. formally  a kripke model
m is a triple where q is a set of states 
뫸  q 뫄 q is a reflexive binary relation over q  the transition relation  and l : q 뫸 1a is a function assigning to each state a propositional valuation of the variables in a. a path in m is a function 뷇 : n 뫸 q such that for all n 뫍 n  뷇 n  뫸 뷇 n + 1 . if 뷇 is a path in m and i 뫍 n  then the ith suffix of 뷇  뷇i : n 뫸 q  is defined as 뷇i j  := 뷇 i + j  for all j 뫍 n.
모for k b 뫍 n  k   b  a path 뷇 = u몫v뷎 consisting of a finite prefix u = 뷇 1  ... 뷇 k 1  and a loopv = 뷇 k  ... 뷇 b  1   repeated infinitely often  is called a  b k -loop. it is called a b-loop if it is a  b k -loop for some k   b.
모the truth of an ltl x formula   along a path 뷇  symbolically 뷇 |=    is now inductively defined as follows: 뷇 |= a :  a 뫍 l 뷇 1   뷇 |=  a :  a /뫍 l 뷇 1  
뷇 |=  1 뫇  1 :  뷇 |=  1 and 뷇 |=  1 뷇 |=  1 뫈  1 :  뷇 |=  1 or 뷇 |=  1 뷇 |= f  :   i 뫍 n : 뷇i |=   뷇 |= g  :   i 뫍 n : 뷇i |=  
뷇 |=  1u 1 :   i 뫍 n : 뷇i |=  1 and
모모모모모모모 j 뫍 {1 ... i   1} : 뷇j |=  1 뷇 |=  1r 1 :   i 뫍 n : 뷇i |=  1 or
 j 뫍 {1 ... i   1} : 뷇j |=  1.
모if a given path 뷇 is a b-loop  the first b states of 뷇 together with the value of k contain all the information needed to evaluate   along 뷇. in the following  all paths we will deal with are of that type.
모let be a finite sequence of states such that qi 뫸 qi+1 for all i 뫍 {1 ... b   1} and that there is a k 뫍 {1 ... b   1} with qb = qk. in order to be able to evaluate an ltl x formula along q몬  we consider an infinite unraveling of q몬: if qb 뫍 {q1 ... qb 1}  say qb = qk  let q몬k : n 뫸 q  where q몬k i  = qi  if i   b  and q몬k i  = q  i b  mod  b k  +k  otherwise. note that q몬k is actually a path  i. e. consecutive states are related by 뫸. an ltl x formula   is valid along such a finite sequence q몬  written as q몬|=    iff there is a k 뫍 {1 ... b   1} such that qb = qk and q몬k |=  .
모we make sure that there is a k 뫍 {1 ... b   1} such that qb = qk by allowing idling in a final state  enforcingit if there is no other loop .
planning
a planning task is a tuple  where a is a finite set of boolean state variables  i 뫍 1a is the initial state  o is a finite set of operators  and   is an ltl x formula with variables in a. operators have the form o =  where p is a propositional formula over a  the precondition of o  e is a finite set of literals over a  the unconditional effects of o  and c is a finite set of pairs  consisting of a propositional formula f and a finite set of literals d. these pairs are the conditional effects of o.
the set of all effects of o will be written as  o   :=
  the set of unconditional effects as
  and the set of active effects in a state q as
for a single oper-
atorfor a set s of operators.
모a set s of operators is applicable in a state q if q |= p for all o 뫍 s and  s q is consistent. we identify an operator o with the singleton set {o}  thus o is applicable in q if its precondition is satisfied and its active effects are consistent. for a set s of operators  possibly singleton for sequential plans or empty to model idling  and a state q such that s is applicable in q  the simultaneous application of s in q results in the state q obtained from q by making the literals in  s q true and leaving the other state variables unchanged. we then
write . let
 be a sequence of sets of operators and q1 a state such that is defined. then the sequence of states exec 1  1 is called the execution of be a sequence of sets of operators   a sequence of binary relations such that  t is a total ordering of st  say ot 1  t 몫몫몫  t ot |st| 1  for all t 뫍 {1 ... b   1}  and q1
a state. assume that qt  ot 뫸1 qt1  ot 뫸1 qt1  ot 뫸1 ...     ot |st| 뫸1 qt+1 is defined for all t 뫍 {1 ... b   1}. then the sequence of states exec q1 s 몬  몬  :=
	is	called	a
linearized execution of s몬 in q1.
모a plan of length  with st   o for all t 뫍 {1 ... b   1}
together with a sequence 
 a   t is a total ordering of st for all t 뫍 {1 ... b   1} and  b  q몬= exec i s 몬  몬  is defined and q몬|=   in the kripke model induced by p.
1 reduction to satisfiability
planning as satisfiability  kautz and selman  1  roughly works as follows: given a planning task  propositional formulae 붯1 붯1 붯1 ... are generated such that there exists a plan of length b for p if 붯b is satisfiable.
the 붯b are evaluated by using a sat solver. if 붯b is unsatisfiable  the evaluation will proceed to 붯b+1  otherwise a plan for p can be extracted from a satisfying valuation v for 붯b.
1 solution quality
the quality of a parallel plan can be measured with respect to its parallel plan length b or its sequential plan length. we will focus on finding plans with a low parallel plan length because the size of the largest propositionalformula to be considered for a given task is roughly proportional to the parallel length of a plan corresponding to a satisfying valuation. as sat solver running times grow exponentially in the formula size in the worst case  obtaining small formulae is particularly important.
1 propositional encoding
1 base encoding
we first give the base encoding base of the transition system induced by a planning taskfor a bound b on the plan length first proposed by  kautz and selman  1   omitting the reachability goal formula:
 
where rt is the conjunction of precondition axioms ot 뫸 pt  effect axioms  conditional effect axioms  for all o =  
and positive and negative frame axioms   at 뫇 at+1  뫸  epca o  t  and 
 epc a o  t   respectively  for all a 뫍 a.	in the frame axioms  epc is defined as   and as
  otherwise.
모this encoding contains propositional variables at for all state variables a 뫍 a and time points t 뫍 {1 ... b} as well as ot for all operators o 뫍 o and time points t 뫍 {1 ... b   1} with the intended semantics that a holds at time point t iff at is true  and that operator o is applied at time point t iff ot is true. where sets of variables or propositional formulae are indexed with some t  this actually denotes the sets or formulae with variables indexed correspondingly.
모the following theorem states the correctness of the propositional translation. a proof can be found in  rintanen et al.  1 .
theorem 1. let be a planning task.
then there exists a sequence of sets of operators s몬 = such that exec i s몬  is defined iff the formula
base is satisfiable.	
1 temporally extended goals
in this subsection we reproduce the reduction of the bounded ltl/ltl x model-checking problem to propositional satisfiability given in  latvala et al.  1   adding the constraint that a satisfying sequence of states must contain a loop: let  be a planning task and b 뫍 n. then  looptoaxb 뫇 beforeaxb 뫇 uniqueaxb 뫇 inftyax  where
looptoax 
b
beforeax 
uniqueaxb := inftyax lt 
with fresh auxiliary variables lt bef t  t 뫍 {1 ... b   1}  with the intended semantics that there is a loop from qb 1 back to qt or back to some  respectively . the recursive translation is defined as
t   bt = b

fat
 at


g



t t	t뫐뫐notice that the translationis closely relatedto the formula progression procedures used in  bacchus and kabanza  1; doherty and kvarnstro몮m  1 .
모the following theorem states the correctness and completeness of the propositional translation. a slightly different formulation as well as a proof can be found in  latvala et al.  1 .
 theorem 1. let be a planning task and b 뫍 n. then there exists a sequence of sets of operators  such that q몬 = exec i s몬  is defined and
q몬|=   iff the formula bbmc is satisfiable.	
1 parallel plans
in this section we present our main contribution  being constraints whichguaranteethat the meaningof ltl x formulae is preserved under parallel plans  and a propositional encoding of these constraints.
모theorem 1 tells us how to encode the requirement that there is a sequence s몬 such that exec i s몬  |=  . but we have not yet made sure that s몬 is in fact a plan  i. e. there is a sequence  몬 of corresponding total orderings such that exec i s 몬  몬  |=  . for such a sequence  몬 to yield an admissible linearization  it must ensure that  a  q몬 = exec i s 몬  몬  is defined and if so  that  b  q몬 |=  . in order to state how this can be achieved  we need some definitions. the first one and the subsequent lemma are due to  lamport  1 .
definition 1. let 뷇 = q1 q1 q1 ... and 뷇  = q 1 q 1 q 1 ... be two infinite  finite  paths in a kripke model . then 뷇 and 뷇  are called stuttering equivalent  뷇 몲 뷇  for short  if there are two infinite  finite  sequences of natural numbers 1 = i1   i1   i1   ...   in  and 1 = j1   j1   j1   ...   jn  such that for all 1 뫞 k    n  :
l qik  = l qik+1  = ... = l qik+1  = l q jk  = l q jk+1  = ... = l q jk+1 . a finite subsequence like qik qik+1 ... qik+1 of 뷇 or 뷇  consisting of identically labeled states is called a block.
lemma 1. let   be an ltl x formula   a
kripke model  where l : q 뫸 1a for some a   var     and 뷇 뷇  two infinite  finite  paths in m with 뷇 몲 뷇 . then 뷇 |=   iff 뷇  |=  .	
모the following definition  adapted from a similar one by  rintanen et al.  1   is crucial for the rest of this section in that it describes under which circumstances an operator o may or may not be applied before an operator o in a linearization   of a set of operators s if one wants to ensure that for all time points t the application of st in qt in the ordering given by  t is defined in the first place  and if so  that exec i s 몬  몬  |=  .
definition 1. let be a planning task and
affects
and either  1.  there is a literalsuch that  a. 
and  b.   i.  neg  or  ii.  occ  for some  or  1.  .
모here   is the restriction of    i. e. of the set of all conditional and unconditional effect literals of o  to those literals occurring  positively or negatively  in  . similarly  for.
모the cases correspond to different problems that can potentially arise if o is applied before o in a linearization  namely to o falsifying the precondition of fecting the set of active effects of   1.a.  +  1.b.ii.    and o and o putting at risk the stuttering equivalence of exec i s몬  and exec i s 몬  몬    1.  . the definition gives rise to a condition on the admissibility of a sequence  몬 of total orderings.
lemma 1. let be a planning task  s몬 =  a sequence of sets of operators such that exec i s몬  |=    anda sequence such that  t is a total ordering of.
if there are no operators and  for any t 뫍 {1 ... b   1}  then s몬 together with  몬 is
a plan for p.
proof sketch. we have to show that exec i s 몬  몬  is defined and exec i s 몬  몬  |=  . as argued in  rintanen et al.  1   in order to show that exec i s 몬  몬  is defined  it suffices to show that no operator o 뫍 st can disable another operator  by potentially falsifying its precondition or altering its set of active effects for any t 뫍 {1 ... b   1}. these two possibilities are ruled out by condition  1.a.  together with  1.b.i.  and  1.b.ii.  of definition 1 respectively  see  rintanen et al.  1  for a detailed proof of that claim . if exec i s 몬  몬  is defined  by using lemma 1 it is sufficient to show that exec i s몬  몲 exec i s 몬  몬  in the kripke model m  where q and 뫸 form the state space induced by p and l : q 뫸 1var    is defined by l q  = q 뫌 var   . to see that this is true  consider a single time point t 뫍 {1 ... b   1} first. let  t be the total ordering of st and  say  ot 1  t 몫몫몫  t ot |st| 1. then the subsequence of the linearized execution exec i s 몬  몬 

corresponds to the subsequence of the execution exec i s몬 
몫몫몫 뫸qt s뫸t qt+1뫸  몫몫몫
note that condition  1.  of definition 1 together with the fact that no operator affects an operator applied later in  t makes sure that for t            holds and thus all effects in  st qt relevant to    i. e. those effects concerning a variable occurring in    are effects of ot 1. therefore  the operators ot 1 ... ot |st| 1 do not have an additional effect on the labeling l. thus  l qt1  = l qt1  = ... = l qt+1   and qt1 qt1 ... qt+1 form one block of the stuttering equivalence of exec i s 몬  몬  and exec i s몬 . the corresponding block in exec i s몬  is the singleton {qt+1}. the other blocks are constructed analogously.	
모the next step is to find a propositional formula encoding the condition that at no time point t any two operators
such that o affects can be applied simultaneously. for that purpose we define the notion of a disabling graph  rintanen et al.  1  for a planning task p.
definition 1.  be a planning task. a directed graph  where e   o뫄o  is a disabling graph for p if e contains all edges  such that  1.  there is a state q reachable from i with operators in o in which o and o are simultaneously applicable and  1.  o affects o.
모let st be a set of operators. if the subgraph  et = e 뫌  st 뫄 st   of a disabling graph for
p induced by st is acyclic  then there is an ordering  t of st in which there are no two operators with o affecting o. in fact   t can be an arbitrary topological ordering of. as the strongly connected components
  sccs  of a directed graph form a directed acyclic graph  instead of ensuring the acyclicity of gt  it is sufficient to ensure the acyclicity of the subgraphs of gt induced by the sccs of   i. e. of t = t t   where sti = st 뫌 ci and
eti = et 뫌  sti 뫄 sti . this can be achieved as follows:
   let be a disabling graph  c = {c1 ... cm} the set of sccs of g  and  i an arbitrary total ordering of ci = {oi  ... oi|c } for all i 뫍 {1 ... m}  say  o1 ... on 뫍 o  e r   o and
  we define formulae stating that there are no oi oj 뫍 {o1 ... on} i   j  such that oi 뫍 e oj 뫍 r  and oi oj are applied simultaneously  intuitively  operators in e can disable operators in
chain

 where the ai  are fresh auxiliary variables. now  the negation of  1  in definition 1 translates to the conjunction of chain formulae for all time points  sccs  and literals in    if we use the following sets:
	and  or ex. s.t. occ .
 similarly  the negation of  1  in definition 1 translates to the conjunction of chain formulae with the sets:
 and .
so  the parallelism constraints can be encodedin the formula
chain
chain .
remark 1. if the valuation corresponding to a sequence of sets of operators satisfies pblin  then for all time points t and sccs ci of the disabling graph  used in the construction of pblin  all subgraphs  are acyclic.1 as the sccs form an acyclic graph  there is a total ordering  c on c such that for all i j 뫍 {1 ... m} with ci  c cj  there are no o 뫍 ci and  such that . since gti is acyclic  there is a total ordering  it of sti for each t 뫍 {1 ... b   1} and i 뫍
{1 ... m}  consistent with the ordering  i used in the con-
  such that there is no pairwith
. the relations  it  i 뫍 {1 ... m} 
and  c can be combined lexicographically resulting in an ordering  t of st. it follows that there is no t 뫍 {1 ... b   1} and no such that o affects.
모the following theorem combines the conclusions from theorem 1 and lemma 1 with the above remark.
main theorem. let be a planning task andblin is satisfiable  then there is a plan of length b for p.
proof sketch. from theorem 1 we know that there exists a sequence of sets of operators such that q몬 = exec i s몬  is defined and q몬 |=  . in order to be able to use lemma 1  we still need a sequence of corresponding total orderings such that there is no time point t 뫍 {1 ... b   1} and no pair of operators with o affecting. the orderings  t constructed in remark 1 form such a sequence. thus  the precondition of lemma 1 is satisfied and it follows that s몬 together with  몬 is a plan for p  and in particular that exec i s 몬  몬  is defined and exec i s 몬  몬  |=  .	
1 experiments
1 setting
we compared the cumulative sat solver running times until the first satisfiable formula for  a.  the parallel encoding described in section 1 and  b.  a sequential encoding derived from the parallel one by replacing the parallelism constraints by axioms demanding at most one operator per time point. the evaluation of the formulae corresponding to increasing plan lengths was performed sequentially. additionally  we compared the  parallel  plan lengths of the resulting plans.
모we used two types of planning tasks. first  we considered a simple hand-crafted logistics-like transportation task with three portables and trucks each. the goal was to find an infinite plan assuring that the portables are shipped back and forth between two locations indefinitely. the goal formula we used wasgf  where the pi are portables and the dij are locations.
모the other tasks were adapted from the 1 international planning competition. we modified the qualitative preferences tasks from the rovers domain by turning the soft temporal constraints  preferences  into hard constraints and by ignoring the metric function. when changing soft into hard constraints  it turned out that it was necessary to drop some of them in order to keep the tasks solvable. this was done by drawing uniformly at random 뷁 constraints for each task and only retaining the ones drawn.1 the constraints were translated to ltl x as explained in  gerevini and long  1 . unlike the first task above  the rovers tasks lacked explicit nesting of temporal operators1 and could  if solvable at all  be solved by plans always yielding finite executions  apart from infinite idling in a final state. the reachability goals specified in the problem definitions were required to hold in such a final state.
모the sat solver we used was siege v. 1  ryan  1 . the experiments were run on a pc with 1 ghz amd athlon 1 cpu  1 mb ram  and a linux operating system.
1 results
table 1 contains results from the logistics task and the modified rovers tasks for 뷁 = 1.
모the second and third columns show the size m of the largest scc of the computed disabling graph compared to its overall number of nodes |o|. the fourth column shows the parallel plan lengths bp obtained with our parallel encoding  compared to sequential plan lengths bs in column five. where an interval  m n  is given  the shortest sequential plan has length m   bs 뫞 n  but we could not precisely determine bs because of sat solver running times exceeding our time-out
task|o|mbpbsrprsrplogist.11111r-111.1.1r-111.1.1r-11     r-111.1.1r-11     r-11 1 111r-11 1 111r-11 1 111r-11 1 111r-11 1 1  1h1r-11 1 111r-11 1 111r-11 1 1  1h1r-11 1 111r-11     r-11 1 1  1h1r-11 1 1  1h1r-11 1 1  1h1r-11 1 1  1h1r-11 1 1  1h1table 1: results for logistics task and modified rovers tasks.
of 1min. the values rp and rs are the cumulativesat solver running times up to the first satisfiable formula in seconds in the parallel and sequential case  respectively. to obtain these values  we used a time-out of 1sec for each single satisfiability test  proceeding to the next formula after time-out. rp denotes the overall running time needed for parallel planning  pddl parsing  encoding  sat solving  decoding  in seconds. the discrepancy between sat solver and overall running times arises because we used an unoptimized sml program to do the encoding. in particular  for the construction of the disabling graph and the computation of invariants  a speed-up by an order of magnitude appears to be possible.
1 conclusion
we combined existing techniques for planning as satisfiability  bounded ltl model-checking  and parallel planning in order to obtain an efficient method of planning for tegs. the use of a disabling-graph-based encoding of constraints ensuring the stuttering equivalence of a parallel and at least one corresponding sequential plan execution allowed us to extend parallel planning to planning for tegs. our experimental results show that  like in classical sat-based planning  kautz and selman  1  and in graphplan  blum and furst  1   admitting parallelism can noticeably speed up planning for tegs. by using the non-sequentialformula evaluation strategies given in  rintanen et al.  1  sections 1  1   which are orthogonal to the contributions of the present paper  planner running times might be further reducible.
acknowledgments
this work was partly supported by the dfg within sfb/tr 1 avacs  by the ec under contract no. fp1-cosy  and by the bmbf through the desire project. jussi rintanen's research was supported by national ict australia  nicta  in connection with the dpolp project. nicta is funded through the australian government's backing australia's ability initiative  in part through the australian national research council.
references
 bacchus and kabanza  1  f. bacchus and f. kabanza. planning for temporally extended goals. in proc. 1th aaai'1  pages 1  1.
 bacchus and kabanza  1  f. bacchus and f. kabanza. using temporal logics to express search control knowledge for planning. artif. intell.  1-1 :1 1.
 baier and mcilraith  1  j. baier and s. mcilraith. planning with first-order temporally extended goals using heuristic search. in proc. 1st aaai'1  pages 1  1.
 biere et al.  1  a. biere  a. cimatti  e. clarke  and y. zhu. symbolic model checking without bdds. in proc. 1th tacas'1  pages 1  1.
 blum and furst  1  a. l. blum and m. l. furst. fast planning through planning graph analysis. in proc. 1th ijcai'1  pages 1  1.
 cresswell and coddington  1  s. cresswell and a. m. coddington. compilation of ltl goal formulas into pddl. in proc. 1th ecai'1  pages 1  1.
 doherty and kvarnstro몮m  1  p. doherty and j. kvarnstro몮m. talplanner: a temporal logic based planner. ai magazine  1 :1  1.
 emerson  1  e. a. emerson. temporal and modal logic. in handbook of theoretical computer science  volume b: formal models and sematics  pages 1. mit press  cambridge  ma  1.
 gerevini and long  1  a. gerevini and d. long. plan constraints and p