 
social law is perceived as evolving through the competition of individual social strategies held by the agents. a strategy with strong authority  accepted by many agents  will tend to diffuse to the remaining agents. the authority of a social strategy is determined by not only the number of but also the collective social positions of its overlaid agents. this paper presents a novel collective strategy diffusion model in agent social law evolution. in the model  social strategies that have strong authority are impressed on the other agents. the agents will accept  partially or in full  or reject them based on their own social strategies and social positions. the diffusion of social strategies proceeds in a series of steps and the final result depends on the interplay between the forces driving diffusion and the counteracting forces. 
1 introduction 
coordination is the key to develop realistic multiagent systems  kraus  1  jiang & jiang  1 . the concept of artificial social system is presented by  shoham and tennenholtz  1 ; their basic idea was to add a mechanism  called a social law  into the system to realize coordination among agents. each agent initially has its own strategy  and the different strategies may produce conflict. therefore  to realize a harmonious agent system  we will need to endow a set of social laws that can be accepted by most agents. a set of social laws represents restrictions on final agent strategies. previous work on artificial social systems  shoham & tennenholtz  1   shoham and tennenholtz 1   fitoussi and tennenholtz  1   boella and van der torre  1  made no systematic analyses on the evolution of social laws from individual social strategies  and the social laws were created off-line. therefore  the social laws described in previous work are always fixed  and so fail to yield dynamic agent systems. 
　this paper presents that social laws aren't fixed over the system's lifetime. a social law represents an island of stability and can be overwhelmed and replaced. in the framework presented by this paper  agents start with their individual social strategies; the social strategies can diffuse and be accepted in part or in full by others. the emergence of a new dominant social strategy represents the emergence of a new social law. 
　we initiated a study on how to evolve individual social strategies to global social law through hierarchical agent diffusion  jiang and ishida  1  jiang and ishida  1 . in our original model  each agent has its own social strategies at the first stage of the system; for simplicity we restrict the discussion to just one action/belief. further  we assume that the agents possess  social rank  and the ranks are known by all agents. as the system runs  the strategies of superior agents will tend to diffuse  be adopted by or accepted by  the junior agents. given the right conditions and enough time  a global social law may be finally established. a simple example is given below: 
　two businessmen enter the same conference room. one starts to smoke but the other complains. upon learning that the smoker has a higher position in the same company  the complainer changes his strategy of  smoking is not permitted  to  go ahead.  this means that the social law in the conference room has become  smoking is permitted .  scenario 1: diffusion by rank  
　only the diffusion of the social strategies of superior agents to junior agents was considered in  jiang and ishida  1   jiang and ishida  1 . however  such a situation is not truly representative of reality. in real society  there are so many collective intentions and practices  balzer and tuomela  1  pacheco and carmo  1   and the social strategies shared by many junior agents can also influence the superior agents. the following example demonstrates this:  
　you like smoking very much and you occupy the highest position in your company. however  if all other members dislike smoking  you will probably stop smoking  i.e. your social strategy has been trumped by that of the majority. therefore  the social law of your office is now  no smoking . 
 scenario 1: diffusion by numbers  
　the interplay between rank  strength of strategy support  and the numbers of supporters is extremely complex. the emergence of a social law may not prevent some agents from maintaining their original strategies or indeed adopting contra-strategies. for example: 
　none of the employees in an office like smoking; so the social law in the office is  no smoking in the office . the boss starts a long discussion with the employees. the boss has a habit: he likes to smoke while giving orders to the staff. therefore  the boss will smoke even though the social law is  no smoking in the office .   scenario 1: persistence of outliers   
　in such a scenario  the outlier agent has a very high social position; so its corresponding social strategy may have high dominance though the number of overlaid agents is few  just one in this case . 
　all three scenarios are common in real world social strategy diffusion. we think that the dominance of a social strategy is determined by the numbers and ranking of its supporters relative to those of other strategies. a strategy becomes more dominant as the number of adopters increases and/or their ranking increases. the success of a social strategy supported by many junior agents over the social strategy of superior agents can be called collective insurgent diffusion; the reverse is called collective elite diffusion.  
　in this paper  we explore how a social strategy can diffuse among agents. our model is explained using the example of crowd orientation.  
1. an example and related concepts 
1 social strategy in queue orientation 
to explain our model  we use the example of an agent system that reproduces a crowd of strangers standing on a soccer field. at the initial stage  the orientation of each agent  its strategy  is quite random. what we are looking for the emergence of a social law; most agents face the same direction. 
  

a b c  d e 1 1 1 1 1   
agent 
 	social strategy  c  
 
 
 
figure 1: the case of an agent system and its social strategies 
　each of the n agents can stand with one of the 1 orientations  see figure 1  a . the social strategy of an agent is its orientation. let n be the number of agents  we can use an array to denote the social strategies of agents. si {1   1} 1 i n   represents social strategy  i.e. the standing orientation  of agent i. the social strategies of the agents in  b  are shown as  c . obviously  the standing orientations of the agents in figure 1  b  are disorderly.  
　since our example consists of strangers  now we may replace explicit social rank with age. for example  if agent c looks older than e  then e may change its orientation to match that of c. if agents b and d share the same orientation  c may not be able to overcome their numerical advantage. at this time  c may change its orientation to match theirs. let us examine the emergence of social laws. we consider five agents a  b  c  d and e  which have the same social rank. if a and b have the same social strategy  sab  but the social strategies of the other three agents are quite different  then the social law can be written as  all agents are under pressure to follow strategy sab . as time goes by  if c  d and e happen to establish the same social strategy  scde  the social law would change to  all agents are under pressure to follow strategy scde . 
　the situation becomes more complex if the agents do have explicit social rank. for this situation  we will need to balance the influence of rank against the weight of sheer numbers. next we will give some related concepts to explain the collective diffusion.  
1 dominance of  social strategy 
if a social strategy is accepted by many agents  its dominance will be strong. however  different agents will contribute different amounts to the dominance of a social strategy. a superior agent strengthens a strategy's dominance far more than a junior agent. to allow for comparison  we equate the dominance of a social strategy to its rank. the concept of rank is used often in the web search field to denote the importance of web pages  haveliwala  1 . now we use it to represent the relative dominance of social strategies. 
　definition 1 social ranking of agent i can be a function: pi  1      where  is a natural number. pi p j i has superior rank to j. the set of the positions of all agents in the system can be denoted as: p   pi   where 1 i n   and n denotes the number of agents in the system.  
　in this paper  our basic idea is: if agent a has a social strategy s  a is implicitly conferring some importance to s. then  how much importance does an agent a confer to its social strategy s  let na be the number of social strategies of a and pa represent the social rank of a  agent a confers pa / na units of rank to s. as for our instance  the number of social strategies of an agent at one time is only one  therefore  agent a confers pa units of rank to s.                                            
1 overlay group of  a social strategy 
the agents that share a social strategy are called the overlay group of th strategy. for example  in figure 1  b   agents b and d share social strategy 1 and so form one overlay group. let g s  represent the overlay group of social strategy s  we have: 
	sg s   	{u agent u accepts the social strategy s|	}	 1                         
 
　obviously  the rank of a social strategy is determined by for example  the difference between social strategy 1 and its overlay group. let g s  be the overlay group of social 1 is 1  and the difference between social strategy 1 and 1 is strategy s  the rank of s can also be defined as: 1. 
srank s     pu / nu	                                             1                                   
	u gs	1. the collective diffusion model 
　as noted above  in our example agents can hold only one social strategy at any one time  and so can only contribute to 1 diffusion impact force from overlay group to the dominance of only one social strategy. the rank of 
social strategy s can be simplified to: 	agent 
u gs　from equations  1   1   we can see that the rank of a social strategy is determined by the number and social ranks of the members of its overlay group.  dominance  i.e. the dominance of the corresponding social strategy . therefore  we define the impact force from overlay group g to agent a as: 	rank s   pu	 1                                                            the impact force from an overlay group to an agent is determined both by their distance and the group's 
s
the diffusion strength of social strategy s is the monotone 
increasing function of its rank  i.e. the higher rank s  is  the ifg a   higher the diffusion strength is. let the diffusion strength of social strategy s be represented as s s   we have: 
	ss s   	 rank s    	 1     	u g
 1  where 	 is a monotone increasing function.                                                        　to simplify the question  we can directly use the authority of a social strategy s to represent its diffusion strength. moreover  we will use the concept of group rank to represent the social strategy rank  i.e.  srank g s        rank s    .                                         1  
1 distance between agent and overlay group 
it is very simple to compute the distance between two agents  but not the one between an agent and a group. as stated above  each agent in the group strengthens the dominance of the strategy to a different extent. therefore  we introduce the factor of social rank into the definition of the distance between an agent and a group as follows: 
　definition 1 if d a u  denote the distance between agent a and agent u  |g| denote the number of agents in group g  pu denote the social rank of agent u  then the distance between agent a and group g can be defined as: 
1
dag	  p d a uu	 	 	  	 1   
     u g                                       
1 difference of two social strategies 
in this paper  the angular difference of two agent orientations is used to represent the difference in their social strategies. therefore  we have the following definition: 
　definition 1 the difference of two social strategies i and j can be defined as the angular distance between their respective orientations: 
where f is a monotone increasing function  	 and 	are 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　1 parameters to determine the relative importance of the two factors. from equation  1   we can see that the nearer the agent is to the group and the higher the group's rank is  then the great the impact force of the group is on that agent. 
1 counteracting force from agent to overlay group 
based on real-world observations  if agent a is not a member of overlay group g  a will instinctively counter such influence. the counteracting force from agent a to overlay group g is determined by the following factors: 1  the social ranking of agent a  1  the average social rank of overlay group g  1  the distance of the social strategies  i.e. the standing orientations  between agent a and overlay group g. the higher the social rank of agent a is  the bigger the difference in social strategies is  the lower the average social rank of overlay group g is  then the more agent a resists adopting the social strategy of overlay group g. therefore  if we let the social strategy of agent a be s1 and the social strategy of overlay group g is s1  we define the counteracting force from agent a to overlay group g as: 
pa
cfa	1	  	 1                       
| g | u g
where g is a monotone increasing function  	 and 	are 
                                                                   1 two weighting parameters.  
	| j	i |  if | j 1                                                  the collective diffusion criterion of agent social strategy 
dliji |  if | j	1	 	needs to consider both ifg a andcfa g . the more ifg a is and the less cfa g is  then the more likely it is that agent 
 1 collective diffusion criterion of social strategy 
a will adopt or move towards the social strategy of group g. therefore  we use the ratio of ifg a to  cfa g as the diffusion criterion. if the ratio exceeds a predefined value  then the social strategy of agent a will change by some amount. 
　we can predefine two parameters  according to the actual situation being simulated. if the value of ifg a / cfa g is more than   the social strategy of a will completely switch to that of g. if the value of ifg a / cfa g is less than but more than   then the social strategy of a will change to some extent but not equal that of g. while the value of ifg a / cfa g is less than   the social strategy of a remains unchanged.   
　let the social strategies of g and a before diffusion are m and n respectively  1 m n  1 . ifm n   the change of the standing orientation of a will be clock-wise; ifm n   the change of the standing orientation of a will be anticlock-wise. therefore  the diffusion criterion  i.e. the change criterion of the social strategy of a can be defined as: 
 

where sa' is the new social strategy of a after one step in the simulation.  
1 goal function of diffusion 
several social strategies may exist even after the diffusion process reaches equilibrium. simulating actual situations will demand that we set different goals for the diffusion results.  
　for our example of crowd orientation  we may want to identify the conditions under which all agents finally adopt the same orientation. moreover  the social laws are always established according to the more dominant social strategies. obviously  the more agent numbers the dominant social strategies are accepted by  the more rational the established social laws are. such assumption is also practical in realworld situations  e.g.  the law should be established to satisfy the needs of most people in the society. 
  therefore  we define the performance criterion of diffusion as a measure of the winnowing of social strategies. 
let ns be the number of social strategies in the system after diffusion  | g s    | be the agent number in the overlay group of social strategy s  then the performance criterion of the diffusion can be defined as: 
ps  rank s    |g s   | 	 1                      
	ns s s	 
　higher values of ps indicate that fewer social strategies have survived and also show that better diffusion performance can be gotten.  
1 diffusion progress 
in the diffusion progress  the social strategy with the strongest dominance will firstly diffuse to other agents that belong to the other social strategies' overlay groups. after that  the social strategy with second strongest authority will diffuse to other agents that belong to the agents with more junior authority social strategy  ....  until there are no diffusions take place.  
　let a be the agent set of the system  sa be the social strategy of agent a  the diffusion progress can be shown as algorithm 1. 
algorithm 1. 
input s; /*the initial set of social strategies of the system*/ 
sl={1  1  ...  1}; 
do 
{ sl'	sl ; a'	 a 
while sl' is not empty 
{select the social strategy with strongest dominance from sl': s ; 
  do 
    {for a a g s'	                 if 	if	/ cf	 
	g s 	 	a	a	g s 	 
                  {g s  a 	g s  a 	{ }a ; 
                   rank s   a	rank s   a	pa 
	if g s  a 	{} then sl	sl { }sa ; 
compute sa' according to equation  1 ; 
	g s  a'  	g s  a'  	{ }a ; 
	rank s  a'  	rank s  a'  	pa ;} 
     } until the ps doesn't change any more; 
    sl'	sl'	{s }; a'	a g s'	    ;}; 
} until the ps doesn't change any more; output s and ps. 
1. case studies 
we examined several cases to demonstrate and test our model. figure 1 is one such case. from the ranks of social strategies  we can see that the social strategy 1 has the strongest dominance. so we compute the ifg a /cfa g between other agents and the overlay group of social strategy 1. the distribution of ifg a /cfa g is shown as figure 1. as a trial  we set 	and	 to 1 and 1  respectively. 
this yields diffusion from g 1  to other agents according to equation  1  and algorithm 1  the progress of diffusion is shown in figures 1. ps does not change from figure 1  so diffusion process is finished. the total number of diffusion steps is 1. 
　from figure 1  we can see that the standing orientations of all agents are identical after three diffusion steps  except for the agent in the bottom right corner.  
　next  we change the values of and . at first we decrease them step by step for 1 cases  and then increase them step by step for another 1 cases. the diffusion results are given in table 1. from table 1  we can see that more 
 
figure 1: the initial case of agent social strategies. rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1. ps=1. 
 

figure 1: the ifg a / cfa g distribution of other agents to the overlay group of social strategy 1. 

figure 1: the agent social strategies after the first round diffusion from g 1  to other agents. where  rank  1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1. ps=1. 

figure 1: the agent social strategies after the second round diffusion from g 1  to other agents. where  rank  1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1. ps=1. 

figure 1: the agent social strategies after the third round diffusion from g 1  to other agents. where  rank  1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1  rank 1 =1. ps=1. 

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1. discussion and conclusion 
a social strategy accepted by many agents will have high dominance and may diffuse to other agents. the dominance of a social strategy is determined by not only the number of adherents but also their social positions. that is  a superior agent strengthens the dominance of a social strategy drastically  while the addition of many junior agents can also strengthen the dominance of a social strategy.  
　this paper presents a collective strategy diffusion model in agent social law evolution. the model shows us that the social strategy of a superior agent may be changed by the social strategy shared by many agents  which is an example of collective insurgent diffusion. section 1 showed that it was possible for one agent of quite high rank to retain its social strategy even after all other agents have adopted the same social strategy  i.e. the counteracting force of the lone agent overrides the collective diffusion force of all other agents. moreover  if we increase the social rank of the lone agent significantly  it is possible that its social strategy will diffuse to all other agents  which is an example of collective elite diffusion. 
　we note that real world situations are often characterized by multiple strategies. for example  a commanding officer may walk among his troops in formation  and so has a completely different orientation to everyone else. the troops understand the situation and so unify their own orientation and do not blindly track the officer's orientation. in another simple example  the commander has an absolute power and can order all soldiers to follow his direction; the soldiers have to obey the order. 
　though we explained our formal framework using the example of crowd orientation  it offers strong generality. the framework and algorithms described are quite general and can be applied in many other cases simply by making small adjustments. 
　our agent social strategy diffusion model is based on the diffusion of strategy from collective agents to one agent step by step. this involves significant time costs when the number of agents is large. such a diffusion model may be practical in some real-world situations  however  which are not fully representative of reality as a whole. in real-world situations  there are many concurrent diffusion movements between groups. therefore  in our future works  we will explore the concurrent diffusion from collective agents to collective agents. 
acknowledgements 
this work is supported by jsps research grant no.1. 
