
most ai diagnostic reasoning approaches model components and but not their interconnections  and when they do model interconnections  they model the possibility that a connection can break  not that two connections may join  e.g.  through fluid leakage or electrical short circuit . two reasons for this limitation are  1  that modeling these interconnection failures could require an exponential number  in the number of interconnections  failure possibilities  and  1  that modeling interconnection failures requires modeling the system at a more precise level which requires far more complex models. a fundamental contribution of this paper is a more powerful approach to modeling connections which does not require special-case post-processing and is computationally tractable. we illustrate our approach in the context of digital systems.
1 introduction
most of the ai diagnostic reasoning approaches for digital systems  hamscher et al.  1  presume that digital components can be modeled as pure functions of their inputs  all signals can be represented by  1 s and  1 s  wires between components cannot fail  and do not model replacement of components or wires. none of these assumptions are valid for the challenges diagnosticians encounter in real systems. although digital systems can be modeled at the analog level with programs such as spice or  at the digital/analog level  with vhdl-based simulators  they are not designed for diagnostic use  require accurate hard-to-obtain component models and do not present results in a way a human diagnostician can understand. the objective of this research is to design a digital expert  dex  that can reason over digital systems as electrical engineer would: at a qualitative  causal level more accurate than the simple  1 / 1  level  but without incurring the costs of full-scale numerical algorithms.
모a key principle for model design is that models be veridical  directly linking causality with effect. examples of nonveridical models are the  stuck-at-1  and  stuck-at-1  models commonly used for reasoning over digital circuits.  stuckat-1  could represent one of four possible faults: that the driving gate's output is stuck at 1  that some driven gate's input is stuck at 1  that the wires are shorted to power  or that the output is undriven and the signal floated to 1. in our veridical models all of these inferences are drawn from the particular model which is causing the malfunction - a wire  gate  or short.  we use  wire  to refer to any electrical connector. 
모in this paper we propose a new methodology for modeling signals in wires by explicitly representing causality for component behaviors. instead of modeling a connection with a  1  or  1   each connection is modeled by multiple variables: one indicating the signal level of the node and the rest representing the causal drivers of the node  see figure 1 . consequently  opens and shorts can be directly modeled  component models can be causally accurate and devices which explicitly determine whether to drive outputs can be modeled as well  such as tri-state and open-collector components .

	typically to drive the signal at n 	causal effect of gate c on node n:
towards 1 or 1.	typically a high passive resistive load which does not influence the signal at n.
figure 1: instead of only modeling a node n with one signal 1 or 1  we model each potential connection which could possibly influence the signal level on the node with a qualitative variable. each circuit node is modeled with n + 1 variables  one for the final signal level  and one for each of the n component terminals connected to it.
모this paper demonstrates the approach on a variety of circuits from the standard iscas-1 test suite described in  brglez and fujiwara  1 . all iscas-1 benchmark  up to 1 components  circuits can be modeled and diagnosed efficiently    1 minute on a modern pc . previous work on shorts and bridge faults presumed considering all possible shorts to be computationally unreasonable and introduced special-case inference procedures to handle them  see section 1 . the analysis will show that extremely few possible shorts can explain typical symptoms  and those that do are a small fraction of the possible diagnoses. thus  model-based diagnosis systems containing shorts can be performed within the framework of existing algorithms using the models presented in this paper.
모dex utilizes a implementation of the gde/sherlock  de kleer and williams  1  probabilistic framework based on the htms  de kleer  1 . all component and models are compiled  individually  not in combination  to their primeimplicates with unmeasurable variables eliminated. the primary inference mechanism is local constraint propagation where completeness  for conflicts and value propagation  is ensured though the introduction of additional assumptions for unassigned measurable variables  propagating these and subsequently using propositional resolution to eliminate the ambiguities.
모in this paper  we make the following simplifications  which we intend to relax these in future work:
  components behave non-intermittently. later in the paper we will generalize definition of non-intermittency from that given in  raiman et al.  1 : a component behaves non-intermittently if its outputs are a function of its inputs. as the models in this paper allow causality to change  inputs and outputs are no longer well-defined.
  no causal loops in the combinatorial logic.
  no logical memory elements.
  no modelof transient behavior.all signals are presumed to have reached quiescence after the input vector has been applied. thus dex cannot reason about hazards  race conditions  or situations in which a node's value switches too slowly because its not driven with enough current or there are too many loads connected to it.
  no fault propagation. a fault in one component cannot cause a fault in another.
1 related work
early work on model-based diagnosis  davis  1  addresses bridge faults. however  this early research treats shorts as a special case  hypothesizing bridge faults only when all single faults were eliminated.  preist and welham  1  inserts additional insulating components at places where shorts may occur and uses stable-model semantics to identify candidate diagnoses. this approach is too inefficient  as the number of possible insulator components to consider grows quadratically with system size.  boettcher et al.  1  model structural shorts in analog systems. again this approach uses the possibility of multiple-faults to invoke an additional algorithm to match observed behavior to known hidden interaction models.
모the broadest system modeling techniques come from the qr and mbd work in the automotive diagnosis and the fmea construction domains  struss et al.  1   n.a.snooke and c.j.price  1   mauss et al.  1 . one methodology for using multiple variables to represent wires can be found in  struss et al.  1 .
모a fundamental contribution of this paper is a more powerful approach to modeling connections which does not require special-case post-processing and is computationally tractable. only one additional component needs to be added to model each node  so the number of additional node components grows linearly in the worst-case. this approach provides a way to model situations where causality changes such as short circuits  open circuits  and tri-state  open-collector  and expand gates. structural faults are modeled as any other fault and are integrated within the gde/sherlock approach to measurement selection and component replacement policies. most of the potential computational complexity introduced by the more detailed causal models is avoided by generating candidate diagnoses in best-first order. candidates are ordered by their posterior probabilities  not the number of faults they contain.
1 preliminaries
this basic framework is described in  de kleer and williams  1; de kleer et al.  1 .
definition 1 a system is a triple  sd comps  obs  where:
1. sd  the system description  is a set of first-order sentences.
1. comps  the system components  is a finite set of constants.
1. obs  a set of observations  is a set of first-order sentences.
definition 1 given two sets of components cp and cn define d cp cn  to be the conjunction:
.
where ab x  represents that the component x is abnormal
 faulted .
모a diagnosis is a sentence describing one possible state of the system  where this state is an assignment of the status normal or abnormal to each system component.
definition 1 let 붟  comps. a diagnosis for  sd comps obs  is d 붟 comps   붟  such that the following is satisfiable:
sd 뫋 obs 뫋 {d 붟 comps   붟 }
모in this framework  a typical model for an inverter is  assuming the appropriate domain axioms for variables :
.
the model for the second inverter of figure 1 is:
.

figure 1: four sequential inverters.
1 introducing causality
models of the type described in the previous section implicitly assume that components have distinguished input terminals that only sense their inputs and then cause an output variable value. both of these assumptions can be faulty. for example  in figure 1  b's input can be shorted to ground internal to the gate. in this case  despite the 1 signal from a  b would be measured to be 1. if a = 1  then the classic models would dictate that a is faulted  when in fact it is actually b that is faulted.
모to model causality more accurately  we must model wires with more accuracy. each terminal of a component is modeled with two variables  one which models how the component is attempting to influence its output  roughly analogous to current   and the other which characterizes the result  roughly analogous to voltage . for a correctly functioning node  these voltage-like variables are equal. there are 1  mutually inconsistent  qualitative values for the influence of a component on a node  we refer to these as  drivers  .
  d    indicates a direct short to ground.
  d 1  pull towards ground  i.e.  1 .
  d r  presents a high  i.e.  draws little current  passive resistive load.
  d 1  pull towards power  i.e.  1 .
  d +  indicates a direct short to power.
intuitively  these 1 qualitative values describe the range of possible current sinking/sourcing behaviors of a component terminal. a direct short to ground can draw a large current inflow. a direct power to ground can drive a large current outflow.
모there are three possible qualitative values for the result variable:
  s 1  the result is close enough to ground to be sensed as a digital 1.
  s x  the result is neither a 1 or 1.
  s 1  the result is close enough to power to be sensed as a digital 1.
different logic families will have different thresholds for determining s 1  or s 1 . for example  the voltage  v  levels for conventional ttl components are: s 1  corresponds to v 뫞 1  s 1  to v 뫟 1 and s x  to 1   s x    1. s x  only arises when measurements are made and is never used within a component model. if some needed component input has been measured to be s x   its output is not determined by the model  i.e.  can be s 1   s x  or s 1  .
모with few exceptions  correctly functioning digital devices present a high  little current drawing  resistive load on all their inputs and drive all their outputs. unless otherwise noted these axioms will be included in every componentmodel. every output drives a signal  except in special cases described later :
 ab x  뫸  d out x t   = d 1  뫈 d out x t   = d 1  .
every input presents a resistive load:
 ab x  뫸 d in x t   = d r .
모under this modeling regime  an inverter is modeled as follows:
.
under the usual modeling regime  there is no need to model the behavior of nodes as they just pass along their signals. however  we need explicit models to describe how the sensed digital value of the node is determined from its drivers. let r v  be resulting signal at node v and s v  be the collection of drivers of node v. for example  in figure 1  s b  = {d out a t  d in b t  }. nodes are modeled as follows  sometimes referred to as 1-dominant models :
  if d    뫍 s v   then r v  = s 1 .
  if d +  뫍 s v   then r v  = s 1 .
  if d 1  뫍 s v   then r v  = s 1 .
  else  if all drivers are known  and the preceding 1 rules do not apply  then r v  = s 1 .
for example  node b of figure 1 is modeled as follows:
 ab b  뫸
 d out a t   = d    뫸 s b  = s 1 
뫇d in b t   = d    뫸 s b  = s 1 
뫇d out a t   = d +  뫸 s b  = s 1 
뫇d in b t   = d +  뫸 s b  = s 1 
뫇d out a t   = d 1  뫸 s b  = s 1 
뫇d in b t   = d 1  뫸 s b  = s 1 
뫇 d out a t   = d 1  뫇 d in b t   = d 1  뫸 s b  = 1 
뫇 d out a t   = d 1  뫇 d in b t   = d r  뫸 s b  = 1 
뫇 d out a t   = d r  뫇 d in b t   = d r  뫸 s b  = 1 
뫇 d out a t   = d r  뫇 d in b t   = d 1  뫸 s b  = 1 -
모we have now laid the groundwork for a new definition of non-intermittency. the definition from  raiman et al.  1  is:
definition 1  raiman et al.  1  a component behaves non-intermittently if its outputs are a function of its inputs.

figure 1: the simplest circuit  c1  from the iscas-1 test suite. inputs are labeled  in   outputs  on   gates  gn   and corresponding internal nodes  nn. 
this definition succinctly captures the intuition of nonintermittency:  1  a component has exactly one output value for a particular set of input values   1  even though other circuit values may change  the same inputs yield the same outputs   1  the inputs are clearly identified - so no  hidden  input can be effecting the output value. we use these same intuitions for our new definition  except that the notion of  input  and  output  is changed.
definition 1 the causal inputs to a component are the signal levels at all the circuit nodes the component is connected to. the causal outputs of a component are the driving signals on all of the wires to the nodes it connects to. a component is causally non-intermittent if all its driving outputs are a function of its sensed inputs.
모under this definition  a  1-input and gate  has 1 sensed inputs and 1 driven outputs. this general definition captures all possible faults of the 1-input and gate including such extreme possibilities of installing the wrong gate or installing it backwards. correctly functioning components will drive all their outputs  but most will not reference the signal level on its teleological output  what the logic designer would call the  output.  

figure 1: the inputs and symptom added. output o1 should be 1 but is measured to be 1. all components fail with equal prior probability. after observing the symptom  the more likely faulted gates are g1  g1 and g1  which are highlighted .
consider the slightly more complex circuit of figure 1 - the simplest examples in the iscas-1 test suite. suppose a test vector  i1  i1  i1  i1  i1  is applied and o1 is measured to be 1  correct is 1 . figure 1 highlights the only component singlefaults under the simple gde models. when our node models are included  g1 is the only node singlefault with its input stuck to ground. therefore  in figure 1 gate g1 is also possibly faulted.
모in order to model that nodes can fail  we model all nodes as components with the same model described earlier. for example  figure 1 highlights the more probable node and component faults.

figure 1: using the expanded node model  gate g1 could have its input shorted to ground causing the symptom at o1  should be 1 but 1 is measured . the likely faulted gates are now g1  g1  g1 and g1.

figure 1: modeling nodes as possibly faulted components. the highlighted components are more likely to be faulted given the observations. component faults  in darker shading  are more likely than connection faults  in lighter shading . lower probability components and nodes are not shaded. prior fault probabilities of components are all equal  as are the component probabilities  in this case with higher priors .
1 bridges and shorts
having laid out the causal modeling paradigm the extension needed to model bridges and shorts is relatively straightforward. we add one fault mode to the model of a node. a node can either be in mode g  working correctly  ab   s for shorted or u  unknown or no model . for every node:
.
table 1: combined drivers of nodes n1 and n1.
iogatedriveoutputg1d 1 inputg1d r inputg1d r outputg1d 1 inputg1d r inputg1d r the g model is unchanged from that described earlier in the paper. there are two additional nodes  power and ground whose output drivers are d    and d +  to model shorts to power and ground.
모each of the nodes in a shorted set will have the same signal level  which is determined as if the combined node were functioning in an overall g mode. for example  consider the candidate diagnosis of circuit c1 in which n1 and n1 are shorted together and all other components and nodes function correctly. table 1 lists the drivers of the combined node  and by the node-model this will produce a signal at n1 of 1 which propagates through g1 to produce 1 which is the observed symptom. therefore  a n1-to-n1 short is a candidate diagnosis which explains all the symptoms.
table 1: combined drivers of nodes i1 and n1.
iogatedrivedriveni1d 1 inputg1d r inputg1d r outputg1d 1 inputg1d r inputg1d r 모notice that the only possible short with node o1 which explains the symptom is a short to power  assuming all other components and nodes are working correctly . as the output driver of g1 is d 1  it cannot pull up any 1 node.
모most combinations of shorts make no causal sense and these are eliminated as a consequence of our models  no additional machinery is required . a trivial instance of a nonsensical short is between nodes i1 and n1. the drivers of this combined node are listed in table 1. so  the signal at the combined node i1-n1 will become 1  which producesan inconsistency with the correct model of the nand gate g1 and will not be considered a possible short  again assuming all other components and nodes are working correctly . if this short had happened in a physical circuit  the circuit would probably oscillate. as we are not modeling oscillation  the inconsistency will guarantee that no candidate diagnosis will include the i1-n1 short.
모finally  consider the case where the nodes i1 and o1 are shorted  with same observations of figure 1 . the drivers of the combined node are listed in table 1. gates g1 and g1 appear to be in a loop. thus the signal levels on nodes i1  n1 and o1 cannot be determined by only considering the driver values. fortunately  the nand model for g1 resolves the amtable 1: combined drivers of nodes i1 and o1.
iogatedrivedriveni1d 1 inputg1d r outputg1 table 1: upper diagonal of this matrix gives the only possible two node shorts for our c1 example which explain the symptoms. for brevity nodes are indicated by their integers. shorts to ground and power are not included.

biguity:
 ab g1  뫸
 d out g1 t   = d 1  뫈 d out g1 t   = d 1  .
thus the output driver of g1 cannot be d +  and thus it can be immediately inferred that shorting i1 and o1 does not explain why o1 is observed to be 1 instead of 1. the only shorts which explain the symptom are shown in table 1. it is interesting to note that the majority of possible shorts are ruled out by just measuring one output signal. only  of the possible shorts explain the evidence.
모as we saw in circuit c1  surprisingly few shorts explain the observations that have been collected on the circuit. table 1 shows that  as comparedto all possible candidates which explain the symptoms  the percentage of shorted node candidates is relatively small.
table 1: number of possible shorts of 1 nodes for a typical symptom for the worst-case where all 1 shorts are equally likely. the percentages characterize how many of all possible 1 or smaller candidates are node shorts. all circuits come from the iscas-1 test suite. c1 is a 1-channel interrupt controller c1 is a 1-bit single-error-correcting-circuit and c1 is an 1-bit arithmetic logic unit.
circuitcomponentsnodes1-shorts%c111c111c111c111 tri-state and open-collector devices
with a modeling paradigm which distinguishes signal levels from drivers  it is simple to model a tri-state device  not possible when modeling gates as purely digital . when g = 1 in figure 1  the gate acts as any other buffer. however  if g = 1  the tristate output only presents high resistive load at its output no matter the value of input a  an exception to the usual output driver :
.
g
a
y
figure 1: tri-state buffer.
모open-collector devices do not need an additional model as these are 1-dominant as well. without an external pull-up resistor these lines rise slowly to their signal level but dex does not yet model this transient behavior.
1 ic components
the methodology in this paper can be used to analyze a system to the gate level. however  in many cases the system is composed of integrated circuits that each contain many gates  and troubleshooting need only identify the faulty ic. figure 1 is the familiar ic which contains 1-input nand gates. intuitively  it looks like we can utilize a single ab-literal for the ic and all the nand-models depend on its negation. this has two problems. first  the extension to fault models is cumbersome. if we model an individual nand gate with 1 faults  e.g.  sa1  sa1  u   then the ic would have 1 fault modes. second  the ability to propose measurements is impeded because 1 components are removed when considering the ic faulty. therefore  dex models all ics with sets of primeimplicates containing only ic terminal variables and the one ic ab-literal  and simply replaces these clauses with individual gate ab-literals and associated clauses whenever the ic ab-literal occurs in any candidate leading diagnosis.
모ic components present a second challenge for our models. consider the 1 ic of figure 1. it contains two distinct sets of gates which compute and-or-invert of their inputs. we could model both of these functions with one ab-literal as we did for the 1. a wire bond from the semiconductor die could short with some other internal metal trace  or two metal traces could short. for example  the output of one of the and gates of the first and-or-invert logic could short with the output of an and gate of the second and-or-invert logic.

figure 1: 1.
in this case  both pieces of logic would behave intermittently. the output of the first and-or-invert logic is no longer a true function of its inputs  but is also a function of the inputs of the second and-or-invert logic. in these cases  we model the ic at the gate level with node models which allow shorts. with node models  internal shorts appear as non-intermittent faults.

figure 1: 1.
1 algorithm
we make the simplifying assumption that we are looking at one set of shorts at a time. all of the nodes which are shorted in any candidate diagnosis are considered shorted together. a simplistic implementation of node models would require the construction of 1n+1n clauses for n-terminal nodes. shorted nodes can have a large number of terminals. therefore  dex constructs these clauses only when they are needed to analyze a leading diagnosis using the consumer architecture of the htms.
모intuitively  our candidate generator operates as follows: candidate diagnoses are generated in best-first posterior probability order as in the gde/sherlock framework. the nodes are simply components. this candidate generator is modified to never generate candidate diagnoses of only one shorted node. whenever a new candidate diagnosis is identified with two or more shorted nodes  any needed additional clauses are added dynamically to model the combined set of shorted nodes. clauses are added to ensure the signal levels at the shorted nodes are all equal  i.e.  modeled as one node . one added circumscription clause disjoins the correct node model with the clause with all the u modes of all the possibly remaining shortable nodes in the current diagnosis. this added clause circumscribes the conditions under which the node model is applied to the node set. this is important to ensure that if the shorted set is ruled out as a diagnosis  that supersets may be considered as shorts without utilizing any additional clauses or inferential machinery. the best-first candidate generator will focus towards the most likely shorts  and not generate candidate diagnoses which contain unlikely shorts. thus  the probabilistic framework does the main work in avoiding considering exponentially many combinations of shorted nodes.
모our algorithm for generating the best k diagnoses uses a variant of a*  de kleer and williams  1; williams and ragno  1 . for brevity we will only describe the basic algorithm without optimizations and not include the bayes' rule updates of candidate posterior probability. the candidate diagnosis assigns a behavior mode to every component  including the nodes  of the system. any gde-style models which characterize only good behavior are modeled as  g  and  u.  assuming all components fail independently the prior probability of a particular candidate cl is:
 
where p m  denotes the prior probability of behavior mode m. the objective of the algorithm is to discover the k most probablediagnoses  the  g  modes have higher priority probabilities than the  u  modes . to cast this search in the familiar a* framework we define cost as the negative sum of the logarithms of the fault mode probabilities. every search node n is represented by a sequence of assignment of modes to components  including the empty model 뷋 if that mode has not been assigned. thus 
 
 
where m c  are the possible modesfor componentc. h clearly is an underestimate and thus admissible for a*. algorithm 1 describes the basic algorithm. consistent is a subprocedure which returns a conflict when the candidate is inconsistent  otherwise it succeeds.

algorithm 1: basic a* search for diagnoses

begin
open 뫹{ci = 뷋}  diagnoses 뫹
   conflicts 뫹 
do
n 뫹 argminx뫍open f x 
open 뫹 open  {n}
then
if n assigns modes to all components then if ng 뫹 consistent n  then
conflicts 뫹
conflicts 뫋{ng}
diagnoses 뫹
diagnoses 뫋{n}
pick any s = 뷋 뫍 n
o 뫹 n  {s = 뷋} 
foreach f 뫍 m s  do
open 뫹 open 뫋{o 뫋{s = f}}
end

모all the axioms of section 1 are included in the initial system description  sd . nodes are just modeled as components  and the conventional model-based algorithm is adequate. the extension to model shorts requires a modification the function consistent which adds the necessary shorted axioms relevant to any candidate diagnosis which is ultimately reached in the search. with this extension  the same algorithm identifies the highest probability candidates correctly.
모nodes typically do not short independently- they short to each other. a more realistic prior probability of a candidate is:
	p cl  = p s1 ... sk  뫄		p m  
m뫍 components of cl
where p s1 ... sk  is the prior probability that nodes s1 through sk are shorted together. to generalize the algorithm to shorts  only f and h need to be modified. let p  n  be the maximum probability of any shorts in search node n. this is computed from the assigned short modes as well as the unassigned node modes  which could be shorted .then 
.
as the additional term in h is derived from a maximum  it underestimates and the heuristic is admissible. this algorithm can be greatly optimized and h and g better estimated. these details are beyond the scope of this paper.
모dex uses the same probe-selection strategy as  de kleer and williams  1 . utilizing our a* algorithm with k = 1 best diagnoses  it can troubleshoot all structural failures  all opens and 1-node-shorts  in all the circuits of the iscas-1 test suite in less than a minute on a modern pc. the troubleshooting task has become considerably more complex because there are now a far higher number of possible faults to distinguish among. therefore the average number of measurements needed to isolate a fault is increased for every circuit.
1 conclusion
in this paper  we focused on identifying connection faults. this approach has been combined with the existing ability to replace components  repair nodes  select new measurements  and generate new test vectors. dex can now perform these same tasks on circuits which contain connection faults.
모a few of the possible directions for research on modeling connections for diagnosis are as follows. first  our models presume that two nodes either short completely or do not influence each other directly  by far the prevalent fault model for digital circuits . sometimes the correct model lies in between - nodes could be shorted with a small resistance. second  introducing analog measurements to track down shorts. third  shorts can change the dynamic behavior of a system  e.g.  introduce oscillation . fourth  connection faults can be intermittent.
모we believe the framework presented in this paper and the notion of causal non-intermittency will generalize to other qualitative models. the concepts of sensed and driven variables and of using the best-probability first candidate generator can combined to reason about structural faults in many domains  e.g.  leaks or breaks in pipes and containers  additional linkages in mechanical systems  without incurring the computational complexity previous schemes require.
1 acknowledgments
elisabeth de kleer  minh do  haitham hindi  wheeler ruml  peter struss  rong zhou provided many useful comments.
