
if modal logics for coalitions need to be applied  one must know how to translate coalition power into agents' actions. to these days  the connection between coalition power and the actions of the agents has not been studied in the literature. this paper fills the gap by presenting a semantic translation from pauly's coalition logic to a  fragment of an  action logic. the interpretation of the empty coalition in pauly's system and the representation of the notion of ability are discussed.
¡¡keywords: modal logic  coalitions  coordination and cooperation  multiagent systems  concurrency
1	introduction
in the last decade  there has been increasing interest in logics suited for reasoning about groups of agents  1; 1; 1; 1; 1  and some systems emerged as paradigmatic in this area. among these  pauly's coalition logic  1; 1  seems to identify the core properties of coalitions and it is practically taken as a parametric system to verifying the adequacy of other logics in this area.
¡¡generally  these modal logics for coalitions address the relationship between models and relative expressivity of the systems without tackling the relationship between coalition power and each agent's actions. they essentially capture implicit coalition power as in  coalition c can enforce proposition     which here we contrast with logics of explicit coalition power   coalition c  doing such and such  can enforce proposition   . the relationship between these two types of systems must be studied if we want to be able to use the general view provided by coalition logics in frameworks where actions and their consequences can be evaluated  cf.  . the study of such a relationship is the goal of this work.
¡¡the first issue is the choice of the target language that can relate coalition power to agents' actions. one way to represent coalition power is to introduce a unary modality with two indices  say  c a   where c is a coalition and a is an action; informally  given a proposition p  formula  c a p stands for  coalition c can enforce p by performing action a . if a coalition c is capable of enforcing p  we need a coalition action to express this fact in the language. if a model has n possible worlds  there are 1n distinct subsets of worlds and  roughly  the same number of coalition actions are needed to effectively capture c's power in this model.
¡¡a way out is to refer to actions without actually naming them. this seems to match the general idea of coalition logic since  informally  what it captures is not  action such and such performed by c enforces p  but  c has a way to enforce p   i.e.   there exists a coalition action for c to enforce p . this latter approach guarantees a concise language by introducing quantifiers. we can implement it in two ways: on the one hand using variables for coalition actions and  on the other hand  using variables for agent actions. at a closer analysis  the first option gives us  c  x  which does not differ in expressive power from pauly's coalition modality  c .
¡¡the other option is what we study in this paper and requires a logic with new features. such a logic has already been studied with other motivations in . here we isolate a fragment of that system and show how to translate coalition logic in it. overview: sections 1 and 1 present the coalition logic  cl  and the action logic  al . section 1 discusses the assumptions of the translation and defines the coalition action logic cal. sections 1 and 1 give the model correspondence. section 1 discusses the approach and the notion of ability.
1	the coalition logic cl
the coalition logic cl  is a modal system for reasoning about groups of agents. the logic is developed to formally prove what a coalition of agents can bring about in a multiagent system. the semantics associates an  extensive  game of perfect information to each state in the system. the central notion is effectiveness: a coalition of agents is effective for a set of states in a game if the coalition can guarantee that the system will necessarily move to one state in the set .
¡¡the language of clis a type of propositional multi-modal logic. it is built out of a countable set of proposition identifiers propid  with ¡Í ¡Ê propid  and contains 1|n| modal operators for some fixed finite set n. the modality markers are the subsets of n:  c  is a modality in clif and only if c   n. formulas in clare defined inductively:
a  all elements of propid are formulas  atomic formulas 
b    ¡Å ¦× and    are formulas if   and ¦× are formulas
c   c   is a formula if c   n and   is a formula
¡¡the intuition behind the formalism is that the modal operator  c  expresses the power of the group c of agents. the formula  c   states that the agents in c  acting as a coalition  can enforce   no matter what the remaining agents do.
¡¡the semantics is based on game frames  that here we dub standard coalition frames. note that standard coalition frames are not kripke frames because modalities in cldo not satisfy the normality condition  i.e  they do not distribute over implication.
definition 1  coalition frame 
a coalition frame for a set n is a pair where
w is a non-empty set  the set of states  and r is a subset of w ¡Á p n  ¡Á p w . furthermore  for all s ¡Ê w  c   n  andsatisfies the following:
i  
ii   s c w  ¡Ê r
iii  if 
iv  if  then 
v  if c1 ¡És cc1 =¡È c  1  xs c1¡É xx1   ¡Ê¡Ê r r and  s c1 x1  ¡Ê r  then  
 paulyp w   . the two definitions are equivalent.introduces r as a function r : w ¡ú  p n  ¡ú
p
proposition 1  coalition monotonicity and	for all s ¡Ê w

definition 1  coalition structure 
a coalition structure for a set n is a triple mf	=  where:
- is a coalition frame fn;
- ¡¤ is a valuation function propid.
writeandsincer s  ncis fixed in advance  we drop it in  for the set of sets v such that  s c vf s c vn. also  we 	 r¡Ê. r
r c  for the set of pairs  s v   such that
mlently fix a coalition structuresatisfied	mclf -formulaand a state.  isstrue.	we write ¡Êequiva-
f s |=   to mean that the  at state s of structure mf
1 atomic 
1 
1 
1 
f
mfor a set of formulaswe writef  that is  it is true at each state ofmf |=¦² into mean that formulacl is a structure. we writem . amf |coalition modelf. =such that allis  to meanvalid in
formulas   ¡Ê ¦² are valid in mf that   is valid in each model based on frameclffollows the ap-
¡¡the interpretation of modal operators in proach called minimal models   cf. clause 1 . from condition i  on relation r  a structure for cl is serial with respect to all the modalities.
axioms for coalition logic:
 1   	   ¡ú	 ;	 1 	  ¡Ä	¡ú	  ¡Ä
 1 clletis determined by the class of coalition structuresc1 ¡É c  1c=1   1 ¡Ä  c1  1  ¡ú  c1 ¡È c1   1 ¡Ä   1  .
1	the action logic al
we consider the multi-agent modal logic given in . this language has the characteristics of merging modalities and quantifiers to model true concurrency  and was shown to be complete and decidable with respect to kripke semantics. for our task  we will apply the fragment of this system selected below and that we dub al.
¡¡fix a set propid of proposition identifiers  with ¡Í ¡Ê propid  and a disjoint set of variables  var. we will use pi for proposition identifiers and xi for variables.
definition 1  modality marker for al  a modality marker for al is a k-column of quantified variables
qi ¡Ê {   }
to maintain a direct connection1 with   no variable can occur more than once in a modality marker.
¡¡the set of formulas for al is the smallest set satisfying the following clauses:
a. all elements of propid are formulas  atomic formulas 
b.   ¡Å ¦× and    are formulas if   and ¦× are formulas
c.  m   is a formula if m is a modality marker and   is a formula
 from this  all al formulas turn out to be closed. 
¡¡there is an obvious bijection between the set of modality markers and the set of modal operators in the language. we will use the two notions indifferently.
definition 1  k-action  given a set act of actions  a kaction is any column of k elements with ¦Ái ¡Ê act.1
definition 1  multi-agent kripke frame for al 
 a	multi-agent	kripke	frame	for al	is	a	triple where:
- w is a non-empty set  the set of states  
- act is a non-empty set  the set of actions   and
- r is an  accessibility  relation mapping k-actions a  over act  to binary relations on w: r a    w ¡Á w.
definition 1  multi-agent kripke structure for al  a multi-agent kripke structure for al is a 1-tuple
¡¤ where:
-  is a multi-agent kripke frame k;
- ¡¤ is a valuation function propid.
¡¡in the remaining of the paper  we use the terms kripke frames  structures  respectively  to refer to multi-agent kripke frames  structures .
definition 1  instances  fix a k-action a and a modality marker m. a i   m i   resp.  is the i-th entry of a  m . for each j  we say that a j  instantiates the j-th variable of m.
fix a kripke structure mk and a state s. relation |= is defined recursively for mk as follows:
1. atomic 
1.
1. |	|	|
1. let x1 ... xr  r ¡Ý 1  be all the existentially quantified variables in m and let xj occur at m ij  
mk s |=  m   if  ¦Á1 ... ¦Ár ¡Ê act  ¦Ám ¦Án not necessarily distinct  such that for all k-action a with
 xj in m  for all j ¡Ü r  if s s	¡Ê	then	k s |	 .
¡¡we write mk |=   to mean that formula   is valid in mk  that is  it is true at each state of mk. a kripke model for a set  of formulas¡Ê ¦² are valid in¦² in almis a structurek. we writemk |k=such that all formulas  to mean that   is valid in each model based on frame k.
¡¡let k be the number of agents in the multi-agent system one wants to model. fix an arbitrary order of the agents and let a1 be the first agent  a1 the second agent  ... ak the k-th agent. technically  a formula  m p with existential entries i1 i1 ...  is true in a state s when there exist values for the existentially quantified variables such that no matter the values selected for the universally quantified variables  the corresponding k-action brings  through r  only to states verifying p. from the point of view of a multi-agent system  a formula  m p is true if the agents ai1 ai1 ...  those whose positions correspond to existential entries of m  can perform a set of actions that force p to be verified no matter the actions executed by the remaining agents.  the general perspective behind al is presented in . 
1	the coalition action logic cal
in this section  we analyze the relationship between cl and al. a byproduct of this comparison is the clarification of a common misunderstanding on the notion of coalition in cl.
¡¡at the core of coalition logic there is the notion of effectiveness which is taken from the theory of social choice . this notion captures the case of a group of agents that can force the system to evolve to states where some given property holds  no matter what the other agents do. the actions of these agents are thus effective in achieving the goal. adopting such an interpretation  one assumes that the realization of the property is a common goal for the agent in the coalition and that they are capable of and intend to coordinate their actions. as a slogan  one can say that coalition logic studies the existence of a joint strategy for a common goal  the strategy itself is unspecified and possibly unknown . this approach is part and parcel of the view proposed by coalition logic  i.e.  that of a system as a whole where the references to agents are more a way of speaking at the informal level than an effective  no pun intended  necessity.
¡¡recall the informal reading of  c  in cl: formula  c p stands for  the group c of agents has the power to enforce a state where p holds.  assume that there are k  k ¡Ý 1  agents in the multi-agent system and that an ordering of the agents has been fixed. let agents a1 a1 ... ar form group
c. from the semantics of al  it is natural to associate  c p with the following formula of al  let p be a formula in both cl and al :
 1 
thus  we can identify this set c with the set of indices {1 ... r}. the modality in  1  is not normal  due to the existential quantifiers occurring in it  although all its instances are. this fact is at the core of the connection between cl and al. however  things do not work quite right. exploiting the previous correspondence  we connect modality      for the empty coalition  to
 1 
note that     can bring about non-trivial consequences.1 since in al only agents have this power and since     corresponds to a coalition with no member  the correspondence given by  1  falls short to model the cl modality.1 there are two possible ways out: to enrich the formalization of cl by constraining further modality     or to accept  and motivate  the above peculiarity of cl by capturing it in the translation. the two choices have different consequences. here we follow the second option.  for the first  proceed according the method given below using operators  1  and  1 . 
¡¡the correspondence we formalize is between a cl system with k agents and an al system with k +1 agents as follows
		;		 1 
in this way  the new agent  associated to x1 in row 1  is always in the coalition group. if the coalition c is empty  then the agent at row 1 is the only member of the corresponding coalition in cal. what is the role of the new agent  formally  it makes the translation possible since it allows to discriminate applications of the     operator. informally  it justifies the fact that an  empty coalition  can bring non-trivial consequences. the 1-th agent plays the role of the environment of the system  or nature for a more suggestive reading  whose power corresponds to that of the empty coalition in cl. in short  we can say that the axiomatization of cl makes sure that a coalition can force some state provided the environment plays on its side.
¡¡since the agents in a coalition  say a1 a1 ... ar  act according to a joint strategy  the choices at the existential entries  here entries at columns 1 to r  have to be made allowing full coordination. this means that the existentially quantified variables x1 x1 ... xr are instantiated at the same time 

be universal  i.e.  if for all1this observation does not apply when modalitys   s   x  ¡Ê r implies x  =  is forced tow.
¡¡¡¡an orthogonal issue is the normality of modality  1  which  generally speaking  might not be a desired property for      although it is forced by the cl system of section 1.
i.e.  sequentially as they were forming an unbroken prefix list bounded by a unique existential quantifier. furthermore  the joint strategy of the agents does not depend on the actions performed by the remaining agents since the agents are acting simultaneously. that is  the instantiation of variables x1 x1 ... xr does not depend on the values chosen for variables xr+1 ... xk. this argument illustrates that the semantics inherited from cl through the translation given above  corresponds to the semantics of al. needless to say that cl and al are equivalent on the  common  propositional fragment of their languages.
¡¡fix k + 1 variables: x1 x1 ... xk. we call cal the language al  for k + 1 agents  restricted to operators  m  such that m 1  =  x1 and m i  = qixi with qi ¡Ê {   }.
 note that the first entry in a modality for cal has index 1. in this way  we preserve the correspondence of the agents a1 ... ak in cl and in cal.  the other characteristics of cal are easily inherited from section 1.
¡¡assume cl and cal have the same proposition identifiers propid  with ¡Í ¡Ê propid . according to  1  we define a one-to-one function ¦Ó from cl to cal as follows
1¦Ó  if p ¡Ê propid  then ¦Ó p  = p;
1¦Ó  if   = ¦× ¡Å ¦Ö  then ¦Ó    = ¦Ó ¦×  ¡Å ¦Ó ¦Ö ;
1¦Ó  if   =  ¦×  then ¦Ó    =  ¦Ó ¦× ;
1¦Ó  if   =  {i1 ... ir} ¦×  then ¦Ó    =  m ¦Ó ¦×  where m j  is existential iff j ¡Ê {1 i1 ... ir}.1
we sometimes write  c¦Ó  for the ¦Ó-image of operator  c  of cl  i.e.  ¦Ó  c   =  c¦Ó .
1	from cl-frames to cal-frames
the next step is to show how this translation behaves with respect to the truth-values of formulas. we take care of this aspect providing a procedure that  given a frame for cl  determines a frame for cal with the following properties:  a  the frames have the same states and  b  for all cl-formulas      is true at a state s in the cl-frame  for some interpretation for the propositional variables  if and only if ¦Ó    is true at the corresponding state s in the cal-frame  for the same
interpretation. 
¡¡fix a set n = {1 ... k} and the language of coalition logic cl. the language cal has the same propositional identifiers of cl and variables x1 x1 ... xk only.
¡¡fix a cl-frame for. the algorithm we are going to describe consists of two parts: subalgorithm a defines the set act and subalgorithm b the relation rk.
these are the elements needed to isolate a kripke frame k =  for cal.
 subalgorithm a  with each state s ¡Ê w associate a set1 ds  ds ¡É dt =   for all states s t . for any state s and set ds  proceed as follows.
basic case:
 a.1  for all   fix a pair   ¦Áv   s   v     where ¦Áv ¡Ê ds and ¦Áv = ¦Áv if and only if.
     let be the set of constants ¦Áv selected at this step. general case:
 a.m  for all 1 ¡Ü i1   ...   im ¡Ü k and all triple  s {i1 .. im} v   ¡Ê rf  fix a pair    where
dms  1 and and
.
let dms be dms  1 plus the set of constants selected at this step.
¡¡put act. this will be the set of actions in the frame of cal.
¡¡we now define relation rk   {k + 1-actions} ¡Á w ¡Á w via subalgorithm b. let p be the set of pairs  ¦Á  s c v   
 isolated at steps  a.1  ...  a.k . as usual  we write  to mean .
 subalgorithm b  for ¦Á ¡Ê act and i = {i1 ... im}  let m¦Á i be any k + 1-action a such that a j  = ¦Á for j ¡Ê
{1}¡Èi. let m¦Á i  be any k+1-action a such that a 1  = ¦Á  for some j ¡Ê i. we start with rk =  .
basic case:
 b.1  given pair   ¦Á  s   v     ¡Ê p  for all m¦Á  
- put	for all 
 for all
 b.m  given pair   ¦Á  s i v     ¡Ê p  for all m¦Á i m¦Á i 
- put	for all 
- put  t u  ¡Ê rk m¦Á i  for all 
- put  t u  ¡Ê rk m¦Á i   for all t u ¡Ê w
from section 1  for all s in w and c   {1 ... k}  there exists   such that  s c v   ¡Ê rf.
since all elements of act have been introduced at some step  a.1  ...  a.k  for some s ¡Ê w and because of the second condition in  b.m   it follows that for any state s and any k + 1-action a  there exists s such that . in modal logic lingo  this property tell us that any multi-agent kripke frame resulting from this algorithm is serial.
¡¡having completed the definition of rk  we can finally put the pieces together. the frame for cal is given by kf =  which is a kripke frame for the multi-agent
logic. our next task is to verify the properties of frames f and kf. for this task  we will need the following lemma which follows by induction from the previous algorithm  note the special role of action ¦Á1 .
lemma 1 
¡¡clearly  the two frames  and kf =  have same support. since the languages have the same propositional variables  without loss of generality we can use the same valuation function ¡¤ for both systems.
¡¡fix a formula   of cl. if   does not contain modal operators  then   = ¦Ó    and the two relations rf rk are inconsequential for the truth-value of  .
to show that f if and only if
¦Ó    for each sentence   of cl  we proceed by induction.wellassume
informed formula inc cl. we show that for all operators  c   where the relations |= refer to cl and to cal  respectively.
without loss of generality  let  c  =  {1 ... r} . let us
write with zi new variables ranging over act.
if . by induc-
tive hypothesis  the latter holds. to prove our claim  it suffices to show:   z1 ...znow  putr  zr+1v... z= {ktif
v ¡Ê rf s  {1 ... r z}1 ...ziff	r  zr+1 ...zk . rk s  z    v
definition 1 given an operator  m   we write us ¦Á r   swherethrough¦Á ¡Êkact+ 1-andactionsr¡Ý1a  for the set offor which a states reachablej  = ¦Á  1 ¡Ü j ¡Üfromr 
.
¡¡note that  from the definition of act and subalgorithm b  us ¦Á r  is non-empty for all ¦Á ¡Ê act. by lemma 1  it suffices that: v ¡Ê rf sv  {=1 ... r . from def 1  condition i  }     ¦Á.us ¦Á r    v . first  consider case
. on the other hand  we already observed that for all r ¡Ü k.
consider now.
¡¡from left to right. by recursion on the size of c we prove a stronger claim  that is  there exists ¦Á such that us ¦Á r  = v .
case c =  . let¦Á v¡Ê act¡Ê rsuch that for allf s    . by construction  step¦Âi ¡Ê act  v     there exists
. fix such an ¦Á  then v   us ¦Á r . we need to show v   us ¦Á r . if t ¡Ê us ¦Á r   then  s t  has been included in the definition of for some ¦Â1 ... ¦Âk.
from steps  a.1  and  b.1   the minimality of rk and the use of a different action at row 1 at each step  a.m   we have
it holds fort ¡Êassume the statement holds forv . thus  us ¦Á r  = v . |c|   r ¡Ü k. we showc = {1 ... r} and fix|c| =vr¡Ê. without loss of generality  letrf s  {1 ... r} . by construction 
stept ¡Ê  ua.rs  ¦Á rs t   there exists action  . since at each step  must have been included while considering pair¦Á such thata.m   a different actionv   us ¦Á r . let
is used 
 i.e. ¦Á u ss  ¦Á r{1 ... r  = v}. v    . thus  t ¡Ê us ¦Á r  implies t ¡Ê v   from right to left. without loss of generality  we consider sets {1 ... rv   we show} with 1v ¡Ü¡Êrr¡Üf ks. let  {1 ... r¦Á be such that} . here
us ¦Á r    the recursion proceeds backward on the size of c from c = {1 ... k} to c =  . since we apply a backword recursion  at step r  1 ¡Ü r   k  it suffices to consider sets. v such that
case c = {1 ... k}. consider set v with us ¦Á k    v and. from the construction and the
lemma 1  ¦Á must have been introduced at step  a.k . let
v  be the set for which ¦Á has been introduced. by construc so that. thus 
  of	 see definition 1   s 	¡Ê	  i.e. 	¡Ê	s	c = {1 ... r.	+
assume now that the statement holds for .
implies ¦Á has been introduced at step 	 a.r  for some set. this conditionv .
follows by construction  thus
ofnally rfv see definition 1  as before.¡Ê rf s  {1 ... r}  is obtained by condition iv  
case c =   is analogous.
theorem 1 for any frame f  valuation function ¡¤  state s  and cl-formula  
 if and only if 
for any frame f and cl-formula  
f |=   if and only if kf |= ¦Ó   
1	from cal-frames to cl-frames
let k be a frame for cal satisfying  1¦Ó - 1¦Ó   i.e.  the ¦Óimages of axioms  1 - 1 .by defining rf to be minimal such that if1 a frame fk for cl is obtained
  then  s c v   ¡Ê rf where c = {i | 1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü k and a i  = ¦Á1}. it is easy to verify that
theorem 1 for any frame k -satisfying  formula  1¦Ó - 1¦Ó   valuation function ¡¤  state s  and cl
 if and only if 
for any frame k and cl-formula  
k |= ¦Ó    if and only if fk |=  
1	discussion and conclusions
we presented a translation between two logics of agency that have been developed independently: a logic of coalition power  cl   where actions are onlygroups of agents with individual actionsimplicit  and  a fragment al .
of  a logic for
al models in detail the concurrent and interactive activity ofclcoarsens the description by focusing on the agents while groups and by disregarding individual actions. our work provided a way to switch from one representation to the other

iom  1note that  1¦Ó  gives seriality on all the modalities. the remaining axioms1¦Ó  and  1¦Ó  are always satisfied in cal-frames. axare specific to the interaction of coalitions.
and can also be used to refine proposals like . technically  we first isolated a fragment of al  called cal  which is isomorphic to the language of cl  sect. 1 . second  we showed that the kripke semantics of cal and the minimal semantics of cl agree  sect. 1 . finally  we showed that for each model for cl there is a corresponding cal-model and vice versa  sect. 1 and 1 . we observe that cal is a fragment of a language determined by the class of multi-agent kripke frames  while cl is determined by its class of minimal frames. although cal itself is not determined by the class of k frames satisfying  1¦Ó - 1¦Ó   note that the last axiom fails due to the existential in row 1   it provides the needed connection between these two determined systems.
an example
consider a cl system with one agent and two states  say t and n. at state t  the actual state  the agent is thirsty. at state n the agent is not. assume that the empty coalition      corresponding to the environment in cal  has the power of making impossible to reach n  e.g.  blocking tap water. thus in cl   t   {t}  ¡Ê r and  by ii  in def. 1   t   {t n}  ¡Ê r. the other coalition c =   that is  the agent plus the environment  has the power to reach n  e.g.  making tap water available  by the environment  and drinking  by the agent . let us assume this coalition has no other power. then   t {1} {n}  ¡Ê r and  by ii  again   t {1} {t n}  ¡Ê r. by subalgorithm a  we get four actions at this state  say actt = {¦Á ¦Â ¦Ã ¦Ä}  for the triples above  in the given order . from subalgorithm 
for any x ¡Ê actt;  1 	= r  ¦Â   t 
                         x for any x¡Ê actt. two observations are in order. first  the elements of actt obtained from the algorithm correspond to action-plans: ¦Ã at row 1 has different meaning than ¦Ã at row 1. that is  these are not action-types  their meaning depends on the agent performing them. a renaming is needed to move from action-plans to action-types. second  different actions  like ¦Â¦Ã and ¦Ä¦Ä   may bring to the same states. however  they capture different situations: with the first the environment prevents from reaching n  with the latter they both act so that the output is not determined. only in the second case the result is due to a cooperation.
ability
one important motivation for logics of groups is to study the notion of ability. ability may vary in strength: ¦Á-ability  effectiveness  tell us that some agents can force   no matter what the other agents do; ¦Â-ability that some agents can force   provided they know what the other agents are going to do; and contingent ability that some agents can force   provided the other agents do nothing  see  and references therein . cl focuses on effectiveness only and the interpretation of cal we have adopted corresponds to the same notion: ¦Áability  also known as   -capability  is captured by the semantic clause 1.  section 1   which is of form:  there exist a list of actions ¦Á  such that for all lists of actions  . contingent ability is obtained by adding a  null action   ¦Å  in cal and substituting ¦Å for the universal quantified variables in the modal operators. finally  ¦Â-ability    -capability  cannot be captured in the semantics of cal  cf.  .
the translation
translations from minimal to normal logics exist already . we have not applied existing methods since they do not preserve important aspects of the structures. indeed  the correspondence between the worlds in the models of cland those in the models of cal as well as the connections between these worlds are crucial to make explicit the relationship between agents  individual actions  and coalition power. a drawback is seen in the dimension of the target model since the size of act is comparable to that of rf. of course  one can make less distinctions. for instance at step  a.m  one may require that a new action is added only if  for all i   {i1 ... im}. however  this new clause does not do justice of the notion of coalition since  c p and   with  are now associated to the same action. if the two coalitions enforce p using the same individual actions  the extra agents of the larger coalition c are factually irrelevant. instead  the algorithm of section 1 links the two coalitions to two different actions. this is important to relate cal  and in turn cl  to logics that can model strategies and plans since  generally speaking  bigger coalitions may have more alternative strategies and plans available.
acknowledgments
work partially funded by the pat  trento  it  with projects  mostro  and  logical instruments for ontology analysis . the author thanks the reviewers for their helpful comments.
