
the ability to automatically detect activities in video is of increasing importance in applications such as bank security  airport tarmac security  baggage area security and building site surveillance. we present a stochastic activity model composed of atomic actions which are directly observable through image understanding primitives. we focus on answering two types of questions:  i  what are the minimal sub-videos in which a given action is identified with probability above a certain threshold and  ii  for a given video  can we decide which activity from a given set most likely occurred  we provide the mps algorithm for the first problem  as well as two different algorithms  naivempa and mpa  to solve the second. our experimental results on a dataset consisting of staged bank robbery videos  described in  vu et al.  1   show that our algorithms are both fast and provide high quality results when compared to human reviewers.
1 introduction
there has been a tremendous amount of work in low-level computer vision video processing algorithms for detection of various types of elementary events or actions such as a person entering or leaving a room or unloading a package. however  there is much less work on how such low level detection algorithms can be utilized in high-level recognition of activities in video. high level activities can include transactions at a bank automatic teller machine  atm   robberies at an atm  unloading an aircraft  moving bags from a secure baggage zone at an airport to the truck that transports it to the plane  etc.
﹛in this paper  we focus on such high level activities  and provide a simple atm example to motivate our work . high level activities consist of a set of simple actions that are detectable using video image processing algorithms  together with some temporal requirements.

 
﹛﹛authors listed in alphabetical order. this work was partly supported by afosr grants fa1 and fa1  aro grant daad1 and by the joint institute for knowledge discovery.﹛in this paper  we provide fast algorithms to answer two kinds of queries. the first type of query tries to find minimal  i.e. the shortest possible  clips of video that contain a given event with a probability exceeding a specified threshold - we call these threshold activity queries. the second type of query takes a portion of a video  the part seen thus far  and a set of activities  and tries to find the activity in the set that most likely has occurred in the video  we call these activity recognition queries .
﹛the key contributions of this paper are the following. we first introduce  in section 1  a simple stochastic automata representation of complex activities based on atomic actions which are recognizable by an image understanding primitive such as those in  elgammal et al.  1; bevilacqua  1; 1; cavallaro et al.  1; 1; makarov  1 . examples of actions we have implemented in our system using computer vision algorithms include person and object identification  identification of people entering and exiting rooms and motion tracking. our first major contribution  in section 1  is the mps algorithm to answer threshold queries. our second major contribution  section 1  are the naivempa and mpa algorithms to solve activity recognition queries. we evaluate these algorithms theoretically as well as experimentally  in section 1  on a third party dataset consisting of staged bank robbery videos  vu et al.  1  and provide evidence that the algorithms are both efficient and yield high-quality results.
1 stochastic activities
in this section  we provide a simple framework to represent high level activities on top of low level image processing primitives. this framework is a simple version of hmms we don't claim it is new. the novel part of this paper starts from the next section onwards.
﹛we assume the existence of a finite set a of  action  symbols; we assume that each such atomic action can be detected by an image understanding method1. for the purposes of this paper  we will assume that action symbols are propositional  though there is no loss of generality in this assumption.
definition 1  stochastic activity  a stochastic activity is a labeled graph  v e 老  where:
1. v is a finite set of action symbols;
1. e is a subset of  v ℅ v  ;
1. 老 is a function that associates  with each v of out-degree
1 or more  a probability distribution on
e}  i.e. for all.
1. . this states that there exists at least one end symbol in the activity definition.
1. . this states that there exists at least one start symbol in the activity definition.
for v ﹋ v   we denote by pb v  the maximum product of probabilities on any paths between v and an end node.
﹛figure 1 a  shows a small example of a stochastic activity associated with transactions at an automatic teller machine  atm . in this figure  we have assumed that edges without a label have probability 1. for example  consider the node withdraw-cash. there are two edges starting at this node - one to withdraw-card labeled with a probability of 1 and one to insert-checks with probability 1. this means that there is a 1% probability of transitioning to the withdraw-card state after executing withdraw-cash and a 1% probability of transitioning to insert-checks after executing withdraw-cash. for the purposes of this paper  this example is somewhat simplified  e.g.  we avoided talking about receipts generated by atms  etc. . each of the actions in this stochastic activity can be easily detected by either an image processing algorithm  e.g. detect-person would check if a person is present in the image  or a sensor  e.g. to detect if insert-card holds . it is also important to note that in this framework  it is possible to execute withdraw-cash  then execute insert-checks  and then again execute withdraw-cash - informally speaking  the probability of this sequence occurring would be 1 ℅ 1 = 1. similarly  figure 1 b  describes an attempted robbery at an atm.
﹛a labeling  of a video v is a mapping that takes a video framef as input  and returnsa set of action symbols as output.
example 1 the following is a labeling of a 1-frame video w.r.t. to the stochastic activity presented in fig-
   1       1    cash}   1 {insert   checks}   1 {withdraw   card}   1 { detect   person} .
﹛we say that an action a follows an action a in segment  s e    v w.r.t. labeling  and activity definition  v e 老  iff:
.
example 1 consider the labeling in example 1. in the subvideo  1   action withdraw   cash follows action insert   card. however  action insert   checks does not follow action insert   card.
intuitively  a labeling of video v specifies which actions are detected in a given video. we now define the probability with which a given video segment  s e  satisfies an activity specification.
 definition 1  probabilistic satisfaction  let v =  s e  be a video segment and let  v e 老  be a stochastic activity. let  be a labeling of the video segment v. we say that v satisfies  v e 老  with probability p iff there exists a sequence of framesf1 ≒ ... ≒ fn ﹋  s e  and a sequence of activity symbols u1 ... un such that:
.
 ii  for all i ﹋  1 n   1   ui+1 follows ui in  fi fi+1  w.r.t.  and  v e 老 .
 iii  {w ﹋ v | w u1  ﹋ e} =   and {w ﹋ v  | un w  ﹋ e} =  .
 iv  旭ni=1老  ui ui+1   ≡ p.
one problem with the above definition is that an activity consisting of very few action symbols will in most cases yield a higher probability than an activity with a hundred times as many actions. in cases when we want to decide which activity from a given set most likely occurs in a video  we need to normalize the probability w.r.t. to the activity definition. we say that a video  s e  satisfies an activity  v e 老  w.r.t. labeling  with relative probability p  iff  s e  satisfies  v e 老  with probability  where pmin pmax are the lowest and respectively highest probabilities labeling a path from a start node1 to an end node1 in  v e 老 .
example 1 consider the labeling in example 1 and the stochastic activity in figure 1. then the video satisfies the action with probability 1. for this example  pmin = 1  since we can have an arbitrarily large sequence of activities repeating the action symbols withdraw   cash  insert   checks  and pmax = 1. then the video whose labeling is given in example 1 satisfies the activity in figure 1 with a relative probability of approximately 1.
proposition 1 let v =  s e  be a video segment  and let  be its labeling. let  v e 老  be a stochastic activity such that v satisfies  v e 老  with probability p. then for all videos
 v with labeling satisfies  v e 老  with probability p.
definition 1 a stochastic activity query  saq  is a four-tuple  where v is a video   is a labeling of the video   v e 老  is a stochastic activity  and p is a threshold probability.
﹛a sequence  s e  is an answer to the above saq iff  s e  satisfies  v e 老  with probability p and there is no strict subset  which satisfies  v e 老  with probability p.
intuitively  we are looking for the smallest subvideos that satisfy an activity definition with probability above a given threshold p. we will now define the most probable subvideo and most probable activity problems more formally.
the most probable subvideo  mps  problem. the most probable subvideo problem can now be defined as follows: given a stochastic activity query   find the set of all answers to the query.

figure 1: atm stochastic activity examplesthe most probable activity  mpa  problem. in many practical cases - airport security  atm monitoring  etc.  the system users are interested in monitoring a list of specific activities. the goal is to identify the activity  or activities  that most likely occur in a given portion of the surveillance video. the most likely activity problem can be defined as follows: given a video v  its labeling   a set of activity definitions a = { v1 e1 老1  ...  vn en 老n }  find the set such that the following hold:  i  let pm = max {p ﹋  1 | ai =  vi ei 老i  ﹋ a s.t. v satisfies ai with relative probability p} . then satisfy v with relative probability 
s.t. v satisfies  vj ej 老j  with relative probability pm.
1 threshold queries
the most probable subvideo  mps  algorithm tries to find all answers to a stochastic activity query and is shown in figure 1.
algorithm mps
input: query   where v =  s e .
output: the set of subvideos representing the answer to the input query and the probabilities with which the activity is satisfied.
notation: c is a set of triples  f p a   where f is a frame in v  p ﹋  1  and a ﹋ v is an activity symbol.
1.;
1.;
1. ;
1. ;
1. for fi = s to e do
1. f p a ﹋ c
1.;
1.
1.
;
;
 endif endfor
endfor
1. for  do
1. c ↘ c ﹍ { fi 1 a };
1. for every  f p a  ﹋ c s.t. a ﹋ ve do
1. r ↘ r ﹍ {  f fi  p };
1. c ↘ c   { f p a };
1. endfor
1. for   	 	 	do
1. for do
if
	else if	then
	↘	   1 	  ;
endfor
1.endfor
1.return r;
figure 1: an algorithm for the mps problem
﹛the mps algorithm maintains a set c of triples  f p a  that correspond to partially detected activities. f represents the frame when a start symbol in  v e 老  is detected; this is later used to determine the subvideos that should go in the answer. p represents the product of probabilities on the path from the start symbol up to the action symbola - the last symbol detected up to the current frame. the algorithm works by changing the state represented by c - intuitively  consisting of all paths through the activity definition for which we may reach an end node with probability above the threshold. triples are removed from c when it is evident that the current path will result in a probability lower than pt  lines 1 . when all frames of the video have been analyzed  the minimality condition in definition 1 is enforced on lines 1 by removing redundant subvideos.
﹛consider the labeling in example 1 and the activity definition in figure 1 a  and assume that pt = 1. at frame 1  the mps algorithm will add the triple  1 detect person  to c  line 1 . at frame 1  this triple will be replaced by  1 present   card . immediately after frame 1  we have c = { 1.1 withdraw   cash }. the process continues until frame 1  after which the condition on line 1 becomes true and  1.1  detect   person  causes the subvideo  1  to be added to the answer r on line 1.
theorem 1  mps correctness  algorithm mps terminates and for an input query  it returns the set of answers r to the query - i.e.:
    s e  ﹋ r   s e  is an answer to  as per definition 1.
 is an answer to  and
theorem 1  mps complexity  algorithm mps for input query  runs in time o |v|1 ﹞ |v | .
﹛note that mps makes only one pass through the video  which allows it to process a video as it comes in frame by frame. mps is therefore well suited for scenarios  such as surveillance  in which a video is analyzed while playing.
1 activity recognition queries
in this section  we present two methods to answer activity recognition queries where:
  v is a video with labeling .
  a = { v1 e1 老1  ...  vn en 老n } is a finite set of activities.
﹛one way to find the set of activities  vi ei 老i  satisfied by v with the maximum relative probability among all activities in a is to use the mps algorithm presented earlier as follows:
1. start with pt = 1.
1. if pt has not changed since the previous iteration  return the last set of activities obtained at step 1.
1. run mps and record all activities satisfied with relative probability at least pt.
1. if there is more than one activity in the previous set  thenset pt to the average between its current and previous value and go to step 1. otherwise if only one activity is obtained at step 1  return it.
1. if there is no activity in the previously computed set  setpt to half its previous value and go to step 1.
﹛for reasons of space  we omit a detailed algorithmic description of naivempa. the algorithm's main issue is the binary search  which can run for many iterations  each taking o n ﹞ |v|1 ﹞ |v |  steps. our experiments show that the algorithm is particularly slow when there is more than one activity to be returned.
example 1 consider the set of activities depicted in figure 1 and the following labeling:  1 {detect   person}   1 {present   card}   1 {insert   card}   1 {withdraw   cash}   1 {insert   checks}   1 {detect assailant}   1 {withdraw  card}   1 {withdraw   cash}   1 { detect   person}   1  detect  person  . naivempauntil pt = 1.
at this point  subvideo  1  satisfies the activity depicted in figure 1 a  with relative probability 1   pt  whereas the subvideo  1  satisfies the activity in figure 1 b  with relative probability of 1   pt  hence the former will be returned.
﹛the activity recognition problem problem can be more efficiently solved by maintaining state in a similar fashion to mps for each of the activities in the set a. the algorithm is shown in figure 1.
﹛mpa maintains an array c...c n  of sets  in which c i  holds the current state for activity  vi ei 老i  in a similar way to the c set used by mps. m i  holds the maximum relative probability with which a i  has been satisfied thus far. pruning occurs when a triple  f p a  in c i  denotes a path that cannot be completed with relative probability greater than m i   line 1 . as mps  mpa makes only one pass through the video  thus permitting incremental computation.
theorem 1  mpa correctness  algorithm mpa terminates and returns the correct answer - i.e. the set of activities {ai} that is satisfied by v with the highest relative probability among all activities in a.
theorem 1  mpa complexity  algorithm mpa runs it time o |v|1 ﹞ maxi﹋ 1 n  |vi|  ﹞ n .
1 experiments and implementation
our prototypeimplementationof the mps  naivempaand mpa consists of approximately 1 lines of java code. in addition  we implemented an image processing library of approximately 1 lines of java code. the library operates on video frames  identifying blobs  corresponding to objects in the video   information about such objects  e.g.  whether
algorithm mpa
input: video v with labeling   set of activities a.
that is satisfied by v with the highest probability p and is either not satisfies by v or is satisfied with probability
is a vector of sets  each c i  has the same structure as c for the mps algorithm. by
  i
notation   where pimax pimin are the maximum and respectively
minimum probabilities for a path in  vi ei 老i .
1. for i = 1 to n do 1.;
1.;
1. endfor
1. for every frame fj in v do
1. for every i = 1 to n do
1. for every  f p a  ﹋ c i  do
1. ;
1. if
1.
1.
1.;
1.	if then
      	     	 	 	 	 ﹋t    	 	  ; endif endfor endfor
 do c i  ↘ c i  ﹍ { fj 1 a }; for every  f p a  ﹋ c i  s.t.
do
m i  ↘ max m i  fi p  ;
endfor
endfor
1.endfor
1.return { ai m i  |m i  = max m ... m n  };
figure 1: an algorithm for the activity recognition problem
an portion of an image is a person  and implementing motion tracking primitives - this in turn leads to the ability to detect atomic actions  e.g.  a person entering a room . the library implements algorithms described in  elgammal et al.  1; bevilacqua  1; 1; cavallaro et al.  1; 1; makarov  1 . labeling data obtained from video processing was stored in a mysql dbms. all experiments were run on a pentium centrino at 1 mhz  with 1gb of ram  running windows xp professional.
﹛our experiments were performed over a dataset of 1 video sequences of approximately 1 seconds  depicting both regular bank operations and  staged  attempted robberies; the dataset is a superset of that described in  vu et al.  1 . we developed five activity definitions with the following notation:  a1  depicts regular customer-employee interaction;  a1  describes a non-employee that enters the vault room  the  safe  ;  a1  describes a bank robbery attempt;  a1  describes a successful bank robbery - in which the assailant s  enter the bank  then enter the safe by holding an employee hostage and then escape;  a1  describes an employee accessing the safe on behalf of a customer.

	 a  mps running time	 b  mps frame precision and recall
figure 1: mps experimental results﹛in the first set of experiments we measured the running time of mps for activity definitions  a1 - a1 . we implemented two version of the algorithm: ca refers to the original algorithm in figure 1; we found that in many scenarios  such as activities at an atm   we can improve efficiency by assuming activities cannot be interleaved - which lead to the version denoted by cna. the running times for labeling size between 1 and 1 actions are shown in figure 1 a 1. the activity definitions  a1 - a1  are satisfied when the labeling size reaches 1  leading to a visible increase in running time; as expected  cna is more efficient than the original ca version. we have also observed that running times are dependent on the complexity of an activity definition.

figure 1: mpa running time
﹛in the second set of experiments  we measure the precision and recall of mps w.r.t. a set of 1 human annotators. the average among the annotations from the four subjects was considered the ground truth when measuring both precision and recall. the results are shown in figure 1 b . we notice that precision is always very high and generally constant  while recall has a rather surprising variation pattern - namely  recall is monotonic with the threshold. the explanation for the apparently anomalous behavior comes from the fact that for low thresholds  the number of candidate subvideos is relatively high  hence the minimality condition causes fewer frames to appear in the answer. the monotonic behavior pattern stops when the threshold becomes high enough  .1 in this case .
﹛in the third set of experiments  we analyzed the performance and answer quality for naivempa and mpa. the following sets of activities were used: s1 = {a1}  s1 = {a1 a1}  s1 = {a1 a1 a1} and s1 = {a1 a1 a1 a1}. the running times are shown in figure 1. naivempa is especially inefficient until the labeling satisfies one of the activities - this is due to the large number of iterations taken until the threshold is close enough to 1. running times for the two algorithms are comparable for labeling sizes greater than 1  although naivempa is always less efficient than mpa. the graph shows running time is generally proportionalto the number of actions in the labeling.
1 related work and conclusions
model-based anomaly recognition techniques provide an a priori definition of an anomalous activity and then detect new anomalousactivities  hongeng and nevatia  1 .  zhonget al.  1; stauffer and grimson  1  define models of regular activities and bags of event n-grams to detect abnormalities. context-free grammars have also been studied  ivanov and bobick  1; vu et al.  1; nevatia et al.  1; narayanan  1 . oliver et al.  oliver et al.  1  described an approach based on coupled hmms for learning and recognizing human interactions. dynamic bayesian networks - which can be viewed as a generalization of hmms -  can be used for tracking and recognizing multi-agent activities  hamid et al.  1 . data-based methods detect activities based on extracted features; cuntoor and chellappa  cuntoor and chellappa  1  proposed a characterization of events based on anti-eigenvalues  which are sensitive to changes. parameswaran and chellappa  parameswaran and chellappa  1 computed view invariantrepresentationsfor human actions in both 1d and 1d.
﹛ontologieshave been recentlyused in differentcontextsfor video surveillance. chen et al  chen et al.  1  use ontologies for analyzing social interaction in nursing homes; hakeem et al use ontologies for classification of meeting videos  hakeem and shah  1 . georis et al  georis et al.  1  use ontologies to recognize activities in a bank monitoring setting. as a result of the video event challenge workshops held in 1  ontologies have been defined for six domains of video surveillance  among which visual bank monitoring and airport-tarmac security; the workshop also led to the development of two languages. the video event representation language  verl   hobbs et al.  1   provides an ontological representation of complex events in terms of simpler sub-events. the video event markup language veml  is used to annotate verl events in videos.
﹛our work differs from the above approaches in the following respects:
1. our stochastic activity modelis not based on features extracted from data or on state-space representations  but on atomic actions that are recognizable by image understanding primitives.
1. to our knowledge  mpa is one of the very few algorithms that addresses the issue of detecting the most likely activity from a given set to have occurred in a certain video. in contrast  model-based representations usually train a specific model to recognize specific situations.
1. to our knowledge  we are the first to find the minimalvideo segments that contain an event with probability exceeding a threshold - this is important as a security guard wants to zero in immediately on the part of the video that contains the desired activity.
