a dynamic pattern recognition method 
using the preview controlled saccadic movement of the detector 
recognition independent of position  rotation  size  or slight deformation of the object. 
masahiro mori  kunikatsu takase  harukazu nishio 
the institute of industrial science the university of tokyo 
tokyo  japan 

abstruct 
　　　the purpose of this paper is to suggest the use of biological movements of detectors for pattern recognition. the authors demonstrate a unique method for recognizing patterns composed of 
straight and curved lines such as characters or edge patterns  independent of position  rotation  size  or slight deformation. the principle of the method i s   different from conventional scanning techniques  
based on preview controlled curve tracking movement similar to the saccadic motion of the eye. the recognition depends on the time sequence of straight line  curve  angle  intersection  etc. discrimi-
nation between a straight and a curved line  larger or small curvature  and obtuse or acute angle is based on the relative d i f f i c u l t y in tracking the line. for small patterns which l i e completely 
within the f i e l d of the detector  a well-known multi-layered recognition device is superior. for larger patterns  however  which l i e partially outside the f i e l d   the method proposed here is su-
perior. 
　　　the authors think that their method could be useful for the eyes of robots when combined with the kind of multi-layered pattern recognition devices described by fukushima* . 
notation 
introduction 
　　　one of the important problems in pattern recognition is the development of techniques to overcome the d i f f i c u l t i e s of translation and rotation. 
　　　it is a fact  proved experimentally  that we cannot see the shape of an object if there is no relative motion between the eyeball and the object. moreover  it is a well known fact also that the frogs do not respond to stationary objects. 	these facts suggest that movement of the optical detector is a necessary condition for the level of pattern recognition that is found in many animals. 
　　　so the authors would like to propose here a novel and simple method which employs mechanical movement of the optical detector. the movement is like the saccadic motion of the human eye. by this method  it is possible to recognize patterns composed of straight and curved lines such as characters and edge patterns independently of their position  rotation  size  or slight deformation. 
　　　although the development of the equipment is s t i l l incomplete and the tracking speed of the detector is not yet adequate  the authors w i l l outline this method and would appreciate your candid criticism. 

the following notation is used in the paper: 
e 	: edge point 
i : pulse signal generated from the inside preview photo-cell ppi 
kj : constant 
k1 : constant 
1 : pulse signal generated from the outside preview photo-cell pp1 inside preview photo-cell outside preview photo-cell photo-cell for servo-tracking radius of curvature of segment of the pattern distance from an end point of a pattern to the detector tracking time  or t shaped part of a pattern tracking speed of optical detector  or angle 
wait straight line segment of a pattern straight line segment of a pattern arc or curved line segment of a pattern arc or curved line segment of a pattern intersection angle 
	i. 	: measurement of pulses intervals 
tracking time independent of sizg and deformation 
　　　it is assumed that the line tracking speed v of a optical detector is a decreasing function of the relative d i f f i c u l t y in following the line. for instance  the curvature is a measure of the d i f f i culty in line tracking. this can be expressed mathematically as. 
 1  
where 
v ＊ tracking speed of the optical detector 
r   radius of curvature of segment of the pattern 
	k	 	k
l   1 * constans 
the relation between v and r is shown in f i g . l . from this relation the following important characteristics are obtained. 
-1-1  the tracking speed decreases with the radius of curvature. this means that the tracking times are nearly the same whether the arc is small or large as long as it has the same center of curvature and an equal subtended angle. 
1  for large r  v is approximately constant. for straight lines  the tracking times are negligibly snail. therefore  it can be seen that the length of a straight line segment has no effect on the total tracking time for a pattern. 
1  the optical detector stops momentarily at a corner  that i s   lim v ＊ 1. 
　　　from conditions 1  and 1  the following performance characteristics are obtained. 
the tracking time of the detector scarcely differs for patterns of various sizes. 
　　　if we plot  for instance  the relation of s to r for the numerals 1 and a  where s is the distance from an end point of the pattern to the detector   we get fig.1  a  and  b . 	we can see that curve  a  and curve  b  are not the same. then if we transform this s-r relation using equation  1   we get s-v relations such as fig.1 
 a1  and   b t   . 	again if we transform the s-v to 
t-v relations using 
ds 
	dt   	 1  
v 
where t=tracking time we obtain fig.1 a   and  b  . 
　　　now  we can see that curve  an  is almost the same as curve  b : . table i gives examples of the t-v relations for the numerals 1 to 1. 
　　　thus  we have found a pattern recognition method independent of size and slight deformation. 
　　　since the method is based on a detector servotracking system  it has no fixed coordinates about the object. therefore  it is also independent of rotation and translation of the pattern. 
　　　to mechanize this saccadic movement of the detector  a preview method w i l l now be proposed. 
preview algorithm 
　　　table ii shows sequences composed of straight lines  curved lines  intersections  and  t's  for the numerals 1 to 1. consider the optical detector  shown in fig.1  which has two photo-cells ppi and ppq for the preview action and one or more photo-cells ps for the conventional servo-tracking. the inside preview photo-cell ppi and the outside preview photo-cell ppo rotate at a suitable speed. as the detector tracks a pattern  ppi and po generate a cyclic pulse sequence such as shown in fig.1. the pulse generated from p p i is denoted as i  and pulse from ppo  as 1. table i i i shows some typical examples of the 1 pulse sequence. for the patterns of the numerals 1 to 1 which we are taking as examples in this paper  the i-1 sequences shown by the tree algorithm in fig.1 are sufficient to distinguish between the straight line  curve  intersection   t   and end point. this discrimination is performed easily by an electronic circuit or by a computer. 
　　　the output signals from the discrimination circuit are fed to the detector-servo-system to control i t s tracking speed according to whether the pattern is a straight line  curve  intersect i o n   etc. thus  the optical detector tracks at a velocity appropriate to the radius of curvature of the segments of the pattern. this is analogous to driving a car at high speed on a straight road  at medium speed on a curved one  and at slow speed or with a momentary stop at a corner. 
　　　fig.1 is a block diagram for the preview controlled tracking servo-system. 
dynamic and coordinate-free pattern recognition 
　　　pattern recognition  the ultimate goal  is done by descriminating between sequences of straight lines  arcs  intersections  and     t   s  as shown in table i i . this is performed also by an electronic logic circuit or by a computer. 
　　　the method proposed is based on a detectorservo  pattern-tracking system. different from conventional scanning methods  this dynamic system needs no fixed coordinates for recognition  and so it is independent of rotation and translation of 
patterns. moreover the recognition method is based upon the sequential combination of unit patterns. furthermore  the use of conditions 	1  and 1  mentioned above very effectively equalizes the tracking time  and removes the restrictions on pattern size and slight deformation. 
conclusions 
　　　the saccadic movement of the detector has a number of advantages. besides being quite simple  it is independent of the location  rotation  size  
or slight deformation of the pattern. here we described a preview method using two photocells. there are other methods available for the preview action. for example  linear or quadratic prediction methods having learning a b i l i t i e s are possible. the errors of the tracking servo-system can be used as a measure of the relative d i f f i c u l t y of the tracking. though these detailed subjects are interesting and important  the principal point of their paper is to introduce the saccadic motion tracking method of pattern recognition which overcomes the limitations of fixed coordinates. 
　　　the authors believe that the method presented here could be effective for eyes of robots if combined with multi-layered devices having variable thresholds1 . 
