computer-aided design for a reader of hand-printed characters 
by 
y. hoshino and k. kiji 
central research laboratories nippon electric co.   ltd. 
kawasaki  japan 

summary 
       a system has been constructed by which we can design recognition logics by trial & error  exchanging information with a computer. 
       if the extracted features fit the experience of a man as regards his recognition of characters the system is useful  because it displays the intuitive information corresponding to demand  permits us to revise the logics online  and evaluates the logics immediately. 
       the system consists of a neac 1 digital computer and a graphic crt display. the system program called cadocr is acompanied with a recognition program of scheme arbitrarily chosen. 
       in order to test the validity of this system  the sequential logics for recognizing handprinted numerals were designed. 
	1. 	introduction 
       various studies have been carried out on the optimum method of designing the recognition logic in pattern recognition. most works were performed on the methods of deriving the optimum discriminant function  mostly linear  statistically from compilation of the sets of the features of the characters. *  1  1  1  1 t h e character recognition system of this type is founded on the assumption of the statistical independency of character features. thus the method can be utilized in the recognition of a limited font. however  it is not very effective in the recognition of hand-printed characters which greatly vary in style and size. 
       many workers postulated that in the recognition of the hand-printed characters  it is 
advantageous to extract the detectable features which fit the intuition of a person  such as terminals  end points  curvatures  inflections of the strokes  and use their relative positions and 
	ft 	1 ft 
connection relations for recognition. 	' 	' 
in such a system the method of extraction 
of the effective features necessary for the recognition is important. however  the 
derivation of the sequential logic to obtain the sequential relations and the method of constructing the decision tree are more important. 
       if the extracted features are geometrical we shall be able to construct the sequential logic by arranging the features sequentially in 
accordance with our concept on the features of the characters. by means of the logic  satisfactory results will not be obtained from the beginning. it is necessary to repeat trials and errors concerning design and recognition. in hand-printed characters  it is not sufficient to prepare only one sequential logic for one class of characters. many more  an average of ten  at least are required. 
       in order to recognize even only the numerals  more than a hundred sequential logics are required. to lossen the allowable degree of deformation in the characters increases the number of sequential logics. an enormous amount of labor will be required to produce the sequential logics. 
       so far no effective method has been developed for the recognition logic that takes sequence into consideration. 
in order to design the sequential logic 
effectively  we developed the cadocr system 
which makes the display of diverse recognition 
states possible according to our demands  allows communication between the designer and computer  and permits the revision of the sequential logics easily. 
	1. 	cadocr system 
       in the design of this system  the following items were taken into consideration. 
 1  in order to design a sequential logic by trial-and-error  there should be various data to revise the sequential logic. 
       macroscopic reviews such as confusion matrix are the most suitable to know the results 

-1-

of overall recognition. but the reviews are not suitable for detecting the defective sequential logic. if more detailed information to modify the sequential logic is required to be known  the information must be derived easily f r o m the macroscopic review. 
if a modification of the defective logics is necessary  the response to the modification must be returned immediately in a visual from. 
 1  in order to let the concept of configuration reflect on the design of sequential logic  the intuitive information such as the sequential logic 
with the codes suggestive of features and the bit pattern of character figure and its corresponding feature string are needed. 
 1  it is desirable to have the time from our demand to computer reply made short. the turn-a round time should be so short as to be agreeable to the designer. 
 1  the preparation of hard copies w i l l be developed when we have demand to record important information for future reference. 
 1  the system is to be made independent of recognition method. the system should be used by merely replacing the recognition program. 
       the system is shown in fig. 1  the input character is first scanned by a scanner and then 
analyzed into feature array be means of feature extracting program. the bit pattern of input character and feature array are named ipt. the ipt's are collected and stored on magnetic tape as ipt file. 
       the ipt file is one of the original data of this system. for other original data the sequential logic  srl  file consisting of srl's  prepared by use and field in magnetic tape  is used. 
       the graphic crt display and the line printer are connected to the central processing unit  neac 1 digital computer. 1 the program consists of a system program called cadocr and a recognition program connected to it. 
       the block diagram of this system is shown in fig. 1. there are six function keys used in this system  add key to add characters  peal key to replace characters  ins key to insert characters  ptn key for bit pattern display  asgn key to assign light buttons  and exeq key to carry out the program connected to the light button. 
       when the asgn key is pressed  the light button is assigned by a light pen. then the exeq key is pressed  and the program corresponding to the name of the light button is carried out. 
seven light buttons have been provided. 
de1p : 	displays the recognition result. lnpr : 	the information displayed on the 
crt is printed in the line printer. para display the succeeding detail information corresponding to the 
parameter such as index of column or row of the matrix. stor : stores the logical formulas of sequential logic displayed on the 
crt into the core memory of central processing unit. recg : recognizes the ipt by means of the sequential logic displayed on the crt. updt : updates the srl file by means of the sequential logic displayed on the crt. c a l l : 	calls the confusion matrix. numerous operations can be performed by the use of function keys  light buttons  light pen and 
character keyboard. 
	1. 	system functions 
sequential display of recognition information 
       in order to find the part of a sequential logic which needs revision  the evolution from overall recognition state to detail state must be observed on the crt. 
       the desired parameter  input character class  sequential logic class  input character 
number of the matrix or the table on the crt  are assigned by means of the light pen. effective detail information corresponding to the parameter are presented. 
for example  take five classes    1       1     
  1       1   and  1 . we shall explain what kind of recognition state corresponding to the assigned 
parameter will be displayed. 
       review of confusion matrix by assigning the light button para and pressing the exeq key  the confusion matrix shown in fig. 1 is displayed. 
in the column at the left end  the   1       1       1       1   and  1  indicate the input character classes  and in the row at the upper end  the   1       1       1       1   and   1   indicate the sequential logic classes  viz  the class names. c indicates correct  e substitution error  w wander.  this means correct and incorrect recognition   r reject  and t total. 
-1-

       in this example  out of the total 1 input characters belonging to class   1     1 characters 
are displayed as being recognized correctly according to the sequential logics in the class   1     while five and two characters are recognized incorrectly according to the sequential logics in classes  1   and  1   respectively. 
       there is one input character which is recognized as correct by the sequential logics in class 1  but recognized incorrectly by the sequential logics in all the other classes. there is also one input character displayed as rejected by all of the sequential logics. 
       review of srl's in a class when sequential logic class in fig. 1  confusion matrix  is designated  the numbers of input characters judged by the various srl's in the designated class are displayed in a matrix form. 
fig. 1 shows the matrix displayed when the 
class   1   sequential logics in fig. 1  confusion matrix  was designated. it can be seen that sequential logic 1  second sequential logic in class  1  has recognized two of the class   1   input characters correctly  but recognized four of the class   1   input characters incorrectly. 
       in this way  we find which sequential logic should be revised. 
       review of ipt's in a class w hen the input character class in fig. 1 or fig. 1 is designated  
the sequential logics recognizing the input characters of the designated class are displayed in a matrix form. 
       fig. 1 shows the matrix displayed when the input character class   1   in fig. 1  confusion matrix  was designated. 
       for example  the codes indicate that the input character 1  third input character in class  1   marked with letter w is shown as being incorrectly recognized by the sequential logic 1 and correctly recognized by the sequential logic 1. this shows the reason why the value of w in fig. 1  confusion matrix  was one. 
       the matrix indicated the detail information relating to the input character class which cannot be found only by looking at fig. 1  confusion matrix  and fig. 1. 
       review of srl when the sequential logic in fig. 1 or fig. 1 on the crt is selected by the light pen  the logical formula of the sequential logic and the feature array of the input 
characters  which can be recognized correctly or incorrectly by the designated sequential logic  are displayed with codes suggestive of the shapes of input character features. 	in fig. 1 are shown the feature arrays  1  of the input characters 1 which the sequential logic 1 in fig. 1 or fig. 1 recognized correctly  and  1  of the input characters 1  1  1  and 1 1 which the same sequential logic recognized incorrectly. 
       f r o m the table  we can determined how to revise the sequential logics. 
       review of ipt : when the input character number in fig. 1 is designated  the feature array of the designated input character and the logical formulas of sequential logic which recognizes the input character correctly or incorrectly  are displayed. among the sequential logics which reject the character  the sequential logics for 
letters of the same class as that of the input character are also displayed with the codes  and 
the places in the logical formula which caused the rejection are pointed out by blinking lights. 
       fig. 1 gives the table displayed on a crt when the input character 1 in fig. 1 is 
designated. 	since input character 1 is recognized incorrectly by sequential logic 1  
the logical formula for the sequential logic 1 is displayed. since the input character 1 is also rejected by sequential logics 1 - 1   1  and 1  the causes for the rejection are indicated by blinking when the logical formulas of these sequential logics are displayed. 
       this serves as an aid to determine how to revise the sequential logics to have the rejected input character recognized correctly. 
revision of sequential logic 
       sequential logics are revised by means of the function keys of addition  replacement and insertion of characters  when the logical formulas of the sequential logics are displayed in fig. 1. 
verification of sequential logic revision 
       after revising the sequential logic  it is essential to see if the recognition ability has 
improved. for this purpose the stor and recg light buttons are used. 
-1-       when the stor light button is assigned  the revised logical formula of the sequential logic in the crt buffer memory is transferred into the central processing unit. when the recg light button is assigned  the input character recog-
nized by the sequential logic prior to recognized once more by the revised sequential logic  and the result is displayed on the crt in the same manner as fig. 1. 	in this checkup  the input character number with the recognition results differing f r o m those prior to revision  are displayed by blinking. 
updating sequential logic file 
       when it is verified that the recognition capability of the revised sequential logic is superior to that before revision  the sequential logic file can be updated with the revised sequential logic by assigning the updt light button. 
recognition by updated sequential logic file 
       after updating the sequential logic file  if necessary  all of the input characters are 
recognized once more by the updated sequential 
logic file  and we can obtain the percentage of the correct recognition of the input characters by 
assigning the c a l l light button. 
hard copy order 
       when we want a hard copy of the information on the crt  we can have it printed by the line printer by assigning the light button lnpr. 
bit pattern display 
       there are two methods of ordering the display of bit pattern in a f o r m of input character. the first method is to press the ptn key and assign the input character number to be displayed 
on the crt by means of the keyboard. the second method is to designate the input character 
numbers to be displayed on the crt  while the fig. 1 is being displayed. the digitized pattern of the designated input character and the feature 
array are displayed on the crt. 
       this display may give means to revising the defective logic more intuitively than feature array. it may also prevent the adoption of ineffective features resulting from the poor printing quality into the sequential logic. 
	1. 	testing 
       tests were made of the effectiveness of the system used in the design of hand-printed character recognition logic. 
       the character samples used were 1 numerals  each written ferrly with pencil inside a frame 1 mm x 1 mm large  1. 1  x 1. 1  . f r o m these input characters  the geometrical features such as stroke end point  curvatures and inflections  and their connection relations were extracted sequentially from the bottom end of the character  and the feature array was made 
as shown in fig. 1. 
       in fig. 1 each feature is shown with a code. this combination of letters and symbols to represent the features enables us to conceive the shape of the feature easily. the bit pattern of the input character and the feature array obtained f r o m the bit pattern are shown in fig. 1. 
       the sequential logic can be expressed by the transition diagram shown in fig. 1  fig. 1 shows the confusion matrix concerning the 1 input characters in this investigation. 
	1. 	conclusion 
       f r o m experiment on the construction of sequential logic utilizing this system  it was found that the labor needed to select the 
necessary data f r o m a multitude of information was greatly reduced and that the revision of sequential logic owing to the character editing function is carried out efficiently. the system was very effective in determining how to construct a sequential logic  and combine two sequential logics  since we can make use of man's highly developed concept of patterns. 
       in the experiment  magnetic tape was used as an external memory. we were not satisfied with the turn-around time. however  we believe that the problem can be solved by using a large capacity random access memory such as a magnetic disk  instead of magnetic tape. 
acknowledgement 
       we would like to thank dr. s. sekiguchi for his continuous guidance  and messrs. j. mita  k. morita  y.watanabe  and k. s asaki for their helpful discussion and suggestion. 

-1-

