recognition of handwritten numerals using decision graph 
s. katsuragi  h. genchi  k. m o r i and s. watanabe 
central research laboratory 
tokyo shibaura electric co.   ltd. kawasaki  japan 

summary 
       an optical character reader capable of reading handwritten numerical characters has 
been developed and applied to mail automation. 
       the recognition of characters is performed by extracting geometrical features out of horizontally divided zones together with their mutual connective relation. the topological structure of character strokes is analyzed by a sequential machine with an input string of stroke segments combined with information on the connective relation. 
       the extracted features are sequentially matched with standard references. a new decision method called decision graph matching is 
fully utilized. the decision graph consists of a set of decision transition diagrams to be com-
pared with the string of extracted features and a penalty count system to detect the optimum match. 
       high flexibility against unlimited variability of handwritten character shapes is achieved by 
means of a stored logic system using rewritable magnetic core memory. 
1. introduction 
       postal code number reader-sorters have been developed by tokyo shibaura electric company  ltd.   under contract with the ministry of postal services of japan  fig. 1 . the machine sorts letters by recognizing three digit handwrit-
ten postal code numbers in the preprinted entry boxes on the envelope. the total system of the prototype model was described in a previous paper 1 . the present paper reports the recognition logic used in the latest model. 
       the major difficulty of recognizing handwritten characters is almost unlimited variability of character shapes  sizes  skew etc.   which vary mainly with individual writers. 	the postal service is nation-wide and open to the public so 
that control over character shapes or writing instruments is practically impossible. consequent-
ly  the machine has to read a tremendous amount of character variations. 	to cope with thi1 difficulty  hardware implementation has as much i m portance as logical design of the recognition logic. 
1. feature extraction by division and recombination of stroke segments 
1 approach to the feature detection 
       feature detection is a technique whereby a two-dimensional pattern can be reduced into a 
       set of combinational or logical parameters com-
prizing its geometrical shape. many contributions have been made  among which the fidac  ledley et al.  1 is one of the most elaborate systems detecting geometrical features using a computer program. another ledley-1 article is also concerned with the linguistic description of twodimensional pictures. greanias  presented a stroke tracing technique by means of a crt scan-
ner showing a practical and economical application to the optical character reader. 
       the method described hereafter is also a trial to transform a two-dimensional stroke pattern to a string of definite symbols in strictly a 
mechanical way  none the less having a great flexibility to match character variations. 	a similar 
method is found in the classical articles of grimsdale ' 1 using an electronic computer  but the following method is more simplified and ma-
chine oriented. 
1 scanning and preprocessing 
       three postal code number entry boxes  1. 1 mm x 1 mm  	with two additional small ones are printed in red near the upper-right corner of postal cards or envelopes. 	the code numbers are expected to be written within these entry boxes in black or blue. 	three digits are recognized by the machine. figure 1 shows the simplified block diagram of the recognition logic. 	two vidicon cameras  one of them equipped with a red optical filter  are used to scan numerals. 	the video 
signal of both cameras is sampled at intervals of 1. 1 m m   quantized into binary level and fed to the segmentation circuit. then the video image is segmented into individual numerals and tored in a magnetic core memory. 

-1-

       the stored pattern is thinned into a skeleton by removing boundary bits of wide strokes. the thinning method is similar to unger's 1   except that a rectangular 1 x 1 bit binary combination is used to determine whether or not to remove a 
boundary bit. 	then the scale of the pattern is roughly normalized by halving it if its horizontal 
height exceeds 1 bits. the pattern is thus represented on the 1 by 1 bit grid. 
1 stroke segment detection 
       as a primary stage in detecting the geometrical features of character shapes  stroke segments are extracted out of a pattern by scan-
ning the whole pattern field with a 1 x 1 bit submatrix. 
       direction of the stroke segment is determined according to the binary configuration of a 1 x 1 bit partial pattern in the matrix. the possible 1  1   partial patterns are classified into one of seven stroke segment directions  including  blank  blank     vertical  vert    etc.  as is listed symbolically in fig. 1. figure 1 shows examples of bit combination which are classified as  incrementally slanted  inc  . most stroke edge irregularities are deleted by this classification. 
       the 1 x 1 submatrix overlappingly scans the pattern every bit horizontally from left to right and every second bit vertically from top to bottom  see fig. 1 . the overlapped scanning extracts rather redundant information from a pattern  but it moderates the effect of the loss of information which otherwise occurs at the boundaries of the field partition. 
       the classification of the stroke segment directions is partly influenced by this scaning mode. since the pattern is scanned every bit horizontally  no distinction is necessary between left and right vertical lines while high and low h o r i zontal lines are both distinguished. the stroke segment indicated by   x   in fig. 1 is such that it 
does not have sufficient information to decide the direction  or has more than one direction within a pattern. such undecided directions can be i n terpolated by adjacent stroke segments. 
1 horizontal feature detection by analysis of vertical connective relation. 
       the next stage of the feature detection procedure is to combine a string of stroke segments and determine a horizontal feature  which represents a partial figure of a character in a horizon-
tal zone  fig. 1 . figure 1 is an example of computer simulation of the feature detection process. 
the pattern on the left represents a thinned and normalized pattern; the middle represents stroke segments; and the right side shows a string of 
extracted features. the 1-bit height pattern field is scanned by the submatrix every two bits vertically  so that there are 1 horizontal zones from which the features are extracted. the feature is determined by a sequential logic with an input string of stroke segment directions. 
       the main problem of reducing a two-dimensional pattern into a combinational or linguistic string of symbols is not to destroy two-dimension-
al relationship involved in the pattern. since the extraction of features is achieved by horizontally scanning the stroke segments  horizontal relation can be extracted without a loss. but the mutual relationship between two vertically adjacent stroke segments is lost by the horizontal zone division  even if they are out of the same continuous v e r t i cal stroke. 
       in order to represent a connective relation of stroke segments  a  tag  bit is affixed to every segment. the tag bit indicates whether this stroke segment connects to the ones in the upper h o r i zontal zone. for the  blank  segment  this bit simply signifies the existence of a stroke in the upper adjacent 1 x 1 submatrix. the tag bit is indicated in figs. 1 and 1 with an asterisk. thus  an input binary pattern is converted to a rectangular array of stroke segment directions accompanied with tags as is illustrated in fig. 1. 
       the horizontal sequence of these compound stroke segments has information on both the geo-
metrical shapes of strokes within a horizontal zone and their connective relation to the upper strokes. the string is supplied to a sequential 
logic and classified to one of the features listed in fig. 1. 
       since topological properties are found among the relative and sequential relation of strokes  sequential analysis of the connective information  tag  plays a fundamental role. 	for example  a joint of two separate strokes is detected by a string sequentially ordered as  tagged segments  
non-tagged segments  and tagged segments . such a sequence signifies a horizontal stroke with both the right and left ends connected to the two separate strokes in the upper zone. figure 1 shows examples of such sequences. those are classified as   c u p   in fig. 1. similarly  a 
branching of a stroke is detected by a sequence of  tagged segments  blanks with tags  and tagged segments.   these are classified as   p a i   in fig. 1. 

-1-

       the connective tags are also utilized to detect a relative location of a stroke at the upper zone's strokes. such information is especially useful to distinguish some types of  1  and  1   whose difference depends only upon whether the vertical stroke connects to the right or left of the upper horizontal bar. roughly speaking  a sequential structure of tagged and non-tagged stroke segments determines an inter-zone characteristic 
of horizontal features and that of stroke segment directions  vert  inc  etc.   traces an intra-zone characteristic  i. e.   upward or downward slope of stroke segments within a horizontal zone. 
       horizontal features are classified into 1 categories  fig. 1  each of which is modified by three kinds of connection representing information   left   middle  or  right . these modifiers are indicated by suffices  -jl     - m     or   - r   if necessary. the primary purpose of this information is to represent a relative location of the feature to the upper one. thus  v r t - l following p a l - m represents a vertical stroke connecting to the left part of a pair of strokes in the upper horizontal zone  whereas a vrt-r following pal.m represents a stroke connecting the right part. therefore  1 distinct horizontal features are available for describing a partial pattern. the whole pattern is transformed to a string of h o r i zontal features of length 1  fig. 1 . 
       topological structures are usually described in term of node  branch and connection matrix in the combinational topology or graph theory. in the above method  strokes and their connective relation are not separately treated  but expressed 
as a whole. although a single horizontal feature may not posess complete information on the topological structure of strokes  any two successive features complete it. 
       compared with the conventional graph theoretical description of features  the present method is reasonable for the recognition logic of handwritten characters in that: first  highly flexible logic to detect the feature is realized by a sequential machine with stored transition table  
secondly  recognition of characters is easily performed by the sequential matching of the detected features as will be described in the following section. 
1. recognition by sequential decision graph 
       the string of horizontal features has a great deal of variability reflecting variations of shapes  sizes  skew  etc.   of handwritten numerals. the 
object of the decision logic is to identify these variations as one of ten numerals. 
       in the articles by grimsdale 1   1   greanias 1 or sakai 1   extracted features are combinationally matched with a standard list of features. in the present method  the features are matched sequentially. the horizontal zones are ordered from the top to the bottom  hence the sequence of the features extracted from them are arranged in the same order. 
       it must be noted that the sequential order of features is not much affected by character variations. for example  the character   1   has two loops vertically connected to each other. divided into horizontal zones  it is transformed into one of the sequences like c a p - m   p a i - m     p a l - m     cup-m  c a p - m   p a i - m    pal-m   cup-m. the number of p a l - m ' s  parallel lines  may be different for each individual character  but the sequential order is not altered. in order to iden-
tify all these strings as the same  sequential logic is the most suitable. 
       the vertical size and location of characters has no essential influence upon the recognition if a sequential logic is used. and the feature extraction logic compensates for the horizontal deviation of characters. therefore the logic is independent of character displacement in both directions  despite the fixed mode of scanning and partition of 
the character field. 
       if one feature string corresponds to a single numeral  a sequential machine whose output is one of the ten numerals will make a sufficient realization of a decision logic. 	in practice  however  it is almost impossible to design such a logic because of an enormous amount of input string variations to be dealt with. 
       this difficulty is overcome by means of a 
       combination of one-to-many recognition logic with an indirect output system. 
       the recognition i1 made by utilizing a set of sequential diagrams. figure 1 is an example of a transition diagram of the sequential recognition logic which identifies one of the variations of the numeral   1   . each diagram identifies only one character variation. for every character  several transition diagrams are provided  each of which identifies a subclass of the character variations. this is also the case in the piecewise linear decision of pattern matching method. 
       the input sequence is compared with every diagram. in fig. 1  circled numbers indicate internal states; arrows indicate the directions of transition; and the accompanying symbols specify input features meeting the transition condition. 

-1-

the comparison with the transition diagram starts from the entry state   1  in fig. 1  and transits step by step to the next internal state correspond-
ing to the input symbol. the destination of the transition is determined by the input feature. the final decision of recognition is not directly performed by the output of the logic  nor by the a r r i v a l to a certain final state. instead  a penalty count system is employed. a penalty is assessed to that diagram every time when a feature improper to that diagram appears in following up that transition diagram. in fig. 1  the symbol in parenthesis indicates such improper inputs    othe r s   mean other features than are specified . the total number of penalty represents a degree of mismatching of the input sequence with that diagram. 
       after comparison with all diagrams  the m i n i m u m value of the penalty is detected for every entry. if the minimum determines a unique numeral  it is selected as an answer  otherwise the recognition is rejected. but  if the minimum value equals or exceeds two  the answer is also rejected. therefore  if the penalty count reaches 
two  further transition may be terminated in order to save recognition time. 
       the method described above is considered as an extension of a decision tree 1 . in the case of the decision tree  the transition is also sequentially executed. one of the problems of the tree decision logic is that the number of nodes  decision point1  increases exponentially when the steps of sequential decisions increase. another problem  closely related to the one above  is that the initial or early stage decisions have too strong influence upon determining the tree structure of problem  since the number of input sequences is too large to be dealt with. therefore  the design is carried out by an intuitive cut-and-try method using computer simulation. in designing a sequential logic  assignment of internal states is the main problem. in case of intuitive design  it is desirable for internal states to have some i n tuitive meanings which are easily understood by a designer. this is especially important in not causing any trouble or confusion when a modification is to be made after the design is completed. 
       the sequence of horizontal features can be naturally divided into several subsequences  each of which represents a partial shape of the character. the numeral   1   gives a good example  where the sequence is divided into two subsequences representing upper and lower loops. each subsequence can be separately identified and then mutually recombined. hence the internal states can also be separately assigned according 
to these subsequences. such an intuitive decomposition and recombination method facilitated the design of the sequential transition diagrams. 
1. inplementation 
       emphasis is put on the hardware feasibility and flexibility of the recognition logic during the system design. the recognition logic is apt to 
become complicated and large in size  since the variation of handwritten characters is very large. besides  the logic must be capable of easy r e v i sion to match the true distribution of character 
variations. even if the logic is initially designed using a great number of character samples  the whole set of characters to be read is much greater  

and further improvement is inevitable after the 
the logic. once the decision takes a wrong branch  machine is made up. 
it could stray into completely irrelevant branches. 
to restore the erroneous decision  a great many 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　a solution to those problems is a stored nodes following that decision would be necessary. 
logic system. since the recognition logic is composed of sequential machines  this is realized by 
the decision graph is a set of sequential stored transition tables and table interpreting cir-
transition diagrams considered as decision logic. cuits. the tables are stored in a 1 bit  1k word 
this is an extension of the tree in the sense that magnetic core memory with a cycle time of 1. 1 u.s. 
it contains loops within it. 	in other words  there 
if the logic has to be revised  it is easily accom-
are more than one path which arrives at the same plished by changing the contents of the memory. 
node. 	this means that  even if the decision takes 
the tables are supplied by a computer prepared 
an erroneous branch  it is possible to be recovered perforated paper tape through a paper tape reader. 
afterwards. 	because of this structure  the defects 
by this  the computer simulation is directly linked 
of the decision tree are moderated  and a great 
to the actual reading machine. 
deal of variations of feature sequences are identi-
fied by a rather simple diagram in a compact and 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　the required recognition speed for the m a i l economical way. 
sorter is a little more than 1 characters per second  1 letters a second  so that a high speed 
       the design of recognition diagrams is very core memory is sufficient for this purpose. important in order to attain a high tolerance 
against character variations. 	the present sys-
tematic design technique cannot be applied to this 
-1-

references 
1. conclusion 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　 1  h. genchi et al.    recognition of handwritten 
numerical characters for automatic letter 
the recognition logic for handwritten nu-
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　sorting   proc. ieee  vol.1  no. 1  pp. 1merals has been designed in order to overcome the almost unlimited possible variability of hand- 1  aug. 1 . 
written character variations. 	the logic consists 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　 1  r. s. ledley et al.    pattern recognition studof geometrical feature detection and feature matching with 