completeness theorems for semantic resolution in consequence-finding 
j.r. slagle  c.l. chang  r.c.t. lee 
national institutes of health 
bethesda  maryland 

summary 
     the object of consequence-finding is to deduce logical consequences from a set of axioms. the theory of j.r. slagle's semantic resolution principle  an inference rule for first-order predicate calculus  is extended to consequence-finding. given an interpretation i  it is proved that any prime  non-trivial  consequence  which is false in i  can be derived from a set of axioms by applying i- semantic  resolution. 
1. introduction 
     the consequence-finding problem which has been described by lee {1} may have the following form: given statements a   . . .   a   find a statement b 
	1	n 
such that b follows from  it may well be that a 	a 	are the axioms or postulates of some theory  and b is a new logical consequence of that theory possible not found before. 	a prooffinding problem is a problem which is given a theorem and asked to find a proof for the theorem  vj. 	in this paper  we shall restrict ourselves to first-order predicate calculus  and consider 
only the cases where 	and b are 
 quantifier-free  clauses 	clearly  
under this formulation  if b is the empty clause  consequence-finding reduces to proof-finding. hence  consequence-finding may be considered more general than proof-finding. 
     because of the relation between consequencefinding and proof-finding  most of the strategies  used in proof-finding can also be used 
in consequence-finding. in  lee proved that robinson's ordinary resolution principle which is for proof-finding is also complete for consequence-finding. the present paper wil l extend the semantic resolution of slagle   to consequence-finding  and prove that given an interpretation i  any prime consequence b  which is false in i  can be derived from a set of axioms roughly speaking  we shall prove below completeness theorems which show that ordinary resolution w i l l generate all the prime consequences of a set of clauses and that semantic resolution w i l l generate all the prime consequences which are false in the interpretation used in the semantic deduction. it is possible that both kinds of resolutions may or 
may not generate some non-prime consequences. 
definition* an interpretation of a set s of clauses consists of a nonempty set u called a universe  sometimes  to emphasize the universe u  we say an interpretation over u.  and an assignment of  values  as follows to each individual symbol  function symbol and predicate symbol occurring in s:   i   to each individual symbol  we assign an element in u;   i i   to each function symbol with n arguments  we assign a function whose n variables range over u and whose values are in uj   i i i   to each predicate symbol with n arguments  we assign a function whose n variables range over u and whose values are the truth values  true and false. when s is a set of ground  variable-free  clauses  we call an interpretation of s a ground interpretation. 
definition. a ground instance of a clause c over a universe u is a ground clause obtained by substituting elements of u for a l l the variables in 
c. 
     we note that if u is the herbrand universe h of s  then an interpretation of s over h may be represented by a sequence m   m   . . .   m.  . . . in which ra- is either a. or~a 	where a 
	r 	1' 	' 
are the distinct ground instances of atoms 
of s over h. 
 or postulates    	by applying i- semantic  definition. an interpretation i of a set s of clauses over a universe u is said to satisfy a clause c in s  or c is true in i  i f f every ground instance of c over u is true in i. otherwise  i is said to f a l s i f y c  or c is false in i   . 

resolution. in order to be more in keeping with standard practice  we use  interpretation  rather than  model   which was used in   our theorems 
are more general than lee's results. the definitions  theorems  and proofs in this paper follow closely those given in it is also assumed that the reader is familiar with robinson's review article 
1. prime  non-trivial  consequences 
     in this section  we shall define a prime consequence  and use this concept to explain completeness theorems in consequence-finding. 
definition* a set s of clauses is said to be satisfiable i f f there is an interpretation i of s such that i satisfies a l l the clauses in s. other-
wise  s is said to be unsatisfiable. 
definition* 	a clause c is said to be a logical consequence of a set s of clauses c   . . .   c   
 or c follows from c    c     i f f for every interpretation i of  s & c  if i satisfies c1  
. . .   c   i also satisfies c. when no confusion is possible  we shall sometimes say that c is a 
logical consequence of c   . . .   c . 	we note that 

-1-





a as required by theorem 1  by theorem 1 there is a ground maximal aih--deduct ion from s' of some 
ground clause t'which subsumes  for this deduction tree tr  we attach to each node of tr a further clause over and above the clause already there as follows: to each i n i t i a l node of tr  attach the corresponding s-clause of which the clause already there is an instance. then for each non-initial node of tr  if clauses have been attached in this way to each of its immediate 
predecessor nodes and constitute the set w  attach 
to it that i -resolvent of the latent i -clash w 
	h 	h 
of which the clause already there is an instance. in this fashion  a clause is attached to each node of which the clause already at the node is an i n stance. 	let the clause attached to the terminal node be t. 	since each is an i-clash  the deduction of t is an i-deduction. 	since t does not contain the individual symbols b   . . .   b 	for 
	1 	m 
   as in ground case  in theorem 1  if c is a prime consequence of s  then t = c. be derived from s  every symbol which occurs in c must occur in s. therefore  we can use interpretations of s  instead of interpretations of  s & c   in the following completeness theorem for f i r s t -
order predicate calculus. 
theorem 1. if a clause c is a prime consequence of a f i n i t e set s of clauses  and is false in an interpretation i of s  then there is an i- semant i c   deduction of c from s. 
     the following theorem follows directly from theorem 1: 
theorem 1  if a clause c is a prime consequence of a f i n i t e set s of clauses and contains no negative  positive  l i t e r a l s   then there is a positive  negative  hyper-deduction of c from s. 
　　we now consider the theorems for unit clauses because prime consequences which are unit clauses are interesting. in this case  we can use p i deduction instead of i-deduction as stated in the following. 
theorem 1. 	if a unit clause c is a prime consequence of a f i n i t e set s of clauses and is false in an interpretation i of s and if the f i r s t predicate symbol in an ordering p of the predicate symbols occurring in s is the predicate symbol in d  then there is a pi-deduction of c from s. 
     the proof is the same as the proof for theorem 1 except we carry the ordering of the predicate symbols from the ground case to the latent case. 
the following theorem is a corollary of theorem 
1: 
theorem 1. if a positive  negative  unit clause c is a prime consequence of a f i n i t e set s of clauses and if the f i r s t predicate symbol in an ordering p of the predicate symbols in s is the predicate symbol in c  then there is a positive  negative  p-hyper-deduction of c from s. 
　　we now give an example to i l l u s t r a t e our results. 
example. in an associative system  if there are left and right solutions  then we can derive that there is a right identity. 
the system is expressed in three clauses: 
al: 
a1: 
a		t	e	n	c	e o f 	a 	right 
solution 
     since we know beforehand that the theorem concerning the right identity is a positive unit  we use a negative interpretation to guide our deduction. the electrons in the deduction w i l l be positive clauses and the deduction uses positive hyper-resolution. 

1. 	conclusion 
     in the preceding sections  we have given several completeness theorems for consequencefinding. using i- semantic  resolution  from a f i n i t e set of axioms  we can generate at least the prime consequences which are false in i. semantic resolution reduces the number of clauses we have to generate in order to derive these prime consequences   
     in consequence-finding  it is d i f f i c u l t to find a criterion for interesting consequences. in this paper  we have given the definition of a prime consequence. we believe that many interesting consequences may be obtained from prime consequences. however  much work needs to be done in this area. 
     in addition to generating interesting consequences  consequence-finding may also be relevant to proof-finding. the theoretical framework given 
tere reveals part of the behavior of semantic resolution. it shows that semantic resolution 

-1generates prime consequences of any subset of a 	 oct. 1   1. set of clauses. 	this gives us more insight into semantic resolution and may prove to be useful in proof-finding. 	for example  in proof-finding  we are interested in deducing a pair of contradictory units. 	from theorem 1  these contradictory units 
can be deduced by using positive and negative p-hyper-resolution simultaneously. we may call the strategy that uses positive and negative p-
hyper-resolution simultaneously the  bridging 
strategy.  in most cases  positive hyper-resolution corresponds to thinking forward from axioms whereas negative hyper-resolution corresponds to thinking backward from conclusion. this is a good sign because people reason in both directions when 
proving d i f f i c u l t theorems. therefore  a program that implements the bridging strategy corresponds to a theorem prover who thinks forward and back-
ward simultaneously. the bridging strategy may be useful for theorems which require long proofs. since unit clauses are either positive or negative the unit section of the unit preference strategy  
which is the most efficient strategy ever implemented on computers  is a special case of the bridging strategy. 
