 
　　　an element having the mechanism of timevarying threshold has been proposed by s. aida and denoted as an imictron. several applications of the imictron have already been discussed. the most distinguishing property of the imictron is its time-varying threshold level with a function of reintegration  which makes it possible to rea-
lize a fuzzy logic  such as required for the dynamic visual-pattern-recognition network discussed here. 
　　　the other method using the time-varying threshold is named the varishold method  which is an abbreviation of the variable threshold method. in this system  the threshold is applied in a descrete time  whose level is variable in each sampling time. 
　　　this paper  therefore  shows the two kinds of the pattern recognition  the one is a visual application  that is a classification by the timevarying threshold  and the other a tactile pattern recognition by the descrete variable threshold. 
	1. 	introduction 
　　　an imictron1 network is characterized by the fact that information appears in the system  at some points  as a sequence of pulses of identical shape  generally non-equally spaced depending upon the number and period of the preceding pulse pattern  and of a positive sign; and this system is considered to be a new type of information processor. 	the imictron has incorporated the classical axonal properties of temporal summation  timevarying threshold with a reintegration  inhibition  refractory time and all-or-none output. 
　　　the name of the imictron came from its mode of coding  time interval modulation information coding 
1
  timic or imic . in a timic system  the interval of the output pulse is determined by the past pattern of the output sequences. therefore  the pulse intervals in imictron networks are dependent upon the input signal and a time-varying threshold 
level  whereas the pulse intervanls in the pwm   pulse width modulation  as well as pam  pulse amplitude modulation  systems may be considered signal-independent. 
　　　the authors have proposed here a neurophysiological on  off logic  in which the information is processed by a time-varying function that is somewhat fuzzy in comparison with the conventional logical systems  and discussed here the pattern recognition for a moving object. 
　　　recently  many results have been presented for the internal structure or information processing of visual and auditory senses but it is impossible to realize the mechanical equipment. and tactile sense  taste sense  and smell sense are in an unknown field or a kind of fuzzy set. to increase productivity  a general purpose machine or a robot has become of major interests lately as the industrial machine to replace 
humans. parts corresponding to a sensory organ which supplies external information needed to design such a machine  and parts corresponding to a cerebrum which carry out control  memory and learning are needed to process the signal from the sensory organ and parts corresponding to a hand and a leg are used to manipulate or locomote in response to an input signal. 
　　　an a r t i f i c i a l finger  being considered as a 
　　　part of general purpose machines or robots  needs the functions of sensory organ  cerebrum and hand or leg. 
　　　therefore  the tactile sense  in the absense of visual sense such as with a blind man  is especially needed and w i l l take over a portion of the function of the visual sense. 
	1. 	basic element  imictron 
　　　a large number of mathematical or electrical models have appeared in the literature.1 	in the imictron model  the time-varying threshold dependent on the past pattern of its output pulse sequences  is the distinguishing property which makes it possible to design easily such a fuzzy 
logic proposed here. 
	1 	sampled-data model of the imictron 
　　　a block diagram of the sampled-data model of the imictron is presented in fig. 1  and i t s main functions are described as follows. 
i  internal potential level i   t   exponentially increases toward the strength of input signal 
x t  at time t or the empty of the input signal. whenever the output pulse is emitted  the internal potential i   t   is reset to zero. i i   time-varying threshold level oft  is a basis for the generation of the output pulse. whenever the internal potential is equal to or greater than the threshold level 1   t     the internal potential is reset to zero  and the output pulse  of duration h  is scheduled to f i r e . the threshold level is increased during the output pulse  then exponentially decays under  c max with the prescribed time constant. if the repetition rate of the output pulses increases  the threshold approaches its 
-1-

minimum level with a certain period and  if no output is emitted within a certain period  the threshold level recovers to the maximum constant threshold level  qmax as shown in fig. 1  this property is a reintegration as it is called. 
　　　the specifications of the imictron  the imictron networks  presented here  emphasize one of the most interesting aspect of this scheme of modulation  namely  the fact that such an element transmits information in the form of pulses  when it is needed. 	these properties may be applicable to various fields such as the imictron modulated feedback control system1  a learning system1  and a pattern recognition system. 
1 	modified imictron  
　　　the modified imictron is an element which is modified for the purpose of realizing on and off responses  and a property of adaptation* in neurophysiology. the authors have defined such models as on- or off-imictron and so on. 
　　　the modified imictron is given the same property of the reintegrative action for the timevarying threshold level and i t s block diagram is shown in fig. 1. 	the internal potential of the modified imictron is not reset to zero when the output pulse is emitted. 	therefore  the output pulses are continually emitted whenever the comparator's output  c in fig. 1  is equal to or greater than zero  c 1 . 
1. 	dynamic visual-pattern-recognition by imictron networks 
1 realization of on  off and on-off cell-nets by modified imictrons 
　　　a basic concept of on  off and on-off responses in a visual receptor is described in the preceding section. here the authors set out to realize these responses by the timic system and to u t i l i z e them in an information processing system. each of the responses is realized by a modified imictron. 
1.1 on-imictron: the block diagram of the onimictron is illustrated in fig. 1. the threshold control pulse generator produces one pulse whose amplitude is m' and width d in the presence of an analog signal from a receptor. 
　　　the shape of the threshold control pulse is determined by the property of 1 t  and the input value 1   t   . 
1.1 off- imictron the off-imictron is identical to the on-imictron in every respect but a position of the output pulses  see fig  1 . 
1.1 on-off imictron: on-off imictron can be realized by the threshold control pulse generator providing functions both of on and off responses. 
1 	network organization 
　　　in u t i l i z i n g the timic system  the network configuration is basically fixed in this kind of connection. for example  the basic circuit of the movement-detection net is shown in fig. 1. the  1n  and  off  in the circles represent the onand off-imictron  respectively. it has been noted 
* upon application af a constant stimulus  the frequency of the nerve output pulses was fast and then soon afterward decreased. 
that the natural response of the imictron to a d.c. input is a non-periodic  asynchronous  sequence of pulses. this system has been constructed consisting of   a  a receptor cone analog  providing continuous voltage output proportional to the stimulus light   b  onand off-imictrons which transform the signal to the pulse trains representing the  1n  and  off  responses in neurophysiology   c  a moving spot detector imictron  in the presence of pulse trains of cells #1 or #1 detects the movement in the directions as shown by the arrows. this system cannot detect the direction of movement whose speed or character  alternative moving  is such that both cells generate pulse trains at the same time. the visual resolution is determined by the factors of each imictron such as their delay and threshold variables. furthermore  this connection saves elements compared with the any of the conventional research1 and represents a new information processing system. 
　　　in fig. 1  if a moving spot moves from receptors 1 to 1  the imictron #1 emits several pulses by the summation of the off- and onimictron during the prescribed time  however cell #1 does not emit enough pulses to recognize the directions or a movement. these operations are caused by the actions of spatial summation with delay to the input pulses and time-varying thresholds of the imictron. after recognized the direction of a movement  when the next moving spot is moved in the opposite direction  if the thresh c  hold level of cell #1 does not recover enough toward the maximum threshold level  omax  both cells #1 and #1 emit several pulses  in this case this system cannot recognize the direction of 
motion. therefore  visual resolution depends upon both the delay time for on- or off-imictron   and the recovery time of the time-varying thresholds of the imictron  cells #1 and #1 . 
　　　fig. 1 illustrates the relationships between the outputs of the on- and off imictrons and the inputs of the imictron cells #1 and #1  respectively in the case of a light spot moving from recep-
tors 1 to 1. 
during the simulation  each input shown in 
fig. 1 is transmitted to as many as 1 detector 
imictrons. each sub-input of the ordinary imictrons  1  is a pulse train and i t s output is assigned by the period and number of the output pulses of the modified imictron. this approach of assigning scattered sub-inputs is influenced by the school of neurophysiologists who emphasize the dendrite reception. 
1 	results and interpretation 
　　　this experience has indicated that the electronic system is a convenient and useful tool in the formulation and exploration of theoretical 
models of retina function. this type of simulation is a more simple configuration and more similar to a living system than any of the 
mathematical or experimental models for the visual information system  especially the delay time of on- and off-imictrons. 

-1-

1. 	tactile pattern recognition using the varishold method 
1 	varishold method 
　　　the varishold method is a shortened form of the variable threshold .method. the threshold is applied in a descrete time. tts level is variable in each sampling time. this section shows the 
method of pattern recognition using the varishold method. 
　　　it is a matter of universal knowledge that the threshold varies its levels and that a living body has the quality of being adaptable. 'the threshold is a reference level relative to external stimuli  and whose level varies due to circumstance.  
　　　this method is to vary the threshold according to the purpose of the system as well as the input of the syst em. 
　　　so to speak  varishold method intends that the authors apply a variable threshold of living body to technological system. the threshold is changed according to time  co-ordinate  and timespace. fig. 1 illustrates some threshold v a r i ations. 
1 	construction of comparator 
　　　this comparator compares a given state  that i s   inner-potential with the threshold. 

where i p   t     1  is inner-potential and thres-
hold respectively  and 1 is delay time. 
1 	tactile pattern recognition 
　　　in general  the objects are recognized as a visual pattern. if the pattern recognition with aid of optical sense is s k i l l f u l l y constructed  a r t i f i c i a l finger can be easily used for manipulator of general purpose machine or hand of robot. 
　　　this section discusses a possible technique  that i s   the varishold method  that is being developed for the recognition of 1-dimensional solid patterns  for example  cubic  edge  plane  etc.  with view of its application to the a r t i f i c i a l finger. 
　　　the following steps are considered as the process of a r t i f i c i a l finger recognition with tactile sense. 
1  taking rough aim at the object scale or form from finger state which is gripping the object. 
1  taking the state of the object surface by t a c t i l e sense. 
1  taking the state of the other surface by changing the grip state of the finger. 
1  recognizing the object from the information of step 1 - step 1. 
　　　main discussion is the surface state of step 1  as shown in pig. 1. 
1 	technological model of tactile receptor 
　　　as shown in fig. 1  a simple model of1 t a c t i l e receptor is constructed from its physiological one. it is well known that sensory nerve and its ending which serve tactile sense exist in skin. the model eliminates temperature  pain and touch sensation of t a c t i l e sense and put a pressureelectric transformation element or pressure sensor corresponding to pressure sense. 
　　　moreover  the surroundings of its elements are f i l l e d by approximate elastic material. when any object comes in contact with the surface of the model  a strain resulting in elastic deformation of material transmits to the pressureelastic transformation element  and is converted to electrical signals. 
1 	construction of receptor 
　　　it is known that the physiological receptor corresponding to pressure sense is the pacinian corpuscle. pacinian corpuscles emit impulses according to corpuscle deformation which results from the strain of skin tissue that is caused by the pressure of an object on the skin. there are larger ones  with a length of rsoyuand diameter of 1 u  in comparison with the other cells. the sensory nerve ending in its corpuscle is surrounded by a lamellated f l u i d - f i l l e d capsule which is dependent on the viscous element. 
　　　therefore  the receptor unit corresponds to the pacinian corpuscle described above and its unit input constructed as shown in fig. 1 can be considered as the skin surface or surface of a pacinian corpuscle. 
　　　it is suitable for our purpose to treat inner-potential i p   as the transfer function  g  is apparently complicated. 
　　　the globular surface contacting on the surface  fig. 1 shows the pressure distribution occuring on the receptive field corresponding to a sensory nerve cell group. 	its distribution is 1-dimensional. 
　　　the response of pressure distribution can be taken by the information for each threshold. 


-1-



movement of finger tips. moreover  it may be recognized by a continuous movement of the finger tips. and the varishold method w i l l be applied to the various engineering fields. 
