. the results obtained show only the possibility of the real existence of observed environmental 
influences upon living organisms; but in order to have any biological value  the results should be 
tested in biological experiments. 
* these computer experiments were supported by a grant from the ford foundation; and computer time 
was granted by the moore school of electrical engineering computer facility. 
-1-







　　the expansion and nonperiodic changes could be considered as an unstable state. the example of a long lasting unstable state is p. 
     it should be noted that the assumption  1  concerning the environment is weak  however  in spite of this  the periodic sequences were always ob-
served after sufficiently long observation without degeneration. if the period sequence is treated as 
a stable state achieved by the evolutionary sequence it is evident that not all stable states have been 
founded by one sequence. after each expansion   in the absence of degeneration  distruc may find the stable state for the just-obtained i value  or may continue the expansion process. the probability of these behaviors are different for just expanded or nonexpanding distrucs. 
     any expansion increases the expanding coefficient in the next generation and this property is recursive. 	that is the reason for the rapid expansions observed in c  f  or h. 	if the j is a current value of i the above theorem could be 
formulated as follows: 
     theorem 1: for every j  expansion in g generation increases the expected value of p  
in the next generation. 	g+1 
     this is true as well in the case of expansion limited by the l value. 
     the beginning of n is an example of this situation. another two theorems can be proved: 
     theorem 1: for s   1 for sufficiently large i  the probability of degeneration in two distruc which have os differs arbitrarily little. 
     theorem 1: for s   1  the nonrandom part of p  j  goes to zero with the increase of j. 
     the conclusion from theorem 1 is important  since it means that for distrucs of sufficient length the effectiveness of selection is the same. limitation of a distrucs length  for any given 
stability threshold   -   is a conclusion from theorem 1. 
conclusions and discussions 
     from the experiment  it follows that randomly growing digital structure could achieve unchangeable  shape  in each evolutionary generation. 	this unique  shape  achievement is obtainable in spite of the fact that the  shape  of the digital structure is not uniquely predetermined by its internal structure. 
     the evolutionary sequence of digital structures could behave in a regular way  i.e.  the sequence is changing periodically  in the 
particular case each generation is exactly the same . 	the periodic changes of evolutionary sequence is the only stable state of an evolutionary sequence. 	any non periodic changing evolutionary sequence will achieve this state after a sufficiently large number of generations or x degenerate. 
     the behavior described above was obtained from a random supplement of creative materials from the environment. the only condition for the 
environment is that there has to be some cycle arbitrarily long  but many times shorter than the life of evolutionary sequence. 	from the point of view of one generation  however   especially for f   1   the environment could be considered as absolutely nonperiodic and random. 
     if the extrapolations of this observed behavior could be made to the living organisms  it could be some basis for interpretation of the beginning of life. according to the experiments  a pre-

-1-

living structure could have only the possibility of random  with only the   f r a m e   determined  
growth and division. the information to guarantee stability could be achieved from environment. such a structure would be relatively simple. 
acknowledgement 
　　　the author sincerely wishes to thank dr. john w. carr  iii for his counsel  discussion  and the help in preparing the final version of this paper. 
abstract 
     computer experiments with a model of a randomly growing structure with the possibility of division are presented. in agreement with the set of conditions  the growing structures are con-
sidered as evolutionary sequences. 
     the randomly growing digital structure could achieve unchangeable  shape  in each evolutionary generation in spite of the lack of complete predetermination of this  shape . the effect was ob-
tained by random supplement of creative materials from the environment. the environment was assumed as random  finite  and repetitive in a 
cyclic way. for this environment the only stable state of evolutionary sequence is a periodic sequence  in a particular case  the same  shape  in each generation . other sequences have either to degenerate or  after a number of nonperiodic charges  become periodic. 
     the model  results obtained from the computer and interpretation are presented. 
-1-













