ed by the description will typically be guided by the type of questions to be asked of the description. thus  in the preceding experiment  the descriptions were well suited to the task of classification  but it is obvious from figures 1 and 1 that these descriptions are totally inadequate for the purpose of reconstructing the objects they describe. the implication here is that a description does not follow naturally from the object being described  but is actually an  artistic  creation  tailored to a specific need  or set of needs . 
      iii  our original hypothesis has been verified. surprisingly high classification performance can be achieved with very simple and seemingly crude descriptions. however  this efficiency of communication can only be accomplished when the communicants share a complex model of the universe of discourse and have similar visual and perceptual abilities. 
machine perception 
     if a machine is to be capable of carrying on a conversation about pictorial data  it must not only be capable of perceiving such data  but it must also be cognizant of the manner in which humans perform this task. 	 see the discussion terminating the preceding section.  	let us now see what this implies. 
     we first note that there is a sharp distinction between  seeing  and  perceiving.   seeing  is the passive reception of visual data; we might say that a t  v. camera  sees  the object it is focused on.   perceiving  is an active creative process in which a visual scene is decomposed into meaningful units. this decomposition is a function of the stimulus pattern  the vocabulary and experience of the observer  and the  psychological set  of the observer. 
     in view of the complexities inherent in the perceptual process  a decision was made to initially restrict the universe of discourse for this investigation to line-type drawings. thus  we would like the machine to be able to talk about lines  the way they are shaped  and their geometric relationships in a given scene. 
     the following paragraphs will sketch some of the details and theoretical considerations in designing a machine which can first see a graphical line-type object  and then perceive it in a goal-directed manner. 
     from a theoretical standpoint  we wish to generate a series of successively more structured representations which start with the raw input data and culminate in a representation of the object as a configuration of line segments with appropriate descriptive tags. 
level la: the object 
     the lowest level  la  representation is the graphical object itself. in this investigation  this is a clear 1-mm film frame on which a line drawing is produced using a nylon-tipped pen. 
-1-
level lb; the sampled contour 
     the next level  lb  of representation is a set of points  critically selected from la  which retain sufficient information to permit subsequent processing without further recourse to level la  except in a very small percentage of cases . 	the lb representation is obtained from la through the use of a computer-controlled flyingspot scanner. 	the scanner first operates in a search 
mode in an attempt to find an object  i.e.  locate a significant black area  somewhere in the picture frame. when an object is found  the scanner enters a contourfollowing mode and determines if the object has a sufficiently long exterior contour to be considered significant. if the object is not deemed significant  the search mode is reentered and the search continues essentially where it left off. if the object is deemed significant  then 1 to 1 points are selected from its exterior contour. at present  the assumption is made that all objects are  solid  and no attempt is made to search for interior contours. 
     a number of interesting problems arise in the design of a contour follower which must operate in the presence of moderate amounts of noise without losing significant shape information. if a large scanning spot is used  critical shape information can be lost and background noise can fuse to produce spurious objects or false appendages to existing objects. on the other hand  a very small scanning spot can enter and get trapped inside a solid appearing object  typically requires more scanning time  and produces a greater volume of data  much of it redundant. regardless of what the scanning-spot size is  certain logical problems still exist. for example  the spot can enter a cavity with a narrow inlet and then not be able to find this inlet again in order to escape. 
     the approach employed here was to use a fine scanning spot  capable of generating a raster 1 by 1 scan lines  to retain resolution  to use a sampling technique to speed up the scan and decrease redundant information acquisition  and to use  high-level  information feedback to counter both noise and logical problems. 
     figure 1a shows the  square-sided-spiral  path taken by the follower as it looks for the next point on a contour; when such a point   hit   is found  the spiral search pattern is repeated. if  after one hit  the first leg of the spiral produces a second hit  this second hit is ignored and the spiral path is altered  as shown in figure 1b. this will permit the follower to enter a 
     narrow well  or explore a small cavity. the follower is expected to return to its approximate starting location after traversing some maximum path length. if this does not occur  it is assumed that the follower is trapped; the scan parameters are automatically altered  and the follower is reset to make another attempt to find the contour. a fixed sequence of parameter sets is available to the follower. each parameter set can alter the starting point for the follower  the effective resolution of the spot  and the criteria for determining a hit. effective spot resolution is altered by having the spot repeat a traverse one or more times with some small lateral displacement. the intensity data returned from these parallel scans are made available to the decision procedure which determines if a hit was detected. 
     after the contour has been successfully acquired  a smoothing routine deletes duplicate points and inserts  by interpolation  points between contour points which 

have too wide a separation. 	each contour point is stored in the  contour point list   cpl  as a pair of  x  y  coordinates  the sequence number of the point  and the gross direction  up  down  right  left  in which the follower was moving when the hit was detected. 
level ic; slope and critical point determination 
     this level of representation is obtained by augmenting the information stored for each point in the cpl comprising the lb representation. the slope  quantized into 1бу intervals  between each point and its preceding neighbor is determined  by table lookup  and stored. points at which a slope change of 1бу or more occurs are flagged as critical points. extremal points  horizontal and vertical  of the contour are flagged. finally  referring to contour follower slope  see previous section  rather than interpoint slope  points about which a 1бу change in follower slope occur are labeled endpoints. the endpoint label is tentative and can be deleted or shifted at higher levels of representation. accurate placement of endpoints according to the standard of human performance was found to be one of the more difficult tasks in acquiring the machine perceived image. 
level id: decomposition into line segments and enclosures 
     the id level of representation involves the assignment of labels to each of the points in the cpl which will identify that point as being part of a particular line segment  intersection  or enclosure. there are usually a number of distinct structurally valid decompositions or parsings of any graphical object.  figure 1 illustrates this point with a number of examples.  therefore  the processing routines associated with this task must be capable of producing many alternate decompositions from which a final choice can be made. this is accomplished by using a number of line-finding routines which operate independently of each other. these routines  using different criteria  search the cpl for point sequences which can be considered to be line segments. the net result is a list of candidate line segments  some of which overlap or even completely cover other candidate line segments. 
     the basic procedure for finding a candidate line segment is to first find a  seed  which can either be an endpoint  as obtained for the ic representation  or a pair of points separated by less than some threshold distance and having opposite contour slopes. starting with the seed  pairs of points are searched for which are adjacent to those points already assigned to the growing line segment  and are separated by less than the threshold distance. the line segment is judged complete when no additional point pairs satisfying these criteria can be found. 
     smoothing routines  driven by higher level requirements  select a covering set of line segments from the available candidates  adjust overlaps and fill gaps to obtain unique intersection points  and make the final decision as to which segments are to be considered enclosure boundaries. endpoints and intersection points may receive minor adjustment  based on the slope information  critical point flags  obtained for the ic representation. redundant endpoints are deleted. 
     for example  if only the major characteristics of the graphical object are of interest  short line segments will be suppressed by choosing the smallest covering set from the line segment candidates. on the other hand  let us assume that the presence of even short line segments with isolated endpoints is significant; in this case  the smoothing routines will choose a covering set of line segments containing the largest number of line segments grown from endpoint seeds. the smoothing routines can also emphasize or eliminate enclosures  merge or break line segments  etc. 
level ie: labeling  and construction of the line segment directory 
     at present  the ie level is the highest level of representation and constitutes the perceived image. line segments  enclosures  and intersections are assigned distinct labels  names . a directory is constructed listing each line sequent in this final stage  its type  i.e.  part of an enclosure; a line segment having zero  one  or two endpoints; or a line segment which is actually part of an extended intersection   and the names and locations of its vertex points in the cpl. 
     algorithmic procedures are employed to determine which line segments go together to form the boundary of any given enclosure  and to determine which vertex points are actually part of the same intersection. 	this information is entered into the line segment directory. finally  global checks are made on the perceived image to determine if it is structurally valid. 	thus  for example  the number of vertices  v   line segments 
 s   and enclosures  e  are counted and must satisfy eulers formula  v - s + e = 1 ; the set of line segments defining the object must include all the points of the cpl and must form a closed contour; etc. 	global checks are also set when individual smoothing algorithms are not able to successfully complete their task. 	when a global check is set  the perceptual image is considered to be invalid and a repeat pass is made through the complete perceptual machinery  using a new parameter set to control the contour follower. 
machine description of graphical data 
     the preceding portions of this paper have covered the steps between seeing and perception. however  it was noted that the final form of the perceived image will depend on the parsing decisions and parameter settings called for by  higher level  expectations and requirements. we further noted that a linguistic description of a graphical object can only be a partial representation of the object and thus is typically created to satisfy some specific need. both of these considerations suggest that perception and description can be most meaningfully discussed in connection with performance of some meaningful task. an experiment requiring machine classification of handprinted arabic numerals will form the basis for the following discussion. 
     a set of reference descriptions  similar in form to those shown in figure 1  was prepared for the ten numeric characters. 	the machine was required to produce a description of a test character presented to it and compare this description with the reference descriptions in order to classify the object. 
     a number of points must be emphasized here. this experiment involving handprinted numerals is simply a 

-1-

vehicle for investigating machine perception and description  not an attempt to produce a character reader. the machinery used here for both perception and description is much more general than is required for this classification task alone. the questions of interest in this experiment were how knowledge of the limited world of possible shapes could be used to direct perception  and what types of linguistic representations of the object would best serve as a data base for both the linguistic matching needed in the classification process  and also as a basis for operator machine communication to improve classification performance. 
the numeric character recognition program  ncrp  
     this program controls the perceptual machinery described earlier as well as the line segment analysis and description program  lsadp  to be described in the next section. its job is to classify graphical objects according to a set of canonical descriptions  given in figure 1  and general information about the type of variations which might occur  given in figure 1 . it may be noted that these descriptions  similar in form to those in figure 1  permit most of the characters to be classified even if they are rotated or mirror imaged  some confusion between the 1  1  and the 1  1 pairs will occur under a symmetric transformation . the three principal variations which are not covered at present are the closed -top-1  the open-loop-1  and the 1 with detached top. procedures to cover these variations will be added in the near future. 
     ncrp begins its analysis of a character oy calling for a perceived image which suppresses small detail  but does capture the gross topology of the character. lsadp is then called to generate a description of the character. 
     if the resulting description shows that the character consists of a single enclosure  it is classified as either a   1   or an  1  depending on the number of lobes it has with respect to its diameter. * 
     if the character consists of two enclosures  with or without a connecting line between them  it is called an   1 .   
     if the character consists of a single nonspiral line  then it is classified as a 1  1  1  1  or 1 according to the criteria given for class ii objects in figure 1. a spiral is classified as 1  open loop . if the end points of a character tentatively classified as a  1  are very close together  the character will be reclassified as a   1 .   
     if the character consists of a single enclosure and a single long line  it is classified as a  1  or  1  according to the criteria given for class lll characters in figure 1. however  if the single line segment was short  the perceptual and descriptive machinery is directed to reexamine the character after suppressing this line. the resulting image will then be classified as a  1  or   1     or possibly rejected. 
     if the character consists of three or more line segments  but no enclosures   its description is examined to determine if it can be classified as a   1 .   if this is 
     *the diameter of an object is the longest straight line which begins and terminates on the object. a lobe is a relative maximum in the normal distance from some line or axis. 
not possible  then it is concluded that the character contains redundant strokes. 	the perceptual and descriptive machinery is directed to reexamine the character after suppressing all short length  or if necessary  even medium  line segments in order to find a valid classification. 
     if the character consists of a single enclosure and two line segments  the distance between the end points of these line segments is examined to determine whether they are sufficiently close together to constitute an improperly formed enclosure in the second loop of an   1 .   if the character cannot be classified as an 1  the perceptual and descriptive machinery is directed to reexamine the character suppressing any component  enclosure or line segment  which is small  or if necessary  medium in size. the result here will probably be a classification as a 1  1  1  1  or reject. 
     if the character consists of some other combination of line segments and enclosures than those discussed so far  the perceptual and descriptive machinery is iteratively called to suppress or delete minor structures until the character is either classified or rejected. 
     the numerical character recognition program  as distinct from the perceptual and descriptive machinery which it directs  is a relatively simple program which took less than one man-week to write and check out. the 1 numeric canonical descriptions are its  modelof-the-world  and it tries to perceive any object it encounters as one of these entities. the information about possible variations is mostly used to help shape perception; however  for a few specific variations  at present  the final identity is deduced from an imperfectly perceived image. 
     the numeric descriptions and list of variations was obtained after a few design iterations using the linguistic output generated by the machine. 	this linguistic feedback was used to correct perceptual problems in the machine as well as shortcomings in the original numeric descriptions. 
     the current version of ncrp was tested on a set of 1 handprinted numerals generated by five different contributors. with the exception of one closed-top-1 and two open-loop-1 for which no descriptions were available to the machine  all the remaining characters were correctly classified. many of the correctly classified characters were additionally presented to the machine in rotated or mirror imaged  the film frame flipped over  position  and with the exception of the 1  1  and 1  1 confusion  no additional errors resulted. 
     this experiment was not intendeu to assess ncrp!s performance as a practical number classifier; the test set was too small  and the ink and film environment probably lead to more carefully generated characters than would result in a more natural situation. what the experiment did demonstrate was that a model based on a small number of  natural  english statements could permit classification of wide variety of graphic shapes by directing the machine to perceive these shapes in a canonical manner. 
the line analysis and description program 
-1-     the perceived image  as currently constituted  is a configuration of line segments. each line segment defined by a sequence of contour points in the cpl. 
     given the name of a line segment  the line segment analysis and description program  lsadp  references the line segment directory to find the location of the corresponding point sequence in the cpl. a series of analytic geometry routines are now called in which make measurements on both the named line segment and on the graphical object as a whole. in particular  the number of contour points assigned to the line segment is taken as a measure of its arc length  while the euclidean distance between its vertex points measures its extent. shape information is obtained by constructing a straight line through the vertex points of the line segment and then computing the normal distance between each contour point assigned to the line segment and this constructed line. the resulting sequence of directed deviations is then processed to determine the number of maxima and the magnitude of the largest positive and negative deviations  the number of times the constructed line is crossed by actual line  and the relative positions of these crossings. additional shape information is available from the interpoint slope data computed for the ic representation. shape information is used to determine if the line segment is straight  slightly curved  or curved. if curved  the derived numerical data permit determination as to whether the curve is basically  c  shaped   s  shaped  spiral or partially spiral shaped  or has some more complex configuration. orientation is measured by the slope of the constructed line and the local slope of the actual line at its vertex points. location of the line segment is determined by the location of its vertex points and the location of the line segments center of gravity. all descriptive evaluations are normalized relative to the overall size of the graphical object; all location references are with respect to the minimal rectangle enclosing the object. 
     lsadp is controlled by a decision tree which directs the analysis in accordance with intermediate findings. as the various attributes of the line segment are derived  these are stored as records in the  object description table  odt    and a linguistic description is simultaneously constructed. 
     the linguistic description generated in the lsadp has some interesting characteristics. there are currently some 1 words and phrases which form the generator's vocabulary. as the line segment analysis proceeds  the linguistic phrases are assembled in a buffer area. numeric values are converted into appropriate descriptive terms by means of translation tables. the specific table employed to translate a numeric quantity can vary depending upon the preceding analysis. thus  for example  a line segment which forms the boundary of an enclosure must have approximately twice the arc length needed by a straight line to be given the attribute value  long.  if there is too much ambiguity associated with a measurement  the corresponding descriptive phrase may be completely deleted  and under some conditions  a phrase previously entered into the buffer area may also be deleted. 
     the organization  phrasing  and information provided in the linguistic descriptions generated by usadp are based on experiments in which a subject attempted to reconstruct simple unseen line drawings based on the answers to questions he was permitted to ask. 
     it should be noted that lsadp does not correlate the descriptions it produces for each of the line segments of a given object. 	thus  the collection of such descriptions must be modified to present an overall object description. a program which accomplished this is currently being prepared. this program  in addition to organizing the data generated by lsadp  must also change some of the assigned attributes. thus  while lsadp might say that two slightly separated lines which leave the same vertex both have a vertical orientation  a program  or person  describing the situation would say that  one of the lines slopes slightly to the left of the vertical  the other line slopes slightly to the right.  similarly  if two line segments in the same object  especially straight lines  have almost identical lengths  then they should be given the same length attribute  even if some absolute criterion in lsadp attempts to assign them differently. 
     figure 1 shows some perceived objects and the linguistic descriptions generated by lsadp for the corresponding line segments. 
concluding comments 
     this paper sketches a research effort concerned with the design of a system capable of perceiving pictorial and graphical data  building a series of internal representa-
tions of these data  and then using these internal representations as the basis for automatic processing and  natural  or linguistic man-machine communication. 
     a detailed description of the specific algorithms and data structures employed is not presented in this paper. the design philosophy  as detailed previously  is summarized as follows: 
 1  to the greatest extent possible  local decisions are avoided. typically  a perceptual hypothesis 
is synthesized from as large a body of data as practical  the data are obtained from lower levels of representation  and then the  reasonableness  of this hypothesis is checked  either immediately or sometimes after a number of intervening steps  against the  model-of-the-world  that the system possesses. if the perceptual hypothesis is found to be untenable  then the system returns to some previous level of representation  modifies parameters and/or procedural steps  and once again attempts to construct a viable hypothesis. typically  the successive attempts at hypothesis formation become more conservative; that is  loss of  resolution  is permitted after repeated failure. 
 1  when a perceptual hypothesis fails  it is usually not necessary to determine the cause of the failure. the simplest way to handle a failure is to take a second look at the object from a slightly different orientation  e.g.  starting the contour at a different location  with no change in the processing. if the processing step at which the failure occurred can be determined  then an alternate procedure might be used  or the original procedure might be repeated with a new set of parameters  chosen from a small selection of such sets   or the troublesome processing step might be omitted entirely. this is frequently possible with no final loss  or only minor loss  of detail. when the step or section in which the trouble occurred cannot be pinpointed  a return to one of the lowest levels of representation is made together with a fixed sequence of parameter and processing step changes. 

бЎ1-

 1  as implied  the complex* algorithms are not expected to be 1% effective. typically  the 
more complex the algorithm  the more its function is overlapped by the preceding and following processing steps. also  many of the complex algorithms are backed up by alternate procedures which can do essentially the same job. 
 1  perception  at each level of representation  is  directed  by higher level expectations. thus  even though there are many structurally valid parsings or decompositions of the object at each level of representation  the particular parsing chosen is one which biases the representation toward some desired final canonical form. this procedure has two advantages. first  knowing what you are looking for and where to look is an effective way of combating noise. second  the combinatorial growth of possible final representations is greatly restricted. 
 1  the overall approach is procedure oriented rather than retrieval oriented. a gross change in representation  e.g.  a change after detection of an error  is accomplished by altering some parameters or processing sequences  and then regenerating the representation starting at some lower level. this is preference to flagging or deleting the old data and adding the required change. further  wherever practical  data are recomputed rather than stored and retrieved. the reason for both of the above techniques is to avoid the necessity of tracing through long chains of derived or deduced conclusions  stored as part of the representation  after a low-level error is detected. 
acknowledgments 
     the author acknowledges the many contributions made by o. firschein to the investigation presented here. 	the work was performed under the lockheed independent research program. 	the support and encouragement of dr. c. e. duncan are greatly appreciated. 
cited references references 
1. 	m. fischler  r. mattson  o. firschein  l. healy  
 an approach to general pattern recognition   
ire trans  on information theory. vol. it-1  sep 1 
1. m. minsky   steps toward artificial intelligence   proc. ire. vol. 1  jan.  1  pp. 1 - 1 
1. r. kirsch   computer interpretation of english text and picture patterns   ieee trans  on electronic computers  vol. ec-1  no. 1  aug 1  pp. 1 
      those procedures which involve a large amount of data-dependent manipulations  and where both input and output to the algorithm are large data sets. 
1. r. ledley  l. rotolo  t. golab  j. jacobsen  
m. ginsberg  and j. wilson   fidac: film 
input to digital automatic computer and associated 
syntax-directed pattern recognition programming 
system    optical and electro-optical information 
processing  tippett. etal.. eds.. chap. 1. mit press  1 
1. r. narasimhan   syntax-directed interpretation of classes of pictures   comm. acm  vol. 1  no. 1  mar 1  pp. 1 
1. t. evans   a heuristic program to solve 
geometric-analogy problems    afips  sjcc  proceedings  vol. 1  1  pp. 1 
1. a. guzman   scene analysis using the concept of a model    afcrl-1  1 
1. w. miller and a. shaw   linguistic methods in picture processing  afips  fjcc  proceedings  vol. 1  1  pp. 1 
1. d. londe  r. simmons   namer: a patternrecognition system for generating sentences 
about relations between line drawings   acm 
1th national conference  1  pp. 1 
1. l. lipkin  w. watt  r. kirsch   the analysis  synthesis and description of biological images    ann. n.y. acad. sci.. vol. 1  jan 1  pp. 1- 1 
uncited 