a formal description for two-dimensional patterns* 
c. t. zahn 
stanford linear accelerator center 
stanford university  stanford  california 

summary 
     a  structural description  for two-dimensional black and white patterns is defined as the set of contour lines for an appropriate function which fits the binary 
pattern. 	these contour lines are mutually non-
intersecting closed polygonal curves with edges in only eight different directions and they represent the boundaries between connected black and white areas of the 
pattern. 	rigorous procedures are described to transform a  matrix pattern  into a  structural description  and vice versa. 	advantages of this method for describing patterns previous to pattern recognition are discussed at some length. 
introduction 
     this paper presents a method for obtaining a  structural description  of any two-dimensional picture whose elements are a finite set of points in the plane each having value zero  white  or one  black  and such that the 
points are arranged in the form of a square lattice. 
figure 1 shows one such picture. the  structural description  we employ consists of a set of simple polygonal closed curves whose vertices are ordered in either clockwise or counter-clockwise sense. these curves represent the continuous boundaries between connected sets of black points which we call  objects  and connected sets of white points which we call  holes.  fig. 1 depicts the structural description of the pattern in 



fig. 1 
 work supported by u.s. atomic energy commission. 
fig. 1 
fig. 1. our structure also includes information indicating which curves are inside each other as shown schematically by dotted lines in fig. 1. the points of a curve are ordered so that the curve is traced keeping black points to the right and white to the left. as a 
result  curves which define the outside boundary of black areas  objects  proceed clockwise and those for white areas  holes  proceed counter-clockwise. it should be noticed that the curves do not go through the outermost picture points of an area but rather go between these outermost points and the adjacent points of opposite color. 
     our selection of this particular format to describe the information content of a black/white pattern was motivated by a belief that the sequential trace of the boundary of an object contains the most useful data for 
-1-

recognizing objects one from another in a great many applications . experimental evidence from the psychology of human visual perception and the neurophysiology of animal visual perception support this belief to an amazing extent. 
     for a more detailed description of this  structural description  and an extended discussion of its uses  the 
reader is referred to zahn. 1 
structural description as contour 
     the closed curves of the  structural description  are  in fact  the contour lines at a height of 1 for a continuous function f x y  defined over the square area of the picture and such that f takes value 1 where the picture has a black point and 1 where it has a white point. 	the precise construction of f is as follows: 
     consider the subdivision of the picture area into smaller squares defined by the square matrix of picture 
points by drawing horizontal and vertical lines through the points of the picture. it should be clear that a t r i angulation* of the picture area can now be effected by separately triangulating each smaller square  as shown in fig. 1. we shall describe rules for determining which diagonal will be added to each square to complete the triangulation. 

to connect two black points or two white points  choose the black and try to have as few curvaturepoints as possible. 	the triangulation rule embodied in  d  of fig. 1 assures that black points have precedence  while rules  b  and  c  prevent a straight edge at 1¡ã from being encoded as a saw-tooth contour line. 	the reader may verify these statements by choosing the other diagonal and then constructing the contour. 	the actual contour for the top pattern in fig. 1 is presented at the bottom of fig. 1 and hatch marks have been appended to show which side of a contour line is the high or black side. 
     there are only six essentially different combinations of values possible for the corners of a square. these are shown in fig. 1 along with the proper diagonal. where no diagonal is shown it means that either one may be chosen. 
     now that the picture area has been triangulated  we define our function f separately for each triangle. supposing some triangle to have vertices a  b  and c  we let p a   pb  pc denote the picture values at points a  b  c which are indeed points of the  matrix picture.   there is a unique linear function f* x y  = ax -t by + c which takes on values pa  pg  pc at points a  b  c 
     each triangle of the triangulation determines uniquely an f*abc and f is defined so that f x y  = f g x.y  whenever  x y  is inside or on triangle abc. 
     the proofs that f is well-defined and continuous are easily derived from the exemplary behavior of linear functions. 	in fact  the only way discontinuity could possibly occur is by way of f being double defined for some 
point on a common edge sb between two triangles a  and a1* the reason that this cannot occur is because f1* and f1*  the linear functions for a  and a1  when restricted to the edge ab are both found to vary linearly between a and b and to have the same values at these two points; hence f1* = f1* on the edge ab and f is welldefined . 
     having defined f over the picture area as a continuous piecewise-linear approximation to the original picture  we can simply repeat that the  structural description  of the picture is the set of contour lines of f drawn at a height of 1. 	this approach certainly corresponds well with any intuitive notion of edges in a binary picture. 
curvaturepoints 
     we use the term  curvaturepoints  to describe the points where the contour lines  called  edges   change direction. for example  in the bottom of fig. 1 the numbered points 1 - 1 are the curvaturepoints whereas e and f are points on the contour but not at bends. this is because the two sections of contour line which meet at e are both in the same direction  t referring to fig. 1  we see that at e there is an incoming edge and an outgoing edge both in direction 1  whereas at point 1 there is an incoming edge in direction 1 and an outgoing edge in direction 1. 
     it turns out that curvaturepoints can only occur at points midway between two picture points. furthermore  the question of whether or not a given point is a 
tcontours are directed so that the hatch mark is on the right. 

-1-






	smoothed 	edge contour 
fig. 1 
bend groups 
¡¡¡¡when the sequence of curvaturepoints describing a single closed contour has been constructed and the  in-
flections  have been deleted as described in the previous section  then a very compact but extremely characterizing signature can be computed by merging curvaturepoints according to the following rules: 
     transform the closed curve into a sequence of integers representing amounts of bend by adding together the values of bend for two adjacent curvaturepoints of like sign whenever their distance apart is less than some threshold which is appropriate to a given application. 
     figure 1 depicts how the grouping of like points would be made for our sample curve of the last section  assuming a threshold distance of approximately 1. 

     once again we must emphasize that special applications will generally suggest variations in the merging of bends in addition to guiding the determination of the distance threshold. some applications may  of course  require the retention of more detailed edge length information in which case this simple scheme would not be appropriate. 

fig. 1 
recovery algorithm 
     an important property of  structural descriptions  is that an algorithm exists which will recover the original digitized binary matrix pattern given only the struc-
tural description. we shall give a brief outline of such an algorithm and discuss the theoretical foundation for its validity. 
     the famous mathematical theorem known as the  jordan curve theorem  states that any simple closed curve in the plane divides the remainder of the plane into two distinct sets called the  inside  and  outside   such that any two points in the same set can always be 
connected with a continuous curve lying entirely in that same set; any continuous plane curve joining a point  inside  the curve to one  outside  must have at least one point in common with the closed curve. the proof of this theorem is much simpler for polygons than for general curves; courant and robbins1 give a proof for the polygonal case which depends on the fact that if a point  outside  a closed curve is connected by a 
straight line l to another point p  then p is also  outside  if and only if l intersects   an even number of times. if l intersects an odd number of times  then p is  inside  
     the algorithm we propose is based on the latter fact  which is also proved in ref. 1. referring to 
fig. 1  we shall show how it is possible to determine 


-1-

	while ranges a  	and 	are outside. 	the proper 
assignment of values then depends only on the status of 

     the determination that ranges p and 1 are inside proceeds as follows: 
     curve r is traced from its top all the way around and back to the top again. whenever the curve crosses the vertical line   we record the fact by making a mark in all points below the crossing. for example  crosses first at and all points in ranges  and c are marked + as shown in the table. this means that each of these marked points can be connected by a straight line to the top of the picture area 
only by a line crossing 	at 	the table is filled in 
f o r a n d i n a n entirely similar manner. after 1  mere are no more crossings and the curve returns to the starting point. we then determine which points have received an odd number of marks and find that all points of ranges b and 1 are inside 
     when this procedure is carried out for all vertical lines  then the  inside  points f o r w i l l have been determined. in any actual implementation  we assume that all would be handled simultaneously while was being traced only once. 
     if the same process is repeated for all curves  in a  structural description  then the result is just as valid as for one curve because curve crossings always represent a color change. 
     no claim is made for the efficiency of this procedure; we merely wanted to show with some degree of mathematical rigor that the  structural description  contains all the information of the original digitized pattern and it can be mechanically recovered if necessary. 
advantages of the curvaturepoint method 
     the generality of the curvaturepoint method is one of its most important properties. 	the method applies to any  black and white  pattern whose significant content consists of connected sets of similar points. 	hence  it also applies to input pictures which can be made to comply with this condition by suitable preprocessing; fairly simple local transformations on binary pictures have 
been found to be very successful at regularizing pictures in this way. our method can be used in some cases to extract contrast information from grey-scale* pictures by converting the picture to binary several times using different thresholds. 	this idea is more fully elaborated in zahn. 1 this applicability to multilevel pictures should come as no surprise when it is remembered that 
the method is simply a contouring of a two-dimensional distribution of numerical values. 
     simplicity and mathematical rigor are properties of the method which we feel have been largely overlooked in most  edge-detection  schemes. the two properties are closely related  for the mathematical rigor with which  curvaturepoint extraction  and  linkage  are performed is a direct consequence of the simple and straightforward definition of the  structural description.  being contour 
 picture values range over an ordered finite set such as  1  1  1  1 . 
lines of a simple function  the  structural description  is constrained to consist of non-intersecting closed polygonal curves whose edges are directed in only eight different ways and whose edge bends or  curvaturepoints  
are also tightly constrained. 	it is precisely because of such constraints that the  linkage  of widely spaced  curvaturepoints  can be accomplished in a completely assured way. 	not only is the transformation from binary pattern to structural description rigorous and uniquely defined; the reverse transformation  see recovery algorithm  exists as well  proving a unique oneto-one correspondence between a binary pattern and its structural description and also showing that the struc-
tural description contains total information from the binary pattern. 
     one of the most serious obstacles to the further development of digital picture processing is the volume of data implied by the two-dimensionality of pictures. when the resolution is doubled the data volume is quadrupled; a picture 1 x 1 has one million data points  an amount which is still prohibitively high for even the largest computers. the  structural description  on the other hand contains one-dimensional information  contour lines  and therefore the data volume increases only linearly with resolution. this means that if  curvaturepoint extraction  can be done in special digital hardware then the storage requirement for implementing the method on a general purpose computer will be greatly reduced and more richly detailed patterns can be handled. the  linkage  would be accomplished by programming. it turns out very happily that  curvaturepoint extraction  is defined by extremely simple boolean logic  see curvaturepoints  and its digital hardware implementation could be accomplished with the addition of two long shift registers. we consider this efficient implementation to be an extremely vital aspect of the method. 
     the intuitive character of our method should prove of considerable benefit in constructing recognition algorithms. in a recent article uhr1 claims that edges  angles and the interrelations between lengths and slopes are the important and meaningful properties for human pattern perception and recognition. if this is true then it is reasonable to expect that algorithms based on  structural descriptions  will be highly intuitive in nature and hence less mysterious than those based on information other than edges. in support of uhr!s claim we shall cite evidence from psychology and neurophysiology which tends to indicate the predominance of edge information in animal visual perception. attneave1 in experiments on human subjects found that the number of bends in polygonal shaped objects accounted for 1% of the difference between objects when rated by subjects according to judged complexity. this clearly suggests importance of curvaturepoints. other researchers have found that an object's visibility is related to the length of its boundary  strongly suggesting that for purposes of perception the edge is the predominant information content. 
     the research of lettvin et ah 1 on the optic nerve cells in the frog indicates that signals reaching the frog's brain from its eyes are highly contrast-oriented. hubel and wiesel1 determined that nerve cells in the cat's brain are specific to the existence of edges in the visual field of given slope. 	this neurophysiologyal 

-1-

evidence if extrapolated to the human case lends further support to the claim that edge information is the raw 
data for visual perception mechanisms in man. 
     although the method is clearly directed toward recognition via edge-bend-sequence  nevertheless familiar quantitative properties such as perimeter  area  moments  height and width are easily calculated. in addition  we can define and compute reasonably intuitive quantitative measures of oblongness  compactness  wigglyness and total absolute curvature. 
     for some pattern recognition applications  character recognition especially  it is useful to have a method which is position and size invariant.  structural descriptions  contain position and size information but in such a way that it is quite easily disregarded. rotation invariance is also easy to achieve by simply considering the sequence of curvaturepoints without paying attention to the initial edge direction. the information is always there when needed  however  so that recognition methods sensitive to position  size and rotation are not hampered in the least. 
     a pattern description method is greatly enhanced if it is compatible with some fairly elegant language for pictures. this is particularly true if the language has a formal phrase structure grammar which allows pattern recognition to be accomplished by the formal parsing procedures which have been developed for such grammars. the survey paper of miller and shaw1 discusses this aspect of picture processing quite comprehensively. ledley1 for example  has shown that formal parsing techniques can be used to recognize different chromosome shapes by transforming their edge sequences into a string of primitives and then parsing 
this string. for example  in fig. 1 o means no bend  e means sharp 1¡ã convexity  y means sharp 1¡ã concavity  etc. these are the primitives of the language. the formal grammar would define  arm  as oeo   double arm  as arm y arm  etc. 
     an essentially one-dimensional data format seems to be advantageous for linguistic processing of pictures because phrase-structure grammars describe sets of  strings.  when the data is not in a trstring  format there are some subtleties involved in making the correspondence between the data and linguistic formalism. the recent work of shaw1 shows that automatic parsing recognizers can be quickly implemented when the structure of the picture can be represented by a suitable onedimensional grammar. syntax directed parsing methods are employed so that new recognition tasks require only a new syntax table and specially written primitive recognizers. 
     in addition to formal language parsing methods  our  structural description  can be used very readily in a decision tree approach to recognition. in fact  the cyclic list data format of the  structural description  lends itself naturally to sequential decisions made as the list is traversed. as with all pattern description schemes  it is possible to reduce to a vector of quantifiable proper-
ties and then use one of the many procedures based on the property vector representation of a pattern. the algorithms of freeman1  1 for  curve segment matching  are applicable with almost no change since  structural descriptions  are essentially  freeman encodings  of the curves defining boundaries in a binary picture. for example  the freeman chain-encoding of the closed curves of fig. 1 would be  1  and  1 . each digit represents a unit vector as shown in fig. 1 and the curve is traced sequentially. our  structural descriptions  vary from this format only to the extent of merging like-direction contiguous unit vectors into a single vector with length. the  structural description  for the outer curve of fig. 1 is 
essentially  these curve 
matching algorithms are capable 1 of putting together an  apictorial jigsaw puzzle  which attests to the subtlety of their shape discrimination. 
acknowledgements 
     the author would like to thank alan shaw of cornell university* and jeno gazdag of ibm for many hours of very useful discussion on pattern recognition methods; robert h. penny of general electric co. for introducing us to and stimulating our interest in digital picture processing and william f. miller of stanford university for his continuing encouragement and support of this research. we also thank the referee for several constructive suggestions. 
