 
　　　abduction is a basic form of logical inference  which is said to engender the use of plans  perceptual models  intuitions  and analogical reasoning a l l aspects of intelligent behavior that have so far failed to find representation in existing formal deductive systems. this paper explores the abductive reasoning process and develops a model for its mechanization  .which consists of an embedding of deductive logic in an iterative hypothesis and test procedure. an application of the method to the problem of medical diagnosis is discussed. 
key words 
　　　planning  perceptual-models  tbduction  deduction  induction  hypothesis-formation  linearresolution  synthesis. 
introduction 
　　　there has been growing criticism lately concerning the methodology of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. while differing in the specifics of their analyses of the problem  most thoughtful observers seem to feel that the current stock of deductive machinery is simply not up to the task at hand. a deficiency often cited with regard to the present deductive procedures is their inability to represent and make use of the sort of plans  perceptual models  intuitions  and analogical reasoning processes that characterize at least some phases of virtually a l l human problem solving activity.1 1 as remedy  various authors have suggested replacement of the existing formalisms by alternative representations such as higher logics  analog models  or general purpose programming languages. 
　　　in this paper  we offer yet another diagnosis of the problem  and propose a somewhat different solution. in our view  the principal deficiency of existing systems is their reliance on a single form of logical inference - deduction - which  though essential  is inadequate for many types of problem solving activity. our proposed remedy is to extend the existing formal systems to embrace additional forms of inferential reasoning  especially that of abduction. 
　　　abductive inference is one of the three fundamental modes of logical reasoning - the others being deduction and induction - characterized by peirce1 as the basis of scientific inquiry. 	according to peirce  abduction underlies   a l l the operations by which theories and conceptions are engendered;  moreover   abductive inference shades into perceptual judgment without any sharp demarcation line 
between them.  by his account  it is  the only kind of reasoning that supplies new ideas  the only kind which is  in this sense  synthetic.  finally  according to peirce  abduction plays a key role in the process of analogical reasoning. 
　　　since these are the very aspects of intelligent behavior that have been found wanting in the methodology of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence  it has seemed to us important to explore the abductive reasoning process and to develop a model for its mechanization. 
　　　the essence of abductive inference is the generation of hypotheses  which  if true  would explain some collection of observed facts. this concept is illustrated by the following example from mcculloch1: 
 ...abduction starts from the rule and guesses that the fact is a case under that rule: all people with tuberculosis have bumps; mr. jones has bumps; perhaps mr. jones has tuberculosis. this  sometimes mistakenly called 'inverse probability ' is never certain but i s   in medicine  called a diagnosis or  when many rules are considered a differential diagnosis  but it is usually fixed  not by a statistic  but by finding some other observable sign to clinch the answer.  
it is important to observe that the hypothesis formulated in an abduction is typically  quite different from anything observed  something that is in the 
majority of cases empirically unobservable.  thus the abductive generation of hypotheses is clearly set apart from that of induction  wherein we typically  generalize from a number of cases of which something is true  and infer that the same thing is probably true of a whole class. 1 
     the various modes of logical inference can be characterized as alternative forms of argument based on the following syllogistic schema: 

specifically: 
a  the process of deduction reasons from a major premise  t  and a minor premise  ii  to a conclusion   i i i   ; thus  from the rule   a l l things that are p are also q  and the specific case  a  is a p   we conclude via deduction inference that  a is a q.  
b  induction  on the other hand  comprises the process of reasoning from a case  ii  and a 
fact relating to that case  iii  to a hypothesis of the rule  i  that describes thia relation in general terms. thus from an observation  a is a p  and the fact  a  is a q   one form of inductive inference 
would be to hypothesize that  perhaps a l l things p are also q.  
c  the process of abduction is characterized by the form of reasoning that takes a given fact  iii  in conjunction with a rule  i  to hypothesize a case  ii  that could account for or  explain  the observed fact. thus  from an observation  a is a q  and the rule   a l l things p are also q   one might hypothesize  via abductive inference  that  perhaps a is a p.  
1 
　　　these forms of reasoning a l l entail the same underlying representation of information. whatever language is used to express the axioms and conjectures of a deductive system can also be used to express the observations and hypotheses required for induction or abduction. however  although they employ a common information structure  each of these inference schemes requires the development of a separate computational procedure for its mechanization. 
　　　some work has been reported in the literature dealing with such procedures; these have  for the most part dealt with approaches to the mechanization 
of induction    although there has also been report of at least one abductive system that takes a 
'british museum' approach to the generation of a l l possible hypotheses.1 
　　　the real problem in this area  of course  is the selective generation of hypotheses that have some 
reasonable prospect of being valid. our approach to this problem has been guided by our interpretation of the traditional maxim of occam's razor  which requires adoption of that hypothesis which is the simplest in the sense that it contains the smallest number of independent types of elements  adding least to what has been observed. we have taken this to mean that the preferred hypothesis is the one that reflects to the greatest extent possible a synthesis of ideas evoked from the observations. this heuristic c r i t e r i on of acceptability w i l l be discussed further in a later section  where procedures for testing and v a l i dation of hypotheses w i l l also be described. 
     before pursuing these matters in more detail  it w i l l be necessary to develop f i r s t the framework 
within which hypothesis formation takes place in our system. 	it w i l l be shown in the following section that the process of abductive inference can be ac-
complished by means of a procedure that makes use of much of the machinery already developed for deductive logic. although our abduction procedure has been implemented using gol1 as the basic deductive processor  for purposes of explication we describe the procedure in the context of the better known deduction scheme of s-linear resolution.1 
　　　in the following  we review f i r s t the linear deduction method  recasting the exposition somewhat so that the intrinsic problem-reduction structure of the method is exposed. in this context  we present the notion of partial trees as a way of characterizing the and/or search procedure underlying this form of 
deduction. we then show that abductive hypothesis formation can be effected by a synthesis process that 
merges partial trees into complete abduction graphs. 
1. linear resolution viewed as a problem reduction 
procedure 
     in this section  we provide a somewhat unorthodox description of the axioms  conjectures  and intermediate structures that arise in the course of a 
typical linear deduction. our purpose is to show that linear resolution can usefully be viewed as a problemreduction procedure  cf. nilsson    which uses backward search to develop direct derivations of conjunctive sets of subgoals. it is a relatively small step then to show how the same sort of search  operating on the same form of data  can be used abductively to develop direct 'explanations' of conjunctive sets of observations. 
1 the information structure 
     a deduction problem is typically stated in terms of a collection of axioms a and a conjecture c which is to be deduced from the axioms. it is conventional in resolution based systems to conjoin the negation of c to the set a  convert the resulting set of expressions to quantifier free form  then to search for evidence of a contradiction that would render the expression aac unsatisfiable. an alternative formulation of the problem would be to search for direct proof of the disjunction avc. in this section  we discuss the procedure from yet a third point of view namely  the demonstration of at-c; i.e.  taking the expressions of a as axioms  to derive c by means of a direct proof procedure. these are a l l essentially equivalent views of the problem; they merely require somewhat different handling of the conversion to quantifier free form and subsequent interpretation of the information structure. 
     the f i r s t step in our procedure is to convert the axiom set a to conjunctive-normal quantifier-free form  using the techniques first outlined by davis -'-1 ordinarily  the conjecture c. would then be negated and added to this axiom set. in our case  however  as in the direct proof procedures of cooper1 and maslov1 the conjecture is transformed into disjunctive normal form on the basis of the following revised rules: 
1. elimination of implication;  as described by davis  
1. reduction of the scope of negation;  as in davis  
1. replacement of each universally quantified variable by a skolem function having as arguments the variables of any existential quantifiers occurring before the universal quantifier. 
1. elimination of existential quantifiers. 
1. transformation of the resulting expression to disjunctive normal form. 
the result of this process will be a disjunctive expression consisting of one or more conjunctive sets of literals. 

1 

     these formulations of the problem are surrogates in the sense that the solution of either one of them is equivalent to solution of the original problem. collectively  therefore  they constitute an  or  branch in the search tree  each successor of which is an  and  node  consisting of the conjunction of l i t e r als in the conjecture associated with that sub-problem . 
     any unit clause in the axiom set is considered to be unconditional assertion of fact; a l l others are conditional. for example  the clause {l1 l1 ...ln} can be thought of as asserting the implication  m 1 l j     where m is the conjunction of a l l tj for j j= i. this can be interpreted aa expressing a condition  namely m  under which li can be deduced  by means of modus ponens perhaps with substitution . similar implicative expressions can be developed to assert the conditions under which each of the other literals of the clause can be derived. 
     these implicative expressions can be thought of as productions  or 'rewrite rules  that are the transformations by which a problem may be 'reduced' i.e.  replaced by an equivalent set of sub-problems. in the running example  if we reformulate the axioms to emphasize the conditional nature of axioms 1 and 1  the resulting set of productions would be: 

here the symbol   actually  is to be thought of as a replacement operator. 
1 interpretation of the deduction procedure 
　　the sub-problems described in the preceding section correspond in an obvious manner to the various 
ways in which an i n i t i a l clause may be selected from the bet of support  where this consists of clauses arising from the conjecture  in a resolution deduction. 
　　　it should also be readily apparent from a comparison of the two procedures that the problem-reduction search process described below  which results from our interpretation of the axioms as productions  is essentially the same as the s-linear resolution 
method described by loveland1. 
　　　a linear deduction is a procedure that 'solves' the conjunctive problem posed by a conjecture by systematically dealing with each of the conjuncts  sub-problems  in turn  proceeding typically from right to l e f t   each l i t e r a l of the conjecture is processed in the folloving manner: 
     first  the l i t e r a l is 'matched'  using robinson's unification procedure 1  against each unit clause and against the l i t e r a l to the left of ' - ' in each production of the axiom set. 	every successful match gives rise to an alternative successor of the starting conjecture. 
     any match that succeeds with respect to a unit  unconditional  axiom provides a solution to the subproblem posed by the subject l i t e r a l  which is true 'by assumption' . thus this term may be deleted from the l i s t of literals of the successor conjecture  after appropriate instantiation of any bindings of 
variables established in the matching process . 
　　　for those matches that succeed with respect to the left hand side of a production  conditional axiom   the successor conjecture is formed by replacing the subject l i t e r a l by the appropriately instantiated collection of literals comprising the right hand side of that axiom. 
　　　the set of successors constructed as above  taken collectively  constitute an 'or' branch in the search tree - each element of which is a surrogate for the original conjecture. 
　　　if a successor node is null   i . e .   contains no further sub-problems   the portion of the search tree by which it was discovered constitutes a solution to the original problem. a non-null node with no successors cannot be solved. 
　　　it sometimes happens that while developing the search tree for a particular l i t e r a l  say s   a sub-
goal is generated that is the negation of that which is to be proved  in this case: s . in such cases  it 
can be shown that  provided that a l l other conjunctive subgoals in the tree are satisfied  a proof of s has been established by reductio ad absurdura  and that the contradictory subgoal can be deleted from further consideration  immediately upon its generation. this refinement to the basic problem-reduction scheme can be seen to be related to the subsumption condition which is required for completeness of linear resolution 
strategies. 
1 
　　　to illustrate the linear deduction procedure  we give below a derivation of version ii of the previous example. 
the starting form of the conjecture is: 
{r z   q z } 
to show that this is derivable we must now show that each l i t e r a l is either an instance of an axiom  in 
which case it can be deleted from the set of subproblems  or else is implied by some conjunction of literals  each of which is derivable. 
　　　in order to prove 'q z ' we can use axiom 1 . by substituting 'a' for the existentially quantified variable v of the conjecture  we bee that the right-most sub-problem in the set  r a   q a } is solved t r i v i a l l y   and we are left with the successor problem  r a l. 
　　　since the l i t e r a l 'r a ' matches two of the conditional axioms  there w i l l be two successor nodes: 
	a: 	{p a   q a }  and 
     as candidate hypotheses  our procedure selectb those literals that are abandoned by deduction  in the sense that they f a i l to generate successor nodes. a candidate hypothesis is entertained seriously if it arises in the partial search trees that are developed on the basis of two or more of the data making up the conjunctive observation being explained; the 
more data accounted for by a candidate hypothesis  the more highly regarded it is by the abduction processor. this is our implementation of the maxim of occam's razor  
     data contribute to a hypothesis by means of an operation that we refer to as synthesis  which is actually analogous to the operation of factoring in resolution. this process of synthesis  or factoring across partial trees  is at present the only 
mechanism by which abductlve hypotheses are generated in our system. other useful heuristic criteria w i l l undoubtedly be forthcoming  but what form these may take is s t i l l an open question. 
     the combined abduction/deduction procedure is illustrated by the following example  based on our 
application of the method to the problem of clinical diagnosis. 
     assume that we have available a pathophysiological data base  structured along the lines suggested in the preceding bection  that includes the following sort of axioms:  note that the replacement operator  -  should rightfully be interpreted as  could be caused by  rather than as  implied by  in this context.  
axioms 
	a1l 	{chills *＊ presence  p.s  a inflammatory  p   
	a1 	{pain  r  *＊ presence  p s  a located-in  s.r } 
	a1 	{inflammatory  abscess } 
	a1 	{located-in  liver  right-upper-quadrant } 
	a1 	{jaundice ＊*＊ presence  p  liver } 
here  we have indicated only those conditional axioms that are considered relevant for the application at hand. other variations of the conditional axioms al and a1 which are not useful for purposes of diagnosis are not explicitly displayed.  in our work  this form of information structure is implemented by means of the gol delta function  cf  ianer -1.  
     assume that the following conjunctive set of symptoms has been observed: 
{chills  pain  right-upper-quadrant } 
the diagnostic task 1b to formulate some hypothesis of the form: 
	{presence 	 p s } 
where p is some abnormal process  and s is some structure such that the presence of p at s could account for the observations given. 
     using the synthesis criterion suggested above to control the adduction of hypotheses  which are displayed to the left of the vertical bar in lines 1 below  a diagnostic model of the pathology can be derived as follows: 
1 

　　　except for the introduction of a tentative hypothesis in line 1 above  and the fact that literals are processed on a first-in-first-out basis  this derivation follows the usual form of a linear deduction as previously described. the abduction task is completed when no remaining subgoals occur to the right of the vertical bar; any terms occurring to the left of the bar at that juncture constitute the 
basis for a diagnostic model. 
　　　it may be of some interest to follow the course of development of the diagnosis in the case i l l u s trated above. in line 1  where the synthesis step occurs  what is hypothesized is that some as yet unknown process affecting an unspecified structure is responsible for both of the observed symptoms. the instantiations that then take place in the final two steps of this derivation entail contributions from the search trees developed from each of the root nodes; thus the proposed diagnosis represents a true synthetic inference. 
　　　a hypothesis developed on the basis of such a procedure i s   in general  not a unique explanation of the data  and the problem then becomes one of discrimination  among contending diagnoses. this phase of the problem entails the use of deductive  as well as abductive logic. once a diagnostic model has been proposed  it can be used to generate predictions of additional unreported manifestations of the assumed pathology. thus  for example  in the case illustrated above  the presumption of a liver abscess can be used to deduce the prediction of jaundice  on the basis of axiom 1 . such predictions can then be subjected to empirical verification. any new observational data can then be fed back via the abduction procedure through another iteration of the cycle - giving rise  perhaps  to revised hypotheses that may in turn generate new predictions  leading to new observations  and so forth. 
1. 	discussion 
　　the iterative hypothesis and test procedure outlined in the preceding section i s   of course  one of the basic paradigms of human cognitive  and problem solving activity. the performance of any task that is basically synthetic in nature entails the use of this procedure. we would include tn the l i s t of such tasks those episodes of comprehension and planning that arise in the course of any real problem-solving act. 
     a number of studies are presently being conducted at pittsburgh to evaluate and further develop this concept. these include the biomedical theory 
1 
formation project which has been reported previously  and a study of planning in organic synthesis  recently completed by smith  1which uses abduction to develop strategies for deductive planning of a synthesis. another interesting project  now nearing completion  uses abductive logic to develop perceptual models for use in natural language comprehension; another exploits the planning and modelbuilding capabilities of the system in the automatic programming task environment. 
     there would appear to be a number of ways to go from here. as practical systems of higher logic 
become available  we may want to raise the sights of the abduction processor accordingly; our gol imple-
mentation already has limited 'higher level' capab i l i t i e s that have been found extremely useful in some applications. certainly  the procedure should be extended to include a mechanization of induction as well as the other two forms of inference: reasoning by analogy  according to peirce  consists of an induction and an abduction followed by a deduction. additional applications that may shed further light on the processes involved  such as procedures for strategic planning in theorem proving  should be investigated. 
     while we have in no way begun to exhaust the questions and issues that this new methodology raises  results from our i n i t i a l forays into the field have encouraged us to continue with the task at hand. 
bibliography 
1. sloman  a.  interactions between philosophy and a r t i f i c i a l intelligence: the role of intuition and non-logical reasoning in intelligence. art i f i c i a l intelligence  1    1   pp. 1. 
1. anderson  b. and hayes  p.  an arraignment of theorem proving or the logicians' folly  dept. of computational logic  university of edinburgh. dcl memo #1  1. 
1. dr-eyfus  h.l.  what computers can't do. harper &. row  1. 
1. peirce  c.s.  collected papers of charles sanders 
	peirce. 	c. hartshorne  p. weiss  and a. burks 
 eds.  1 vols.  cambridge  mass.  1  especially vol. i i   p. 1. 
1. mcculloch  w.s.   what's in the brain that ink may character   presented at the international congress for logic  methodology  and philosophy of science  1. reprinted in: w.s. mcculloch  embodiments of mind  the mit press  1. 
1. goudge  t.a.  the thought of c.s. peirce  dover  1. 
1. plotkin  g.d.  a further note on inductive gen-eralization. in: mach. int. 1  meltzer  d. and michie  b.  eds.   amer. elsevier  1  
1. popplestone. r.j.  an experiment in automatic i n -duction. in; mach. int. 1  meltzer  b. and michie  d.  eds.   amer. elsevier  1. 
1. morgan  c.g.  hypothesis generation by machine. 
a r t i f i c i a l intelligence 1  1  pp. 1. 
1 
1. pople  h.e.  jr.  a goal oriented language for the computer  in representation and meaning experiments with information processing systems. 
b simon and l. siklossy 	 eds.   prentice-hall  1. 
1. loveland  d.w.  a unifying view of some linear herbrand procedures. jacm  vol. 1  1  april  1. 
1. nilsson  n.j   problem solving methods in art i f i c i a l intelligence. mcgraw-hill  new york  new york 1. 
1. davis  m.  eliminating the irrelevant from mechanical proofs  proc. symposia in applied maths  vol. xv  ams.  ed. metropolis  et. al.  1  pp. 1. 
1. cooper  d.c.  theorem proving in computers  in 
advances in programming and non-numerical computation. l. fox  ed.   pergamon press  1. pp. 1. 
1. maslov  s.ju.  proof-search strategies for methods of the resolution type. in: mach  int. 1  meltzer  b. and michie  d.  eds.  amer. elsevier  1. 
1. robinson  j.a.  a machine-oriented logic based on the resolution principle. j. ass. comput. mach.  1  pp. 1. 
1. isner  d.w.  an inferential processor for interacting with biomedical data using restricted natural language. proc. sjcc  1. 
1. pople  h. and werner  g.  an information processing approach to theory formation in biomedical research. proc. sjcc  1. 
1. smith  g.  jr. mechanized procedures for strategic planning in synthetic organic chemistry. doctoral dissertation  dept. of chemistry  univ. of pittsburgh  1. 
1 
