 
     a computer program has been written that successfully discovers syntheses for complex organic chemical moleculeb. the definition of the search space and strategies for heuristic search are described in this paper. 
it is not growing like a tree ... 
. . . i n small proportions we just beauties see; - ben jonson. 
introduction 
     the design of application of a r t i f i c i a l i n t e l l i gence to a scientific task such as organic chemical synthesis was the topic of a doctoral thesis completed in the summer of 1i.1 chemical synthesis in practice involves i  the choice of molecule to be synthesized; i i   the formulation and specification of a plan for synthesis  involving a valid reaction pathway leading from commercial or readily available compounds to the 
target compounds with consideration of feasibility regarding the purposes of synthesis ; i i i   the selection of specific individual steps of reaction and their temporal ordering for execution; iv  the experimental execution of the synthesis and v  the redesign of syntheses  if necessary  depending upon the experimental results. 	in contrast to the physical synthesis of the molecule  the activity in i i   above can be termed the 'formal synthesis'. 	this development of the specification of syntheses involves no laboratory 
technique and is carried out mainly on paper and in the minds of chemists  and now within a computer's memory! . 
importance and difficulty of chemical synthesis 
     the importance of chemical synthesis is undeniable and there is emphatic testimony to the high regard held by scientists for synthesis chemists. the level of intellectual activity and d i f f i c u l t y involved in chemical synthesis are illustrated by vitamin a  example solved by our program  and vitamin b1. both problems absorbed the efforts of several teams of expert chemists and held  them at bay for over 1 years.; professor r.b. woodward of harvard university was awarded the nobel prize in 1 for his numerous and b r i l l i a n t syntheses and their contribution to science. 
a design decision 
　　a program has been written to execute a search for chemical syntheses   i . e .   formal syntheses  for relatively complex organic molecules. emphasis has 
been placed on achieving a fast and efficient practical system that solves interesting problems in organic chemistry. 
　　the choice of design made very early in this project is worth mentioning. we could have aimed at an interactive system which would employ a chemist seated at a console guiding the search for synthesis. the merit of this approach  exemplified by corey  lies in this direct interaction between the chemist and computer whereby the designers are afforded rapid feedback allowing the system to evolve into a tool for 
the chemists. an obvious shortcoming  however  is that it circumvents the questions that are very pertinent to a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. in contrast  our approach was to design a non-interactive  batch-mode program with a r t i f i c i a l intelligence aspects b u i l t into i t . we have tackled the problem of synthesis discovery chiefly from the vantage point of a r t i f i c i a l i n t e l l i gence  u t i l i z i n g the task area only as a vehicle to investigate the nature of am application of machine 
reasoning with am extensive scientific knowledge base. 
our choice is perhaps vindicated on three counts: 
a  it has freed us from the distractions of designing a user interface  which is not a simple task; 
b  it has resulted in a fast system that runs on standard hardware to be found in nearly every mediumsized computation center  and has produced successfully several syntheses for each of several complex molecules; 
c  the program works autonomously in searching for solutions and incorporates into its task several key judgemental capabilities of a competent synthesis chemist. 
task environment 
     the program accepts as input some representation of the target compound together with a l i s t of conditions and constraints that must govern the proposed syntheses  figure l     a l i s t of compounds that are commercially available  along with indications of cost and availability  can  be consulted. a reaction library containing generalized procedures is supplied to the program. the output is a set of proposed syntheses  each being a valid reaction pathway from available compounds to the target molecule. the syntheses are arrived at by means of strategic exploration of an and-or search space. the design of the search strategy concerns us here. 
     the search space has characteristics that make the problem a novel one. well-known search strategies using and-or problem solving trees1 concern themselves with either optimal solutions or minimal effort spent in finding a solution. heuristic dendral in its search for a solution has the distinction of knowing that only one answer is 'the correct answer' and fewer number of alternative solutions is commensurate with greater success for the program. the synthesis program  on the other hand  is not aimed toward any optimal search or toward 'the best' synthesis  there is not one . quite simply  the task of the synthesis search is to explore alternative routes of synthesis and develop a problem solving tree rich in information  having several 'good' complete syntheses. the success of the program is not to be judged solely on the number or variety of completed syntheses  but with the understanding that paths of exploration not completed by the program are very informative as well. 
     the reader is referred to the thesis for a detailed exposition of the algorithm  programming details such as chemical structure representation  representation of reactions  the setup of a reaction library and a catalog of readily available compounds. this brief article describes one aspect of the problem that is of primary significance to those interested in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. other topics of interest to 
be found in the thesis include: 	elimination of invalid 
1 subgoals. invalidation of subgoals by cost considerations  elimination of redundant subgoals and elimination of unpromising subgoals. 
basil- concepts and terms 
     a sample synthesis problem  deliberately chosen for its simplicity  is now followed partially through the search for a solution. the intent of this example is mainly to introduce some basic concepts and to illustrate terminology. it is not intended to explicate the complexity of the task area. in dealing 
with the example  the hypothetical course of problem solution by a chemist is given and the problem solving components related to the program are presented in addition. it should be mentioned that this problem has been solved by the program  with f a c i l i t y   . 
     consider a synthesis is required for a compound whose structural formula is as shown below. 
＊ch1 
ch 
chemists also accept a stylized version of the same diagram: 
　　the usual representation of chemical structures for program manipulation involves a l i s t structure with each item in the l i s t representing an atom and its connections to other atoms by bonds. we have designed a variant of the connection l i s t to suit the manipulations relevant to synthesis. this variant w i l l be referred to as the topological structure description for a compound. details of this representation and 
manipulation are described in the thesis 	and are not needed to understand this paper. 
     the chemist examines the molecule and recognizes several structural features such as the presence of the six-membered ring with three internal double bonds  usually called the phenyl group . other noticeable features are the ketone  c=1. and olefin bond  -ch=ch- . what is defined as a feature depends upon the purpose of the examination and the chemical knowledge one possesses. we use the term syntheme to refer to the structural features of a molecule that are relevant to i t s synthesis. 
　　the program examines the topological structure description and through graphical pattern matching techniques develops an attribute list consisting of a l i s t of synthemes for the molecule. 
　　among the features of the molecule  the phenyl group is very stable and occurs in many commercially available compounds. thus  in seeking ways to synthesize this compound the chemist considers the ketone and olefin bond and not the benzene as possible reactive sites. 
　　the chemist knows of several reactions that can synthesize an olefin bond and several that can synthesize the ketone syntheme. he can consider each of these as the t r i a l last step of the synthesis sequence he is seeking. 
　　the program is provided with a collection of reaction schemata called the reaction library. the reaction schemata are grouped into reaction chapters according to the syntheme they synthesize. each reaction schema is provided with a set of tests to be performed on the target molecule and structural patterns for the target and subgoal molecules. the tests embody many of the chemical heuristics that guide the program. based on the results of some of the tests the program may reject the reaction schema. each schema has an a p r i o r i assignment of merit rating. based on the results of other tests the program may alter the merit rating to reflect the suitability of the schema to the specific target molecule. 
     we may represent the alternative courses of syntheses developed for the target molecule by a problem solving graph {figure 1 . the target molecule is a node at the top. a series of arrows lead from the target through the chapter  attribute and schema layers to the subgoal layer. each subgoal consists of one or more conjoined compounds - implying that they a l l enter the reaction to generate the target molecule. thus  the compound layer is an and-layer in this and-or graph. 
     if a l l the compounds needed for any one subgoal are available commercially we would consider that we know a plausible single-step synthesis for the target molecule. any compound generated as subgoal which is not commercially available needs to be synthesized and can be considered in turn as a target molecule. 
     repeating the above considerations with the new target molecule w i l l open the path for multi-step syntheses. the problem solving graph branches downward like a tree whereby each path represents a possible course of synthesis for the target molecule. 
     the above presentation is not to imply that a 
     chemist actually follows these steps shown in devising syntheses. the method of reasoning analytically from the target molecule in a sequence of steps  ending up in available compounds is but one technique in the vast 
repertoire a chemist usually possesses. however  the analytic search procedure is amenable to convenient computer implementation and is suitable for investigating a very large class of synthesis problems. the solution scheme is described in the next section. 
solution scheme 
     the problem lends i t s e l f to an analytic search procedure. the search begins at the target molecule and the last step of the synthesis is the f i r s t to be discovered  the next to the last step is found second and so on. thus the discovery sequence is the reverse of the synthesis sequence. 
     the goal is given to the program as a chemical structure description. 	the description  whether given as a canonical compact linear notation {wiswesser notation   or as a topological structure description  gives information about what atoms are present in the 
molecule and how they are connected. 
　　the structure of the molecule is then examined to identify i t s syhthemes  such as the presence of certain types of bonds  the occurrence of certain groups of atoms and generally the substructures of given types. such information is automatically collected into an attribute list. 
     a large set of chemical reactions  over 1  is compiled and each reaction is schematized to be usable as an operator in developing the search space. 	in using the reaction schema as an operator the reaction is used in its inverse direction   i . e .   from the reaction product to the reactant  analogous to the use of a rule of logical deduction in its inverse 

1 





1 

1 

direction in a theorem proving task. 
     the collection of reaction schemata is known as the reaction library. 	the reaction library is arranged as several chapters  each containing reaction schemata that are relevant to or affect a syntheme of a target molecule - the theme of the chapter. 
     each reaction scheme has detailed tests op relevance and tests of applicability toward the target molecule. the tests are performed before the operator 
is employed. 	the application of an operator on a specific attribute of a molecule results in one or 
more subgoals. each subgoal in turn has one or more conjoined molecules to be used together in the reaction. a subgoal thus generated is further subject to tests of validity. the distinction between the two sets of tests is that one set is conducted on the target molecule  whereas the other set is conducted on the subgoals after subgoal generation. 
     the successive application of operators on the subgoal compounds and a l l their subgoals generates the search space. the strongest condition for termination of path development is the ready availability of the compounds needed. the availability is checked using a compound catalog of a chemical manufacturing company  a l i s t of about 1 compounds. 
     figures 1 and 1 describe the schematic flowchart of the algorithm and the five layers of the problem solving tree generated in developing subgoals of one level. 
sample problem and effort spent 
     it is a matter of considerable d i f f i c u l t y to estimate the sise of search space either in general or for a specific example. an attempt is made here  
however  to arrive at a figure for the search space of the compound vitamin a. this compound bears a complex structure  figure 1  and has held the attention of synthesis chemists for more than a decade of research effort. 

     there are two synthemes of the molecule for which the program finds reaction chapters. there are five 
instances of the syntheme doublebond and one instance of the syntheme alcohol. 	thus  there are six attribute nodes in the f i r s t level of subgoal generation  refer figure 1 . 	the reaction chapters have five and four reaction schemata in the respective chapters. 	one schema is invalid according to the tests and one schema fails in matching the goal pattern specified in the transformation  with the structure of the molecule. 	after validating and pruning out duplicates  1 subgoals are entered in the problem solving tree to conclude the f i r s t level of subgoal generation  none of these subgoals completes a synthesis for vitamin a. 	some of the subgoals are 
of single molecules while others are of two. 	there are 1 distinct compounds in the subgoals and only three of these are found readily available through the compound catalog. 
     the program developed the space to a maximum depth of nine subgoal levels  or  1 times 1 plus 1 =  1 layers of the problem solving tree. if the potential problem solving tree were considered to be branching uniformly at a l l levels  it would represent a potential search space of  1 **1 or approximately  lo **ls  subgoals. however  the growth of the problem solving tree can be attenuated strongly by a variety of factors such as the duplication of subgoal compounds  the completion of syntheses or the reduction of the number of applicable operators at deeper levels of the tree. allowing such attenuation the search space might then be of the order of  l1 **1 subgoals. this estimate is conservative. 
     the prograra explored the search space for a time duration of six minutes  *  and examined about 1 subgoals. these subgoals include only those generated from applicable schema  validated and retained for further perusal. of these  over 1 subgoals were expanded and had subtrees developed for them. at least 1 different completed syntheses were extracted from the search tree  and many more were interesting and near completion. the problem solving tree actually developed by the program is summarized in figure 1. 
 *  program written mainly in pl/one running on ibm 1 under batch mode. 
design of search strategy 
     the importance of guiding the search properly through the search space cannot be overemphasized. many a designer of al programs has wrestled with the question of what is the 'best' strategy for guiding heuristic search  taking into account the characteristics of the space and the requirements on the solution. the strategies considered vary in their choice of primitives and their sources of information. 
     the programmed determination of a search strategy - an aspect of what may be termed the paradigm issue in artificial intelligence - is worthy of attention. although we do not have a program to generate its own strategy as yet  we do have a program that selects a strategy suitable for the situation from among 
prespecifled alternatives. the following strategies can either be observed as program's behaviour or can be considered useful for incorporation. 
fixed strategy in chemical synthesis 
     fixed strategies are useful when one needs to be systematic in generation. the depth-first and one level breadth-first strategies are well known and are quite unsuitable for developing syntheses. 
     however  under most schemes of evaluation and subgoal selection there are situations when several contenders t i e to the highest value. a fixed strategyis usually pursued in those instances. the synthesis program w i l l select the latest subgoal f i r s t among those whose priority is not resolved otherwise. 
     most organic compounds of 'small' size are either available or can be easily synthesized. when the program encounters small compounds that are readily available  search is terminated along that path after assigning a compound merit determined by the catalog 

1 

1 
	figure s. 	machine generated problem solving tree for vitamin a 
note on figure 1. 
synthesis-search tree  schematic  for vitamin a. filled-in. circles represent reactants of subgoals selected for further development. order of development is indicated by the circled numerals. compound nodes connected by a horizontal line segment  as in subgoal 1  are both required for a given reaction. a l l generated subgoals on the tree that were not selected for exploration ore represented by a horizontal bar  with the number of subgoals in the unexplored group indicated under the bar. subgoals that were selected for exploration that have no progeny on the tree  as in subgoal 1  failed to generate any subgoalb that could pass the heuristic tests for admission to the search-tree. 
1 

entries like the cost of the substance. search is terminated for small compounds even when not readily available  with the computation of the estimated d i f f i c u l t y of its synthesis. 
partial path evaluation in chemical synthesis 
     the predominant strategy that the program uses is to evaluate every path in the search tree leading down from the prime target molecule and to choose one that gets the highest value. the compounds that terminate the branched path and the reactions used in every step enter into computing the value for each path. the program has rules on computing compound merits  combining merits of conjoined compounds to get subgoal 
merits and combining those with reaction merits to 
obtain values that can be backed up the tree. 
conjoined subgoal compounds a and b 
	a 	b 
     it is also reasonable to use an estimated size of search that may ensue on different paths  in order to continue search. it is especially useful when such program resources as time or storage are dwindling or when the evaluation leaves a large number of subgoals of equal priority. 
application of key transforms in chemical synthesis 
　　the democratic tenet  all reactions are created equal  has to be cast aside  in order to allow preferential treatment for key transformations. the present reaction library contains a priori merit ratings of reaction schemata. the merit of each schema is further adjusted when used  to correspond to the specific application of the transformation. this technique allows preferred pursuit of paths having the key transforms. 
is the technique known to chemists as blocking or protection. blocking of certain structural features of molecules is a very useful synthesis technique 
facilitating solutions to many problems. sometimes a synthesis without blocking may not be possible. with 
reference to figure 1  the reasoning may proceed as 
follows. 
backup merit for c 
	= f  merit of d  reaction merit d - 	c   	subgoal compound with attributes 
backup merit for b 
	= f  merit of c  reaction merit c - 	b   
backup merit for a 
= r  merit of e  merit of f and 
	reaction merit of e + f - 	a   
backup merit for subgoal ab 	subgoal where fb gets blocked 
= g  merit of a  merit of b   
presently  the functions f and g simply multiply their 
arguments and return the product normalized to the projected subgoal 　　this a priori preference system can be overridden by the program under special situations. 	an example 

scale 1. 	the definitions are presently adequate  but can be changed easily. 
     the selection of subgoal proceeds from the top of the tree downward  selecting the subgoal with the highest merit at every level. however  conjoined 
compounds represent anp-nodes in this; and-or tree  and 
so the compound with the least merit is chosen from among conjuncts. this is in accordance with the 
general strategy of dealing with anp-or problem 
solving graphs. 
     the evaluation  backup procedure and goal selection are described in fuller details in the thesis . 
complexity/simplicity of subgoal compounds 
　　at every stage of evaluation and search continuation  the terminal nodes of the search tree are compounds. a graph-traverser-like strategy w i l l 
evaluate the terminal nodes and continue search with 
one of highest merit. in designing syntheses  the intervening reactions are as important as the subgoal compounds. thus this strategy in i t s e l f is unsuitable. but again  among partial paths that get equal evaluation  it is reasonable to choose those that are terminated by subgoals of higher merit.   i f the subgoal is of higher merit this would imply that the 
reactions are poorer on that path; thus one may actually prefer terminating subgoals with the lowest merit depending upon solution requirements.  
size of search space 
 simple  valid  
	figure 1. 	application of key transform - blocking 
     the transformation ta is a preferred transformation but it is made inapplicable as functional group fb is 
very sensitive to the reaction  making it invalid. 	the 
transformation tb which does not have a priori high 
merit  however  removes fb or changes it to fb'; and 
fb' is not sensitive to ta. thus subgoal resulting from ta can be terminated. the subgoal from tb is 
realized to have higher merit in this context  because 
it can now be subject to ta to yield a simpler valid subgoal. such a sophisticated attention refocussing 
scheme using contextual evaluation produces excellent 
results  by overruling the standard evaluation and forcing development along lines that are intuitive to 
the consulting chemist. 
selection and ordering of attributes 
　　some attributes of molecules prove to be more sensitive than others toward a l l or most transforma-
tions. 	thus  while selecting attributes one may impose an order of preference or one may exclude certain 
attributes  saving the effort to be spent on whole 
chapters of the reaction library. 	the a priori 
ordering of attributes with due consideration to reactivities is another piece of chemical knowledge thus available. 
1      further  a contextual reordering is possible here. vitamin a  for example  has four instances of the attribute olefin bond. one of the operators results in a smaller but similar compound with only three olefin bonds and the reaction i t s e l f has high merit. 
when continuing search vith this new subgoal a clear indication now comes from the above observation  to prefer to operate on another olefin bond. the similarity of the resulting compound also raises the expectation that successive application of the same 
transformation may solve the problem at hand. 
key intermediate compounds in chemical synthesis 
 suggested  
     some compounds can be changed quickly into a variety of similar but different compounds and are often used as key intermediate compounds in synthesis. when a subgoal compound is similar to a readily available key intermediate  synthesis search may profitably be geared toward the specific intermediate. on the other hand  when a key intermediate subgoal is generated that is not available  a synthesis for that intermediate subgoal is to be actively pursued with 
high priority. 
use of analogy in chemical synthesis  suggested  
     quite often chemists arrive at syntheses by following the known synthesis of an analogous compound. situations where solution  or simplification  by analogy can be applied arise profusely: the goal compound is analogous to a compound whose synthesis is published  a key intermediate can be synthesized by analogy to an available key intermediate  a subgoal generated is similar to one or more intermediate compounds generated and solved by the program during 
this run alone. however  the advantages of overruling normal search by reasoning through analogy in these situations is not clear. 
     it is needless to emphasize that the synthesis of an intermediate compound solved at one instance in. the problem solving tree is available throughout the course of the program run and is reused by direct reference. 
external conditions guiding the search 
　　there is need for tempering the selection of syntheses with such considerations as the toxicity of 
the substances to be manipulated  special apparatus needed to contain and react gases and cost associated with expensive commercial compounds  reagents or catalysts. 	however  	the problem at present is seen as being one of f i l t e r i n g out syntheses not desired from the output of the program. 	this allows a fuller set of prejudices and personal preferences of chemists to 
be imposed upon the choice of syntheses. 
     we have consciously avoided developing an interactive system where a chemist supplies guidance on-line to the program. our interest in the problem is mainly as an ai endeavour and to that extent our attention was given to designing a good blend of search strategies as outlined above that could effectively substitute for the chemists' guidance. 
remarks 
     the strategies discussed above f a l l roughly into subgoal-dependence  transform-dependence and partial-path-dependence. the criteria to be used in each strategy  the l i m i t s   thresholds  orderings and 
merit boosts  can have several sources of information  figure 1 . 

　　f i r s t l y   quite often the criteria derived from models  implicit or explicit  are in the form of absolute limits or fixed orderings  reflecting the static nature of the model one has in mind. in  tuning  these c r i t e r i a   one is readjusting the model of the problem or solution space. secondly  in certain cases  the program can be delegated the task of keeping i t s e l f tuned with respect to certain c r i t e r i a   using cumulated past experience  giving rise to an adaptive  and maybe learning  characteristic. thirdly  the contextual evaluations explained in the last section illustrate how the program can  using knowledge 
acquired from the current session  temporarily overrule a model prescribed to aid it in finding better solu-
tions faster  without leading to adaptation or adjustment of the model. 
acknowledgement: 	help from mr. arthur hart and 
mrs. ho-jane shue  and guidance from professors herbert gelernter and frank fowler is acknowledged with deepest thanks. 
