 
   this paper reports on current work at the university of california at berkeley whose goal is the design and implementation of a relatively inexpensive  but versat i l e   experimental  computer-controlled robot suitable for use in either a research or educational setting. the berkeley robot  dubbed jason  is nearing comoletion and hardware tests are now being conducted. 
   jason is designed so as to permit 1t to navigate and manipulate simple objects in a real-world environment. it uses a variety of sensory-motor and communication devices; among these are an ultrasonic range  motion  and material detector  an isolated-word speech recognizer  a limited speech synthesizer  six inexpensive proximity detectors  and two arms for simple manipulation  all of which are mounted on a platform chassis. the robot vehicle is remotely controlled  using radio telemetry  by a time-shared  virtual memory  hp-1 mini-computer  utilizing adaptive learning programs. 
jason was primarily constructed to explore: 
    1  how an inexpensive  real-world robot system might be designed  and 
    1  what problems a robot  encounters  and  creates  while performing tasks in a real-world environment populated by humans. 
   the results of this research will hopefully enable us to design and build better  more reliable and safer  robots at a modest price that are still capable of performing a variety of interesting and useful tasks. 
key words and phrases 
   robots  artificial intelligence  problem solving  learning  real-world environment. 
cr categories 
   1  learning and adaptive systems ! 1  problem solving -  1  miscellaneous-robots . 
 the research reported here was sponsored in part by the electronics research laboratory of the university of california at berkeley under grants afosr-1  nsf-gj-1 and nsf-go-1. additional support was provided by the department of electrical engineering and computer sciences and the lawrence hall of science of the university of california at berkeley. 
i. introduction 
   the field of robotics is rapidly becoming an important topic of research and study. this is due 1n part to the possible widespread applications of robots to tedious  repetitive  or dangerous tasks. while robots with one or two highly sophisticated sensory devices have been extensively investigated  it 1s only recently that more research is being extended to system design and integration of a robot having a relatively large number of sensory-motor devices. 
   current work at the university of california 1s being carried out with the objective of designing and building a comparatively inexpensive  but generalpurpose experimental computer-controlled robot. the berkeley robot  dubbed jason  is intended to be capable of operating in a real-world environment populated by human beings. for the sake of this investigation  the real-world environment is taken to consist of the berkeley campus at large  especially the second and third floors of cory hall  the engineering building on campus. when jason is fully operational  it will not only be used for research  but also as a teaching aid for young children at the lawrence hall of science  as 
well as for public demonstrations. 
   this paper is divided into four sections  the first section explores the background and rationale of the project. the second section presents a brief description of jason itself. the third section briefly 
mentions the need for safety precautions. finally  the last section summarizes and draws some conclusions about the berkeley robot project. 
i i . background and purpose 
   considerable effort has already been directed toward the development of automatic machines for factories  farming  transportation  and so forth. yet such 
machines have been carefully contrived to deal with highly constrained environments. the addition of just a few advanced sensors and a small amount of computational ability might enhance the versatility of such machines man vfold. l  for example  advanced  general purpose robots could carrv out diverse real-world tasks such as the following:  1  space and underwater 
exploration  	 1  teach1nq-aid in schools  
 1  gardening  	 1  harvesting  	 1  bank security 
guard  	 1  warehouseman  	 1  inexpensive hospital aid 
1  1  traffic controller   1  mining surveilance  1  street cleaning   1  deed sea farming  and  1  office-building external window washer. 
   in fact  any task which requires only  closed thinking   i.e.  a task constrained by a specified goal and set of operators  could be performed by an advanced robot. furthermore  several robots  carrying out different tasks  could all be supervised by the same time-shared computer system. these robots  with various interchangeable sensory-motor devices and computer programs for different tasks  would be able to carry out a wide variety of jobs for a much smaller cost than the exnense of developing special purpose automation for each task. 
   in the field of industrial robots  a careful survey of the potential marketinq opportunities has been made in coles  pp. 1 . in the area of education  papert has made considerable'strides with his ''turtle  robots. 
   for this reason  considerable research in robots is currently being carried out at major centers such as sri  mit  stanford university   and the university of edinburgh  sophisticated automata have been designed and built to oper .te on table-tops or in carefully controlled environments. however  when 
trying to perceive and model the real world  ai researchers in the field of robotics have traditionally focused their attention on the television camera as their major source of sensory data. consequently  a great deal of effort has been directed toward the computational processes needed to make  sense  out of the tv camera image whenever it depicted a typicallycluttered  real-world scene. these processes have tended to become increasingly expensive even when the environment is ingeniously constrained to capitalize on the idiosyncrasies of the tv camera. the time to process a single complete scene has taken upwards of ten minutes at sri using a high-powered computer facility. obviously  a low-cost robot cannot afford to adopt this approach. 
   our own research departs from previous work 1n that it attempts to incorporate the output of a variety of inexpensive sensors to nrovide more efficient perception of the real world  when tailored to simple navigation and manipulation tasks. under these conditions such sensors are not only computationally cheaper  but are more reliable  since different sensory modes can mutually reinforce and corroborate one another. if binary sensing-decisions can be made in real time  the possibility for dynamically altering a precomputed path during navigation  to compensate for an unanticipated obstacle  can become feasible. 
   in an effort to obtain further insight into the problem of ooerating a real-world robot  our experimental robot project was begun in april of 1. special emphasis was placed on designing a small  low cost  but versatile mobile robot capable of performing a wide variety of tasks  such as exploring fairly uncluttered environments and manipulating small objects. therefore  jason has been provided with a wide range of sensory and data-qathering input devices  none of which 1s very sophisticated 1n itself or imposes severe computational requirements on the control computer  but all of which could be well integrated. figure 1 gives an overview of jason in its proposed form. 
   jason has the following sensory/motor and interface devices: 
    1  an ultrasonic range and material detector; 
    1  two simple arms with clasping grippers; 
    1  proximity sensors  used in place of microswitch 
bump detectors ; 
    1  a 1 to 1 word speech recognizer; 
    1  a limited speech synthesizer ; 
    1  optical counters for measuring wheel distances traveled by the vehicle; 
    1  a robot chassis powered bv two 1-horsepower permanent-magnetic motors; and  
    1  a ten-watt nower output  1-megahertz radio communication network. 
   a time-shared  virtual memory  hewlett packard 1 computer with appropriate software serves as jason's control computer. the hp-1 is located at the lawrence hall of science and controls the robot vehicle by means of radio telemetry. one of the advantages of a time-shared computer 1s the possibility of runninq several similar robots  planned for the near future  under the same executive orogram  so the problems associated with multi-robot cooneration and communication can be investigated. however  1t should be stressed that neither jason's robot vehicle  the above mentioned sensory/motor devices  nor the computer programs are very sonhisticated. they are not intended to be. rather  the purpose of the project is to study the problems in designing a simolified and inexnensive robot system that integrates a variety of sensory/motor devices. 
   when jason was designed  one of the important constraints was to minimize the cost of construction. throughout this paper we shall stress the economical design and the simplicity of the sensory/motor devices. although the labor involved was considerable  the actual cost of parts  including the radio network  but not the computer or its interface  was well under $1. yet jason cannot be thought of as a toy. it is capable of carrying out a wide variety of tasks  even though they may be elementary by human standards. it is precisely this generality in the class of tasks which is the key to the project. 
i i i . a description of jason 
   jason consists of three major subsystems:  a  the chassis   b  communication and sensory/motor devices  and  c  software control nrograms. the robot vehicle transports jason through its environment in a precise manner. reasonably accurate movement is needed to avoid either the ranid accumulation of errors that 
would otherwise lead to bumping into walls  etc.  or highly inefficient behavior in carrying out the simplest of tasks. a variety of sensory devices are needed to guarantee a rich base of information about the external environment so that reliable decisions can be 
made. the robot software has the task of integrating the output of these sensors so as to construct an accurate model of the environment and harmoniously control the various sub-systems. 
a. the robot chassis 
   the first major subsystem is the robot chassis. it consists of two segments: the actual mechanical wheel assembly and the on-board  electronic logic which controls the vehicle's wheel assembly. the chassis  see figure 1  by itself weighs about 1 pounds  not including the sensory/motor devices . its dimensions are approximately 1 feet by 1 feet and it cost about $1 for parts  including electronics  but not including labor and overhead. 

1 




1 

   the chassis was designed to have the following mechanical properties and subcomponents: 
    1  each of the two six-inch diameter  rubbercovered  rear wheels 1s gear driven by a separate 1 horsepower  permanent-magnetic motor. 
    1  the two rear wheel surfaces are mechanically around to within .1 of an inch in circumference to insure accuracy in rolling movement. 
    1  a magnetic clutch is utilized to insure that both rear wheels rotate together when the vehicle is moving in a straight-line path. 
    1  the front of the chassis is supported by three one-inch diameter steel balls in the shape of an equilateral triangle. this design firstly eliminates torque problems otherwise associated with turning  and secondly  supports the chassis in the event that one  or two  ball s  slides into a crack 1n the floor or pavement. 
    1  two five-inch discs with two rows of 1 holes drilled around their perimeter are mounted on the 
wheel shafts. when used with optical encoders  they enable the robot to determine the distance and direction of travel quite precisely. the vehicle has a 
maximum linear accuracy of one-quarter inch. 
    1  finally  the chassis 1s of rugged design with 1 inch diameter steel wheel shafts and a 1 inch thick aluminum body plate. 
   the second segment of the chassis  the basic control logic  electronics  subsystem  is shown in figure 1. it has the following properties: 
    1  the logic circuit 1s designed such that the computer program is only required to load a 1-bit command and a 1-bit location counter  to indicate the distance the vehicle is to travel . 
    1  the logic circuit then determines  1  the correct speed  based on distance to be traveled    ii  direction of travel  and   i i i   1f any overshoot has occurred  if so  it is corrected by the logic circuit automatically . 
    1  the logic circuit  together with the clutch  insures that both rear wheels rotate together. 
    1  if the robot  for some reason  cannot move to the desired location  e.g.  it encounters an obstacle  an interrupt 1s generated and transmitted to the computer. 
    1  the electronics controls the motor's speed by providing pulses to the motor; this conserves battery power. 
    1  braking is done electronically by placing a variable load  amount determines the rate of braking  across the terminals of each rear motor. 
    1  the maximum distance it can travel in a straight line without additional computer commands is 1 feet. 
    1  finally  the robot vehicle's motors  control electronics  and sensory/motor and on-board communication devices are powered by an 1 amp-hour lead-storage battery  which is easily recharged as necessary. other smaller batteries are installed on-board for special purposes. for example  one battery provides negative 1 volts to the speech-recognition detector and 
provides for fall-safe operation in the event of a main battery power failure. 
   the vehicle has already been built and has proven satisfactory and reliable 1n manual tests. actual 
computer tests are not yet possible because our fcc approval for the assianed robot communication freguency is still pending at the time of this writing. 
b. communication and sensery/tt tor devices 
   the second major subsystem for jason consists of its sensory/motor devicesand a 1-way  half-duplex  radio communication controller.  see fioure 1 . the communications-controllerprovides a central distribution system for reception and transmission for jason's perpherical devices and the host computer. the communication system consists of:  1  a standard serial terminal interface   1  a high-soeed asynchronous modem  up to 1 baud max.  depends on radio    1  two ten-watt power output  fm modulated 1 mhz transceivers   1 an antenna system   1  a communication controller on the robot vehicle  and   1  jason's nernherical devices-
   1. radio network. because it was desirable to make the controller as independent as possible from the characteristics of any one computer  the controller appears as a bit serial asynchronous data terminal to the host computer  and as a byte-serial interface to any of jason's perpherical devices. thus standard serial terminal interfaces can be used; this allows easy interfacing to most time-shared computers without the high cost of buildina a highly specialized interface. also  either half duplex  as used presently  
or full duplex  planned for the future  transmission can be done. finally  asynchronous operation is reguired to allow for transmission interruption by a 
higher priority device. 
   initially  both the host computer interface and the communications controller on jason will be in the receive mode. 	if a device wishes to transmit  it must first issue an interrupt reouest to the controller. 	if 
no higher priority device 1s transmittina and the controller is not receiving data at the time  receive-tock 
mode   then the controller will issue an interrupt acknowledge to the device. 	the controller will then switch the transceiver to transmit mode  wait approximately 1msec for the carrier to reach the transceiver at the computer end and for the computer software routine to lock its ti-ansceiver to the lock-receive mode  
queueing any further transmission requests. 
   transmission from jason to the computer may now begin. if a higher priority device requests to transmit  the current transmission will be terminated immediately and its interrupt acknowledge line will be made false  each device has its own interrupt request and interrupt acknowledge lines . the interrupt acknowledge for the higher priority device will then be made true. to indicate that the previous transmission was interrupted  a device-interrupted pulse  1nsec  1s issued to all devices. furthermore  the ambiguity of a device thinking that it has been interrupted when 1n reality it caused the interrupt  1s avoided by not having the device look at the device interrupt control line for 1nsec after receiving interrupt acknowledge. finally  each interrupted device will make a new interrupt request and will then hold the interrupted data 1n its buffer until it can be transmitted. all interrupt requests are handled 1n an ascending priority order until all interrupts have been cleared. 
if the transceiver is in the receive mode  normal 

1 

1 

1 

default mode when not transmitting  and carrier detect goes true; indicating that the computer end has turned 
on us transmitter  then the robot vehicle's controller will go into lock-receive mode  reception starts and interrupts are no longer acknowledged . after the controller reaches lock-receive mode  it will search the input data stream for the first occurance of a  control  byte. the present of a control byte will start the controller's receive sequencer. the receive sequencer first loads the control byte into a error detection data register  then waits for the reception of the next byte  which is a error-checking byte. this byte is loaded into the error-detection error-byte register. the sequencer then tells the error detection logic to start processing. the error loaic 
will signal the sequencer when error checking is 
completed. the tested byte is now loaded into the device code register and the byte count register if it 
was a control byte; or it is loaded into the outdut data bus register if it was a data byte. when a control byte is received  the device code line  byte select lines  and 'rec' line are set up for the device which is to receive the data. the 'rec line plus the correct device code on the device-code lines is the proper indication to a device that it is receiving data; nete that only data can be passed to a device via the 1 bit i/o bus  and not control bytes. if an error occurs during reception  an error flip-flop is set and remains set until the end of the reception-sequence. 
the error flip-flop's output is passed to all devices. since the system will be initially half-dunlex  the computer cannot be informed that an error has occurred until the reception sequence is completed; only then may a special device transmit the error condition back to the computer. 
   the error code used for error checking is a form of double error correcting hamming code. the process involved in generating the error code is discussed by berlekamp in  1  chap. 1 . error coding generation is done in hardware on the controller and in software on the computer. it involves calculating the polynomial  x +x +x +x +1  of the parity check matrix formed from the serial data input. a root of the polynomial is assumed to be  x +x+l  and was used in developing the hardware and software. the resulting error code is then transmitted after the data. on reception  the data is first passed to another error-code generator; the resulting error code generated is then compared 
with the error byte received after the data byte. in the present version of the system  no automatic error correcting 1s done in order to limit the initial expense. 
　1. description of devices. the sensory/motor and communication devices utilized by the robot are summarized below: 
    a  arms - jason will have two hands of the simple clasping type  each with three degrees of freedom. these have been roughly designed  but not yet constructed. the arms are not intended to be fast  accurate  or 
heavy-duty. they will be lightweight and will pick up lightweight boxes  push buttons and push or pull simple 
objects. 
    b  ultrasonic detector -- a narrow-beam  frequency modulation  echo location system in the form of a  torch  is ut1zed. ultrasonic waves which cover a wavelength range of 1 to 1mm are used. bandwidth compression  achieved by continuous wave  frequency-
modulation transmission  is needed since the useful auditory bandwidth 1s approximately 1 khz while the bandwidth of the information carrier in air using ultrasonics 1s about 1 khz. thus  ultrasonics provide an overall reduction in information transmitted of 1 as compared with vision. the ultrasonic  torch  sensor sweeps downward from 1khz to 1khz. the pitch of the return echoes  which are converted to audio tones  are nrooortional to the ranoe of an object  each 1hz change corresponding to about 1 foot  see figure 1 . the ouality  timbre  of the echo indicates the type of surface from which the echo was reflected  hence indicating the nature of the object. because soft objects reflect noorly at higher frequencies  these echoes build in strength as the sensor sweeps down. by digitizina the pitch  the width of the echo pulse period  and the relative echo strength  by taking 1 to 1 samples as the sensor sweeps downward   it is possible to determine the range with an accuracy of +1 percent and to obtain textural information. unfortunately  the angle from which the ultrasonic beam is reflected from an object affects echo strength  and thus appears to change textural information  e.g.  a hard object at an angile such as a slanted wall could look to jason like a soft object directly in front of the sensor. semantic information is needed to resolve such ambiguities. 
　up to three objects at different ranoe and directions within the field of view may be resolved when the torch is held stationary  i.e.  multiple tones or  chords  are possible with multiple objects. dynamic conditions are more complex. however  experienced blind persons using such a device are capable of: 
　 1  identifying objects such as the following: smooth poles  windows  bushes  trees  parking meters  cars  railings  street sions  doorways  moving pedestrians  traffic liqhts  mail boxes  rising steps  grass  plaster walls  etc  
　 1i  walking up and grasping a one-inch diameter pole from a distance of 1 feet; 
　 iii  weaving in  slalom  fashion between poles in a row or a circle; 
　 iv  placing a group of poles in a straight line; 
　 v  grasping a pole from a group of closely spaced poles; 
　 vi  walking past a pole at a specified lateral distance  using the rate of change of distance and direction to gage relative positions. 
all these skills are normally tauoht to a blind 
derson in approximately one week of intensive training . while it is not expected that the robot will be able to do such sophisticated tasks  we do suspect that ultrasonics will be useful to the robot since the information is there. furthermore  an ultrasonic detector was chosen over a vidicon tv camera as the principal sensory modality because of fi  its lower cost  about $1 - $1 for a detector    1  the fact that a considerably reduced information processing toad is imposed on the computer  as compared with a tv picture whose processing may take upwards of ten 
minutes on a high powered machine   and  iii  the fact that the ultrasonic detector will probably serve just as well as a tv camera on the class of applications for which jason was desianed. a detector has been loaned to us from the veteran's administration for use 
on this project and the digitization logic is being tested. for future work  simple silicon image sensors 
will offer an alternative approach to object detection. 
 c  proximity sensors - instead of the standard  

1x 

1 

 cat-whisker  style mechanical sense-switch  bumpdetectors  jason will use six led proximity sensors distributed around the perimeter of the chassis to protect the vehicle against inadvertently bumping into obstacles. the sensors  loaned to us by scientific technology  inc.  are able to reliably detect large barriers or small objects of an arbitrary material within a range of up to eight feet. 
   the detectors operate essentially as follows: an invisible  infra-red  modulated light beam  approximately 1 angstroms  is projected by a semiconductor gallium-arsenide transmitter module with a fairly narrow beam angle. any obstacle which intersects the transmitted beam will reflect light energy back into the receiver module as a function of its distance  and its color and texture to some extent . thus  if one knows the nature of the obstacle in advance because of semantic information available  it is possible to calibrate the readings and determine distance quite accurately. because the transmitted light is modulated  the detector can never be falsely triggered by ambient light or heat  or even bright sunlight. five of the sensors will be positioned so as to form an invisible curtain of protection surrounding the vehicle  while tne last sensor will be beamed down at an angle to detect sharp irregularities on the ground directly in front of the vehicle. 
    d  speech recognition detector -- a speech recognition device has been constructed for about $1 in parts which can extract features suitable for recognizing a limited vocabulary of 1 to 1 carefully chosen 
words when spoken in isolation and tuned to an individual speaker. words are analyzed by a bank of six filters  eight in the future . the quantity of energy in each filter frequency band is ranked relative to 
one another for each change in phoneme. thfs data is then transmitted to the computer and a learning program identifies the word using its distinctive features. this device must be tuned to one person's voice. however  this is advantageous for safety reasons  since properly formulated commands will not be accepted from just anyone. 
   the robot will be capable of recognizing words using two methods:  l  either a given word matches with a word stored in memory within a given minimum standard  or   1  a given word could be matched by sevaral possible candidates'  but the syntactic context of the current 
sentence restricts the set of alternatives to only one possibility. 	the current plan calls for the following thirty words to be included in the recognition vocabulary: 
 e  speech synthesizer - jason includes a digital speech storage and retrieval device in order to generate verba! responses to commands or to carry on a dialog. a delta-modulator with a clock frequency of lokhz  1s utilized to generate a digital bit-pattern corresponding to a spoken word or phoneme. these digital bit patterns are stored in shift registers on board the robot vehicle with about ik bits required for each phoneme  ik shift registers with a cost of about $1 each  surplus  are used for this purpose -
a delta demodulator  upon command by the main computer  will convert the string or strings of the desired 
digital bit-patterns back into audio. either strings of phonemes can be concatenated to form words or whole words can be stored and demodulated. at dresent  this device is operating with a small memory of 1k bits  
which will be expanded when more memory is obtained. 
c. software 
   finally  the third and one of the most difficult portions of the robot is its software. the executive control programs are primarily oriented toward simple problem solving and adaptation to variations in the environment. figure 1 shows a flowchart of jason's executive program. techniques such as signature tables   shortest paths   strategy learning   and problem solving methods   are under development. once the mechanical and electronical sub-systems of the robot have been implemented  the bulk of the research 
pursued in this project will be on the software. a future paper will report on nroaress in this area as soon as some empirical results are obtained. 
	iv. 	safety precautions 
   once a robot with the above capabilities and functions is operational  a major problem remaining is how to achieve adequate safeguards to ensure the safety both of the robot itself and the humans that may be in the vicinity. a robot that is simultaneously mobile  
fast  powerful  and unpredictable can be highly dangerous if well-conceived nrecautions are not scrupulously observed. thus  various hardware and software safety devices  operational precautions  and other ground rules must be formulated and implemented before any robot should be released into the human world to carry 
out even the simplest task. jason is to have three types of safety devices and controls:  i  those built into the robot's hardware   ii  those built into the software  and  iii  those observed by the experimenter  s  during robot operation. all of these are being studied and will be implemented before jason is permitted to operate in a human environment. 
v. summary and conclusions 
   the berkeley robot project is concerned with a relatively unexplored area of robotics -- that of designing  implementing  and of operating an economically viable and durable robot  canable of performing useful tasks in a human world. as mentioned in this 
paper  there remain many problems to be explored further  such as:safety precautions  planning vs  execution  sensory integration  etc. such research is clearly required if a robot is to be released into the real-world without an inordinate number of restrictions and constant surveillance. the berkeley project is in the midst of design and construction. some devices have been completed and checked out. others  such as the arms  are still in the design staoe. it is planned that a fully integrated robot vehicle with elementary 
control software will be operational in the near future. once operational  jason will primarily be used as a test bed for the development of future  real-world robots with considerably greater sophistication and intelligence. 


1 

acknowledgments 
   the authors wish to thank various graduate students and members of the faculty of the department of electrical engineering  and computer sciences of the university of california at berkeley  especially including professors c.v. ramamoorthy  douglas maurer  and arthur hopkin  and e.e.c.s. students al robb  david ott and ken holt. messrs. leonard baldwin and wilfried zeilinger of the departmental machine shop were responsible for much of the construction. miss barbara kerekes did many of the final drawings. also  students in eecs 1g contributed much to the project. 
   in addition  we appreciate the help of various members of the staff of the artificial intelligence 
center and the augmentation research center at 
stanford research institute  especially dr. william 
rupert  mr. jerry gleason  and mr. kirk kelley. we would like to acknowledge the computer time  equipment  and considerable encouragement provided by the lawrence 
hall of science of the university of california at 
berkeley. 	finally  we would like to thank the 
veteran's administration for the loan of an ultrasonic  torch   and scientific technology  inc. for the loan of the led proximity detectors. 

 a.l. samuel   some studies in machine learning 
using the game of checkers  i i : recent progress   ibm systems journal  nov. 1   pp. 1. 
 e.l. lawler   a procedure for computing the k best solutions to discrete optimization problems and its application to the shortest path problem   management science  vol. 1  no. 1  march 1. 
 m.h. smith   a learning program which plays partnership dominoes   communications of the acm  august 1 . 
 n.j. nilsson  problem solving methods in artificial intelligence   mcgraw-hill  new york. 1 . 

1 
