 
     pops ts a processor for a simple nondeterministic programming language  psl. pops accepts a problem stated in psl and attempts to solve it by finding a successful execution of the psl program  pops operates by identifying elements of the input program with elements of the heuristic search paradigm  analyzing the input program to obtain information about the problem opera-
tors  and applying methods borrowed from gps to solve the problem. in addition to the goal-directed methods based on gps  pops contains the methods developed by fikes in his program ref-arf. 
     key words: problem solving. heuristic search  nondetermlnistic programming language. 
background 
nondetermlnistic algorithms 
     robert floyd  floyd  1  suggested that a compiler for a nondetermlnistic programming language  ndpi.  could be used as a problem solver. his ndpl was obtained by adding to algol the function choice  n  and two special labels for exits  success and failure. the value of choice n  is an unspecified integer between 1 and n. only executions that terminate with a success exit are considered to be computations of the algorithm. the programmer may impose constraints on the values of the program variables by inserting  for example  if statements that direct the flow of control to a failure exit unless the constraints are satisfied. in this way the programmer specifies what constitutes a solution to his problem. 
     the proposed problem solver would operate as a compiler by translating a nondetermlnistic program into a deterministic one and executing the resulting program. the deterministic program is so constructed as to simulate the input program by enumerating the possible combinations of values of the choice function. 
     floyd illustrated his proposal with a complete statement  translation  and solution of a sophisticated 
representation of the eight queens problem. this example shows clearly that programming a problem in his nondetermlnistic language is much easier than programming the corresponding search in a conventional language. however  it is also clear that the solution is obtained by a blind generate and test search. thus  un-
sophisticated representations of problems having large search sp.aces would result in unacceptably long execution times. 
interpretation of nondetermlnistic programs 
     nondetermlnistic programs are convenient for stating problems because they leave unspecified the order in which some alternatives are to be considered. 	consequently  the process that interprets a nondeterministic program must determine for itself which alternative to consider at a given time. 
     a processor for a language containing a choice function must select values for the function. if the language contains a nondeterministic branch instruction  or if the particular program's flow of control depends on the value of a choice function  the processor must select possible control paths as well. a problem represented by a nondeterministic program is  therefore  a search problem in the space of possible combinations of values of the choice function and possible control paths through the program. 
     nondeterministic programs fall into two categories: those in which the flow of control is deterministic  and those in which it is not. in the former case  the processor may be required to select values for the program variables so that certain constraints are satisfied. if this selection is made symbolically  the processor can execute the program until and end statement ts encountered  at which time the symbolic selections must be replaced by actual values. such problems are referred to as constraint satisfaction problems. fikes's program rer-arf solves a class of constraint satisfaction problems of considerable difficulty. 
     to execute a program having nondetermlnistic conflow  a processor must select the control path it will follow  as well as the values for the program variables. the problems represented by programs inthe second category are heuristic search  hs  problems. 
ref-arf 
1      richard fikes  ftkes  1  1  implemented a problem solving system  ref-arf  based on floyd's suggestion  but containing much improved  solution methods. tikes represents nondeterministic values symbolically by creating internal variables. constraints are represented as formulas involving these variables. this representation allows the use of algebraic simplification methods to reduce the size of the space to be searched. fikes's most powerful solution method consists of a l ternating value instantiation and algebraic simplification  effectively reducing large spaces to anything from a few to a few hundred nodes. this method enables ref-arf to solve some constraint satisfaction problems that would not only swamp a system designed along the lines suggested by floyd  but would prove very difficult for humans to solve as well. 
     p.ef-arf will accept hs problems  but is essentially limited to a generate and test algorithm in its search for an executable path through the program. 	hs problems can induce ref-arf to expend thousands of times 
more effort than is intrinsically required by the problem. for example  tf the missionaries and cannibals problem is represented by a program with a single loop rep-
resenting a crossing of the river  and the loading of the boat is selected nondetermintstically  then each path through the program will represent a constraint satisfaction problem having two selections for each crossing of the river. ref1   an early version of pops which used the same search mechanism as ref-abf  was presented with such a program. calculation showed that the solution would have required over 1 hours of 1 time. 
pops 
pops  procedure oriented problem solver  extends 
fikes's work by including the successful methods of ref-arf in a system designed to solve heuristic search problems. pops was written in lisp 1 and run on the 1 computer at the naval postgraduate school using the waterloo lisp interpreter  bolce  1 . 
the problem statement language. psl 
     psl is a simple algebraic language  similar to fikes's language  ref. psl contains a nondeterministic choice function select a   whose value is some element of the named range a. the user may impose constraints on the values of the program variables by using the statement condtcion b   which means that at the time the statement is executed the boolean expression b must be satisfied. psl also contains a nonde-
termintstic branch instruction  gotol  li 1 . . . ln . gotol is essentially a computed go to with the index unspecified. 
an approach to heuristic search problems: gps 
     ref-apf's considerable success with constraint satisfaction problems is due largely to algebraic simplification methods which allow it to reduce its search space without eliminating valid solutions. unfortunately  there is no similar way of reducing the space of possible execution paths when a program's flow of control is nondeterministic. the alternative is to provide some mechanism whereby the processor can make informed decisions in its search for a successful control path. the gps work of newell and others  newell  simon  and shaw  1; ernst and newell  1  provides such a mechanism  namely  the selection of operators on the basis of their apparent usefulness ln the current situation. 
     a problem statement for gps contains a set of objects which are transformable by a given set of operators. 	a problem takes the form: 	given an initial object x.  find a sequence of operators q such that the predicate p is true of the object q   x j . gps attempts to transform the initial object into a desired object by matching the initial object to the desired object  or to the properties of a desired object  in order to obtain a difference; gps then attempts to reduce the difference by applying an operator to the object. the operator is selected by means of a table of connections which indicates the relevance of the operators to the various differences. 
the pops program 
pops solves heuristic search problems by applying 
gps techniques to the interpretation of psl. l k e gps  pops operates by transforming an initial object into a desired object by the application of operators. 
     the task environment of pops. 	in the task environment of pops  an object is a path from the beginning to the end of a psl program. 	if the entry and exit points of the program are given labels  and tf every point in the program at which control paths join is labelled  then every execution path corresponds to a string of labels. the set of such strings of labels can be given by a grammar. 
     pops obtains a suitable grammar by identifying all simple closed paths in the program and all simple paths from the beginning to the end of the program. 	for example  the program whose flowchart appears in figure 1 has possible execution paths given by the following grammar: 
s - begin a exit 
	a - a 	m l f l 	| 	a m 1 	a 	| 	. . . 	  a 	m n a 
thus  solving a problem stated as a psl program can be considered as searching in the space of strings of labels. the initial object is  begin a exit   and each subsequent object results from applying one of the rules of the grammar for the program to a previously generated object. 
     the final object is a string of labels representing a path through the program such that if the path were executed  all the constraints would be satlsfiable. 	clearly not all grammatically legal paths have this property. thus  the search process must select the rules to apply at each point  and verify that at each point in the path 
the current constraints can be satisfied. 	such a path will be referred to as a legal path. 
     because applying a rule of the grammar to a string can result ln an illegal path  the process of applying an operator in the original problem is represented by applying a rule of grammar and then executing the psl program along the control path represented by the resulting string. if this execution results in the creation of an unsatlsfiable constraint  then the operator represented by rule does not apply to the object represented by the previous string of labels. 
     description of operators. 	pops uses a technique similar to that of gps to make rational selections of 
operators. 	in place of a table of connections  pops 
uses a description of the effects of the problem operators. 	to obtain these descriptions  pops executes each operator in isolation  i.e.  with no assumptions about the effects of any prior operators. 	by examining the assignments and the constraints so generated  pops constructs a simple description of the operator's effects. presently  this description consists of 1  a list of the program variables that are used before they are assigned  1  a list of program variables that are changed  1  the 
set of constraints that must be satisfied before the 
operator may be applied  and 1  the size of the operator  as measured by the number of symbols in the data structure generated by the trial execution of the operator. while the current set of descriptors is minimal. it ls sufficient to guide pops directly to the solutions of several simple heuristic search problems  as will be seen. more sophisticated analysis of operators would facilitate more intelligent selection of operators by the problem solver  and should enable it to solve more substantial problems. 
     differences. 	since any complete executable path is an acceptable final object  the match is accomplished by attempting to execute the path represented by the object. 	if a path is not executable  it is because at some point in the execution of the path  the processor encounters a constraint that cannot be satisfied. 	the processor then returns a triple  l  r  d   where l is the portion of the path that can be executed  r is the remainder of the path  and d is the unsatisfiable constraint  together with a description of what changes to 
the program variables must be made in order to satisfy the constraint. this description is the pops version of the gps difference. 
     selection of operators. to select an operator  pops compares the difference with the descriptions of the available operators  and selects the operator that appears most promising. currently  pops selects the operator that changes the most program variables needing change. in case of a tie  it selects the operator that changes the fewest variables having acceptable values. finally  if there is sttll more than one candidate operator  pops selects the smallest one. 
     example. consider  for example  the msnkey problem   given in figure 1. the grammar for the psl pro-
gram is: 
	s - begin 	a get bananas 
	a - a walk a   a carry a 	i a climb a 
the initial object is  begin a get bananas . if this path is executed  a contradiction will be found after passing a  because the necessary conditions for exiting the program have not been met - the monkey doesn't have the bananas. the goal then becomes that of making the offending constraint true. this requires changing the values of m   l     m 1  and b l . since walk changes m{1   carry changes m l  and b l   and climb changes m 1   it is reasonable to guess that rule a - a carry a should be applied. the proposed path then becomes: 
 begin a carry a get bananas . 
when execution of this path is attempted  however  a contradiction is encountered at carry: the monkey cannot carry the box unless he is located where the box is  i . e .   m l  = b l . the subgoal then becomes: make m l  = b l  true. both walk and carry change m   l     but carry does other things as well  so a - a walk a is the move to try. the proposed path is then: 
 begin a walk a carry a get bananas . 
execution of this path proceeds into get bananas 
before finding a false constraint. this one is: m 1 =box  representing that the monkey must be on the box. the correct move is a - a climb a. the path becomes: 
 begin a walk a carry a climb a get bananas . 
since this path can be successfully executed  the solution has been found. 
redundancy tests 
     pops employs tests to prevent two types of redundancy in its search for a complete executable path. a newly generated path is redundant if it is either identical with or equivalent to a previously generated path. equivalent paths can be generated  for instance  if there are two operators q1 and q1 such that ctjd  an   q 1  achieve the same effect. identical paths can be genated as follows: 

  a c a   -     
here the two operators a -  a b a and a -  a c a have been used to expand  a  to generate   a b a c a   in two different ways. 
     pops tests newly generated paths for equivalence to previous paths by comparing the state of the program variables resulting from the execution of the new path with the results of executing previously generated paths. this comparison can be rather expensive if the variable values are formulas; however  the comparison is essential to limit search. 
     pops automatically avoids the generation of identical paths by restricting the selection of operators according to a rule known as the o-size rule. 	each operator q is assigned a unique size  denoted |qj. 	the o-size rule provides that an operator q may be considered for application to a path p =  l  r  g  only if 
 |1 |   qr and  q     ql  where ql is the size of the last operator used to generate l and or is the size of the next operator in r. intuitively  one may consider the size of an operator to be its difficulty. the q-size rule then predicates that pops will consider applying an operator to an object only if the operator is easier than its immediate supergoal and no more difficult than the previous goal. 
     the importance of the q-size rule is that it prevents the catastrophic proliferation of identical nodes in the program's search space. 	without such a test  the number of redundant nodes can grow as fast as n!   where n is the number of operators applied to generate a single node. 	the redundancy could be eliminated by means of a direct comparison with previous nodes; indeed  this ls the usual practice. 	however  the number of comparisons required grows exponentially with n. 	in contrast  
the cost of the q-slze rule is only two comparisons per node generated. these assertions about the q-size rule are proved elsewhere  gibbons  1 . 
     pops flowcharts. 	the flowcharts for the major problem solving processes in pops are given in figure 1. pops itself is an executive routine that analyzes the psl program to obtain the grammar and operator descriptions  and then enumerates the simple paths through the psl program until one is found that can be converted into a legal path. the other programs  transform  fixpath and apply are similar to the gps methods transform   reduce  and apply  respectively  as given in newell and simon  1 . in fixpath  the list of operators is filtered by the q-size pule before an operator is selec-
ted. the operation  assign if appropriate  selects actual values for nondeterministic expressions under certain circumstances. issues surrounding this assignment will be discussed in the following section. 
performance of pops 
     the performance of pops can be easily evaluated by means of a comparison with the performance of ref1 on the same problem. ref1 is the immediate predecessor of pops  and contains the same basic machinery i n cluding formula manipulation processes  data representation  and constraint satisfaction methods. the 
design of ref1 is sufficiently similar to that of ref-art  except in its data representation  that comments about 
the performance of ref1 apply equally well to ref-arr. the performances of ref1 and pops on the problems discussed are summarized in figure 1. 
     the gps-like control structure of pops and the basic control of search provided by the q-size rule and the redundancy test  provide a skeleton of a problemsolver. the sources of problem solving power in pops 
are the processes that analyze the psl program to get a description of the operators  select the operator to apply during fixpath  and decide whether to assign values to variables during fixpath  and if so  what values to assign. 	the performance of pops depends directly on the adequacy of these description and comparison processes. 	these processes are rather rudimentary at present  yet they suffice to guide pops to the solution of some simple us problems that ref-arf and ref1 were unable to solve with reasonable effort. 
the missionaries and cannibals problem 
     ref1 is unable to solve the missionaries and cannibals problem as stated in figure 1. the problem statement contains only one operator. executing the 
operator requires that two selections be made from a range of three possible values. ref1 approaches this program by executing directly to the end  where it encounters a constraint satisfaction problem. if it finds no solution to the constraint satisfaction problem  ref1 attempts an alternate path to the end. since the solution of the problem requires eleven crossings of 
the river  and each crossing is accomplished by one execution of the loop in the program  the first ten constraint satisfaction problems will have no solution. since each crossing of the river generates two additional variables  we may estimate the size of the nth constraint satisfaction problem to be kn  where k is the average number of possible selections generated by one crossing of the river. 
     on being given this program  ref1 ran out of time at eight minutes  having failed to complete the search on the fifth constraint satisfaction problem. if we assume k = 1  then the total space ref1 would search 
through the fifth constraint problem would contain about 1 nodes  so that the search rate established by ref1 is roughly 1 nodes per eight minutes. under these assumptions  the total space to be searched by ref1 up through the tenth crossing of the river is roughly 1 nodes. in short  kef1 would start on the final crossing of the river after computing for something in excess of 1 hours on the problem. 
     whether the above estimate is accurate is immaterial; the point of consequence here is that delaying the determination of actual values for the nondeterministic selections causes ref1 to expend a tremendous amount 
of time on redundant search. the space of the missionary problem is actually remarkably small - only sixteen distinct legal configurations can be reached from the initial node. 
     in contrast to ref1's estimated time of 1 hours  pops solves the missionary problem in somewhat less than six minutes. the search conducted by pops is shown in figure 1. this success is based on a method of assigning actual values to nondeterministic selec-
tions before the end of the program has been reached. 
     when to assign actual values. an assignment is made only if failing to do so would deepen the space of the constraint satisfaction problem at the end of the program. for instance  if an operator contains an assignment such as x = x + select  a   and the current value of x is already select  a   then the eventual constraint satisfaction problem would contain variables representing both selections. if the range a contains n elements  the number of possible selections would be n   but the number of distinct values of x could be as small as 1n. before applying the operator in such a 
case  pops chooses an actual value for the first selection. 	then after the operator is applied  the value of x still depends on only one select operator. 	consequently  in the missionary problem  each of the constraint satisfaction problems encountered at the end of the program has only two variables  and the constraint satisfaction problem space searched by pops in the 
first ten crossings contains roughly 1 nodes. 
     selection of actual values to assign. in choosing an actual value  pops attempts to find the value that is most likely to be helpful in solving the problem. for example  in the missionary problem  where the selections determine the number of missionaries and the number of cannibals to place in the boat for a crossing of the river  pops makes selections that maximize the number of persons being transported to the right side of river and minimize the number being transported to the left side of the river. the sense of direction this gives the search can be seen in figure 1. 
     when pops selects an operator  it is attempting to find one that will modify the current state of the program in a direction that will tend to satisfy some currently unsatisfied constraint. 	this constraint is also used to guide the selection of actual values. 	for example  in 
the missionary problem  the constraint on the exit 
branch of the program says  among other things  that the number of missionaries on the right side of the river  
mr  should be 1. 	suppose the current value of mr is 
select  a   where a = {1  1  1}. then the first choice pops will make for the value of this selection is 1  since that choice minimizes the difference between the current and desired values of mr. if the current value of mr were -select a   then the first choice would be 1  for the same reason. 
the monkey problem 
     the monkey problem has been formulated in three different ways. the performance of pops on these three problem statements illustrates its dependence on the i n formation it can derive from the psl program. briefly  one version contains sufficient information that pops makes no wrong decisions in the solution process. the other two formulations require some search. flowcharts for these formulations are shown in figure 1. 
     mb1 .and mb1. the first version of the monkey problem will be referred to as mb1  because the constraint on the exit branch of the program specifies what 
the values of each of the four variables in the program must be. the second version will be called mb1  because it is identical to mb1 except that the constraint on the exit branch of the program specifies the values of only two variables. mb1 requires the monkey to be on the box under the bananas end the box to be on the floor under the bananas. mb1 requires only that the monkey be on the box under the bananas  and says nothing about the box. of course  because of the structure of the problem  the box must be under the bananas and on the floor in order for the monkey to be on the box under the bananas  so that any solution of mb1 is a solution of mb1. 
     pops does not recognize the necessity of moving the box in mb1 until it fails to solve the problem without moving the box. 	thus  pops obtains less guidance from the constraints in mb1 than it does from the constraints in mb1; as a result  while pops goes directly 
to a solution in mb1  it is forced to perform some search in mb1. the executions of mb1 and mb1 by pops are shown in figure 1. 
     because m b1 and mb1 are identical except for the constraint on the exit branch  and because ref1 gets no direction from the constraints  ref1 carries out the same search on mb1 as it does on mb1. thus  because of its ability to use constraints to guide the selection of operators  pops not only searches a smaller space than ref1 on mb1  but is also able to make 
use of the additional information in mb1 to reduce the search further. 
     mbf. the third version of the monkey problem that pops has run  called mbf  is a translation of fikes's statement of the problem for bef-arf. 	mbt was considered in order to get a direct comparison of ref1 and pops with ref-arf  since fikes does not report running problems stated like mb1 and mb1. 	the search carried out by ref-arf on mbf generated 1 nodes. 
     the chief difference between mbf and mb1 is that the control structure in mbf carries some information of potential value to the problem solver  whereas mb1 is 
     *in fact  ref1 runs one second faster on mb1 than on mb1; the reason is that the shorter constraint in mb1 takes less time to evaluate. 
in strictly hs form. ref1 performs considerably better on mbf than on mb1. pops  however  finds a solution for mbf after applying only one operator  generating a space of only two nodes. 
robot and two boxes tasks* 
     this is a sequence of simple robot tasks with a single initial situation. in the initial situation  there is a room  and a  b  o  and d are locations within it. the robot is at location a  and two boxes  b1 and b1  are at location b. the following actions are available to the robot: it can walk to any location in the room; if the robot and box b1 are at the same location as box b l   the robot can stack b1 on top of bl; and if the robot is at the same location as bl   the robot can push bl to any location in the room. thus  the only way the robot can 
move b1 to another location is by stacking it on bl and pushing b1. also  the robot must know whether b1 has been moved or not. 
	there are five tasks in the sequence. 	they are; 
1: the null task 
	1: 	move the robot to location c 
	1: 	move box bl to location c 
1: move box b1 to location c 
1: move box 1 to location c and box bl to location b 
these tasks were intended to be of gradually increasing complexity so that some indication of the effect of increasing complexity on the performance of pops could be obtained. this sequence of problems was also given to ref1 for comparison purposes. 
     pops executions of the robot problems. the null task  problem1  is included in order to determine the cost of initialization; pops spends 1 seconds solving 
this problem. there is no search. the second task requires one operator  walk. pops finds and appllestbis operator in 1 seconds. problem 1  move box bl to c  is also simple  because the robot can push the box. the solution requires two steps  however- pops first attempts to apply the operator that pushes b1. before that operator can be applied  however  it is necessary to apply walk  to get the robot to the same location as 
b l . 	pops selects and applies these two operators in 
1 seconds  or 1 seconds per subgoal. to move box b1 to c {problem 1   it is necessary to push bl over to b1  stack b1 on b l   and then push them both to c  requiring a total of four operators and taking pops 1 seconds plus initialization  or 1 seconds per subgoal. in the fifth problem  pops must move b1 to o as in problem 1 and then unstack b1 from bl and push bl to location b. after stacking b1 on bl and pushing them to location c  pops erroneously selects walk instead of attempting to push b1  thereby generating seven subgoals instead of the necessary six  for a cost of 1 seconds  or 1 seconds per subgoal. 
     figure 1 shows the search pops conducted on these problems. the performance of pops on these problems 
¡¡¡¡*these problems were suggested by a similar set of tasks given by raphael  1 . raphael uses these tasks to illustrate the frame problem. 

is summarized in figure 1. 
	ref1 executions of the robot problems. 	because 
ref1 performs essentially no preliminary analysis of a 
psl program  it can do the null robot task faster than pops. on the more complex task  however  ref1 becomes less effective than pops. this is to be expected in problems where pops is able to derive some guidance from the problem statement. see figure 1. 
conclusion 
     the mafor accomplishment of pops is the application of goal directed methods to the execution of nondeterministic programs. the analysis of the effects of operators and the selection of operators on the basis of. a match between the current situation and the desired situation allows pops to display a sense of direction in its search  and not rely merely on generate and test search  as other processors for nondeterministic lan-
guages do. 	pops contains discrete processes for describing operators  describing goals  selecting opera-
tors  and selecting values to assign. these processes may be improved almost independently of each other  and without modification of the basic system. consequently  the design will support substantial improve-
ment in problem solving ability. 
bibliography 
1. bolce  j.f.   lisp/1  a description of the university of waterloo lisp 1. 1 interpreter for the ibm system/1   computing centre university of waterloo  waterloo  ontario  canada  1. 
1. ernst  george w. and newell  allen  gps: a case study in generality and problem solving  academic press  n. y.  1. 
1. feigenbaum  e. and i. feldman  eds.   computers and thought  mcgraw-hill  1. 
1. fikes  richard earl  a heuristic program for solying problems stated as nondeterministic procedures  
doctoral thesis  carnegie-mellon university  1. 
1. fikes  richard earl  ref-arf: a system for solving problems stated as procedures  j. art. intel. 1  1  1. 
1. floyd  robert   nondeterministic algorithms    j. acm 1  1  1. 
1. gibbons  g  d.  beyond ref-arf: toward an intelligent processor for a nondeterministic programming language  doctoral thesis  carnegiemellon university  1. 
1. newell  a. and simon  h. a.  gps  a program that simulates human thought   in feigenbaum and feldman  1. 
1. raphael  b.   the frame problem in problem-solving systems   in artificial intelligence and heuristic programming   edinburgh university press  1 . 
1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 


1 

1 















