 
     this paper describes a preliminary attempt to apply organizational principles taken from animal perceptual processes to the problem of providing a robot visual qrasp reflex. the goal is to provide a cheap  rapid mechanism for directinq a hand/arm to grasp one of several arbitrarily shaped objects in the visual scene. a proqram which implements a simple form of such a reflex is described. 
introduction 
     the structure of animal nervous systems was first analyzed in terms of reflexes. a reflex is sometimes thought of as a response which involves only a few synaptic delays and which is independent of higher centers of the brain. thus the doctor's hammer striking  and stretchinq  the tendon just below the kneecap results in a reflexive kick no matter what we may be thinklnq about at the time. however  more current notions hold that reflexes are to be thought of as part of a hierarchical control scheme  functioninq to carry out incompletely specified commands from above. thus  we find that the familiar knee jerk reflex does not occur when the knee's owner is in free fall1 while this particular reflex is adequate and appropriate in some cases  especially locomotion   it is under the control of other reqions of the brain. and so it goes: if we look at the nervous system hierarchically  we can discover layer upon layer of relatively autonomous subsystems controlling and controlled by others. 
     the visual orientinq reflex has received a substantial amount of attention in a wide ranqe of animals. attempts to model it have led me throuqh a number of concepts which i thouqht would be interestinq to apply to the robot problem. the main notion is that this system is a rapid  parallel device which typically needs to know remarkably little about an object to respond appropriately to it. thus  it seems to me  a robot grasp reflex could be constructed which could appropriately grasp an object in the visual scene quickly and cheaply upon a very crude command  i.e. without beinq told the object's exact location  orientation or shape . 
     the next section of this paper provides a brief review of midbrain mechanisms which mediate the vis-
ual orienting response. the last section describes a rather brief and superficial effort at applying notions from the nervous system to the problem of usinq a serial computer to control a robot hand in a simple environment. finally there are some suqqestions for generalizinq to a more realistic case. 
author's address as of september  1: 
r. l. didday 
information and computer science 
applied sciences buildinq university of california 
santa cruz  california 1 
animal visual orientinq reflexes 
     the optic tectum  or superior colllculus as this midbrain structure is called in mammals  is common to vertebrates and is implicated in visual localizing responses. in the frog  it mediates visual approach responses  snapping and orienting   while in humans it produces reflex eye movements. let us look at its structure in the frog. 
     the optic tectum stands between sensory and motor systems. there is an orderly  somatotopic mappinq of points on the retina onto the tectum and from tectum to motor response. this is illustrated by microelectrode recordlnqs and by electrical stimulation of the tectum-such experiments show that a particular region of the tectum can produce a motor response which is  aimed  at the same region of visual space which projects to that spot on the tectum. 1 
     an early paper by pitts and mcculloch orovides a provocative framework for describinq the operation of the frog. tectum. 	picture the retina and its processes as sendinq a spatially arrayed somatotopically mapped representation of the visual scene through the ganalion cell axons to the tectum. 	regions of this array which are highly excited correspond to regions of the visual scene containing visual details which 
 fit  the feature detecting processes of the retina. we might then imagine that each locus of excitation on the tectum triggers a motor command aimed at the corresponding point in space so that the summated effect of all the muscle commands yields a response to the  average  location-the  feature center of gravity   see didday1 for a more detailed discussion . this scheme would predict proper behavior when faced by one  prey object   but would nredict responses to the average spatial location of a number of visual stimuli. 'surprisinqly enouqh  this does sometimes occur in the frog1  but usually response is made to only one of those objects present- the basic pittsmcculloch scheme does not predict this  usually more appropriate  type of resnonse. 
     the notion that the image of an object can directly lead to the proper combination of muscle contractions required to deal with it is very appealing. it offers a rapid way to deal with the problem of orientina the body with respect to objects in the environ-
ment. one possible way to allow for responses to only one of several stimuli present while maintaining the feature of allowing the stimulus to shape the response directly is to alter the pitts-ncculloch scheme by dividinq the incoming information into overlapping regions and providina a mechanism to select one region. the  super-position  effect which uses an object's image to tailor the response then works within the chosen region. the more rare responses  between  two stimuli would then respresent failure of the selection mechanism. 
     clearly  there are a great number of ways to implement such a function  and three different imple-
mentations are contrasted in didday1. one implementation utilizes cells which function much like the  newness  and  sameness  cells described by lettvin  et. a l . ' . 
1      arbib and didday1 describe how this basic framework might be used as a locallzina reflex which acts in conjunction with recognition mechanisms to form a percelvlna system capable of using memory to interact with a complex environment. 
　　　the basic organization provides a means of using visual features to control motor behavior which must be accurately tailored to local details of an object in the visual scene. behavior which depends on detailed analysis and knowledge of more subtle aspects of the objects is carried out by other reqions  cortical visual centers in mammals . the optic tectum or superior colliculus thus is seen as performing 
a reflexive localizinq role. 
a grasp reflex for robots 
　　　this section describes a f i r s t attemot to define a system which is organized like the visual mechanisms depicted in the previous section. the motor behavior which the system is to control is arm and hand movement. 
　　　i have made a number of assumptions in what follows  many of them with an eye to simplifyinq the problem. many of them could be relaxed with present knowledge and further effort. some thoughts on such expansions of the power of the reflex are described later. the most serious simplifying assumption is 
that the world may be treated as two-dimensional. 
　　　one of the principal notions put forth by arbib and didday1 was that the qoal of perception is in determining appropriate motor behavior. this led to the idea that the task of perception is not to construct a delicately detailed internal reconstruction of the input scene but rather to help choose possible motor responses. thus we find sensory feature detectors elegantly matched to possible motor response  or perhaps vice versa . the feature detectors soon to be described owe their details to the hand they 
are to help control. 
　　　the hand is assumed to consist of two  fingers  on a palm as shown in fig. 1. 	details of the hand which are reflected in the desiqn of the feature detectors are the length and width of the fingers and the maximum opening distance of the fingers. 	as seems to be the case in animal nervous systems  motor programs  are assumed to  exist which  when given the appropriate parameters  can direct the hand so that the palm lies over point  x  y} at an angle o and 
with the fingers w units apart. 	it is then the task of the grasp reflex to analyze the visual scene and produce values of these four parameters which are appropriate for graspino some object in the scene. four parameters suffice because the system to be described functions in two dimensions only. 
　　　further simplifications arise from the assumption that the two-dimensional visual input is obtained from  above  the real world scene and in such a way that all objects are seen from the same distance. 	thus an object's size is immediately recoverable from the size of its retinal image. 	finally i have assumed that all objects are darker than the surround. 
　　　figure 1 provides an outline of the conceptual organization of the system. 	the implementation is for a serial computer  thus where layers of parallel operating cell types would exist in animals  this implementation simply maintains lists of the loca-
tion  orientation and level of excitation of active  cells . the terminology from nervous systems is used throughout  however. 
　　　there are five classes of  cells  which process the visual scene to produce a specific motor command. all are  directional . the f i r s t two are sensory feature detectors which receive inputs from local regions of the retina and detect  tongues   class a  and  inward boundedness   class b . these somewhat obscure descriptions are ellucidated in fig. 1a and 
b. there is already a larqe amount of detail of the nature of the hand included at this level. the maximum opening width of the hand determines the width of the excitatory region of the class a cells. the lenqth of the class b cells corresponds to the length of the hand  and the width of the inhibitory cell row in the class b cells corresponds to the widths of the 
fingers. 	all these would change 1f a different hand 
were to be used. 
　　　in a nervous system implementation  there would be some number of overlapping cells of both classes for each point on the retina  and the outnuts of these feature detectors would lie in some topographically 
mapped region. in the current  serial implementation  a l i s t is created with an element for each class a cell which has a non-zero level of excitation  and similarly for class b. 
　　　class d cells are excited by the concurrence of a class a cell at angle e and a class b cell at the same anole in a reaion  to the left of  the class a cell. thus a class d cell siqnals the joint existence of a  tonque  and a reaion appropriate for the left finoer to occuny. class e cells do the same but for the right finger. 
　　　class c cells are excited by concurrent class d 
　　　and class e excitation which is centered on the same class a cell. thus class c excitation sinnals an appropriate angle and position for the nalm of the hand to occupy. 
     the selection mechanism operates on the totality of class c excitation  and selects that spatial region 
which has maximal class c excitation  just as the selection mechanism in the froq model selects that reqion which has maximal  foodness  potency. since an object which is small enough to f i t entirely within the opened hand could be qrasped equally well from any direction  there will in general be many class c cells excited. to aid the selection mechanism in such cases  a bias is applied to those class c firinq levels which result in arm positions which are less  awkward  beinq favored. that i s   hand orientations that call for the least deviation from the hand/arm startinq position are preferred. 
     once a region has been chosen  the class c  class d and class e excitation levels in that reqion are used to derive the motor command  the positional parameters for the hand . the hand position and orientation command is obtained by computing the sum of the x and y coordinates and angle for each class e cell in the region weighted by the firing rate of each cell. it is this weighting process which allows the determination of position and angle to a greater precision than the spacing of the cells. the command for finger width is computed in a similar manner from class d and class e cells within the chosen region. 
　　　figs. 1 show three visual scenes on which the simulated mechanism has been tested. 	the input scene is a 1 x 1 array of squares. 	the actual incut to the program is an array which for each square has a number corresponding to the proportion of that square which is dark. 	fig. 1 illustrates a blob shaped object which has a lobe to the right which  qiven the feature detectors used  is good for grasping. 	this region produced maximal class c excitation  so the parameters are tailored to qrasp the object there. the  hand  is sketched in the chosen orientation. 
　　　fig. 1a illustrates an object which is squared off at one end and pointed at the other and which is at an angle with respect to the coordinates of the input grid. 	fig. 1b illustrates the regions correspondinq to those class a cells which were excited. the response is made up of weighted sums of this information  and so is appropriate to the position of the object even though no cell is oriented colinearly with any side of i t . 
1 　　　fig. 1 illustrates the ability of the mechanism to choose one of several objects present. 	given the forms of the class a and class b cells  a squared off end is more appropriate for graspino than is a 
blob  so the upper object is chosen. the approach from the right was chosen due to the bias toward smaller arm movement. 
conclusion 
     in its current  preliminary form  the grasp reflex carries out the operation  go get the best lookinq thinq to grasp . what is  best  is determined by the two classes of feature detection units operating on the input scene. another layer of feature detectors which process the scene before it gets to the qrasp reflex could bias what is  best . this new layer  which would be under program control  could 
serve to enrich the power of the grasp reflex by allowing different sorts of things to be  best  at different times. if  for example   handles  have some particular feature characteristics  appropriate settings of this new layer could cause the reflex to pick an object up by the handle  for using it  one time  and pick it up by some other appropriate part  for givinq the object to someone else  the next. like any reflex  the mechanism has a fairly narrow range in which it can function appropriately. if  for example  the reflex chooses to grasp an object which turns out to be too heavy to move  some higher level function which makes a more sophisticated analysis of the situation will have to be alerted. in cases when the grasp reflex is adequate  it can serve to perform the task of orienting the hand very rapidly at very little computational effort. 
     the scheme must be further enlarged to incorporate  neqative  sorts of information  e.g. excitation caused by objects not in the chosen region could be used to prevent those motor responses which would bump into other objects. also  negative information could be used to allow picking up an object with the finqertips when it is shaped so that a full hand qrip is impossible. more importantly  negative information is needed when the object is so small that it can be picked up from any orientation. in this case  even 
weighting in favor of minimal arm movements will not preclude the possibility that the average location nf excitation lies within the boundaries of the objectthus producinq a command which would tend to place the hand on top of the chosen object. one other possibility that shows promise here is to use information from the object to alter the size and shape of the regions used by the selection mechanism. 
     the most important alteration would be to have the system function in a three dimensional world. feature detectors responsive to visual features such as those guzman1 utilized might prove helpful here. most of guzman's features are local in nature-if complex global features prove to be necessary then the reflex organization becomes unattractive-the reflex is of value only if it is extremely fast. 
     it is conceivable that the organization described here is really only appropriate to the parallel nature of the brain. much of the efforts in the analysis of didday1 were concerned with the problems of global versus local information flow. in the brain  global functions are very costly  require many interconnections --in a serial computer they are somewhat more expensive than local ones due to the combinatorics involved. it remains to be seen whether takinq ideas of organization from the brain is of use to robots. perhaps the organization into hierarchically controlled reflexes will provide less direct insights than those suggested here  but it seems to have been so universally employed in brains as to be of some basic value-
1 
