A New Approach for Stereo Matching in Autonomous Mobile Robot Applications 

Pasquale Foggia 

Dipartimento di  Informatica e Sistemistica 
Università di Napoli, Via Claudio 21, I80125, 

Napoli, ITALY 
foggiapa@unina.it 

Jean-Michel Jolion 

Lyon Research Center for Images and Information 
Systems, UMR CNRS 5205 Bat. J. Verne INSA 

Lyon 69621, Villeurbanne Cedex, France 

Jean-Michel.Jolion@insa-lyon.fr 

Alessandro Limongiello    

  Mario Vento   

Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione ed Ingegneria Elettrica  

Università di Salerno, Via Ponte don Melillo, I84084 Fisciano (SA), ITALY  

[mvento, alimongiello]@unisa.it 

Abstract 

We propose a new approach for stereo matching in 
Autonomous  Mobile  Robot  applications.  In  this 
framework  an  accurate  but  slow  reconstruction  of 
the  3D  scene  is  not  needed;  rather,  it  is  more 
important  to  have  a  fast  localization  of  the 
obstacles  to  avoid  them.  All  the  methods  in  the 
literature are based on a punctual correspondence, 
but they are inefficient in realistic contexts for the 
presence of uniform patterns, or some perturbations 
between the two images of the stereo pair. Our idea 
is  to  face  the  stereo  matching  problem  as  a 
matching between homologous regions, instead of 
a  point  matching.  The 
images  are 
represented  as  graphs  and  a  graph  matching  is 
computed to find homologous regions. We present 
some results on a standard stereo database and also 
on a more realistic stereo sequence acquired from a 
robot  moving  in  an  indoor  environment,  and  a 
performance comparison with other approaches in 
the literature is reported and discussed. Our method 
is  strongly  robust  in  case  of  some  fluctuations  of 
the  stereo  pair,  homogeneous  and  repetitive 
regions,  and  is  fast.  The  result  is  a  semi-dense 
disparity  map,  leaving  only  a  few  regions  in  the 
scene unmatched. 

stereo 

1  Introduction 
A  pair  of  images  acquired  from  a  stereo  camera  contains 
depth  information  about  the  scene:  this  is  the  main 
assumption of stereo vision, based on the binocular parallax 
property of the human visual system. The main difficulty is 
to  establish  a  correspondence  between  points  of  the  two 
images  representing  the  same  point  of  the  scene;  this 
process 
set  of 
displacements  between  matched  pixels  is  usually  indicated 
as disparity map.

is  called  disparity  matching.  The 

All  the  approaches,  in  the  literature,  are  based  on  this 
punctual definition of the disparity. In this paper we propose 
an extension of that concept, namely we define a disparity 
value for a whole region of the scene starting from the two 
homologous views of it in the stereo pair. The main reason 
of this extension is that a punctual approach is redundant for 
Autonomous Mobile Robot (AMR) applications. In fact, in 
AMR applications, it is not very important to have a good 
reconstruction  of  the  surfaces,  but  it  is  more  important  to 
identify adequately the space occupied by each object in the 
scene (as soon as possible to avoid collisions), even by just 
assigning to it a single disparity information. Moreover the 
punctual  approaches  are  lacking  in  robustness  in  some 
realistic  frameworks,  especially  for  video  acquired  from  a 
mobile  platform.  The  algorithms  based  on  correlation, 
which  are  available  in  off-the-shelf  systems,  are  unable  to 
deal  with  large  uniform  regions  or  with  vibration  of  the 
cameras.  On  the  contrary,  some  efforts  have  been  done  in 
the  literature  to  improve  the  robustness  of  the  algorithms, 
but in despite of the running time. Our method estimates the 
average depth of the whole region by an integral  measure, 
and  so  has  less  problems  with  uniform  regions  than  other 
methods have. The estimate of the position of the regions is 
sufficiently  accurate  for  navigation,  also  in  the  mentioned 
cases, and it is fast enough for real time processing. 

Now, we report a brief description of several methods to 
show  better  the  limits  of  punctual  approaches.  For  more 
details, there is a good taxonomy of dense two-frame stereo 
correspondence algorithms, recently proposed by Scharstein 
and  Szeliski  [2002],  and  a  survey  on  stereo  vision  for 
mobile robot by Zhang [2002]. There are two major types of 
techniques, in the literature, for disparity matching: the area-
based  (also  known  as  correlation-based)  and  feature-based 
techniques.  Moreover,  the  area-based  algorithms  can  be 
classified in local and global approaches.  

The  local  area-based  algorithms  [Kanade  and  Okutomi, 
1994; Fusiello and Roberto, 1997; Veksler, 2001] provide a 
correspondence  for  each  pixel  of  the  stereo  pair.  They 

IJCAI-07

2103

assume  that  a  pixel  is  surrounded  by  a  window  of  pixels 
with  the  same  disparity,  and  these  windows  of  pixels  are 
matched. They produce a dense disparity map, excessive for 
AMR  aims.  Furthermore,  they  can  be  quite  unreliable  not 
only in  homogeneous regions, but also in textured regions 
for an inappropriately chosen window size.  

On the other side, the global area-based approaches try to 
propagate disparity information from a pixel to its neighbors 
[Marr and Poggio, 1976; Zitnick and Kanade, 2000], or they 
define and  minimize some energy function over the whole 
disparity  map  [Geiger  et  al.,  1995;  Roy,  1999;  Boykov  et 
al., 2001]. They have a better performance in homogeneous 
regions,  but  they  frequently  have  parameters  which  are 
difficult to set, and are highly time-consuming. 

The  feature-based  approaches  [Marr  and  Poggio,  1979; 
Grimson,  1981;  Candocia  and  Adjouadi,  1997]  detect  and 
match  only  “feature”  pixels  (as  corner,  edges,  etc.).  These 
methods produce accurate and efficient results, but compute 
sparse disparity maps (only in correspondence to the feature 
points). Therefore, AMR applications require more details, 
in fact some information about the size; also a rough shape 
of  the  objects  is  needed  for  guiding  a  robot  in  the 
environment or for basic recognition tasks (e.g. in industrial 
applications, or for platooning of robots). 

All  the  proposed  methods,  as  already  said,  look  for  a 
punctual  matching  in  the  stereo  pair.  Therefore,  some 
constraints both on the scene and on the input images have 
been introduced, since the  first works on  the stereopsis by 
Marr  and  Poggio  [1976;1979],  in  order  to  guarantee  good 
results  and  to  reduce  the  complexity.  To  guarantee  these 
constraints, the stereo pair is supposed to be acquired from a 
sophisticated system, so that the energy distributions of the 
two  images  are  as  similar  as  possible.  Moreover,  a  pre-
processing  phase  is  needed,  before  the  correspondence 
finding step, to compensate the hardware setup (calibration
phase),  or  to  assume  an  horizontal  epipolar  line  (epipolar 
rectification).  Unfortunately,  in  realistic  applications  of 
mobile robot these constraints are not easy to guarantee. The 
two images of the stereo pair could have a different lighting, 
the motion of the mobile platform on a rough ground should 
produce  mechanical  vibrations  of 
the  cameras,  and 
consequently local or global perturbations between the two 
images, 
initial  phases  of 
calibration  and  rectification.  We  want  to  relax  some 
constraints on the input images in order to consider a more 
realistic  acquiring  system,  and  consequently  we  add  some 
constraints on our goal. 

that  could  undermine 

the 

In this paper we propose, as said before, an extension of 
the  disparity  concept.  The  main  idea  is  to  determinate  a 
unique disparity value for a whole region of the scene and 
not  for  a  pixel.  In  fact,  even  if  we  can  suppose  an  unique 
correspondence  between  each  pixel  in  the  left  and  right 
images  from  an  optical  point  of  view  (as  said  by  the 
uniqueness  constraint),  in  some  cases  we  can  not  have 
enough information to find this correspondence looking just 
at a single pixel. Let us consider, for example, pixels inside 
homogeneous  areas,  or  belonging  to  repetitive  patterns,  or 
pixels suffering from perspective or photometric distortions. 

We prefer to have a 2D and ½ representation of the scene, 
assigning  a constant  disparity value to a whole region and 
only  to  some  significant  regions.  Therefore,  we  propose  a 
new  stereo  matching  approach  based  on  a 
region 
segmentation of the two images and a graph representation 
of  these  regions,  to  face  the  matching  problem  as  a  graph 
matching  problem.  The  computational  process  is  simpler 
and  faster,  because  we  consider  only  some  significant 
regions, i.e. big areas, or some areas selected by a specific 
target.  The  result  is  more  robust  in  a  realistic  context, 
because  an  integral  measurement  of  the  disparity  for  the 
whole 
local  and  global 
region  can  mitigate  some 
fluctuations between the two images.  

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an 
overview  of  our  approach;  Section  3  is  devoted  to  the 
segmentation and the graph representation of the stereo pair; 
Section  4  shows  the  graph  matching  between  the  left  and 
right image and Section 5 shows the disparity computation. 
Finally,  in  Section  6  there  is  a  discussion  of  experimental 
results  on  standard  stereo  database  and  also  on  our  stereo 
video sequence. Conclusions are drawn in Section 7. 

2  Overview of our approach 
The main idea of our approach is to obtain a disparity map 
looking  at  the  distance  between  homologous  regions 
(instead of pixels) in the stereo images. Let these regions be 
called  blobs.  In  this  way  the  computation  of  the  disparity 
map is carried out on a set of pixels having the same spatial 
and color proprieties, producing a more robust performance 
with  respect  to  local  and  global  perturbations  in  the  two 
images.  

Left Image 

Right Image 

Segmentation

Segmentation

Graph 

Representation

Graph 

Representation

Recursive Weighted 

Bipartite Graph Matching 

matched 

areas 

Disparity  
Computation 

Performance 

map 

don’t care 

areas 

Semi-dense 
Disparity map 

Figure 1: A scheme of our approach. 

It should be noted that a blob is not an object; objects are 
decomposed into several blobs, so the overall shape of the 
object  is  however  reconstructed,  except  for  uncommon 

IJCAI-07

2104

pathological cases. An example of pathological case can be 
a  uniform  object  almost  along  the  line  of  sight,  but  it  has 
been  satisfactorily  dealt  with  only  by  global  criteria 
optimization, which is extremely time consuming. 

In our approach (see Figure 1), the left and right images 
are  segmented  and  each  area  identifies  a  node  of  a  graph 
(see section 3). The segmentation process is simple and very 
fast.  In  fact,  we  are  not  interested  in  a  fine  segmentation, 
because we do not pursue a reconstruction aim. Anyway, we 
need  similar  segments  between  the  left  and  right  image  in 
order to  correctly  find  homologous regions.  This  objective 
is  possible,  in  fact  the  stereo  images  are  likely  similar 
because they represent two different view points of the same 
the  segmentation  process  does  not 
scene.  Moreover, 
influence 
the  rest  of  algorithm,  because  a  recursive 
definition of the matching (see section 4) and a performance 
function  (see  section  5)  guarantee  a  recovery  of  some 
segmentation problems.  

A  bipartite  graph  matching  between  the  two  graphs  is 
computed in order to match each area of the left image with 
only one area of the right image. This process yields a list of 
reliably  matched  areas  and  a  list  of  so-called  don’t  care 
areas.  By  calculating  a  vertical  displacement  between  the 
corresponding areas, a depth is found for those areas of the 
reference image (i.e. left image). The list of the don’t care 
areas,  instead,  could  be  processed  in  order  to  refine  our 
result (see section 4). 

As  it  is  clear,  this  approach  is  robust  even  in  case  of 
uniform  texture  and  it  does  not  need  a  strong  calibration 
process  because  it  looks  for  area  correspondence  and  not 
pixel  correspondence.  On  the  other  hand,  an  effort  is 
required in graph matching to assure real-time requirements. 
The application time is reduced using some constraints for a 
quicker  computation  of  the  bipartite  graph  matching  (see 
section  4).  Our  method  can  be  classified  as  a  systemic 
approach  [Jolion,  1994],  in  fact  we  consider  constraints 
coming  from  the  scene,  from  the  objective  and  from  the 
observer. In particular, with regard to scene constraints, we 
assume  a  strong  continuity  constraint  for  each  selected 
region, and the compatibility and the uniqueness constraints 
are  applied  on  the  whole  region  and  not  longer  on  each 
pixel. The horizontal epipolar line constraint is generalized 
in  a  horizontal  epipolar  band  (see  section  4),  to  take  the 
nature  of  the  mobile  observer  into  account.  Moreover,  the 
observer is supposed to move in an indoor environment and 
not too fast. Finally, the objective is considered to be real-
time and highly related to the AMR applications. Therefore, 
all  these  constraints  are  taken  into  account  to  achieve  our 
goal. 

3  Segmentation and Graph representation  
The first phase of the algorithm is the segmentation of the 
stereo  images  and  their  graph  representation.  We  need  a 
very  fast  segmentation  process  that  produces  similarly 
segmented areas between the left and right images. We have 
used a simple multi-threshold segmentation. It is essentially 
based  on  the  quantization  of  the  histogram  in  some  color 
ranges (of the same size). The left and right segmentations 

are  very  similar,  considering  an  adaptive  quantization  for 
each image according to its lighting condition. A connected 
component  detection  procedure 
is  applied  on  each 
segmented  image  to  obtain  4-connected  areas  of  the  same 
color.  Each  connected  area  (blob)  is  then  represented  as  a 
node  of  an  attributed  graph.  Each  node  has  the  following 
attributes: 

  colMean: the RGB mean value of the blob (m_r, m_g, 

m_b); 

  size: the number of pixels in a connected area; 
  coord:  the  coordinates  of  the  box  containing  the  blob 

(top, left, bottom, right); 

  blobMask:  a  binary  mask  for  the  pixels  belonging  to 

the blob.  

It is easy to understand that a segmentation yielding many 
segments  can  be  more  accurate  but  creates  lots  of  nodes, 
consequently  requiring  a  more  expensive  graph  matching 
process. On the other hand, a rougher segmentation process 
generates matching nodes that are very dissimilar in size and 
shape.  As  a  compromise,  we  consider  a  segmentation 
process tuned to over-segment the image, and subsequently 
we filter the image in order to discard small noisy areas. 

L,…,Nn

R,…,Nm

4  Graph Matching 
Formally  our  matching  algorithm  can  be  described  in  the 
following  way.  A  number  of  nodes  is  identified  in  each 
frame  (left  and  right  image)  and  a  progressive  label  is 
L} and 
associated to each node (blob). Let GL = {N0
R} be the two graphs representing the left 
GR = {N0
and  right  image  respectively.  The  solution  of  the  spatial 
matching  problem,  between  two  stereo  frames,  is  an 
injective  mapping  between  a  subset  of  GL  and  a  subset  of 
GR.  The  problem  at  hand  can  be  represented  by  using  a 
matrix  whose  rows  and  columns  are  respectively  used  to 
represent the nodes of the set GL, and the nodes of the set 
GR (correspondence matrix). The element (i,j) of the matrix 
L with the 
is 1 if we have a matching between the element Ni
R, it is 0 otherwise. Each row contains no  more 
element Nj
than  one  value  set  to  1.  If  the  j-th  row  or  the  i-th  column 
contains only zeros, it means that it is a don’t care node. The 
  GR  solves  a  suitable  Weighted 
bijective  mapping 
Bipartite  Graph  Matching  (WBGM)  problem.  A  Bipartite 
Graph  (BG)  [Baier  and  Lucchesi,  1993]  is  a  graph  where 
nodes  can  be  divided  into  two  sets  such  that  no  edge 
connects nodes in the same set. In our problem, the first set 
is GL, while the second set is GR. Before the correspondence 
is  determined,  each  node  of  the  set  GL  is  connected  with 
each node of the set GR, thus obtaining a Complete BG. In 
general, an assignment between two sets GL and GR is any 
subset of GL 
 GR, i.e., any set of ordered pairs whose first 
elements belongs to GL and whose second elements belongs 
to GR, with the constraint that each node may appear at most 
once in the  set.  A  maximal assignment, i.e. an assignment 
containing a maximal number of ordered pairs is known as a 
matching (BGM) [Kuhn, 1955]. 

:  GL 

IJCAI-07

2105

L, 
A cost function is then introduced, so that each edge (Ni
R) of the complete bipartite graph is assigned a cost. This 
Nj
L 
cost  takes  into  account  how  similar  are  the  two  nodes  Ni
R.  The  lower  is  the  cost,  the  more  suitable  is  that 
and  Nj
edge.  If  the  cost  of  an  edge  is  higher  than  a  threshold 
(thrMatch),  the  edge  is  considered  unprofitable  and  is 
removed from the graph (its cost is considered to be 

). 

Let us now introduce the cost function: 

colCost

id

mCost
3

posCost

 

Cost
Where: 

colCost

bmgmrmi
_,_,_

L
colMean
i

R
colMean
i

*3
L
i
(

256
L
j

)

R

i
(

R

j

)

 

id

mCost

i
j

bottom
,
left
top
,

right

width

height
i
i

L

R

posCost

i

bottom
,
(*2

top
right
,
width

left
,
height

)

 

where width and height are the dimensions of the frame. The 
matching with the lowest cost among the ones with maximal 
cardinality is selected as the best solution. The problem of 
computing  a  matching  having  minimum  cost  is  called 
Weighted BGM (WBGM). This operation is generally time-
consuming; for this reason the search area (that is the subset 
of  possible  couples  of  nodes)  is  bounded  by  the  epipolar 
and disparity bands (see Figure 2).  
R 
L 

 
 

 
 
 

R 

    

 
epipolar 
band  

Two nodes that do not 
belong to the search 

area  

disparity 

band 

 

max 

disparity  

Figure 2: Epipolar and disparity bands: some constraints 

to optimize the WBGM. 

 
These constraints come from stereo vision geometry, but 
in  our  case  they  represent  a  generalization.  The  epipolar 
band  is  a  generalization  for  epipolar  line,  that  is  the 

maximum  horizontal  displacement  of  two  corresponding 
nodes  (generally  its  value  can  be  a  few  pixel).  Disparity 
band,  instead,  is  a  vertical  displacement,  so  a  node  of  the 
right image can move on the left almost of  *maxdisparity 
pixels (with 
a small integer). These two displacements are 
computed with respect to the centers of the bounding box  of 
the two blobs. 

The  graph  matching  process  yields  a  list  of  reliably 
matched areas and a list of so-called don’t care areas. The 
matched  areas  are  considered  in  the  following  section  for 
the disparity  computation. The list  of the  don’t care areas, 
instead, is processed in order to group adjacent blobs in the 
left  and  right  image  and  consequently  reduce  split  and 
merge artifacts of the segmentation process. Finally, a new 
matching of these nodes is found. The  recursive definition 
of this phase assures a reduction of the don’t care areas in 
few steps, but sometimes this process is not needed because 
don’t care areas are very small. 

5  Disparity Computation 

The  disparity  computation  is  faced  superimposing  the 
corresponding  nodes  until  the  maximum  covering  occurs. 
The  overlapping  is  obtained  moving  the  bounding  box  of 
the smallest region into the bounding box of the largest one; 
precisely,  the  bounding  box  with  the  minimum  width  is 
moved  horizontally  into  the  other  box,  and  the  bounding 
box  with  the  minimum  height  is  moved  vertically  into  the 
other  box.  The  horizontal  displacement,  corresponding  to 
the best fitting of the matched nodes, is the disparity value 
for the node in the reference image (left image).  

 

 
Figure  3:  Some  examples  of  matched  regions.  In  grey 
color the region from the right image and in white color the 
region from the left image. 

 
the 

Figure  4:  The  overlapping  process  minimizes 

mismatching between the two matched regions. 

 
A  lot  of  objects  have  some  appendices  (see  Figure  4) 
depending  on  the  different  segmentation  between  left  and 
right  image.  However,  this  process  finds  the  correct  value 
for the disparity, minimizing  the  mismatching between the 
two matched regions. Moreover, we propose a performance 
measurement  for  the  disparity  computation  in  order  to 

IJCAI-07

2106

consider  also  some  cases  with  larger  errors  coming  from 
both segmentation and matching process. 

quantitative performance evaluation for disparity map but in 
case of reconstruction aims. The following figure presents a 
stereo pair from the Tsukuba data set.  

performanc
e

 

max

Fitting

max(

sizeL
,

sizeR

)

 
It  is  the  percentage  value  of  the  best  fitting  area  size 
(maxFitting)  with  respect  to  the  maximum  size  of  the  two 
matched regions (sizeL and sizeR). 

 

 

 
Figure 5: On the left side our disparity map; on the right 
side a graphical representation of the performance function 
(a brighter region has the upper value of performance). 

to  refine 

the  result.  Anyway, 

 
The result of our algorithm can be represented in a graph, 
the  so-called  disparity  graph,  and,  as  it  is  clear  from  the 
Figure  5,  the  nodes  of  this  graph  can  have  a  don’t  care 
attribute  or,  alternatively,  the  couple  of  disparity  and 
performance  attributes.  Therefore,  we  could  select  a 
minimum  performance  value,  and  label  the  regions  below 
this value as don’t care. All these don’t care areas could be 
processed again in the WBGM, as say in the section 3, if we 
should  need 
in  our 
experimental results, we use a simple post-filtering in order 
to  reduce  don’t  care  regions.  Each  4-connected  don’t  care 
area  is  labeled  choosing  the  most  frequent  among  the 
disparities  of  the  adjacent  regions.  This  assumption  comes 
from  the  continuity  constraint,  but  it  is  clear  that  it  is 
applicable  only  inside  a  region  and  not  between  two 
different regions, so it is checked that most of the adjacent 
regions  have  the  same  disparity  value.  An  example  of  the 
post-filtering use is shown in the Figure 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6: On the left side the original disparity map; on 

the right side the result after applying the post-filtering. 

6  Experimental results 
In  the  literature,  tests  are  usually  performed  with  standard 
databases  composed  of  static  images,  well-calibrated  and 
acquired in uniform lighting. The web site of Scharstein and 
Szeliski [Middlebury web site] is a good reference for some 
stereo images and to compare some stereovision algorithms. 
In this section we want to show our qualitative results and 
discuss some errors of the best algorithms in the literature, 
when applied to real cases. Nowadays, in AMR applications 
it is not defined a quantitative measurement for performance 
evaluation.  On  Middlebury  web  site  it  is  proposed  a 

Figure  7:  The  reference  image  (on  the  left)  and  the 

ground truth (on the right), from Tsukuba data set. 

 
The second image in Figure 7 represents the ground truth 
of  the  disparity  map.  An  object  has  a  higher  grey  level 
(corresponding to a high disparity between the two images) 
the closer it is to the camera, i.e. the lamp is in front of the 
statue that it in front of the table, etc.  

the  best  methods 

The following Figure 8 shows our result on the Tsukuba 
DB  and  a  comparison  with  other  approaches.  We  have 
selected 
literature:  squared 
differences  (SSD),  dynamic  programming  (DP)  and  graph 
cuts  (GC)  [Scharstein  and  Szeliski,  2002].  The  first  is  a 
local  area-based  algorithm,  the  other  two  ones  are  global 
area-based algorithm. The experiments have been performed 
on  a  notebook  Intel  P4  1.5  GHz,  512  Mb  RAM,  and  we 
have considered a resolution of 384x288 pixel. 

the 

in 

SSD: Time < 1 sec   

DP: Time 2 sec          

Graph Cut: Time 70 sec

OOUURR::  TTiimmee  11..1144  sseecc  
Figure 8: A comparison with other approaches. 

Before 

Before 

After 

After 

SSD: Time < 1 sec

OOUURR::  TTiimmee  11..1144 sseecc 

 

IJCAI-07

2107

Figure 9: SSD and Our approach after a vertical translation 
of 2 pixels. 

In Figure 9 it is clear  the robustness of our approach  in 

relation to the loss of the horizontal epipolar constraint. 

    SSD: Time < 1 sec            

  DP: Time 2 sec 

Graph Cut: Time 50 sec 

OOUURR:: TTiimmee 00..77 sseecc

Figure 10: Results on our stereo pair: it is characterized by 
only one homogeneous object. 

The  presence  of  texture-less  regions  (very  frequent  in  real 
contexts) causes serious problems to the best algorithms of 
the literature.  

7  Conclusions 
We  have  presented  a  stereo  matching  algorithm  that  is 
especially oriented towards AMR applications, providing a 
fast  and  robust  detection  of  object  positions  instead  of  a 
detailed  but  slow  reconstruction  of  the  3D  scene.  The 
algorithm  has  been  experimentally  validated  showing  an 
encouraging  performance  when  compared  to  the  most 
commonly  used  matching  algorithms,  especially  on  real-
world  images.  Furthermore,  we  are  working  on  a  further 
improvement  of  the  performance  by  defining  an  hybrid 
approach, i.e. we can apply our algorithm only to the large 
homogenous  regions,  and  use  traditional  dense  stereo 
matching for the rest. 

References 
[Scharstein and Szeliski, 2002] D. Scharstein, R. Szeliski. A 
Taxonomy and Evaluation of Dense Two-Frame Stereo 
Correspondence  Algorithms.  International  Journal  of 
Computer Vision, 47(1):7-42, May 2002.  

[Zhang,  2002]  C.  Zhang.  A  Survey  on  Stereo  Vision  for 
Mobile Robots. Technical report, Dept. of Electrical and 

Computer  Engineering,  Carnegie  Mellon  University,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA, 2002. 

[Kanade and Okutomi, 1994] T. Kanade, and M. Okutomi. 
A stereo  matching algorithm with an adaptive window: 
Theory  and  experiment.  IEEE  Transaction  on  Pattern 
Analysis  and  Machine  Intelligence,  16(9):920-932, 
September 1994. 

[Fusiello  and  Roberto,  1997]  A.  Fusiello  and  V.  Roberto. 
Efficient  stereo  with  multiple  windowing.  In  IEEE 
Conference 
and  Pattern 
Recognition, pages 858–863, Puerto Rico, June 1997. 

on  Computer  Vision 

[Veksler,  2001]  O.  Veksler.  Stereo  matching  by  compact 
windows via minimum ratio cycle. In Proceedings of the 
International  Conference  on  Computer  Vision,  I:  540–
547, Vancouver, Canada, July 2001. 

[Marr  and  Poggio,  1976]  D.  Marr  and  T.A.  Poggio. 
Cooperative  computation  of  stereo  disparity.  Science,
194(4262):283–287, October 1976. 

[Zitnick and Kanade, 2000] C.L. Zitnick and T. Kanade. A 
cooperative algorithm for stereo matching and occlusion 
detection.  IEEE  Transaction  on  Pattern  Analysis  and 
Machine Intelligence, 22(7):675–684, July 2000. 

[Geiger  et  al.,  1995]  D.  Geiger,  B.  Ladendorf,  and  A. 
Yuille.  Occlusions  and  binocular  stereo.  International 
Journal of Computer Vision, 14:211–226, 1995. 

[Roy,  1999]  S.  Roy.  Stereo  without  epipolar  lines:  A 
maximum-flow  formulation.  International  Journal  of 
Computer Vision, 34(2/3):1–15, August 1999. 

[Boykov et al., 2001] Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, and R. Zabih. 
Fast  approximate  energy  minimization  via  graph  cuts. 
IEEE  Transaction  on  Pattern  Analysis  and  Machine 
Intelligence, 23(11):1222–1239, 2001. 

[Marr  and  Poggio,  1979]  D.  Marr  and  T.A.  Poggio.  A 
computational theory of human stereo vision. RoyalP, B-
204:301–328, 1979. 

[Grimson, 

1981]  W.E.L.  Grimson.  A 

computer 
implementation  of  a  theory  of  human  stereo  vision. 
Royal, B-292:217–253, 1981. 

[Candocia  and  Adjouadi,  1997]  F.  Candocia,  and  M. 
Adjouadi.  A  similarity  measure  for  stereo  feature 
matching.  IEEE  Transaction  on  Image  Processing,
6:1460-1464, 1997. 

[Baier  and  Lucchesi,  1993]  H.  Baier  and  C.  L.  Lucchesi. 
Matching  Algorithms  for  Bipartite  Graphs.  Technical 
Report  DCC-03/93,  DCC-IMECC-UNICAMP,  Brazil, 
March 1993. 

[Kuhn,  1955]  H.W.  Kuhn.  The  Hungarian  Method  for  the 
Assignment  Problem.  Naval  Research  Logistics 
Quarterly, 2: 83-97, 1955. 

[Middlebury web site] http://cat.middlebury.edu/stereo/
[Jolion, 1994] J.M. Jolion. Computer Vision Methodologies. 

CVGIP: Image Understanding, 59(1):53–71, 1994. 

IJCAI-07

2108

