Efﬁcient Calculation of Personalized Document Rankings

Claudia Hess, Klaus Stein

Laboratory for Semantic Information Technology
{claudia.hess, klaus.stein}@wiai.uni-bamberg.de

Bamberg University

Abstract

Social networks allow users getting personalized
recommendations for interesting resources like
websites or scientiﬁc papers by using reviews of
users they trust. Search engines rank documents by
using the reference structure to compute a visibility
for each document with reference structure-based
functions like PageRank. Personalized document
visibilities can be computed by integrating both ap-
proaches. We present a framework for incorporat-
ing the information from both networks, and rank-
ing algorithms using this information for personal-
ized recommendations. Because the computation
of document visibilities is costly and therefore can-
not be done in runtime, i.e., when a user searches
a document repository, we pay special attention to
develop algorithms providing an efﬁcient calcula-
tion of personalized visibilities at query time based
on precalculated global visibilities. The presented
ranking algorithms are evaluated by a simulation
study.

1

Introduction

Recently several approaches for combining social networks
and document reference networks have been proposed [Hess
et al., 2006], [Stein and Hess, 2006], [Garc´ıa-Barriocanal and
Sicilia, 2005], [Korﬁatis and Naeve, 2005]. They integrate
information on social relationships into classical reference-
based measures such as PageRank [Page et al., 1998] or HITS
[Kleinberg, 1999]. Trust networks gained much attention be-
cause trust relationships constitute a strong basis for personal-
ized recommendations as shown by trust-based recommender
systems such as [Golbeck, 2006], [Massa and Avesani, 2004],
[Avesani et al., 2005]. We call such measures operating
on two-layer networks trust-enhanced visibility measures.1

1Other approaches like TrustRank [Gy¨ongyi et al., 2004] directly
attach reliability information to a subset of documents to improve
recommendations, which does not correspond to the notion of social
trust (derived from a trust network) and does not allow for personal-
ization.

They are motivated by the fact that a document can be highly
visible although its content is completely untrustworthy. Ex-
amples are cases of scientiﬁc misconduct in which publica-
tions considered as valid or even as landmark papers such as
the Science papers by the South-Corean stem cell researcher
Hwang2 are declared as faked. Reference-based measures
still assign them a high visibility because citations are rarely
removed and, as e.g. [Budd et al., 1998] showed, faked pa-
pers continue to be cited even after ofﬁcial retraction.
In
this case, more accurate rankings can be provided by look-
ing at other users’ recommendations: as it is a fake, it will
no longer be recommended by anyone knowing this. Less
extreme, though more frequent is that opinions on the same
document differ greatly between users, for example, when a
user has a very extreme, or a very progressive opinion. So this
user might consider a document as very interesting, whereas
most users deem it as untrustworthy. Here, it is crucial whose
recommendations are taken into account: considering docu-
ment reviews depending on the user’s trust in the reviewer
highly personalizes recommendations. However, as it is rea-
sonable to assume that only a small fraction of documents is
reviewed, we integrate trust-weighted reviews into reference-
based measures that calculate recommendations for all doc-
uments. We therefore have a two-layer architecture with a
document reference network and a reader trust network being
connected by reviews.
Current recommender systems do not yet integrate this in-
formation although parts are already available on the web.
A user’s bookmarks made available via applications such as
del.iciou.us3 are e.g. simple reviews of webpages. The num-
ber of trust networks on the web increases, too. Well-known
applications are Epinions or communities such as Orkut.
Many users provide FOAF (Friend-of-a-Friend) ﬁles (see e. g.
[Dumbill, 2002]) with their proﬁle and relationships. An ex-
tension of the FOAF vocabulary encodes trust information4.
This paper analyzes how information from trust and docu-
ment networks can be integrated into algorithms for person-
alized recommendations. Based on a general framework for

2E.g.

news@nature.com: http://www.nature.com/news/2005/

051219/full/051219-3.html, (accessed June 28, 2006).

3http://del.icio.us/
4See the ontology for trust ratings at http://trust.mindswap.org/

ont/trust.owl (accessed June 29, 2006)

IJCAI-07

2778

such trust-enhanced visibility measures, we develop concrete
functions. To consider up-to-date trust information and re-
views, these functions have to be efﬁciently computable at
query time, i. e., in the moment a user searches a document
repository. As it is the reference-based measure that is typi-
cally very costly, we explore how to use precalculated visibil-
ities. The efﬁciency of the measures introduced is analyzed
with respect to recommendations for a single document and
rankings of a set of documents. In the scope of a simulation
study, the results obtained by the different functions are com-
pared. The rest of the paper is hence structured as follows:
Section 2 discusses the general framework. In section 3, we
develop different trust-review-enhanced visibility measures.
Section 4 presents the simulation study in which the functions
are evaluated and section 5 gives the conclusion.

2 Framework for a Trust-Enhanced Visibility

2.1 Trust and Document Reference Networks

The two-layer architecture encompasses a document refer-
ence network and a trust network as shown in ﬁgure 1. Doc-
uments such as webpages or scientiﬁc papers refer to other
documents via hyperlinks or citations. Based on the refer-
ence structure, a visibility can be calculated for each docu-
ment, i.e., its importance or rank. The best-known ranking
algorithm is PageRank that has originally been incorporated
in Google. It computes the visibility visd of a document pd
by using the weighted sum of the visibilities visk of the pa-
pers pk citing pd (based on the idea that a paper cited from
many important papers must be somehow important)5:

= 1− α

N

vispd

+ α ∑
pk∈Bd

vispk
|Ck|

where Bd is the set of pages citing pd and Ck is the set of
pages cited by pk.6 Originally N is the number of documents
in the network, in general it is simply a linear scaling fac-
tor. An important feature of this function is that the visibility
of any document pd depends on the visibilities of documents
p j ∈ Bd citing it. Therefore, changing the visibility of one
document inﬂuences the visibility of other documents. Other
approaches, e. g. HITS, which determines a hub and an au-
thority value for webpages, are based on such a recursive def-
inition, too. The framework presented works with any refer-
ence structure-based visibility measure.

The trust network is established between reviewers, i.e., read-
ers or editors who express their opinion on documents. Re-
viewers assign a trust value to other reviewers, giving directed

5The basic idea of this algorithm was used before by [Pinski and

Narin, 1976] to compute the importance of scientiﬁc journals.

6For n pages this gives a linear system of n equations. Solving
this equation system is possible but (for large n) very expensive, so
an iterative approach is used. First all visi are set to some default
(cid:3)
i are calculated repeatingly until all
value and then the new values r
visi converge (for a discussion of convergence problems in leaves
see [Page et al., 1998]).

u1
t 1,4

t 1,2

u4

u2

r3

trust network

u5

r1

p5

t 1,5

r2

p2

p3
document network

p4

t 2,3

u3

r4

p1

Figure 1: Trust and Document Reference Networks

and weighted edges in the trust network. High trust means
that the evaluating user appreciates the evaluated user’s re-
views, e. g., because he or she applies similar criteria in the
review. Trust between indirectly connected users, i.e., the
“friends of our friends”, can be inferred by trust propagation:
if user um has not directly evaluated un, the trust value tum→un
for un is derived by aggregating the trust values on the path
from um to un. Examples for trust metrics include [Golbeck et
al., 2003] and [Avesani et al., 2005].7 Reviews connect trust
and document networks.

2.2 Personalizing Recommendations

The two-layer architecture permits calculating a recommen-
dation for a document (page) pd from the perspective of a
person (user) um. For the recommendation, a citation-based
measure on the document reference network is enhanced with
information from the trust network. As this measure con-
siders in addition the reviews made by the users in the trust
network, it is called a trust-review-enhanced visibility, in the
following: tre-visibility (vistre
pd ).

By interpolation on the trust network, the reviews of other
users can be taken into account. So we are able to calculate
recommendations for documents that are not reviewed by the
requesting user her/himself. The information from the trust
network tells us to which degree a review should inﬂuence
the recommendation vistre
pd : the reviews made by users who
user um considers as trustworthy should have most impact.
So all reviews are personalized by the user’s view on the trust
network. By interpolating on the document reference net-
work, recommendations cannot only be calculated for docu-
ments that have been reviewed but for all documents. As the
visibility of a document depends on the visibilities of the doc-
uments citing it, reviews have an indirect impact on adjacent
documents: in the example from Fig. 1, reviews r3 and r4 will
inﬂuence the visibility of p1 if u1 considers the reviewers u3

7As we aim to personalize recommendations, we use one of
these trust metrics providing trust values from the user’s perspec-
tive. Other trust metrics calculate global values, e. g., with metrics
in the style of PageRank.

IJCAI-07

2779

and u4 as trustworthy. While the trust tu1→u4 of u1 in u4 is di-
rectly given, tu1→u3 is interpolated by some trust metric (see
◦ tu2→u3. The reviews r2 and r1 exert an
Sec. 2.1) by tu1→u2
indirect inﬂuence on vistre
p1 through the ciations from p2 and
p5 to p1.

2.3 The Trust-Enhanced Visibility

We now design the tre-visibility-framework using the struc-
ture of the document network and the trust-weighted reviews
as the basis for personalizing document visibilities.
In the
ﬁrst step by interpolation on the trust network, the trust of a
user um to all others reachable from her or him is computed.
Non-reachable users are given a default trust tdefault (setting
tdefault = 0 implies that the corresponding reviews have no im-
pact). This interpolation can be done efﬁciently for all users
in parallel. For all reviews r j of a user un, we consider um’s
trust tum→un in un to be the trust in all reviews by un. Now
um’s trust in every review is known. In the second step, per-
sonalized tre-visibilities of all documents are computed by
incorporating the reviews and weighting them by the trust um
has in them. Here we can choose between two different ap-
proaches:

◦
1. compute a document base visibility vis
p j of all docu-
ments p j using some visibility function like PageRank
and then derive the personalized tre-visibility vistre
p j from
◦
the user-independent document base visibility vis
p j by
including trustworthy reviews, or

2. use a modiﬁed visibility function that incorporates the
reviews on each document directly when computing
vistre
p j .

The ﬁrst approach has the advantage to be simple and to be
◦
◦
able to precompute8 vis
p j for all documents as vis
p j is user-
independent, but the integration of indirect reviews is not
straightforward. The second approach automatically handles
indirect reviews because the tre-visibilities are used for prop-
agation, but here everything has to be computed on the ﬂy,
because no user-independent part exists. To be able to pre-
compute most of the values is important for providing per-
sonalized recommendations in search engines to queries such
as “should I buy this pay-per-view?” and for sorting query
results in a personalized ranking.9 Anything that has to be
computed at query time increases the load of the document
repository server and demands the user to wait.

Regardless of the approach used, a tre-visibility function
should satisfy the following properties:

1. A review’s impact on a document recommendation de-
pends on the degree of trust that the requesting user has
in the reviewer. Reviews provided by users who are fully

trusted should have a considerable impact on the recom-
mendation, whereas reviews by users deemed as untrust-
worthy should have minimal impact.

2. If no review by a trustworthy person is available, the
recommendation will consist of the visibility calculated
on the document network. Although this mere visibility
measure is not personalized, it is appropriate: having no
review by a trustworthy user does not permit inferring
that the document is not worth reading.

3. The degree of inﬂuence that reviews have compared with
the pure structure-based visibility should be adjustable.
4. Trust-weighted reviews of a document p j exert an indi-
rect inﬂuence on the visibilities of the papers referenced
in p j, because p j’s visibility is modiﬁed by the reviews,
and so it propagates a modiﬁed visibility to the docu-
ments that it cites.

The reference-based visibility measure has to be chosen de-
pending on the type of document network: cyclic networks
such as the Web normally require different measures as typi-
cally acyclic publication networks.

3 TRE-Visibilities

In this section we introduce several functions to compute the
trust-review-enhanced document visibility. We use the fol-
lowing deﬁnitions: for a document pd, Rpd is the set of direct
◦
reviews on pd, and vis
pd is the (precalculated) document base
visibility. The distance ki,d of a direct review ri ∈ Rp j to pd
is the length10 of the shortest path from p j to pd (if no path
exists, ki,d := ∞).
All trust values are in [0,1]. Reviews are non-negative and
in the same range as the visibilities computed by the chosen
structure-based visibility function.11

3.1 Simple TRE-Visibility

The simplest approach to compute the tre-visibility of pd is to
combine the reviews ri ∈ Rpd of pd, weighted with the respec-
◦
◦
tive trust ti in ri, and vis
pd . To indicate the impact of vis
pd , it
is weighted by its visibility contribution vc which is globally
set by the user, e. g., vc := 0.5. So the document base visi-
◦
bility can be treated as additional review with r0 := vis
pd and
t0 := vc. This gives the simple tre-visibility:
vc·vis
◦
pd

tiri

vistres
pd

=

=

n∑
tiri
i=0
n∑
i=0

ti

+

n∑
i=1
n∑
i=1

ti

vc+

.

8as Google does to rank millions of webpages
9As users normally only read the documents provided on the ﬁrst

page of the result listing this ranking is fairly important.

10i. e. the number of edges
11This can be achieved by scaling either the reviews or the visi-

bilities, e. g., by choosing an appropriate N in the PageRank.

IJCAI-07

2780

p27

p33

p42

p30

p11

p23

p45

p76

p58

Figure 2: part of a document reference network

3.2

Integrated TRE-Visibility

The tres-visibility algorithm is appealing in its simplicity but
neglects indirect reviews. As in structure-based visibility al-
gorithms like PageRank or HITS the visibility of a document
depends on the visibilities of the documents citing it, an indi-
rect effect of reviews on adjacent documents can be achieved
by simply swapping the computation sequence:
instead of
ﬁrst computing the document visibility and then adding the
reviews, the reviews are directly incorporated in the visibility
function, e. g. with PageRank12:
= 1− α

(cid:3)
vis
pd

N
vc·vis
(cid:3)
pd

vc+

vistrei
pk
|Ck|

+

+ α ∑
pk∈Bd
n∑
i=1
n∑
i=1

ti

tiri

.

vistrei
pd

=

As the visibility vistrei
pd of a document pd now depends on the
pk of the documents pk ∈ Bd citing it, the re-
visibilities vistrei
views on the documents pk have an impact on vistrei
pd ; in other
words: the trust-review-enhanced visibilities are propagated
through the document network.

The drawback of this approach is that the visibilities of all
(cid:3)
pd of a
documents are now user-dependent: the visibility vis
document pd can no longer be precomputed ofﬂine because it
is inﬂuenced by the trust-weighted reviews of the documents
citing it, and on those of the documents citing these and so
on.13 Precomputing personalized rankings for all users would
only be possible for a very small set of users (a small trust
network), while computing the complete ranking on the ﬂy at
query time is only possible for small document sets. So we
need some more efﬁcient visibility algorithm.

3.3 Path-based TRE-Visibility

account indirect reviews like the integrated trei-visibility
(Sec. 3.2).

2 to vis

p30 by 1

The trei-visibility vistrei
p58 of document p58 shown in Fig. 2 is
computed by the reviews on p58 and the visibilities vistrei
p42 and
vistrei
p30 of p42 and p30, which depend on the reviews on p42 and
p42 of p42 contributes by 1
p30 and so on. The visibility vistrei
3
◦
and vistrei
p58, because p42 has 3 and p30 2 outgoing
citations and (according to PageRank) the visibility of a docu-
ment is distributed over all outgoing citations. The reviews on
p42 thus contribute by 1
p42. This
also works for larger distances: a review ri on p11 contributes
3→ p58 ]
to p42 by 1
by 1
6. The total
contribution of a review ri on p11 to the visibility of p42 is
therefore 1
9
In general: the contribution cπ
j of a review ri of a document
p j along a path π = [ p j → q1 → q2 → . . . → qm → pd ] is
cπ
j

3 to p58, as they are part of vistrei
3→ p42
2→ p58 ] by 1

3 and therefore along the path [ p11

9, and along the path [ p11

3→ p30

| + . . . + 1|Cqm|.

= 5
18.

| + 1|Cq2

+ 1
6

= 1|Cp j

| + 1|Cq1

1

1

1

1

By restricting the review inﬂuence to some maximum dis-
tance kmax, all indirect reviews and their contributions can be
precomputed offline for all documents.14 So we get

vistrep
pd

=

vc·vis
◦
pd

vc+

ticiri

.

+

n∑
i=1
n∑
i=1

tici

with ci being the contribution of review ri to pd. If ri is a
direct review on pd, ci = 1. If ri is a review of a document
p j, ci is the sum of the contributions of ri along all paths
[ p j → . . . → pd ] with path length less or equal to kmax.

3.4 Distance-based TRE-Visibility

We can simplify the tre-visibility calculation by determining
the contribution of a review ri solely by its distance ki,d to pd,
following the idea that a review should have a larger impact
if it is closer to the paper.15 With β for ﬁnetuning the impact
of indirect reviews, we get:
vc·vis
◦
pd

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

+

ti

n∑
i=1
n∑
i=1

(ki,d + 1)β · ri
(ki,d + 1)β

ti

vc+

We therefore have to develop a function that uses precal-
◦
pd for all documents pd like the tres-
culated visibilities vis
visibility function (Sec. 3.1) but that additionally takes into

vispd

=

12Obviously this can be done in a similar way for other visibility

functions.

13This also holds for other recursive approaches for integrating
a second, user-dependent source of information in a recursive vis-
ibility function, see e. g. the twr-visibility function of [Hess et al.,
2006].

14This can be done very efﬁciently by simply propagating all re-
views of a document pi to all documents pa ∈ Ci cited by it, anno-
tated with the outdegree |Ci| and repeated for kmax steps.
15This is implicitly also true for the trep-visibility if each docu-
ment in a path cites more than one other document, and the average
number of documents cited is larger than the number of paths.

IJCAI-07

2781

3.5 Efﬁcient Computation

Discussing the runtime of the functions described above, we
have to distinguish the overall costs and costs at query time.
While ofﬂine computation of large document repositories is
costly, it is feasible as e. g. Google shows. Critical is the time
needed to answer a single search query. As mentioned before
it is impossible to compute the visibilities of all documents of
a large document repository at query time. On the other hand,
it is also impossible to precompute personalized rankings of
all documents for all users, as this would even ofﬂine be to
costly. Thus trei is at least not appropriate for personalized
search engines.

We could reduce computation costs by restricting the visibil-
ity computation to the subset of documents we are interested
in (e. g.
the set of documents matching the search term).
Unfortunately, this is not possible for trei because the trei-
visibility of the documents in the subset depends on the trei-
visibility of the documents they are cited by and so on.16

Here the other tre-visibility functions come into play: the data
on both subnets can be precomputed, and only the join has to
be done on the ﬂy. The trust of any user in any other user
can be precomputed offline, which automatically gives the
trust in each review. Re-computation is required if trust edges
change or new users join (but not, if new reviews are given!).
◦
p j of each document p j can also be pre-
The base visibility vis
computed. The simple tre-visibility tres of the subset of doc-
uments the user is interested in can now be computed in a
single run through these documents. For using trep or tred,
each document additionally has to know its indirect reviews,
and these sets of reviews can also be precomputed by sim-
ply propagating all reviews through the document network
while computing the base document visibility. New reviews
are propagated through the document network at the time they
are created. So at query time all to be done is the join: for all
documents p j in the selected subset, all direct and indirect re-
◦
p j are summed up,
views and the document base visibility vis
weighted by their corresponding trust values in order to com-
pute vistre
p j . And ﬁnally the documents are sorted to provide a
personalized ranking.

4 Simulation

It is obvious that the functions presented take direct (and indi-
rect) reviews weighted by their trust values into account and
compute personalized tre-visibilities. The interesting ques-
tion is how much the presented functions differ and which
impact they give to indirect reviews.

We compare the different tre-visibility functions by comput-
ing tre-visibilities from the perspective of a test user u on
10 document reference networks, each with ≈ 12000 docu-
ments (with 2 to 7 references) and 1000 reviews randomly

16This does not fully hold for HITS, where the computation is in

fact done on a subset.

Alg. A
PageRank
PageRank
PageRank
PageRank
tres
tres
tres
trei
trei
tred

Alg. B
tres
trei
tred
trep
trei
tred
trep
tred
trep
trep

Δdirect
0.228
0.267
0.256
0.257
0.040
0.030
0.031
0.024
0.025
0.010

Δindirect
0
0.075
0.077
0.079
0.075
0.077
0.079
0.043
0.046
0.020

Δtotal
0.019
0.091
0.092
0.094
0.072
0.073
0.075
0.042
0.044
0.019

Table 1: Differences in visibility computation

distributed. The test user’s trust in each review was uniformly
distributed in [0,1]. The document base visibilities were com-
puted by PageRank with α = 0.85 and N = 100. Now the tre-
visibilities of all documents were computed using tres, trei,
trep and tred (with vc = 0.5, kmax = 3, β = 3). By compar-
ing the visibilities (visA
pd ) of a node pd as computed
by two visibility algorithms A and B we can see how big the
differences between A and B are. If A and B would compute
the same function, the difference would be 0. Table 1 gives
the average difference of the visibilities computed by algo-
rithm A and B, respectively, over all documents: Δdirect is the
average difference of documents with at least one direct re-
view, Δindirect the same for documents without direct review
and Δtotal the overall difference.17

pd , visB

The ﬁrst four lines of Tab. 1 show the differences to Page-
Rank. Obviously, direct reviews have high impact on all tre-
visibility functions, but also the effect of indirect reviews is
considerable (with the exception of tres, certainly).
In the
next three lines Δdirect is most interesting, which shows to
which amount the visibility of directly reviewed documents
is changed by additional indirect reviews (which are not con-
sidered by tres but by the other functions). The next two lines
show (Δindirect) that tred and trep differ from trei (we did not
expect them to totally resemble trei), but much less than from
PageRank. And ﬁnally the last line shows, that trep and tred
are very close so that for the given networks the average num-
ber of 4.5 outgoing citations per document (affecting trep) is
well resembled by setting β = 3 (pretests with β = 2 gave
large differences). This also shows that the parameters of the
functions used have to be adjusted for each network size and
structure to give appropriate results.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced different trust-enhanced visibil-
ity function integrating document visibilities, user-dependent
trust information and reviews for personalized document rec-
ommendations. We attached importance to design functions
that calculate personalized rankings efﬁciently at query time.

17We did this separately for all 10 networks, but the differences
between them were so small (standard deviation s < 1%), that we
only show the average over all networks.

IJCAI-07

2782

[Kleinberg, 1999] Jon M. Kleinberg. Authoritative sources
Journal of the ACM,

in a hyperlinked environment.
46(5):604–632, September 1999.

[Korﬁatis and Naeve, 2005] Nikolaos Korﬁatis and Ambj¨orn
Naeve. Evaluating wiki contributions using social net-
works: A case study on wikipedia. In First on-Line con-
ference on Metadata and Semantics Research (MTSR’05),
2005.

[Massa and Avesani, 2004] Paolo Massa and Paolo Avesani.
Trust-aware collaborative ﬁltering for recommender sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Cooperative Information Systems (CoopIS), 2004.

[Page et al., 1998] Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev
Motwani, and Terry Winograd. The pagerank citation
ranking: Bringing order to the web. Technical report, Stan-
ford Digital Library Technologies Project, 1998.

[Pinski and Narin, 1976] Gabriel Pinski and Francis Narin.
Citation inﬂuence for journal aggregates of scientiﬁc pub-
lications: Theory, with application to the literature of
physics. Information Processing & Management, 12:297–
312, 1976.

[Stein and Hess, 2006] Klaus Stein and Claudia Hess.

In-
formation retrieval in trust-enhanced document networks.
In M. Ackermann, B. Berendt, M. Grobelnik, A. Hotho,
D. Mladenic, G. Semeraro, M. Spiliopoulou, G. Stumme,
V. Svatek, and M. van Someren, editors, Semantics, Web,
and Mining. European Web Mining Forum, EMWF 2005,
and Knowledge Discovery and Ontologies, KDO 2005,
Porto, Portugal, October 2005, Revised Selected and In-
vited Papers, LNAI 4289. Springer, 2006.

Therefore, we analyzed how to use pre-calculated informa-
tion on both networks that is joint on the ﬂy. The simulation
study compared the functions, and we can conclude that the
path-based and the distance-based tre-visibility permit com-
puting personalized recommendations of the same quality as
the costly recursive tre-visibility while being efﬁciently com-
putable, and thus appropriate for search engines. On the ba-
sis of these results, we now aim to develop a personalized
recommender system integrating our efﬁcient trust-enhanced
visibility computation.

Acknowledgments

This work was partially supported by the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD) and the German Science Founda-
tion (DFG).

References
[Avesani et al., 2005] Paolo Avesani, Paolo Massa, and
Roberto Tiella. A trust-enhanced recommender system ap-
plication: Moleskiing. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual
ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pages 1589–
1593, 2005.

[Budd et al., 1998] John M. Budd, MaryEllen Sievert, and
Phenomena of retraction: Reasons
JAMA,

Tom R. Schultz.
for retraction and citations to the publications.
280(3):296–297, July 1998.

[Dumbill, 2002] Edd Dumbill. Finding friends with xml and

rdf. IBM’s XML Watch, June 2002.

[Garc´ıa-Barriocanal and Sicilia, 2005] Elena

Garc´ıa-
Barriocanal and Miguel-Angel Sicilia. Filtering informa-
tion with imprecise social criteria: A foaf-based backlink
model.
In 4th Conference of the European Society for
Fuzzy Logic and Technology EUSFLAT, Barcelona, Spain,
2005.

[Golbeck et al., 2003] Jennifer Golbeck, Bjian Parsia, and
James Hendler. Trust networks on the semantic web. In
Proceedings of Cooperative Intelligent Agents, Helsinki,
Finland, August 2003.

[Golbeck, 2006] Jennifer Golbeck. Generating predictive
movie recommendations from trust in social networks. In
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Trust Management, Pisa, Italy, May 2006.

[Gy¨ongyi et al., 2004] Zolt´an Gy¨ongyi, Hector Garcia-
Molina, and Jan Pedersen. Combating web spam with
trustrank.
the 30th International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), pages
271–279, 2004.

In Proceedings of

[Hess et al., 2006] Claudia Hess, Klaus Stein, and Christoph
Schlieder. Trust-enhanced visibility for personalized docu-
ment recommendations. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual
ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, Dijon, France,
April 2006.

IJCAI-07

2783

