Layout Analysis of Tree-Structured Scene Frames in Comic Images

Takamasa Tanaka, Kenji Shoji, Fubito Toyama, and Juichi Miyamichi

Department of Information Science

Faculty of Engineering, Utsunomiya University,

Utsunomiya-shi, 321-8585 Japan
taka@athena.is.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp

Abstract

Today, the demand of services for comic contents
increases because paper magazines and books are
bulky while digital contents can be read anytime
and anywhere with cellular phones and PDAs. To
convert existing print comic materials into digital
format such that they can be read using the cellular
phones and the PDAs with small screens, it is nec-
essary to divide each page into scene frames and to
determine reading order of the scene frames. The
division of comic images into the scene frames can
be considered as a type of document layout analy-
sis. We analyzed layout of comic images using den-
sity gradient. The method can be applied to comics
in which comic balloons or pictures are drawn over
scene frames. In this research, a method for detect-
ing the scene frame division in comic images using
the density gradient after ﬁlling the quadrangle re-
gions in each image with black is proposed. Exper-
imental results show that 80 percent of 672 pages in
four print comic booklets are successfully divided
into scene frames by the proposed method.

1 Introduction

In this paper, a technique for searching the order to be read
and the position of the scene frame in the page is proposed
based on structure analysis for the image of each page of print
comic materials.

Today, communication networks are in wide spread use,
copyright management systems are in practical use, and many
services using digital contents have been started in various
ﬁelds. The demand of the service for comic contents in-
creases because paper magazines and books are bulky while
digital contents can be read anytime and anywhere with cel-
lular phones and PDAs. Actually, some services for digi-
tal comics have been started. eBooksJapan1 is the specialty
site which sells the digital books, and the number of sell-
ing comics has exceeded 10,000. In the portal site YAHOO!
JAPAN, an online delivery service for comics is started by

1eBOOK Initiative Japan Co.,Ltd.,

http://www.ebookjapan.jp/shop/

the name of a YAHOO! JAPAN Comics2. Digital Comic
of Rakuten ICHIBA3 is selling comics of about 6000 vol-
umes. Many of them provide comic images to users page
by page. Some of new comics such as “SALARY MAN
KINTARO”4 are published as the exclusive use of online de-
livery services. They are displayed on personal computers
with respect to each scene frame having BGMs and sound
effects. Their presentations are advanced to next frames au-
tomatically. “comic i” and “comic cmoa”5, which are the ser-
vices intended for cellular phones, have been favorably well
received at the point of presenting each scene frame reedited
with action effects.

To convert existing print comic materials into digital for-
mat such that they can be presented using the cellular phones
and the PDAs with small screens, it is necessary to divide
each page into scene frames and to determine reading order
after converting each page into digital form using a scanner.
It is very convenient not to have to use any keyboard or
mouse when personal computer users would enjoy comic
contents lying sprawled.

As a method for providing such lazy viewing to us, au-
tomatic page turning by eye-gaze tracking is considered. In
order to implement the automatic page turning, it is neces-
sary to detect the timing when a user ﬁnishes the reading of
a current page. To detect the timing, it is considered that a
eye-gaze tracking system can be used. For that purpose, it is
necessary to know the arrangement of scene frames and the
reading order in the page.

The division of comic images into the scene frames can
be considered as document layout analysis for comic images.
In document layout analysis [Ishitani, 2001], the shape of re-
gion of interest is assumed to be only rectangle in most cases,
while shapes of scene frames in comic images are fundamen-
tally quadrangle which is not limited to rectangle. Therefore,
a new analysis method for comic images is needed.

We ﬁnd that the most of comic pages can be divided into
scene frames by recursive guillotine cut, and that the pro-
cess of the guillotine cut makes the tree structure of the scene

2Yahoo Japan Corporation, http://comics.yahoo.co.jp/
3Rakuten,Inc., http://dl.rakuten.co.jp/shop/rt/comic/
4author Hiroshi Motomiya,

http://dl.rakuten.co.jp/shop/rt/sp/kintaro/

5NTT SOLMARE CORPORATION,

http://dl.foobio.net/free/cmoa/index.html

IJCAI-07

2885

frames which has an information to determine the order of the
scene frames to be read. The concept of guillotine cut is used
by optimization of cutting a sheet into quadrangles requested
[Ono, 1999].

As a layout analysis method of comics, Yamada et al. [Ya-
mada et al., 2004] has been realized an algorithm for divi-
sion and alignment of the scene frame by tracking white re-
gion between the scene frame of the comic image. But, only
23 images of comics pages are used by experiments, since
main purpose is a realization of the method of image com-
pression and extraction efﬁciently considered built-in mem-
ory capacity and telecommunications cost of cellular phone.
And, when the comic balloon or picture are drawn over scene
frame, the division of the scene frame can not be well detected
in this algorithm.

We analyzed layout of comic images using density gra-
dient [Tanaka et al., 2006]. The method can be applied to
comics in which comic balloons or pictures are drawn over
scene frames. Experimental results of the method show that
60 percent of 672 pages in four print comic booklets are suc-
cessfully divided into scene frames.

In this research, we propose an improved detection method
of scene frame division for our previous method by prepro-
cessing comic images before detection of division line. And
experimental results of scene frame division for sum total of
672 pages of 4 print comic materials are reported.

2 Comics Structure

2.1 Comics Scene Frame Deﬁnition

In this study, the scene frame of comics is deﬁned as a quadri-
lateral frame composed of four straight lines including pic-
ture in its interior. Then, the frame lines interrupted by a
balloon or a picture are also regarded as scene frame. In addi-
tion, the scene frame that consists of imaginary quadrilateral
frame line made by other scene frame or the edge of the page
is also contained. Though scene frames of comics are mere
frame in single panel cartoons, scene frames of comics repre-
sent time and space in multiple panel cartoons [Takekuma and
Natsume, 1995]. In Japanese comics, reading order is funda-
mentally from right to left and downward. Reading order is
uniquely decided by the arrangement of scene frames.

2.2 Comics Tree Structure

The structure of a comics page can be represented by a tree,
whose root is the whole comic image (see Figure 2). The tree
is obtained by dividing the image recursively. An example
of the structure of comics represented by a tree is shown in
Figure 1.

In the example, ﬁrstly the comic image is divided into
three frames by horizontal division lines in left part of Fig-
ure 3 (gray lines are these horizontal division lines), and three
leaves are made under the root in right part of Figure 3.

Secondly, the top of the frames (the left leaf which is the
elder son on layer 1 in left part of Figure 4) is divided into
right and left frames by a vertical division line in left part of
Figure 4, and two leaves are made under the node of the elder
son in right part of Figure 4.

3
3

6
6

2
2

4
4

1
1

5
5

H

V

4

V

Layer1

H

3

5

6

Layer2

1

2

Layer3

V
H

Vertical Division
Horizontal Division

Figure 1: The structure of a comics page (left) and the tree
structure of it (right).
Figures within scene frames in comics page shown reading
order, and this reading order is shown by the depth ﬁrst search
of this tree.

Figure 2: The structure of a comics page before division into
scene frames (left) and the tree structure of it (right).

Thirdly, the right frame is divided into top and bottom

scene frame, and two leaves are made under the node.

Finally, the bottom of three frames divided into ﬁrstly is
divided into right and left frames, and two leaves are made at
the node.

In this way, the tree in right part of Figure 1 is created. The
order of scene frames is decided by ordering the leaves of this
tree by means of the depth ﬁrst search. Thus, it is shown that
the order of scene frames of the comics is decided by forming
the tree structure.

2.3 Structure of the Scene Frame out of Scope in

Our Proposed Method

In the case where scene frames exist inside of a scene frame,
the page can not form the tree structure by dividing the image
recursively. Figure 5 shows an example of such page.

In such case, it is considered one scene frame including the
scene frame which exists in the inside. If such scene frame is
the whole image of a page, the scene frame is not chosen as
the object of experiments. And if such scene frame appears
in the stage on the way of the scene frame division, the scene
frame division is not subsequently carried out.

IJCAI-07

2886

H

Layer1

V
H

Vertical Division
Horizontal Division

Figure 3: The structure of a comics page at ﬁrst step (left) and
the tree structure of it (right).

H

V

Figure 5: An example page out of scope in the proposed
method (source: title Ranma 1/2, author Rumiko Takahashi,
publisher Shogakukan Inc., volume 38 p.108).

Layer1

Layer2

Image f(x, y)
Image f(x, y)

V
H

Vertical Division
Horizontal Division

Figure 4: The structure of a comics page at second step (left)
and the tree structure of it (right).

3 Division Line Detection Using Density

Gradient

3.1 Representation of Straight Line
A straight line is represented by ρ which is the length of the
perpendicular line from the origin to the straight line and θ
which is the angle between the X-axis and the perpendicular
line (see Figure 6). Here, the origin (0, 0) is the center of
comics image, the x-axis is deﬁned that the rightward direc-
tion is positive and the y-axis is deﬁned that the downward
direction is positive in a comics page image.

The straight line L(ρ, θ) are expressed as follows:

ρ = x cos θ + y sin θ

(1)

3.2 Weighted Accumulation Value of Gradient
The density gradient gθ(x, y) of the θ direction at the position
(x, y) on an image is given as follows:

gθ(x, y) = gx(x, y) cos θ + gy(x, y) sin θ

(2)

where gx(x, y) is the density gradient of the X-axis direc-
tion, and gy(x, y) is the density gradient of the Y-axis direc-
tion.

The accumulation value A(ρ, θ) of the density gradient
value of the θ direction is obtained along the straight line

(0,0)
(0,0)

ρρρρ
ρρρρ

θθθθ
θθθθ

x
x

Straight line L(ρρρρ, θθθθ)
Straight line L(ρρρρ, θθθθ)

y
y

Figure 6: Representation of straight line L(ρ, θ).

L(ρ, θ). The set of pixel positions on the straight line L(ρ, θ)
is deﬁned as S(ρ, θ). The density gradient value A(ρ, θ) of
the straight line L(ρ, θ) on an image is given as follows:

(cid:2)

A(ρ, θ) =

gθ(x, y)

(3)

(x,y)∈S(ρ,θ)

The central part of the image is expected that there is the
high possibility a division line is located. Therefore, in order
to raise the weight of the central part of the image, a weighted
accumulation value of gradient AW (ρ, θ) is obtained by mul-
tiplying A(ρ, θ) by a Gaussian function G(ρ) on ρ as shown
in Figure 7.

AW (ρ, θ) = G(ρ)A(ρ, θ)

(4)

where

G(ρ) = exp(−ρ2/σ2), and σ = [Image height]/4.
We use an evaluation value based on the AW (ρ, θ) to

search division lines.

IJCAI-07

2887

Image f(x, y)
Image f(x, y)

Gaussian function
Gaussian function

G(ρρρρ)
G(ρρρρ)

ρρρρ
ρρρρ

x
x

y
y

Figure 7: Weighted Accumulation Value of Gradient.

3.3 Continued White Pixels

Since scene frames are separated by a white pixel region,
white pixels continued to some extent length exist in the origi-
nal image near division lines detected by the density gradient.
Therefore, the constant width (the width ±10 pixels) of the
original image is scanned at the same angle and white pixels
continued to some extent length are searched after the divi-
sion line was detected from the density gradient image. Then,
the evaluation value HW (ρ, θ) of segment without white pix-
els of some extent length is lowered by multiplying AW (ρ, θ)
by the ratio of the length of the longest white pixel column to
that of the segment. Here, the threshold of the white pixel is
set to 224 in 256 tones of gray scale.

3.4 T-type Division Line Judgment

In our previous method, the failure showed the side effect that
can be applied to the case where comic balloons or pictures
overlap with scene frames. For example, when the shape of
the region of interest is vertically extending and its correct di-
vision lines are T-type, the division of it by the horizontal line
should be followed by the division of the lower half by the
vertical line. But the vertical division line actually is ﬁrstly
detected because of the superiority of the accumulated gradi-
ent value of the vertical division line over the horizontal one
(the division line of layer 1 in Figure 8)

The ﬁgures “1” to “3” in Figure 8 are the layer numbers in
the tree structure. In order to correct this problem, a process-
ing for judgment of a T-type division line is added. In vertical
division lines and horizontal division lines, each division line
that the evaluation value HW (ρp, θp) is the highest is chosen.
Then, T-type judgment is processed when the ratio between
each evaluation value HW (ρp, θp) is less than 3 times.

First, the intersection point of a candidate of the vertical
division line and that of horizontal one is detected. Next, in
the neighborhood at the intersection point (40 × 40pixels)
the evaluation values Tv and Th of the vertical and hori-

Figure 8: Input image (source: title DRAGON BALL, au-
thor Akira Toriyama, publisher SHUEISHA Inc., volume 42
p.205) (left), and the scene frame division image for input
image using the convetional method (right).

zontal lines respectively are calculated. Last, if Tv > Th,
HW (ρp, θp) for the vertical division line is increased by mul-
tiplying it by the ratio of Tv to Th, and vice versa, so that the
T-type is well divided by the following processing.

3.5 Division Line Decision
The straight line judged as division line is stored in a taboo
list. The straight line which is similar to the straight line
stored in the taboo list is not chosen as a division line in the
matter of subsequently division line detection. Under the con-
straint, the candidate of division line is obtained as

(ρp, θp) = arg max
ρ,θ

HW (ρ, θ).

Whether L(ρp, θp) is division line or not is decided by
whether HW (ρp, θp) ≥ hth or not. As hth is raised, divi-
sion lines detected is limited more. We decided hth heuris-
tically. When the range of θ of detected division lines is
−45◦ < θP ≤ 45◦, the division line L(ρp, θp) is made to
be a vertical division line. When −90◦ < θP ≤ −45◦ or
45◦ < θP ≤ 90◦, the division line L(ρp, θp) is made to be a
horizontal division line. In each divided region, the division
is repeated by the same procedure until a division line is not
detected.

Implementation

3.6
θ is changed from −90◦ to 90◦ at 1◦ step, and ρ is changed
within the image at 1 pixel step. We used straight line gener-
ation algorithm DDA in the digital image when accumulating
the density gradient of each pixel along straight line.

Since the outside frame of a page image should not be de-
tected as a division line, we trim input page images such that
they do not include the outside frame in advance.

3.7 Preprocessing
As a preprocessing of the division line detection, we approx-
imate the outlines of input images with polygons.
In the

IJCAI-07

2888

polygonal approximation, we use the Douglas-Peucker ap-
proximation [Hershberger and Snoeyink, 1992]. From the
approximated polygons we choose quadrangles. Then we ﬁll
the region of the quadrangles with black in order to reduce
the inﬂuence of pictures within scene frames on the evalua-
tion value for division line detection and to avoid detecting
division lines within scene frames.

4 Experiments

Experiments were conducted for the images of pages in print
comics excluding the pages composed of single scene frames
such as title pages, contents pages, and particular pages in
main volume. We used here 672 pages in four print comics.
Each image of page was scanned in the resolution of 650 by
1000 pixels.

4.1 Experimental Results

Experimental results for the image set of 672 pages in four
print comics are shown in Table 1.

Method A in Table 1 denotes our previous method, method
B indicated the proposed method without the preprocessing,
and method C is the proposed method with the preprocessing.
The results were classiﬁed into ﬁve groups such as “suc-
ceeded”, “failed”, “-1”, “+1”, and “the others”. The term
“succeeded” means the success for the scene frame division.
The term “failed” means the failure for the scene frame divi-
sion. The term “-1” means that one division line is lacking
for the correct scene frame division. The term “+1” means
that there is one division line over the correct ones. The term
“the others” means that there is an excess or deﬁciency of two
division lines and over.

For the left part of Figure 8 as an input image, a result by
the proposed method is shown in Figure 9. In this case the
proposed method judging T-type division line is succeeded
while our previous method is failed.

Table 1: Experimental results for the comic image set of 672
pages. Values separated by ” / ” within each cell show the
number of pages and ratio(%) respectively.

4.2 Discussion
In these experimental results, proposed method have a 16%
higher success rate than our previous method. By ﬁlling the
region of the quadrangles with black, detecting division lines

Figure 9: The scene frame division image for left part of Fig-
ure 8 using the proposed method.

within scene frames was reduced. But, when scene frames
that comic balloons or pictures are drawn over scene frames
and the outline of comic image is part of scene frame, the
scene frames are hardly detected as quadrangles. An exam-
ple of the latter is shown in Figure 10. In the bottom scene
frames, two lines have also been detected as a division line.

Figure 10: Input image (source: title SLAM DUNK, author
Takehiko Inoue, publisher SHUEISHA Inc., volume 31 p.71)
(left), and the scene frame division image for input image
(right).

Several T-type division lines didn’t be detected without the
preprocessing. But, by preprocessing, some of them are de-
tected. These examples are shown in Figure 11. The scene
frame division succeeded by judging T-type division line us-
ing the proposed method.

Since comic drawing style, such as the arrangement of the
scene frame, the picture which overlapped with the frame line
of the scene frame, and so on, is different by comic artists, the
success rate of the experiments is greatly different by each
comic. The experimental results for the comic image set of
DRAGON BALL volume 42 are shown in Table 2.
In the
comic image set of DRAGON BALL volume 42, experimen-

IJCAI-07

2889

Table 2: Experimental results for the comic image set of
DRAGON BALL volume 42.

• We make it possible to correctly divide the failed pages

in the experiments here.

• We make it possible to detect the pages with only one

scene frames which need not be divided any more.

• In the scene of ﬂashback, the region between neighbor-
ing scene frames may be colored by black. We make
it possible to correctly divide such regions that the pro-
posed method can not treat at present.

References
[Hershberger and Snoeyink, 1992] John Hershberger and
Jack Snoeyink. Speeding up the douglas-peucker line-
simpliﬁcation algorithm.
the 5th
International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling. IGU
Commission on GIS, pages 134–143, 1992.

In Proceedings of

[Ishitani, 2001] Yasuto Ishitani. Document layout analy-
sis by interaction between data-driven processing and
concept-driven processing. Journal of Information Pro-
cessing Society of Japan, 42(11):2711–2723, November
2001.

[Ono, 1999] Toshihiko Ono. Optimizing two-dimensional
guillotine cut by genetic algorithms. In Proc. of the Ninth
AJOU-FIT-NUST Joint Seminar, pages 40–47, July 1999.

[Takekuma and Natsume, 1995] Kentaro Takekuma and Fu-
sanosuke Natsume. Reading of comics: As it is under-
stood, it can not be explained! Why are comics interest-
ing? Separate volume takarajimaEX (in Japanese), pages
168–215. TAKARAJIMASHA,Inc, May 1995.

[Tanaka et al., 2006] Takamasa Tanaka, Kenji Shoji, Fubito
Toyama, and Juichi Miyamichi. Layout analysis of scene
frames in comic images. In Proceedings of The 13th In-
ternational Display Workshops (IDW’06), VHFp - 20, De-
cember 6-8 2006. (accepted).

[Yamada et al., 2004] Masashi Yamada, Rahmat Budiarto,
Mamoru Endoo, and Shinya Miyazaki. Comic image de-
composition for reading comics on cellular phones. IEICE
transactions on information and systems, E87-D(6):1370–
1376, June 2004.

Figure 11: Input image (source: title DRAGON BALL, au-
thor Akira Toriyama, publisher SHUEISHA Inc., volume 42
p.205) (upper left), and the scene frame division image for
input image using the convetional method (upper right), and
the scene frame division image for input image using the pro-
posed method without preprocess (lower left), and the scene
frame division image for input image using the proposed
method (lower right).

tal results without preprocess have a 32% higher success rate
than experimental results of our previous method.

In addition, experimental results of the proposed method
have a 8% higher success rate than experimental results with-
out preprocess. The superiority of success rate was remark-
able as compared with other three comics.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, a method for detecting the scene frame division
in comic images using the density gradient after ﬁlling the
quadrangle regions in each image with black was proposed
and experimental results of scene frame division for the sum
total of 672 pages were reported. In these experimental re-
sults, the success rate was 80% as a whole, and these exper-
imental results have a 16% higher success rate than experi-
mental results of our previous method. It is thought that it is
satisfactory success rate for scene frames including compli-
cated arrangement. Future works are listed as follows:

IJCAI-07

2890

