Automatic Decision of Piano Fingering Based on Hidden Markov Models

Yuichiro YONEBAYASHI, Hirokazu KAMEOKA and Shigeki SAGAYAMA

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology

The University of Tokyo

{yonebayashi,kameoka,sagayama}@hil.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

This paper proposes a Hidden Markov Model
(HMM)-based algorithm for automatic decision of
piano ﬁngering. We represent the positions and
forms of hands and ﬁngers as HMM states and
model the resulted sequence of performed notes as
emissions associated with HMM transitions. Opti-
mal ﬁngering decision is thus formulated as Viterbi
search to ﬁnd the most likely sequence of state tran-
sitions. The proposed algorithm models the re-
quired efforts in pressing a key with a ﬁnger fol-
lowed by another key with another ﬁnger, and in
two-dimensional positioning of ﬁngers on the piano
keyboard with diatonic and chromatic keys. Funda-
mental functionality of the algorithm was veriﬁed
through experiments with real piano pieces. This
framework can be extended to polyphonic music
containing chords.

1 Introduction
This paper proposes an algorithm for automatic decision of
piano ﬁngering based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs,
see [Huang et al., 2001]). The goal is to formulate the reason-
able hand motion in a piano performance as well as achieving
highly reliable decision of piano ﬁngering. This algorithm is
expected to be utilized for presenting a model performance to
piano learners, estimating the required playing skill of piano
pieces, etc. If considered as part of the motion planning of a
robot piano player, the proposed approach in this paper may
be widely applicable to more general robot’s manipulation
tasks using robot ﬁngers.

A number of existing papers on piano ﬁngering decision
dealt with monophonic melodies in a single hand through
statistical methods [Noguchi et al., 1996], ﬁngering cost
functions deﬁned in between two notes [Hart et al., 2000;
Kasimi et al., 2005], or rule-based methods [Hayashida and
Mizutani, 2003]. In [Kasimi et al., 2005], chords and poly-
phonic melodies in a single hand were also studied. However,
the statistical method presented in [Noguchi et al., 1996] re-
quired score data tagged with ﬁngering information and the
rule-based approach [Hayashida and Mizutani, 2003] needed
to handle conﬂict resolution between applicable rules.

Past research on automatic ﬁngering decision seemed to
focus on the score-to-ﬁngering conversion. Instead, we fo-
cus on another aspect of ﬁngering-to-performance conversion
which can be easily formulated mathematically by introduc-
ing a probabilistic approach.

2 Automatic Decision of Piano Fingering
2.1 Formulation of Piano Fingering
Automatic decision of piano ﬁngering can be formulated as a
problem to ﬁnd the most likely ﬁngering adopted by well-
trained piano players.
It essentially involves probabilistic
modeling of piano performance.

The process by which a piano performer plays a sequence
of notes given in a score or in MIDI format can be considered
as consisting of the following three steps:
(1) read the input “score”,
(2) decide the “ﬁngering”,
(3) and produce the music sounds (“performance”).
Direct score-to-ﬁngering conversion (from (1) to (2)) may
face a difﬁculty in ﬁnding a reasonable local objective func-
tion representing the ease of playing. For example, the sum of
the ﬁngering costs in [Hart et al., 2000; Kasimi et al., 2005]
lacks mathematical and well-deﬁned meanings.

In contrast, we focus on another natural order, i.e., the
ﬁngering-to-performance conversion (from (2) to (3)). We
will design a ﬁngering model where we can incorporate var-
ious probabilistic factors representing physical constraints of
ﬁngering and can design a local objective function mathe-
matically. Considering an imaginary piano performance, we
can determine the most likely ﬁngering for producing that
imaginary performance through the maximum a posteriori
(MAP) approach. If the imaginary performance perfectly cor-
responds to the given score, the over-all function becomes au-
tomatic ﬁngering decision for the given score.

2.2 Mathematical Model of Fingering with HMM
Fingering would be no problem unless music notes were pre-
ceded and/or followed by other notes. Fingering is actually a
problem because one note (or more notes) should be played
after another (or others) within the time of the note length
assigned to the preceding notes. This implies that ﬁngering
is essentially a problem of ﬁnding an optimal sequence of
smooth state transition, typically, from a state of one ﬁnger

IJCAI-07

2915

pressing a key (corresponding a note pitch) to another state of
another ﬁnger pressing another key. Thus, piano performance
can be interpreted as the process of generating a sequence N
of performed notes from a sequence S of states of the posi-
tion and form of hands and ﬁngers, where N contains various
information, such as duration of key pressing, note strength
and tone as well as pitch and note length.

Conversely, automatic ﬁngering decision is considered as
the problem of estimating the ﬁngering S which an ideal per-
former would adopt most likely for the given sequence N
of performed notes. Here, for the purpose of the model ap-
proximation described later, we factorize the sequence N of
performed notes into a triplet sequence (Y, O, T ), where T is
the sequence of note lengths, Y the sequence of pitches, and
O the sequence of all other information which could include
note strength and tone. Then the problem to be solved is to
calculate the ﬁngering S which maximizes P (S|(Y, O, T ))
for a given sequence N = (Y, O, T ).

The most important is the probability whether the player
can make a smooth transition from the current note to the
next note under the state transition from the current state to
the next state of hands and ﬁngers. Assuming that the state
of hands and ﬁngers at each note ni = (yi, oi, ti) depends
only on the state at its previous note ni−1 and its note length
ti−1, the probability of ﬁngering S being used for the se-
quence N = (Y, O, T ) of performed notes is approximated
by Bayes’ Theorem as follows:

P (S|(Y, O, T )) ∝ P ((Y, O, T )|S)P (S)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

≈

P ((yi, oi, ti−1)|(si, si−1))

P (si|si−1) (1)

where P (·) denotes probability.

Consequently, an arc-emission HMM (Mealy machine) ﬁt
in very well as a ﬁngering decision model where the states of
the hands and the ﬁngers are hidden states and a sequence of
performed notes results from the state transition process.

The output probability function, when transiting from a
: M → [0, 1]
state s1 to a state s2, is represented by bs1,s2
where M is the set of all the possible note transitions. The
function bs1,s2 indicates the likelihood of a given ﬁngering
transition s1 → s2 when playing the respective note transi-
tions. For example, let s1 be a state using the 4th ﬁnger of the
right hand and s2 the 5th ﬁnger, and consider the ﬁngering
transition from the 4th to the 5th. Then the fact that perfor-
mance of F#→G is natural while that of A→G is not is shown
in Figure 1.

2.3 Model Formulation through HMMs
By using HMMs, ﬁngering decision can be looked as the
probabilistic inverse problem of estimating the ﬁngering hid-
den behind a sequence of performed notes, which is paral-
lel to the principle of modern speech recognition. Fingering
decision is thus formulated as the problem of calculating S
which maximizes the a posteriori probability P (S|(Y, O, T ))
in formula (1) with Viterbi search (see [Huang et al., 2001]).
As already stated, the main purpose of our paper is to
probabilistically formulate the ﬁngering-to-performance pro-
cess which ﬁts well with Hidden Markov Models (HMMs).
Though often misunderstood, HMM represents a class of

Figure 1: Piano ﬁngering model using an HMM.

probabilistic structures where the learning process is not al-
ways essential. We consider physical constraints in ﬁngering
and give reasonable parameter values to examine our model.
Using this formulation, it is also possible to handle with
expressive performances. Given an (imaginary) expressive
music performance, the most likely ﬁngering that has pro-
duced such a performance can be estimated according to the
a posteriori probability maximization principle.

2.4 Model Approximation
The ﬁngering decision model described above can typically
contain a very large number of model parameters. In this pa-
per, as a ﬁrst step, we introduce the following three approxi-
mations to narrow down the parameters to a small number.

Simplifying the States of Hands and the Note
Information
We suppose that a ﬁnger (or a set of ﬁngers) playing a note
(or a set of notes) at some point in time is the hidden state
and that pitch transition (e.g., F#→G#) is the output. In other
words, we ignore O and T . That is:

P (S|(Y, O, T ))

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

∝

≈

(cid:2)

P (si|si−1)

P ((yi, oi, ti−1)|(si, si−1))

(cid:2)

P (yi|(fi, fi−1))

P (fi|fi−1),

(2)

where fi is the ﬁnger (set of ﬁngers) playing the ith note (set
of notes). Through this approximation, the set M introduced
in Section 2.2 is considered as the set of all the possible pitch
transitions.

This approximation is intended to recognize the funda-
mental functionality of the decision model by limiting in-
put/output data to the pitches (the primary input for ﬁngering
decision) and the ﬁngers (the primary output to be decided).
One can however expect the following drawbacks:

IJCAI-07

2916

• Limiting the note information which affects ﬁngering
to the pitches might miss important factors of ﬁnger-
ing decision (for example, the decision cannot take note
lengths into account), and decision accuracy might thus
decrease.

• It is impossible to decide the ﬁngering in a broad sense
(such as the position/form of the hands, elbow motion,
and so on). Limiting the decided information to ﬁngers
position might narrow the range of possible applications
of the algorithm (e.g., estimating the required playing
skill of piano scores based on ﬁngering information).

The former problem is expected to be solved by including
:
note information as parameters of M in the function bs1,s2
M → [0, ∞). The latter is expected to be solved by deﬁning
possible ﬁngerings (in a broad sense) at each point in time as
a discrete set and deﬁning state transitions inside this set.

Ignoring Octave Position
We ignore the octave position of pitches when deﬁning the set
M . This means that, for example, the pitch transition D→G
performed in the middle of the keyboard is supposed to be
the same as when performed in the right side of the keyboard,
although the keys are not equally easy to play.

This approximation is intended to reduce the domain M
: M → [0, ∞).
of the output probability function bs1,s2
However, the difﬁculty of playing low/high pitch keys in the
right/left hand cannot then be considered in the ﬁngering de-
cision model, which will have a negative effect when deciding
which hand has to be used to play a note. A possible way to
deal with this problem is to adjust the output probability func-
tions bs1,s2 for each octave position of the pitch transitions.
This adjustment should be done for each bs1,s2 because the
range of keys which can be easily played will differ accord-
ing to the ﬁnger used.

Simplifying the Output Probability Function
We express a pitch transition in the set M as a two-
−→
d from a key position to another in order
dimensional vector
to consider two-dimensional (right/left and back/fore) ﬁnger
position on the keyboard. We suppose that the output prob-
: M → [0, ∞) deﬁned on the contin-
ability function bs1,s2
uous space M follows a two-dimensional Gaussian distribu-
tion.

Figure 2 shows an example of such a distribution bs1,s2. It
shows that if F# (the origin of the plane) is played with the
3rd ﬁnger (= s1) of the right hand, then the note played next
with the 5th ﬁnger (= s2) of the right hand is most likely to
be A (the mean of the distribution).

This approximation is intended to decrease the number of
parameters which enter into the deﬁnition of the function
: M → [0, ∞) for a given hidden state transition
bs1,s2
s1 → s2.

However, this strongly constrains the form of the function
bs1,s2 (for example, bs1,s2 cannot be locally adjusted), there-
fore accuracy improvement by parameter learning might be
limited. A possible way to solve this problem is to relax the
constraint in some way, for example by replacing the Gaus-
sian distribution with a distribution in polygonal form.

Figure 2: 2D distribution of the output probability function.

2.5 Setting Model Parameters
It is necessary that not only the structure and the parameters
of the ﬁngering decision model but also the speciﬁc values
taken by the model parameters reasonably explain the mo-
tion and the structure of hands and ﬁngers in piano perfor-
mance. Therefore, it is important to choose the values of the
model parameters such that they reﬂect the physical structure
of the human hand and the conventions in the actual ﬁnger-
ing decision. For example, concerning the physical structure,
the ﬁnger lengths and the tendency that the stretch between
the 1st ﬁnger (the thumb) and one of the other ﬁngers is eas-
ier than that among two of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th ﬁngers
should be taken into account, while for the decision conven-
tions one should model the fact that the distance in a ﬁnger
pair usually corresponds to the distance in a key pair but that
ﬁnger-crossing sometimes occurs.

Speciﬁcally, we should decide the values of the model pa-

rameters based on the following ideas:

• The horizontal-direction element of the mean of the out-
put probability function should be close to the distance
in the key pair corresponding to the distance in the ﬁnger
pair. For example, the transition from the 3rd ﬁnger to
the 5th ﬁnger corresponds to twice the width of a white
key.

• The depth-direction element of the mean of the output
probability function should be close to the difference be-
tween the distances from the wrist to the ﬁngertips.

• The tendency of the stretch between the 1st ﬁnger and
one of the other ﬁngers to be easier should be reﬂected
by choosing a larger value for the variance of the corre-
sponding output probability function.

• The fact that ﬁnger-crossing likely occurs in the transi-
tion between the 1st ﬁnger and one of the other ﬁngers
should be reﬂected by choosing a corresponding output
probability function with two distinct peaks. The two
peaks will correspond to normal ﬁngering and ﬁnger-
crossing respectively.

IJCAI-07

2917

• The fact that the ﬁngering making a transition between
the 3rd(4th) and 4th(5th) ﬁngers is often avoided be-
cause of the limited independency of those ﬁnger pairs
should be reﬂected by choosing a smaller value for the
corresponding state transition probability.

3 Experiments
This chapter describes the experiment performed to show the
fundamental functionality of the proposed algorithm.

3.1 Conditions
We used piano scores of monophonic melodies in a single
hand (speciﬁcally, the right-hand monophonic melodies in
Bach’s Inventions No. 1 and 2, which include about 620 notes
in total). We made the three approximations introduced in
Section 2.4. Here, larger amount of piano scores should be
used in experimental evaluations and we plan to increase our
sample data. Our current paper, however, focuses on formu-
lating the ﬁngering decision problem, leaving the parameter
learning issues to our future study.

We initially set the values of the model parameters as de-
scribed in Section 2.5, and then tuned them manually so that
the decided ﬁngering becomes as likely as possible. As the
manual tuning of model parameters can be regarded as a
primitive learning process, we suppose there is little risk of
over-ﬁtting where only a few parameters are involved in the
manual adjustment.

3.2 Results
The decided ﬁngering is reasonable in many places as can be
seen in Figure 3:
(A) The distance in the key pair corresponds to that of the

ﬁnger pair,

(B) Finger-crossing is introduced in appropriate places,
(C) The difﬁculty of playing a black key with the 1st ﬁnger

is reﬂected.

However, the decided ﬁngering is problematic in a few places
as shown in Figure 4:
(D) It is difﬁcult to play the same key consecutively with the

same ﬁnger for some note lengths,

(E) The distance in the key pair corresponds to that in the

ﬁnger pair but the hand motion is awkward.

Table 3: Experimental values of the state transition probabil-
ities.

Figure 3: Reasonable parts in the decided ﬁngering.

Figure 4: Problematic parts in the decided ﬁngering.

3.3 Analysis
The reasonable parts (A)–(C) in the decided ﬁngering are
considered to be resulted from an appropriate choice of model
parameters described in Section 2.5. Meanwhile, the prob-
lematic places (D) and (E) are considered to be due to the
approximations introduced in Section 2.4. Speciﬁcally :
(D) The problem comes from the fact that note length infor-

mation T is ignored in the sequence N = (Y, O, T ).

(E) The problem comes from the fact that the set of hidden
states is lacking of model parameters representing the
hand motion.

The problem (E) may be also caused by the assumption made
in Section 2.2 that the current state of hands and ﬁngers does
not depend on the states at the notes before the previous note.
We can see that the manually-adjusted model parameters
are not far from the values given by the parameter setting
guidelines described in Section 2.5 (the values are reproduced
in Tables 1, 2 and 3). In particular, the tendency to often avoid
some ﬁngerings because of the limited independency of the
involved ﬁnger pair is achieved through corresponding state
transition probabilities which are lower by approximately 30
percents than other state transition probabilities.

IJCAI-07

2918

Table 1: Values for the mean of the 2D Gaussian distribution output probability functions.

Table 2: Values for the covariance of the 2D Gaussian distribution output probability functions.

Figure 5: Various cases of ﬁngering decision.

IJCAI-07

2919

4 Considerations on the Model
4.1 Characteristics of the Model
As mentioned in Section 2.2, our problem is to calculate the
ﬁngering sequence S which maximizes P (S|N ) for a given
sequence N of performed notes. In this expression we can
easily see that the current ﬁngering reﬂects the notes at all
points in time. This can be seen from another viewpoint as
follows.

In Section 2.2, we focused on the transition from the ﬁn-
gering state for one note to that for the next note, and made
a minimal assumption in formula (1) that the ﬁngering state
at every note only depends on the state at its previous note
and its note length. We select, by means of Viterbi search,
the chain of such transitions throughout the entire score with
a high a posteriori probability, hence we can see that the cur-
rent ﬁngering reﬂects the notes at all points in time.

Consequently, we can say that the model described in this
paper formulates the mechanism of ﬁngering decision from
an essential and minimal hypothesis, and that maximum ef-
fect is obtained through the tuning of the HMM function
and the use of very efﬁcient existing methods such as Viterbi
search and parameter learning.

4.2 Training the Model Parameters
Experiments still have to be performed on what values the
model parameters will converge to through parameter learn-
ing. However, from the discussion in Section 3.3 on the result
of the manually-adjusted model parameters, one could expect
that the convergence values are near to the ones reﬂecting the
physical structure of the human hand and the conventions in
the actual ﬁngering decision described in Section 2.5. More-
over, besides parameter learning based on score data, it might
also be possible to perform parameter learning by measuring
the physical structure of a performer’s hands.

4.3 Fingering Decision Based on Musicality
The ﬁngering decision algorithm proposed reﬂects the physi-
cal structure of the human hand and the conventions in the ac-
tual ﬁngering, and the ﬁngering decided is intuitive from the
viewpoint of the physical motion of the human hand. How-
ever, earlier musicological discussions show that counter-
intuitive ﬁngerings may be chosen to reﬂect phrasing or motif
in music (for example, [Bamberger, 1976]).

We should ﬁrst work on the ﬁngering decision based on
the physical motion of the human hand, which will clarify
the limits of such decision and help us work further on the
ﬁngering decision based on musicality.

4.4 Estimating the Required Playing Skill
It is possible to calculate the likelihood value per note of the
ﬁngering decided by the model, which can be thought of as
an expression of the required playing skill of a given piano
piece. The value calculated in this way is characteristics of
piano scores and expected to be a good feature of a piano
piece. This may be used as retrieval criteria for piano piece
retrieval or as means for classifying piano pieces according to
their required playing skill.

5 Discussion on the Algorithm
The advantages of the proposed algorithm include:

• The mechanism of ﬁngering decision can be expressed
qualitatively and quantitatively by the characteristics and
the values of the model parameters, for example, the
stretchability of a ﬁnger pair with which two notes are
played and the difﬁculty of moving a ﬁnger pair inde-
pendently (see Section 2.5).

• Reasonability and likelihood of the estimation process
and result can be expressed as probabilities. Conﬂicts
among applicable rules do not arise as in rule-based ap-
proach.

• The algorithm can decide not only the ﬁngers used but
the position and the form of the hands and the ﬁngers,
based on which applied researches are expected such as
estimation of the required playing skill.

Moreover, the proposed algorithm can be extended in the

following ways:

• The algorithm can be applied not only to monophonic
melodies in a single hand but also to chords and poly-
phonic melodies in both hands even in the case where
the hand to be used is undecided. See the sample scores
in Figure 5.

• Exceptional rules can be applied by limiting the search
space, such as partial ﬁngering instructions in scores or
the rule that the 1st ﬁnger should be used for sforzando
on a strong beat.

• Parameter learning is possible even from scores with no
ﬁngering information by means of Baum-Welch algo-
rithm, as well as from scores tagged with ﬁngering infor-
mation. Moreover, parameter learning might be possi-
ble by measuring the physical structure of a performer’s
hands, such as their size or the stretchability and inde-
pendency of ﬁnger pairs.

• Multiple-solution search can be realized by N -best

search.

The proposed algorithm is expected to be applied to various

technologies. We give several examples below.

• Application based on required playing skill:

Estimating the required playing skill and generating
practice planning from given scores. Piano piece re-
trieval using the degree of required playing skil as a re-
trieval key (for the estimation of the required playing
skill, see 4.4).

• Application to composition and transcription:

Judging whether an automatically-composed piano
piece is actually playable. Basic technology for au-
tomatic composition and transcription of piano pieces
which are both easy to perform and effective, such as
transcribing from orchestral to piano pieces.

• Application to other instruments:

Applying the mathematical model proposed in this paper
to other instruments such as guitar.

IJCAI-07

2920

6 Future Works
We are currently working on the implementation of a more
accurate version of our model and of the parameter learning.
We also plan to extend our model to chords and polyphonic
melodies in both hands including the case where the hand to
be used is undecided. Considering 1024(= 210) states to rep-
resent all the combinations of the 10 ﬁngers each of which
is pressing a key or not, polyphonic ﬁngering problem can
be solved in a way similar to the monophonic case. In addi-
tion, we will work on comparative performance evaluations
of other approaches and models, considering expressive pi-
ano performances.

7 Summary
This paper proposed an algorithm for automatic decision of
piano ﬁngering based on HMMs. Piano performance is mod-
eled as a process by which a sequence of respective (hidden)
state transitions produces a sequence of respective note tran-
sitions and the maximum a prosteriori solution is obtained by
the Viterbi algorithm. The algorithm proposed has multiple
advantages and can be extended and applied in many ways.
The experiment based on the approximated model has shown
the fundamental functionality of this algorithm.

References
[Bamberger, 1976] Jeanne Bamberger. The musical signiﬁ-
cance of beethoven’s ﬁngerings in the piano sonatas.
In
Music Forum, volume 4, pages 237–280, 1976. Columbia
University Press, New York.

[Hart et al., 2000] Melanie Hart, Robert Bosch, and Elbert
In The UMAP

Tsai. Finding optimal piano ﬁngerings.
Journal 21, volume 2, pages 167–177, 2000.

[Hayashida and Mizutani, 2003] Norihiro Hayashida

and
Tetsuya Mizutani. Logical representation of piano ﬁnger-
ing rules based on musical structure.
In Proceedings of
the 65th National Convention of IPSJ, volume 2, pages
203–204, 2003. (in Japanese).

[Huang et al., 2001] Xuedong Huang, Alex Acero, and
Hsiao-Wuen Hon. Spoken Language Processing: A Guide
to Theory, Algorithm and System Development. Prentice
Hall, 2001.

[Kasimi et al., 2005] Alia

Al

Kasimi,

and Christopher Raphael.

Nichols,
matic ﬁngering
http://www.cs.indiana.edu/∼epnichol/ﬁles/epn
/ISMIR%202005%20Automatic%20Fingering%20System
%20Kasimi%20Nichols%20Raphael.pdf, 2005.

system (AFS).

Available

Eric
Auto-
at

[Noguchi et al., 1996] Kenji Noguchi, Kenji Noike, Nobuo
Inui, Takashi Nose, Yoshiyuki Kotani, and Hirohiko
Nishimura. Reasoning how to move ﬁngers for piano
based on n-gram model. In Proceedings of the 52th Na-
tional Convention of IPSJ, volume 6D-7, pages 2–101–2–
102, 1996. (in Japanese).

IJCAI-07

2921

