A  FORMAL  DESCRIPTION  FOR  TWO-DIMENSIONAL  PATTERNS* 

C.  T.  Zahn 

Stanford  Linear  Accelerator  Center 

Stanford  University,  Stanford,  California 

description"  we  employ  consists  of  a  set  of  simple  polyg­
onal  closed  curves  whose  vertices  are  ordered  in  either 
clockwise  or  counter-clockwise  sense.  These  curves 
represent  the  continuous  boundaries  between  connected 
sets  of black  points  which  we  call  "objects"  and  con­
nected  sets  of white  points  which  we  call  "holes."  Fig. 
2  depicts  the  structural  description  of  the  pattern  in 

Summary 

A  "structural  description"  for  two-dimensional 

black  and  white patterns  is  defined  as  the  set  of  contour 
lines  for  an  appropriate  function  which  fits  the  binary 
pattern.  These  contour  lines  are  mutually  non-
intersecting  closed polygonal  curves  with  edges  in  only 
eight  different  directions  and  they  represent  the  bound­
aries  between  connected  black  and  white  areas  of  the 
pattern.  Rigorous  procedures  are  described  to  trans­
form  a  "matrix pattern"  into  a  "structural  description" 
and  vice  versa.  Advantages  of  this  method  for  describ­
ing  patterns  previous  to  pattern  recognition  are  dis­
cussed  at  some  length. 

Introduction 

This  paper  presents  a  method  for  obtaining  a  "struc­
tural  description"  of  any  two-dimensional  picture  whose 
elements  are  a  finite  set  of points  in  the  plane  each  hav­
ing  value  zero  (white)  or  one  (black)  and  such  that  the 
points  are  arranged  in  the  form  of  a  square  lattice. 
Figure  1  shows  one  such picture.  The  "structural 

FIG.  2 

Fig.  1.  Our  structure  also  includes  information  indi­
cating which  curves  are  inside  each  other  as  shown 
schematically by dotted  lines  in  Fig.  2.  The  points  of  a 
curve  are  ordered  so  that  the  curve  is  traced  keeping 
black  points  to  the  right  and  white  to  the  left.  As  a 
result,  curves  which  define  the  outside  boundary  of 
black  areas  (objects)  proceed  clockwise  and  those  for 
white  areas  (holes)  proceed  counter-clockwise. 
should  be  noticed  that  the  curves  do  not  go  through  the 
outermost  picture  points  of  an  area  but  rather  go  be­
tween  these  outermost  points  and  the  adjacent  points  of 
opposite  color. 

It 

Our  selection  of  this  particular  format  to  describe 

the  information  content  of  a  black/white  pattern  was 
motivated  by  a  belief that  the  sequential  trace  of the 
boundary  of  an  object  contains  the  most  useful  data  for 

FIG.  1 

♦Work  supported  by  U.S.  Atomic  Energy  Commission. 

- 6 2 1-

recognizing objects one from another in a great many appli­
cations .  Experimental evidence from the psychology of hu-
man visual perception and the neurophysiology of animal 
visual perception support this belief to an amazing extent. 

For  a  more  detailed  description  of  this  "structural 
description"  and  an  extended discussion  of its  uses,  the 
reader  is  referred  to  Z a h n .1 

Structural  Description  as  Contour 

The  closed  curves  of  the  "structural  description" 
are,  in  fact,  the  contour  lines  at  a  height  of  1/2  for  a 
continuous  function  F(x,y)  defined  over  the  square  area 
of the  picture  and  such  that  F  takes  value  1  where  the 
picture  has  a  black  point  and  0  where  it  has  a white 
point.  The  precise  construction  of  F  is  as  follows: 

Consider  the  subdivision  of  the  picture  area  into 

smaller  squares  defined  by  the  square  matrix  of picture 
points  by  drawing  horizontal  and  vertical  lines  through 
the  points  of the  picture. 
It  should  be  clear  that  a  t r i-
angulation*  of the  picture  area  can  now  be  effected  by 
separately  triangulating  each  smaller  square,  as  shown 
in  Fig.  3.  We  shall  describe  rules  for  determining which 
diagonal  w i ll  be  added  to  each  square  to  complete  the 
triangulation. 

to  connect  two  black  points  or  two  white  points,  choose 
the  black  and  t ry  to  have  as  few  curvaturepoints  as 
possible.  The  triangulation  rule  embodied  in  (d)  of 
Fig.  3  assures  that  black  points  have  precedence,  while 
rules  (b)  and  (c)  prevent  a  straight  edge  at  45°  from 
being  encoded  as  a  saw-tooth  contour  line.  The  reader 
may  verify  these  statements  by  choosing  the  other  diag­
onal  and  then  constructing  the  contour.  The  actual  con­
tour  for  the  top  pattern  in  Fig.  3  is  presented  at  the 
bottom  of  Fig.  3  and  hatch marks  have been  appended  to 
show which  side  of  a  contour  line  is  the  high  or  black 
side. 

There  are  only  six  essentially  different  combina­

tions  of  values  possible  for  the  corners  of  a  square. 
These  are  shown  in  Fig.  3  along  with  the  proper  diag­
onal.  Where  no  diagonal  is  shown  it  means  that  either 
one  may  be  chosen. 

Now  that  the  picture  area  has  been  triangulated,  we 

define  our  function  F  separately  for  each  triangle. 
Supposing  some  triangle  to  have  vertices  A,  B,  and  C, 
we  let  PA,  PB,  Pc  denote  the  picture  values  at  points 
A,  B,  C  which  are  indeed  points  of  the  "matrix  picture. " 
There  is  a  unique  linear  function  F*(x,y) =  ax -t  by +  c 
which  takes  on  values  PA,  P g,  PC  at  points  A,  B,  C 
Each  triangle  of  the  triangulation  determines  uniquely 
an F*ABC and  F  is  defined  so  that  F(x,y)  =  F ^ g ^ x . y) 
whenever  (x,y)  is  inside  or  on  triangle  ABC. 

The  proofs  that  F  is  well-defined  and  continuous  are 

easily  derived  from  the  exemplary  behavior  of  linear 
functions. 
In  fact,  the  only  way  discontinuity  could  pos­
sibly  occur  is  by  way  of  F  being  double  defined  for  some 
point  on  a  common  edge  SB  between  two  triangles  A^ 
and  A2*  The  reason  that  this  cannot  occur  is  because 
F1*  and  F2*  (the  linear  functions  for  A^  and  A2)  when 
restricted  to  the  edge  AB  are  both  found  to  vary  linearly 
between  A  and  B  and  to  have  the  same  values  at  these 
two  points;  hence F1* = F2* on the  edge  AB  and  F  is  w e l l-
defined . 

Having  defined  F  over  the  picture  area  as  a  contin­
uous  piecewise-linear  approximation  to  the  original  pic­
ture,  we  can  simply  repeat  that  the  "structural  descrip­
tion"  of the  picture  is  the  set  of  contour  lines  of  F  drawn 
at  a  height  of  1/2.  This  approach  certainly  corresponds 
well  with  any  intuitive  notion  of  edges  in  a  binary  picture. 

Curvaturepoints 

We  use  the  t e rm  "curvaturepoints"  to  describe  the 
points  where  the  contour  lines  (called  "edges")  change 
direction.  For  example,  in  the bottom  of  Fig.  3  the 
numbered  points  1 - 10  are  the  curvaturepoints  whereas 
E  and  F  are  points  on  the  contour  but  not  at  bends.  This 
is  because  the  two  sections  of contour  line  which  meet 
at  E  are  both  in  the  same  direction, t  Referring  to  Fig. 
4,  we  see  that  at  E  there  is  an  incoming  edge  and  an 
outgoing  edge  both  in direction  5,  whereas  at point  8 
there  is  an  incoming  edge  in direction  6  and  an  outgoing 
edge  in  direction  5. 

It  turns  out  that  curvaturepoints  can  only  occur  at 

points  midway  between  two  picture  points.  Further­
more,  the  question  of whether  or  not  a  given  point  is  a 

tContours  are  directed  so  that  the  hatch  mark  is  on  the 
right. 

-622-

FIG.  5 

curve  is  not disturbed  at  a l l.  The  bend  at  point  5  in 
Fig.  6  is  not  exactly +1  as  can  readily be  seen,  but  as 
an  approximation  it does  not  really  go  far  wrong.  Fur­
thermore,  if  more  precision  is  required,  it  can  be  c a l­
culated  from  the  X  and  Y  coordinate  values  of  the  3 
points  1,  5  and  9. 

The  main  advantages  of  performing  this  smoothing 
of  inflections  are  the  reduction  in  the  amount  of  data  to 
be  processed  in  subsequent  discrimination  algorithms 
and  the  elimination  of  some  sequences  of  edge  bends 
which  we  may  call  "spurious  wiggles"  since  the  cor­
responding  edge  in  a  typical  original  continuous  pattern 
was  probably  straight.  Figure  5  shows  a  "spurious 
wiggle"  of  4  pairs  of points. 
In  the  example  depicted 
the  reduction  in data  is  substantial,  amounting  to  40%, 
although  the  picture  pattern  contains  a  great deal  of 
real  detail. 

As  a  final  point  we  want  to  make  it  perfectly  clear 
that  this  smoothing  procedure  is  not  an  absolutely  nec­
essary  part  of  the  overall  method.  Depending  on  the 
particular  application,  it  may  or  may  not  be  appropri­
ate.  We  present  it  here  in  place  of  several  other 
smoothing  algorithms  which  we  have  experimented  with 
because  it  has  been  found  to  accomplish  a  substantial 
reduction  in  data  without  eliminating  many  major  de­
tails  and  while  requiring  only  simple  decision  c r i t e r i a. 

SMOOTHED  EDGE  CONTOUR 

FIG.  6 

Bend  Groups 

When  the  sequence  of  curvaturepoints  describing  a 
single  closed  contour  has  been  constructed  and  the  " i n(cid:173)
flections"  have  been  deleted  as  described  in  the  previous 
section,  then  a  very  compact  but  extremely  character-
izing  signature  can  be  computed  by  merging  curvature-
points  according  to  the  following  rules: 

Transform  the  closed  curve  into  a  sequence  of  i n(cid:173)

tegers  representing  amounts  of  bend  by  adding  together 
the  values  of  bend  for  two  adjacent  curvaturepoints  of 
like  sign  whenever  their  distance  apart  is  less  than  some 
threshold  which  is  appropriate  to  a  given  application. 

Figure  7  depicts  how  the  grouping  of  like  points 

would  be  made  for  our  sample  curve  of the  last  section, 
assuming  a  threshold  distance  of  approximately  4.0. 

Once  again  we  must  emphasize  that  special  appli(cid:173)

cations  w i ll  generally  suggest  variations  in  the  merging 
of  bends  in  addition  to  guiding  the  determination  of  the 
distance  threshold.  Some  applications  may,  of course, 
require  the  retention  of  more  detailed  edge  length  infor(cid:173)
mation  in  which  case  this  simple  scheme  would  not  be 
appropriate. 

- 6 2 5-

FIG.  7 

Recovery  Algorithm 

An  important  property  of  "structural  descriptions" 
is  that  an  algorithm  exists  which  w i ll  recover  the  o r i g(cid:173)
inal  digitized  binary  matrix  pattern  given  only  the  struc(cid:173)
tural  description.  We  shall  give  a brief  outline  of  such 
an  algorithm  and  discuss  the  theoretical  foundation  for 
its  validity. 

The  famous  mathematical  theorem  known  as  the 

"Jordan  Curve  Theorem"  states  that  any  simple  closed 
curve  in  the  plane  divides  the  remainder  of  the  plane 
into  two  distinct  sets  called  the  "inside"  and  "outside," 
such  that  any two  points  in  the  same  set  can  always  be 
connected  with  a  continuous  curve  lying  entirely  in  that 
same  set;  any  continuous  plane  curve  joining  a point 
"inside"  the  curve  to  one  "outside"  must  have  at  least 
one  point  in  common with  the  closed  curve.  The  proof 
of  this  theorem  is  much  simpler  for  polygons  than  for 
general  curves;  Courant  and  Robbins2  give  a proof  for 
the  polygonal  case  which depends  on  the  fact  that  if  a 
point  "outside"  a  closed  curve  
is  connected  by  a 
straight  line  L  to  another  point  P,  then  P  is  also  "out(cid:173)
if  and  only  if  L  intersects   "  an  even  number 
side" 
of  times. 
an  odd number  of times, 
then  P  is  "inside" 

If  L  intersects  

The  algorithm  we  propose  is  based  on the  latter 

fact,  which  is  also  proved  in  Ref.  2.  Referring to 
Fig.  9,  we  shall  show  how  it  is  possible  to  determine 

while  ranges  a,  

are  outside.  The  proper 
assignment  of values  then depends  only  on  the  status  of 

and 

The  determination  that  ranges  p  and  5  are  inside 

proceeds  as  follows: 

Curve  r  is  traced  from  its  top  all  the  way  around 

and  back  to  the  top  again.  Whenever  the  curve 
crosses  the  vertical  line  
making  a  mark  in  all  points  below  the  crossing.  For 
example, 

crosses  f i r st  at  

,  we  record  the  fact by 

and  all  points  in  ranges, 

and  c  are  marked +  as  shown  in  the  table. 

This  means  that  each  of these  marked  points  can  be  con­
nected  by  a  straight  line  to  the  top  of  the  picture  area 
The  table  is  filled  in 
only  by  a  line  crossing  
f o r a nd  
in  an  entirely  similar  manner.  After 
64,  mere  are  no  more  crossings  and  the  curve  returns 
to  the  starting  point.  We  then  determine  which  points 
have  received  an  odd  number  of marks  and  find  that  all 
points  of  ranges B and  5  are  inside 

at 

When  this  procedure  is  carried  out  for  all  vertical 

then the  "inside"  points 

lines 
determined. 
that  all  
was  being  traced  only  once. 

  have  been 
In  any  actual  implementation,  we  assume 
would  be  handled  simultaneously  while 

f o r w i ll

If the  same  process  is  repeated  for  all  curves  

in 
a  "structural  description"  then  the  result  is  Just  as  valid 
as  for  one  curve  because  curve  crossings  always  r e p r e­
sent  a  color  change. 

No  claim  is  made  for  the  efficiency  of this  procedure; 

we  merely wanted  to  show  with  some  degree  of  mathe­
matical  rigor  that  the  "structural  description"  contains 
all  the  information  of  the  original  digitized  pattern  and  it 
can  be  mechanically  recovered  if  necessary. 

Advantages  of  the  Curvaturepoint  Method 

The  generality  of  the  curvaturepoint  method  is  one 

of  its  most  important  properties.  The  method  applies  to 
any  "black  and  white"  pattern  whose  significant  content 
consists  of  connected  sets  of  similar  points.  Hence,  it 
also  applies  to  input pictures  which  can  be  made  to  com­
ply  with  this  condition  by  suitable  preprocessing;  fairly 
simple  local  transformations  on  binary  pictures  have 
been  found  to  be  very  successful  at  regularizing  pictures 
in  this  way.  Our  method  can  be  used  in  some  cases  to 
extract  contrast  information  from  grey-scale*  pictures 
by  converting  the  picture  to  binary  several  times  using 
different  thresholds.  This  idea  is  more  fully  elaborated 
in  Zahn.  1  This  applicability  to  multilevel  pictures 
should  come  as  no  surprise  when  it  is  remembered  that 
the  method  is  simply  a  contouring  of  a  two-dimensional 
distribution  of  numerical  values. 

Simplicity  and  mathematical  rigor  are  properties  of 
the  method  which  we  feel  have  been  largely  overlooked  in 
most  "edge-detection"  schemes.  The  two  properties  are 
closely  related,  for  the  mathematical  rigor  with  which 
"curvaturepoint  extraction"  and  "linkage"  are  performed 
is  a  direct  consequence  of  the  simple  and  straightforward 
definition  of the  "structural  description."  Being  contour 

♦Picture  values  range  over  an ordered  finite  set  such  as 
(0,  1,  2,  3). 

-626-

It  is  precisely  because  of 

lines  of  a  simple  function,  the  "structural  description" 
is  constrained  to  consist  of  non-intersecting  closed 
polygonal  curves  whose  edges  are  directed  in  only  eight 
different  ways  and  whose  edge  bends  or  "curvaturepoints" 
are  also  tightly  constrained. 
such  constraints  that  the  "linkage"  of  widely  spaced 
"curvaturepoints"  can  be  accomplished  in  a  completely 
assured  way.  Not  only  is  the  transformation  from  bin­
ary  pattern  to  structural  description  rigorous  and 
uniquely  defined;  the  reverse  transformation  (see  Re­
covery Algorithm)  exists  as  well,  proving  a  unique  one-
to-one  correspondence  between  a  binary  pattern  and  its 
structural  description  and  also  showing  that  the  struc­
tural  description  contains  total  information  from  the 
binary  pattern. 

One  of  the  most  serious  obstacles  to  the  further 

development  of  digital  picture  processing  is  the  volume 
of  data  implied  by  the  two-dimensionality  of  pictures. 
When  the  resolution  is  doubled  the  data  volume  is  quad­
rupled;  a picture  1,000  x  1,000  has  one  million  data 
points,  an  amount  which  is  still  prohibitively  high  for 
even  the  largest  computers.  The  "structural  descrip­
tion"  on  the  other  hand  contains  one-dimensional  infor­
mation  (contour  lines)  and  therefore  the  data  volume 
increases  only  linearly  with  resolution.  This  means 
that  if  "curvaturepoint  extraction"  can  be  done  in  special 
digital  hardware  then the storage  requirement  for  imple­
menting  the  method  on  a  general  purpose  computer  will 
be  greatly  reduced  and  more  richly  detailed  patterns  can 
be  handled.  The  "linkage"  would  be  accomplished  by 
It  turns  out  very  happily  that  "curvature­
programming. 
point  extraction"  is  defined  by  extremely  simple  Boolean 
logic  (see  Curvaturepoints)  and  its  digital  hardware 
implementation  could  be  accomplished  with  the  addition 
of  two  long  shift  registers.  We  consider  this  efficient 
implementation  to  be  an  extremely  vital  aspect  of  the 
method. 

The  intuitive  character  of  our  method  should  prove 

of  considerable  benefit  in  constructing  recognition  a l­
gorithms. 
In  a  recent  article  Uhr3  claims  that  edges, 
angles  and  the  interrelations  between  lengths  and  slopes 
are  the  important  and  meaningful  properties  for  human 
pattern  perception  and  recognition. 
If  this  is  true  then 
it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  algorithms  based  on 
"structural  descriptions"  will  be  highly  intuitive  in  na­
ture  and  hence  less  mysterious  than  those  based  on  i n­
formation  other  than  edges. 
In  support  of  Uhr!s  claim 
we  shall  cite  evidence  from  psychology  and  neurophysi­
ology  which  tends  to  indicate  the  predominance  of  edge 
information  in  animal  visual  perception.  Attneave4 
in 
experiments  on  human  subjects  found  that  the  number  of 
bends  in  polygonal  shaped  objects  accounted  for  80% of 
the difference  between  objects  when  rated  by  subjects 
according  to  judged  complexity.  This  clearly  suggests 
importance  of  curvaturepoints.  Other  researchers  have 
found  that  an  object's  visibility  is  related  to  the  length 
of  its  boundary,  strongly  suggesting  that  for  purposes  of 
perception  the  edge  is  the  predominant  information  con­
tent. 

The  research  of  Lettvin  et  ah 5  on  the  optic  nerve 

cells  in  the  frog  indicates  that  signals 
frog's  brain  from  its  eyes  are  highly  contrast-oriented. 
Hubel  and  Wiesel6  determined  that  nerve  cells  in  the 
cat's  brain  are  specific  to  the  existence  of  edges  in  the 
visual  field  of given  slope.  This  neurophysiologyal 

reaching  the 

evidence  if  extrapolated  to  the  human  case  lends  further 
support  to  the  claim  that  edge  information  is  the  raw 
data  for  visual  perception  mechanisms  in  man. 

Although  the  method  is  clearly  directed  toward  rec­
ognition  via  edge-bend-sequence,  nevertheless  familiar 
quantitative  properties  such  as  perimeter,  area,  mo­
ments,  height  and  width  are  easily  calculated. 
tion,  we  can  define  and  compute  reasonably  intuitive 
quantitative  measures  of  oblongness,  compactness, 
wigglyness  and  total  absolute  curvature. 

In  addi­

For  some  pattern  recognition  applications  (character 

recognition  especially)  it  is  useful  to  have  a  method 
which  is  position  and  size  invariant. 
"Structural  de­
scriptions"  contain  position  and  size  information  but  in 
such  a  way  that  it  is  quite  easily disregarded.  Rotation 
invariance  is  also  easy  to  achieve  by  simply  considering 
the  sequence  of  curvaturepoints  without  paying  attention 
to  the  initial  edge  direction.  The  information  is  always 
there  when  needed,  however,  so  that  recognition  methods 
sensitive  to  position,  size  and  rotation  are  not  hampered 
in  the  least. 

A  pattern  description  method  is  greatly  enhanced  if 

it  is  compatible  with  some  fairly  elegant  language  for 
pictures.  This  is  particularly  true  if the  language  has 
a  formal  phrase  structure  grammar  which  allows  pat­
tern  recognition  to  be  accomplished  by  the  formal  par­
sing  procedures  which  have  been  developed  for  such 
grammars.  The  survey  paper  of  Miller  and  Shaw13 
discusses  this  aspect  of  picture  processing  quite  com­
prehensively.  Ledley7  for  example,  has  shown  that 
formal  parsing  techniques  can  be  used  to  recognize  dif­
ferent  chromosome  shapes  by  transforming  their  edge 
sequences  into  a  string  of  primitives  and  then  parsing 
this  string.  For  example,  in  Fig.  8  O  means  no  bend, 
E  means  sharp  180°  convexity,  Y  means  sharp  180°  con­
cavity,  etc.  These  are  the  primitives  of the  language. 
The  formal  grammar  would  define  " a r m"  as  OEO, 
"double  a r m"  as  arm  Y  a r m,  etc. 

An  essentially  one-dimensional  data  format  seems 
to  be  advantageous  for  linguistic  processing  of  pictures 
because  phrase-structure  grammars  describe  sets  of 
" s t r i n g s ."  When  the  data  is  not  in  a  t rstring"  format 
there  are  some  subtleties  involved  in  making  the  cor­
respondence  between  the  data  and  linguistic  formalism. 
The  recent  work  of  Shaw8  shows  that  automatic  parsing 
recognizers  can  be  quickly  implemented  when  the  struc­
ture  of the  picture  can  be  represented  by  a  suitable  one-
dimensional  grammar.  Syntax  directed  parsing  methods 
are  employed  so  that  new  recognition  tasks  require  only 
a  new  syntax  table  and  specially  written  primitive  r e c­
ognizers. 

In  addition  to  formal  language  parsing  methods,  our 

In  fact,  the  cyclic 

"structural  description"  can  be  used  very  readily  in  a 
decision  tree  approach to  recognition. 
list  data  format  of  the  "structural  description"  lends  it-
self  naturally  to  sequential  decisions  made  as  the  list  is 
traversed.  As  with  all  pattern description  schemes,  it 
is  possible  to  reduce  to  a  vector  of  quantifiable  proper­
ties  and  then use  one  of the  many  procedures  based  on 
the  property  vector  representation  of  a  pattern.  The 
algorithms  of  Freeman9,  10,11  for  "curve  segment 
matching"  are  applicable  with  almost  no  change  since 
"structural  descriptions"  are  essentially  "Freeman 

encodings"  of  the  curves  defining  boundaries  in  a  binary 
picture.  For  example,  the  Freeman  chain-encoding  of 
the  closed  curves  of  Fig.  3 would  be  (00766555333111) 
and  (5713).  Each digit  represents  a unit  vector  as 
shown  in  Fig.  4  and  the  curve  is  traced  sequentially. 
Our  "structural  descriptions"  vary  from  this  format 
only  to  the  extent  of  merging  like-direction  contiguous 
unit  vectors  into  a  single  vector  with  length.  The 
"structural  description"  for  the  outer  curve  of  Fig.  3  is 
essentially 
These  curve 
matching  algorithms  are  capable  12  of  putting  together 
an  "apictorial  jigsaw  puzzle"  which  attests  to  the  sub­
tlety  of  their  shape  discrimination. 

Acknowledgements 

The  author  would  like  to  thank  Alan  Shaw  of  Cornell 

University*  and  Jeno  Gazdag  of  IBM  for  many  hours  of 
very  useful  discussion  on  pattern  recognition  methods; 
Robert  H.  Penny  of  General  Electric  Co.  for  introducing 
us  to  and  stimulating  our  interest  in  digital  picture 
processing  and  William  F.  Miller  of  Stanford  University 
for  his  continuing  encouragement  and  support  of  this 
research.  We  also  thank  the  referee  for  several  con­
structive  suggestions. 

References 

1.  C.  T.  Zahn,  "Two-dimensional  pattern  description 
and  recognition  via  curvaturepoints,"  Report  No. 
S  LAC-70,  Stanford  Linear  Accelerator  Center, 
Stanford  University,  Stanford,  California  (1966). 

2.  R.  Courant  and  H.  Robbins,  What  is  Mathematics ? 
(Oxford  University  Press,  London,  1941);  pp.  267-
269. 

3.  L.Uhr,  "Pattern  recognition,"  in  Pattern  Recogni­

tion,  ed.  Leonard  Uhr  (John Wiley  &  Sons,  New 
York,  1966);  pp.  365-381. 

4.  F.  Attneave,  "Physical  determinants  of the  judged 
complexity  of  shapes,"  J.  Exptl.  Psychol.  53,  221 
(1957). 

5. 

J.  Y.  Lettvin,  H.  R.  Maturana,  W.  S.  McCulloch 
and  W.  H.  Pitts,  "What  the  frog's  eye  tells  the 
frog's  b r a i n ,"  Proc.  IRE  47,  (November  1959); 
pp.  1940-1951. 

6.  D.  H.  Hubel  and  T.  N.  Wiesel,  "Receptive  fields, 
binocular  interaction,  and  functional  architecture 
in  the  cat's  visual  cortex,"  J.  Physiol.  160,  106 
(1962). 

7.  R.  S.  Ledley,  "High-speed  automatic  analysis  of 

biomedical  pictures,"  Science  146,  216  (1964). 

8.  A.  C.  Shaw,  "The  formal  description  and  parsing 
of pictures,  Report  No.  SLAC-84,  Stanford  Linear 
Accelerator  Center,  Stanford  University,  Stanford 
California  (1968). 

9.  H.  Freeman,  "On  the  encoding  of  arbitrary  geo­

metric  configurations,"  IRE  Trans,  on  Electronic 
Computers  EC-10,  (1961);  pp.  260-268. 

♦formerly  Stanford  University. 

-627-

-628-

