On the Axiomatic Foundations of Ranking Systems

Alon Altman and Moshe Tennenholtz

Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management

Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Haifa 32000

Israel

Abstract

Reasoning about agent preferences on a set of al-
ternatives, and the aggregation of such preferences
into some social ranking is a fundamental issue in
reasoning about multi-agent systems. When the set
of agents and the set of alternatives coincide, we get
the ranking systems setting. A famous type of rank-
ing systems are page ranking systems in the con-
text of search engines. In this paper we present an
extensive axiomatic study of ranking systems. In
particular, we consider two fundamental axioms:
Transitivity, and Ranked Independence of Irrele-
vant Alternatives. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that there
is no general social ranking rule that satisﬁes both
requirements. Furthermore, we show that our im-
possibility result holds under various restrictions on
the class of ranking problems considered. Each of
these axioms can be individually satisﬁed. More-
over, we show a complete axiomatization of ap-
proval voting using one of these axioms.

1 Introduction
The ranking of agents based on other agents’ input is fun-
[Resnick et al.,
damental to multi-agent systems (see e.g.
2000]). Moreover, it has become a central ingredient of a va-
riety of Internet sites, where perhaps the most famous exam-
ples are Google’s PageRank algorithm[Page et al., 1998] and
eBay’s reputation system[Resnick and Zeckhauser, 2001].

This basic problem introduces a new social choice model.
In the classical theory of social choice, as manifested by
Arrow[1963], a set of agents/voters is called to rank a set of
alternatives. Given the agents’ input, i.e. the agents’ indi-
vidual rankings, a social ranking of the alternatives is gener-
ated. The theory studies desired properties of the aggregation
of agents’ rankings into a social ranking. In particular, Ar-
row’s celebrated impossibility theorem[Arrow, 1963] shows
that there is no aggregation rule that satisﬁes some minimal
requirements, while by relaxing any of these requirements ap-
propriate social aggregation rules can be deﬁned. The novel
feature of the ranking systems setting is that the set of agents
and the set of alternatives coincide. Therefore, in such setting
one may need to consider the transitive effects of voting. For
example, if agent a reports on the importance of (i.e. votes

for) agent b then this may inﬂuence the credibility of a re-
port by b on the importance of agent c; these indirect effects
should be considered when we wish to aggregate the infor-
mation provided by the agents into a social ranking.

Notice that a natural interpretation/application of this set-
ting is the ranking of Internet pages. In this case, the set of
agents represents the set of Internet pages, and the links from
a page p to a set of pages Q can be viewed as a two-level
ranking where agents in Q are preferred by agent(page) p to
the agents(pages) which are not in Q. The problem of ﬁnd-
ing an appropriate social ranking in this case is in fact the
problem of (global) page ranking. Particular approaches for
obtaining a useful page ranking have been implemented by
search engines such as Google[Page et al., 1998].

The theory of social choice consists of two complementary

axiomatic perspectives:

• The descriptive perspective: given a particular rule r for
the aggregation of individual rankings into a social rank-
ing, ﬁnd a set of axioms that are sound and complete
for r. That is, ﬁnd a set of requirements that r satis-
ﬁes; moreover, every social aggregation rule that satis-
ﬁes these requirements should coincide with r. A result
showing such an axiomatization is termed a representa-
tion theorem and it captures the exact essence of (and
assumptions behind) the use of the particular rule.

• The normative perspective: devise a set of requirements
that a social aggregation rule should satisfy, and try to
ﬁnd whether there is a social aggregation rule that satis-
ﬁes these requirements.

Many efforts have been invested in the descriptive approach
in the framework of the classical theory of social choice. In
that setting, representation theorems have been presented to
major voting rules such as the majority rule[May, 1952]. Re-
cently, we have successfully applied the descriptive perspec-
tive in the context of ranking systems by providing a represen-
tation theorem[Altman and Tennenholtz, 2005] for the well-
known PageRank algorithm [Page et al., 1998], which is the
basis of Google’s search technology.

An excellent example for the normative perspective is Ar-
row’s impossibility theorem mentioned above. In [Tennen-
holtz, 2004], we presented some preliminary results for rank-
ing systems where the set of voters and the set of alternatives
coincide. However, the axioms presented in that work consist

of several very strong requirements which naturally lead to an
impossibility result.

In this paper we provide an extensive study of ranking sys-
tems. We introduce two fundamental axioms. One of these
axioms captures the transitive effects of voting in ranking sys-
tems, and the other adapts Arrow’s well-known independence
of irrelevant alternatives(IIA) axiom to the context of ranking
systems. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that no general ranking sys-
tem can simultaneously satisfy these two axioms! We further
show that our impossibility result holds under various restric-
tions on the class of ranking problems considered. On the
other hand, we show that each of these axioms can be individ-
ually satisﬁed. Moreover, we use our IIA axiom to present a
positive result in the form of a representation theorem for the
well-known approval voting ranking system, which ranks the
agents based on the number of votes received. This axiom-
atization shows that when ignoring transitive effects, there is
only one ranking system that satisﬁes our IIA axiom.

This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 formally de-
ﬁnes our setting and the notion of ranking systems. Sections 3
and 4 introduce our axioms of Transitivity and Ranked Inde-
pendence of Irrelevant Alternatives respectively. Our main
impossibility result is presented in Section 5, and further
strengthened in Section 6. Our positive result, in the form
of an axiomatization for the Approval Voting ranking system
in presented in Section 7. Finally, some concluding remarks
are given in Section 8.

2 Ranking Systems
Before describing our results regarding ranking systems, we
must ﬁrst formally deﬁne what we mean by the words “rank-
ing system” in terms of graphs and linear orderings:
Deﬁnition 2.1. Let A be some set. A relation R ⊆ A × A
is called an ordering on A if it is reﬂexive, transitive, and
complete. Let L(A) denote the set of orderings on A.
Notation 2.2. Let (cid:22) be an ordering, then ' is the equality
predicate of (cid:22), and ≺ is the strict order induced by (cid:22). For-
mally, a ' b if and only if a (cid:22) b and b (cid:22) a; and a ≺ b if and
only if a (cid:22) b but not b (cid:22) a.

Given the above we can deﬁne what a ranking system is:

Deﬁnition 2.3. Let GV be the set of all graphs with vertex
set V . A ranking system F is a functional that for every ﬁnite
G∈ L(V ).
vertex set V maps graphs G ∈ GV to an ordering (cid:22)F
If F is a partial function then it is called a partial ranking
system, otherwise it is called a general ranking system.

One can view this setting as a variation/extension of the
classical theory of social choice as modeled by [Arrow,
1963]. The ranking systems setting differs in two main prop-
erties. First, in this setting we assume that the set of vot-
ers and the set of alternatives coincide, and second, we allow
agents only two levels of preference over the alternatives, as
opposed to Arrow’s setting where agents could rank alterna-
tives arbitrarily.

3 Transitivity
A basic property one would assume of ranking systems is that
if an agent a’s voters are ranked higher than those of agent b,

d

a

c

b

Figure 1: Example of Transitivity

then agent a should be ranked higher than agent b. This notion
is formally captured below:
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let F be a ranking system. We say that F
satisﬁes strong transitivity if for all graphs G = (V, E) and
for all vertices v1, v2 ∈ V : Assume there is a 1-1 mapping
f : P (v1) 7→ P (v2) s.t. for all v ∈ P (v1): v (cid:22) f (v). Further
assume that either f is not onto or for some v ∈ P (v1): v ≺
f (v). Then, v1 ≺ v2.

G c ≺F

G b ≺F

G a.

Consider for example the graph G in Figure 1 and any
ranking system F that satisﬁes strong transitivity. F must
rank vertex d below all other vertices, as it has no predeces-
G b, then
sors, unlike all other vertices. If we assume that a (cid:22)F
G c as well.
by strong transitivity we must conclude that b (cid:22)F
But then we must conclude that b ≺F
G a (as b’s predecessor
a is ranked lower than a’s predecessor c, and a has an addi-
tional predecessor d), which leads to a contradiction. Given
G b,
b ≺F
so the only ranking for the graph G that satisﬁes strong tran-
sitivity is d ≺F

G a, again by transitivity, we must conclude that c ≺F

In [Tennenholtz, 2004], we have suggested an algorithm
that deﬁnes a ranking system that satisﬁes strong transitivity
by iteratively reﬁning an ordering of the vertices.

Note that the PageRank ranking system deﬁned in [Page et
al., 1998] does not satisfy strong transitivity. This is due to
the fact that PageRank reduces the weight of links (or votes)
from nodes which have a higher out-degree. Thus, assuming
Yahoo! and Microsoft are equally ranked, a link from Yahoo!
means less than a link from Microsoft, because Yahoo! links
to more external pages than does Microsoft. Noting this fact,
we can weaken the deﬁnition of transitivity to require that
the predecessors of the compared agents have an equal out-
degree:
Deﬁnition 3.2. Let F be a ranking system. We say that F
satisﬁes weak transitivity if for all graphs G = (V, E) and
for all vertices v1, v2 ∈ V : Assume there is a 1-1 mapping
f : P (v1) 7→ P (v2) s.t. for all v ∈ P (v1): v (cid:22) f (v) and
|S(v)| = |S(f (v))|. Further assume that either f is not onto
or for some v ∈ P (v1): v ≺ f (v). Then, v1 ≺ v2.

Indeed, an idealized version of the PageRank ranking sys-
tem deﬁned on strongly connected graphs satisﬁes this weak-
ened version of transitivity. Furthermore, the result in the
example above does not change when we consider weak tran-
sitivity in place of strong transitivity.

4 Ranked Independence of Irrelevant

Alternatives

A standard assumption in social choice settings is that an
agent’s relative rank should only depend on (some property
of) their immediate predecessors. Such axioms are usually
called independence of irrelevant alternatives(IIA) axioms.

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 2: An example of RIIA.

c

b

d

a1

a1

d

a2

b

c

In our setting, we require the relative ranking of two agents
must only depend on the pairwise comparisons of the ranks of
their predecessors, and not on their identity or cardinal value.
Our IIA axiom, called ranked IIA, differs from the one sug-
gested by [Arrow, 1963] in the fact that we do not consider
the identity of the voters, but rather their relative rank.

For example, consider the graph in Figure 2. Furthermore,
assume a ranking system F has ranked the vertices of this
graph as following: a ' b ≺ c ' d ≺ e ' f . Now look
at the comparison between c and d. c’s predecessors, a and
b, are both ranked equally, and both ranked lower than d’s
predecessor f . This is also true when considering e and f
– e’s predecessors c and d are both ranked equally, and both
ranked lower than f ’s predecessor e. Therefore, if we agree
with ranked IIA, the relation between c and d, and the relation
between e and f must be the same, which indeed it is – both
c ' d and e ' f . However, this same situation also occurs
when comparing c and f (c’s predecessors a and b are equally
ranked and ranked lower than f ’s predecessor e), but in this
case c ≺ f . So, we can conclude that the ranking system F
which produced these rankings does not satisfy ranked IIA.

To formally deﬁne this condition, one must consider all
possibilities of comparing two nodes in a graph based only
on ordinal comparisons of their predecessors. We call these
possibilities comparison proﬁles:
Deﬁnition 4.1. A comparison proﬁle is a pair ha, bi
where a = (a1, . . . , an), b = (b1, . . . , bm),
a1, . . . , an, b1, . . . , bm ∈ N, a1 ≤ a2 ≤ · · · ≤ an,
and b1 ≤ b2 ≤ · · · ≤ bm. Let P be the set of all such proﬁles.
A ranking system F , a graph G = (V, E), and a pair of
vertices v1, v2 ∈ V are said to satisfy such a comparison
proﬁle ha, bi if there exist 1-1 mappings f1 : P (v1) 7→
{1 . . . n} and f2 : P (v2) 7→ {1 . . . m} such that given
f : ({1} × P (v1)) ∪ ({2} × P (v2)) 7→ N deﬁned as:

f (1, v) = af1(v)
f (2, u) = bf2(u),

f (i, x) ≤ f (j, y) ⇔ x (cid:22)F
P (v1)) ∪ ({2} × P (v2)).

G y for all (i, x), (j, y) ∈ ({1} ×

For example, in the example considered above, all of the
pairs (c, d), (c, f ), and (e, f ) satisfy the comparison proﬁle
h(1, 1), (2)i.

We now require that for every such proﬁle the ranking sys-

tem ranks the nodes consistently:
Deﬁnition 4.2. Let F be a ranking system. We say that F sat-
isﬁes ranked independence of irrelevant alternatives (RIIA) if
there exists a mapping f : P 7→ {0, 1} such that for every
graph G = (V, E) and for every pair of vertices v1, v2 ∈ V

a2

(a) Graph G1

(b) Graph G2

Figure 3: Graphs for the proof of Theorem 5.1

and for every comparison proﬁle p ∈ P that v1 and v2 satisfy,
v1 (cid:22)F

G v2 ⇔ f (p) = 1.

As RIIA is an independence property, the ranking system
F=, that ranks all agents equally, satisﬁes RIIA. A more in-
teresting ranking system that satisﬁes RIIA is the approval
voting ranking system, deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 4.3. The approval voting ranking system AV is
the ranking system deﬁned by:

v1 (cid:22)AV

G v2 ⇔ |P (v1)| ≤ |P (v2)|

A full axiomatization of the approval voting ranking sys-

tem is given in section 7.

5 Impossibility
Our main result illustrates the impossibility of satisfying
(weak) transitivity and RIIA simultaneously.
Theorem 5.1. There is no general ranking system that satis-
ﬁes weak transitivity and RIIA.

Proof. Assume for contradiction that there exists a ranking
system F that satisﬁes weak transitivity and RIIA. Consider
ﬁrst the graph G1 in Figure 3(a). First, note that a1 and
a2 satisfy some comparison proﬁle pa = ((x, y), (x, y))
because they have identical predecessors. Thus, by RIIA,
a2.
a1, and therefore a1 'F
a1 (cid:22)F
G1
G1
By weak transitivity, it is easy to see that c ≺F
a1 and
G1
a1, then by weak transitivity,
b. If we assume b (cid:22)F
c ≺F
G1
G1
b which contradicts our assumption. So we conclude
a1 ≺F
G1
that c ≺F
G1

a2 ⇔ a2 (cid:22)F
G1

Now consider the graph G2 in Figure 3(b). Again, by
a2. By weak transitivity, it is easy to see that
G2 c. If we assume a1 (cid:22)F
G2 b, then by weak
a1 which contradicts our assumption. So

RIIA, a1 'F
G2
a1 ≺F
transitivity, b ≺F
G2
we conclude that b ≺F
G2

G2 c and b ≺F

a1 ≺F
G2

a1 ≺F
G1

Consider the comparison proﬁle p = ((1, 3), (2, 2)). Given
a2 ≺F
a1 'F
G1
G1
c). Thus, by

F , a1 and b satisfy p in G1 (because c ≺F
G1
b) and in G2 (because b ≺F
G2

a1 'F
G2

a2 ≺F
G2

b.

c.

RIIA, a1 (cid:22)F
G1
fact that a1 ≺F
G1

b ⇔ a1 (cid:22)F
G2
b but b ≺F
G2

b, which is a contradiction to the
a1.

This result is quite a surprise, as it means that every reason-
able deﬁnition of a ranking system must either consider car-
dinal values for nodes and/or edges (like [Page et al., 1998]),
or operate ordinally on a global scale (like [Altman and Ten-
nenholtz, 2005]).

6 Relaxing Generality
A hidden assumption in our impossibility result is the fact
that we considered only general ranking systems. In this sec-
tion we analyze several special classes of graphs that relate to
common ranking scenarios.

6.1 Small Graphs
A natural limitation on a preference graph is a cap on the
number of vertices (agents) that participate in the ranking.
Indeed, when there are three or less agents involved in the
ranking, strong transitivity and RIIA can be simultaneously
satisﬁed. An appropriate ranking algorithm for this case is
the one we suggested in [Tennenholtz, 2004].

However, when there are four or more agents, strong transi-
tivity and RIIA cannot be simultaneously satisﬁed (the proof
is similar to that of Theorem 5.1, but with vertex d removed
in both graphs). When ﬁve or more agents are involved, even
weak transitivity and RIIA cannot be simultaneously satis-
ﬁed, as implied by the proof of Theorem 5.1.

6.2 Single Vote Setting
Another natural limitation on the domain of graphs that we
might be interested in is the restriction of each agent(vertex)
to exactly one vote(successor). For example, in the voting
paradigm this could be viewed as a setting where every agent
votes for exactly one agent. The following proposition shows
that even in this simple setting weak transitivity and RIIA
cannot be simultaneously satisﬁed.
Proposition 6.1. Let G1 be the set of all graphs G = (V, E)
such that |S(v)| = 1 for all v ∈ V . There is no partial
ranking system over G1 that satisﬁes weak transitivity and
RIIA.

Proof. Assume for contradiction that there is a partial ranking
system F over G1 that satisﬁes weak transitivity and RIIA.
Let f : P 7→ {0, 1} be the mapping from the deﬁnition of
RIIA for F .

b ≺F
G1

x2 ≺F
G1

Let G1 ∈ G1 be the graph in Figure 4a. By weak transitiv-
a. (a, b) satisﬁes the comparison
ity, x1 'F
G1
proﬁle h(1, 1, 2), (3)i, so we must have f h(1, 1, 2), (3)i = 0.
Now let G2 ∈ G1 be the graph in Figure 4b. By weak tran-
(b, a) satis-
sitivity x1 'F
G2
ﬁes the comparison proﬁle h(2, 3), (1, 4)i, so we must have
f h(2, 3), (1, 4)i = 0.

x2 ≺F
G2

a ≺F
G2

y ≺F
G2

b.

Let G3 ∈ G1 be the graph in Figure 4c. By weak transitiv-
y1 'F
G3
d. Furthermore, by weak transitivity we
d; and

ity it is easy to see that x1 'F
y2 ≺F
G3
conclude that a ≺F
G3

b0 from c ≺F
G3

b and a0 ≺F
G3

G3 · · · 'F
G3

x7 ≺F
G3

c ≺F
G3

x1

x2

x4

a

b

x2

x1

y

a

(a) Graph G1

(b) Graph G2

y2

x5

x6

x7

b’

c

d

a’

x3

b

x1

x2

y1

(c) Graph G3

b

a

Figure 4: Graphs from the proof of proposition 6.1

x2 ≺F
G3

b from x3 ≺F
G3

d. Now consider the vertex pair
y1 ≺F
G3
(c, b0). We have shown that x1 'F
b. So,
G3
(c, b0) satisﬁes the comparison proﬁle h(1, 1, 2), (3)i, thus by
RIIA b0 ≺F
c. Now consider the vertex pair (b, a). We
G3
have already shown that a0 ≺F
d. So, (a, b)
G3
satisﬁes the comparison proﬁle h(2, 3), (1, 4)i, thus by RIIA
a. However, we have already shown that a ≺F
b – a
b ≺F
G3
G3
contradiction. Thus, the ranking system F cannot exist.

y1 ≺F
G3

b0 ≺F
G3

c ≺F
G3

6.3 Bipartite Setting
In the world of reputation systems[Resnick et al., 2000], we
frequently observe a distinction between two types of agents
such that each type of agent only ranks agents of the other
type. For example buyers only interact with sellers and vice
versa. This type of limitation is captured by requiring the
preference graphs to be bipartite, as deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 6.2. A graph G = (V, E) is called bipartite if
there exist V1, V2 such that V = V1 ∪ V2, V1 ∩ V2 = ∅, and
E ⊆ (V1 × V2) ∪ (V2 × V1). Let GB be the set of all bipartite
graphs.

Our impossibility result extends to the limited domain of

bipartite graphs.
Proposition 6.3. There is no partial ranking system over
GB ∩ G1 that satisﬁes weak transitivity and RIIA.

6.4 Strongly Connected Graphs
The well-known PageRank ranking system is (ideally) de-
ﬁned on the set of strongly connected graphs. That is, the

set of graphs where there exists a directed path between any
two vertices.

Let us denote the set of all strongly connected graphs GSC.
The following proposition extends our impossibility result to
strongly connected graphs.
Proposition 6.4. There is no partial ranking system over
GSC.

7 Axiomatization of Approval Voting
In the previous sections we have seen mostly negative results
which arise when trying to accommodate (weak) transitivity
and RIIA. We have shown that although each of the axioms
can be satisﬁed seperately, there exists no general ranking
system that satisﬁes both axioms.

We have previously shown[Tennenholtz, 2004] a non-
trivial ranking system that satisﬁes (weak) transitivity, but
have not yet shown such a ranking system for RIIA. In this
section we provide a representation theorem for a ranking
system that satisﬁes RIIA but not weak transitivity — the ap-
proval voting ranking system. This system ranks the agents
based on the number of votes each agent received, with no re-
gard to the rank of the voters. The axiomatization we provide
in this section shows the power of RIIA, as it shows that there
exists only one (interesting) ranking system that satisﬁes it
without introducing transitive effects.

In order to specify our axiomatization, recall the following

classical deﬁnitions from the theory of social choice:

The positive response axiom essentially means that if an

agent receives additional votes, its rank must improve:
Deﬁnition 7.1. Let F be a ranking system. F satisﬁes pos-
itive response if for all graphs G = (V, E) and for all
(v1, v2) ∈ (V × V ) \ E, and for all v3 ∈ V : Let G0 =
(V, E ∪ (v1, v2)). If v3 (cid:22)F

G v2, then v3 ≺F

G0 v2.

The anonymity and neutrality axioms mean that the names
of the voters and alternatives respectively do not matter for
the ranking:
Deﬁnition 7.2. A ranking system F satisﬁes anonymity if for
all G = (V, E), for all permutations π : V 7→ V , and for
all v1, v2 ∈ V : Let E0 = {(π(v1), v2)|(v1, v2) ∈ E}. Then,
v1 (cid:22)F
Deﬁnition 7.3. A ranking system F satisﬁes neutrality if for
all G = (V, E), for all permutations π : V 7→ V , and for
all v1, v2 ∈ V : Let E0 = {(v1, π(v2))|(v1, v2) ∈ E}. Then,
v1 (cid:22)F

(V,E) v2 ⇔ v1 (cid:22)F

(V,E) v2 ⇔ v1 (cid:22)F

(V,E 0) v2.

(V,E 0) v2.

Arrow’s classical Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives
axiom requires that the relative rank of two agents be depen-
dant only on the set of agents that preferred one over the other.
Deﬁnition 7.4. A ranking system F satisﬁes Arrow’s Inde-
pendence of Irrelevant Alternatives (AIIA) if for all G =
(V, E), for all G0 = (V, E0), and for all v1, v2 ∈ V :
Let PG(v1) \ PG(v2) = PG0(v1) \ PG0 (v2) and PG(v2) \
PG(v1) = PG0(v2)\PG0(v1). Then, v1 (cid:22)F
G0 v2.
Our representation theorem states that together with pos-
itive response and RIIA, any one of the three independence

G v2 ⇔ v1 (cid:22)F

conditions above (anonymity, neutrality, and AIIA) are es-
sential and sufﬁcient for a ranking system being AV 1.
In
addition, we show that as in the classical social choice set-
ting when only considering two-level preferences, positive re-
sponse, anonymity, neutrality, and AIIA are an essential and
sufﬁcient representation of approval voting. This result ex-
tends the well known axiomatization of the majority rule due
to [May, 1952]:
Proposition 7.5. (May’s Theorem) A social welfare func-
tional over two alternatives is a majority social welfare func-
tional if and only if it satisﬁes anonymity, neutrality, and pos-
itive response.

We can now formally state our theorem:

Theorem 7.6. Let F be a general ranking system. Then, the
following statements are equivalent:

1. F is the approval voting ranking system(F = AV )
2. F satisﬁes positive response, anonymity, neutrality, and

AIIA

3. F satisﬁes positive response, RIIA, and either one of

anonymity, neutrality, and AIIA

Proof. (Sketch) It is easy to see that AV satisﬁes positive
response, RIIA, anonymity, neutrality, and AIIA. It remains
to show that (2) and (3) entail (1) above.

To prove (2) entails (1), assume that F satisﬁes positive re-
sponse, anonymity, neutrality, and AIIA. Let G = (V, E) be
some graph and let v1, v2 ∈ V be some agents. By AIIA,
the relative ranking of v1 and v2 depends only on the sets
PG(v1) \ PG(v2) and PG(v2) \ PG(v1). We have now nar-
rowed our consideration to a set of agents with preferences
over two alternatives, so we can apply Proposition 7.5 to com-
plete our proof.

To prove (3) entails (1), assume that F satisﬁes positive
response, RIIA and either anonymity or neutrality or AIIA.
As F satisﬁes RIIA we can limit our discussion to compar-
ison proﬁles. Let f : P 7→ {0, 1} be the function from the
deﬁnition of RIIA. We will use the notation a (cid:22) b to mean
f ha, bi = 1, a ≺ b to mean f hb, ai = 0, and a ' b to
mean a (cid:22) b and b (cid:22) a.

By the deﬁnition of RIIA, it is easy to see that a '
a for all a. By positive response it is also easy to see
that (1, 1, . . . , 1
) iff n ≤ m. Let P =
}

h(a1, . . . , an), (b1, . . . , bm)i be a comparison proﬁle. Let
G = (V, E) be the following graph :

) (cid:22) (1, 1, . . . , 1

{z
}m

{z

|

|

n

V = {x1, . . . , xmax{an,bm}} ∪
1, . . . , v0
1, . . . , u0

∪{v1, . . . , vn, v0
∪{u1, . . . , um, u0

n, v} ∪
m, u}

E = {(xi, vj)|i ≤ aj} ∪ {(xi, uj)|i ≤ bj} ∪

∪{(vi, v)|i = 1, . . . , n} ∪ {(ui, u)|i = 1, . . . , m}.

1In fact, an even weaker condition of decoupling, that in essence
allows us to permute the graph structure while keeping the edges’
names is sufﬁcient in this case.

It is easy to see that in the graph G, v and u satisfy the proﬁle
P . Let π be the following permutation:

π(x) =

v0
i x = vi
vi x = v0
i
u0
i x = ui
ui x = u0
i
x Otherwise.




The remainder of the proof depends on which additional ax-
iom F satisﬁes:

• If F satisﬁes anonymity, let E0 = {(π(x), y)|(x, y) ∈
E}. Note that in the graph (V, E0) v and u satisfy the
proﬁle h(1, 1, . . . , 1
}

{z
}m
u ⇔ n ≤ m. By anonymity, u (cid:22)F
(V,E 0)
v, thus proving that f (P ) = 1 ⇔ n ≤ m for an arbitrary
comparison proﬁle P , and thus F = AV .

(V,E) v ⇔ u (cid:22)F

)i, and thus v (cid:22)F

), (1, 1, . . . , 1

{z

(V,E 0)

|

|

n

• If F satisﬁes neutrality, let E0 = {(x, π(y))|(x, y) ∈
E}. Note that in the graph (V, E0) v and u satisfy the
proﬁle h(1, 1, . . . , 1
}

{z
}m
u ⇔ n ≤ m. By neutrality, u (cid:22)F
(V,E 0) v,
again showing that f (P ) = 1 ⇔ n ≤ m for an arbitrary
comparison proﬁle P , and thus F = AV .

(V,E) v ⇔ u (cid:22)F

)i, and thus v (cid:22)F

), (1, 1, . . . , 1

{z

(V,E 0)

|

|

n

• If F satisﬁes AIIA, let E0 = {(x, π(y))|(x, y) ∈ E}
as before. So, also v (cid:22)F
(V,E 0) u ⇔ n ≤ m. Note that
PG(v) = P(V,E 0)(v) and PG(u) = P(V,E 0)(u), so by
AIIA, u (cid:22)F
(V,E 0) v, and thus as before,
F = AV .

(V,E) v ⇔ u (cid:22)F

8 Concluding Remarks
Reasoning about preferences and preference aggregation is a
fundamental task in reasoning about multi-agent systems (see
e.g. [Boutilier et al., 2004; Conitzer and Sandholm, 2002;
LaMura and Shoham, 1998]). A typical instance of prefer-
ence aggregation is the setting of ranking systems. Rank-
ing systems are fundamental ingredients of some of the most
famous tools/techniques in the Internet (e.g. Google’s page
rank and eBay’s reputation systems, among many others).

Our aim in this paper was to treat ranking systems from
an axiomatic perspective. The classical theory of social
choice lay the foundations to a large part of the rigorous
work on multi-agent systems. Indeed, the most classical re-
sults in the theory of mechanism design, such as the Gibbard-
Satterthwaite Theorem (see [Mas-Colell et al., 1995]) are ap-
plications of the theory of social choice. Moreover, previous
work in AI has employed the theory of social choice for ob-
taining foundations for reasoning tasks [Doyle and Wellman,
1989] and multi-agent coordination [Kﬁr-Dahav and Tennen-
holtz, 1996]. It is however interesting to note that ranking sys-
tems suggest a novel and new type of theory of social choice.
We see this point as especially attractive, and as a main reason
for concentrating on the study of the axiomatic foundations of
ranking systems.

In this paper we identiﬁed two fundamental axioms for
ranking systems, and conducted a basic axiomatic study of

such systems. In particular, we presented surprising impos-
sibility results, and a representation theorem for the well-
known approval voting scheme.

References
[Altman and Tennenholtz, 2005] Alon Altman and Moshe
Tennenholtz. Ranking systems: The pagerank axioms.
In Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Electronic
commerce (EC-05), 2005.

[Arrow, 1963] K.J. Arrow. Social Choice and Individual Val-

ues (2nd Ed.). Yale University Press, 1963.

[Boutilier et al., 2004] Craig Boutilier, Ronen I. Brafman,
Carmel Domshlak, Holger H. Hoos, and David Poole. Cp-
nets: A tool for representing and reasoning with condi-
tional ceteris paribus preference statements. J. Artif. Intell.
Res. (JAIR), 21:135–191, 2004.

[Conitzer and Sandholm, 2002] V. Conitzer and T. Sand-
holm. Complexity of mechanism design. In Proceedings
of the 18th conference on uncertainity in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (UAI-02), pages 103–110, 2002.

[Doyle and Wellman, 1989] J. Doyle and M.P. Wellman. Im-
pediments to Universal Preference-Based Default Theo-
ries.
In Proceedings of the 1st conference on principles
of knowledge representation and reasoning, 1989.

[Kﬁr-Dahav and Tennenholtz, 1996] Noa E. Kﬁr-Dahav and
Moshe Tennenholtz. Multi-Agent Belief Revision. In Pro-
ceedings of the 6th conference on theoretical aspects of
rationality and knowledge (TARK), 1996.

[LaMura and Shoham, 1998] P. LaMura and Y. Shoham.
Conditional, Hierarchical Multi-Agent Preferences.
In
Proceedings of Theoretical Aspects of Rationality and
Knowledge, pages 215–224, 1998.

[Mas-Colell et al., 1995] A. Mas-Colell, M.D. Whinston,
and J.R. Green. Microeconomic Theory. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1995.

[May, 1952] Kenneth O. May. A set of independent, neces-
sary and sufﬁcient conditions for simple majority decision.
Econometrica, 20(4):680–84, 1952.

[Page et al., 1998] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and
T. Winograd. The pagerank citation ranking: Bringing
order to the web. Technical Report, Stanford University,
1998.

[Resnick and Zeckhauser, 2001] P. Resnick and R. Zeck-
hauser. Trust among strangers in internet transactions:
Empirical analysis of ebay’s reputation system. Work-
ing Paper for the NBER workshop on empirical studies
of electronic commerce, January 2001.

[Resnick et al., 2000] P. Resnick, R. Zeckhauser, R. Fried-
man, and E. Kuwabara. Reputation systems. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 43(12):45–48, 2000.

[Tennenholtz, 2004] M. Tennenholtz. Reputation systems:
An axiomatic approach. In Proceedings of the 20th con-
ference on uncertainity in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI-04),
2004.

