Levels  of  Complexity  in  Discourse 

for  Anaphora  Disambiguation 
and  Speech  Act  Interpretation 

Candace  Bullwinkle 

M.I.T.  Artificial  Intelligence  Lab 

Cambridge, MA.  U.S.A. 

A b s t r a c t:  This  paper  presents  a  discussion  of  means  of 
describing  the  discourse  and  its  components  which  makes 
speech  act  i n t e r p r e t a t i on  and  anaphora  disambiguation 
possible  with  minimal  search  of  the  knowledge  in  the  database. 
A  p o r t i on  of 
representation  of  sentences  and  common  sense  knowledge 
provides  a  mechanism  for  representing 
the  postulated 
discourse  components.  Finally  some  discussion  of  the  use  of 
the  d i s c o u r se  model  and  of 
in  a  d i s c o u r se 
understanding  program  for  a  personal  assistant  will  be 
presented. 

t h is  paper  w i ll  consider  how  a 

f r a m es 

frames 

Introduction 

The  person  who  communicates  with  a  personal  assistant, 
whether  human  or  machine,  wants  to  request  some  action  of 
the  assistant  via  sentences  in  English.  Generally,  a  single 
sentence  is  insufficient  to  capture  all  the  information  that  is  to 
be  given  as  well  as  an  unnatural  way  to  make  a  request. 
However,  as  several  example  dialogues  below  will  show,  the 
human  user  does  not  tightly  relate  the  sentences  s/he  speaks 
about  a  particular  subject. 
It  is  instead  the  job  of  the  hearer 
to  interpret  how  the  incoming  sentence  is  related  to  the 
previous  discourse. 

Each  sentence  or  clause  of  a  discourse  that  makes  some 
demand  upon  the  hearer  must  be  interpreted  for  the  kind  of 
demand  being  made.  These  demands  are  generally  referred  to 
as  speech  acts  {1}.  However,  the  speech  acts  are  not  just 
strings  of  individual  requests.  They  have  a  connecting  pattern 
which  the  hearer  must  extract  as  the  discourse  goes  on.  Thus 
the  hearer's  task  is  two-fold:  to  interpret  the  speech  act  in  a 
clause  and  to  relate  that  speech  act  to  the  overall  discourse. 
In  this  paper  this  two-pronged  task  will  be  referred  to  as 
speech  act  interpretation. 

in 

Closely  associated  with  speech  act  interpretation  is  the 
process  of  understanding  what  the  various  noun  and  pronoun 
phrases  of  the  incoming  sentence  refer  to.  Speakers  denote 
previously  mentioned  objects 
in  a  variety  of  ways  with 
apparent  ambiguity 
the  choice  of  referents.  Objects 
associated  with  some  previously  mentioned  object  (such  as  the 
time  when  a  meeting  has  been  mentioned)  are  not  marked  in 
any  linguistic  manner,  and  the  hearer  must  decide  what  if  any 
connection  exists  between  the  two.  This  process,  which  will 
be  called  anaphora  disambiguation,  determines  the  relation 
between  terms  in  the  current  sentence  and  those  in  previous 
ones. 

The  two  processes  described  above  are  central  features 
of  discourse  interpretation. 
In  this  paper  I  will  discuss  a 
means  of  describing  the  discourse  and  its  components  which 
makes  speech  act  interpretation  and  anaphora  disambiguation 
possible  with  minimal  search  of  the  knowledge  in  the  database. 
I  will  show  how  speech  act  interpretation  plays  a  vital  role  in 
anaphora  disambiguation. 
In  a  portion  of  this  paper,  I  will 
discuss  how  a  frames  representation  of  sentences  and  of 
common  sense  knowledge  provides  a  representation  mechanism 
for  the  postulated  discourse  components.  Finally  some 
discussion  of  the  use  of  the  discourse  model  and  frames 
representation  in  a  discourse  understanding  program  for  a 
personal  assistant  wilt  be  presented. 

The  two  processes  of  speech  act  interpretation  and 
anaphora  disambiguation  require  a  detailed  descriptive 
representation  as  the  structure  of  the  discourses  becomes 
more  complex.  By  looking  at  several  sample  discourses  of 
increasing  complexity,  more  can  be  seen  about  the  kinds  of 
capabilities  which  must  be  included  in  anaphora  disambiguation 
and  speech  act  interpretation.  Figures  1  and  2  present 
various  problems  in  anaphora  disambiguation  and  speech  act 
interpretation  which  will  be  discussed  by  examples.  The 
problems  are  ordered  by 
this 
complexity  will  be  considered  in  the  section  following  the 
figures.  Special  terms  like  topic,  surface  inference,  contractive 
reference  and  stacked  topic  will  be  defined  in  the  course  of 
this  paper. 

increasing  complexity,  and 

Anaphora 

Problem 
-choosing  the  referent  of  a  unique 

proper  name 

-reference  of  definite  noun  phrases  where 

the  noun  phrase  is  previously  used 

-anaphoric  references  of  topic  of  a  request 
-anaphor  of  definite  noun  phrases  to  a 
concept  associated  with  the  topic  by 
surface  inferences 

-anaphora  referring  to  objects  besides  topic 
-reference  of  definite  noun  phrase  described 

in  previous  discourses 

-anaphor  of  definite  noun  phrases  where  the 
discourse  implies  the  concept  to  which  the 
noun  phrase  refers 

-contrastive  references 
-anaphora  referring  to  unmentioned  objects 
-references  to  stacked  topics 
-anaphora  of  definite  noun  phrases  to  a 
concept  associated  with  the  topic  by 
deep  inferences 

Figure  1 

Problem 
-recognition  of  a  speech  act  when  no 

Speech  Acts 

previous  discourse  exists 

-recognition  of  a  speech  act  which  is 

related  to  discourse  by  the  same  topic 

-recognition  of  a  speech  act  which  is 

related  to  discourse  but  which  seems  to 
have  different  topic 

-recognition  of  the  role  of  assertions  and 

questions  to  other  speech  acts 

-recognition  of  multiple  speech  acts  of 

the  same  type  with  different  topics 
-recognition  of  speech  acts  that  have 

different  topics  but  which  are 
related  by  deep  inferencing 

Figure  2 

Some  Discourse  Examples 

In  the  examples  below,  different  aspects  of  the  problem 

N a t u r al 

L a n g u a r g -3 

: 

B u l l w i n k le 

43 

of  determining  both  the  referent  of  definite  noun  phrases  and 
anaphoric  phrases  will  be  presented.  These  examples  will  also 
show  what  Kinds  of  interactions  can  occur  between  different 
speech  acts  and  how  these  interactions  are  reflected  in  the 
references. 

(1)  I  want  to  schedule  a  meeting  with  Ira. 

It  should  be 
tomorrow.  We  can  meet  in  Bruce's 

at  3  p.m. 
office. 

In  (1)  above,  there  are  two  kinds  of  speech  acts.  The 
first  is  a  request  for  some  action  to  be  performed,  i.e. 
scheduling  a  meeting.  The  sentences  that  follow  contain  a 
second  kind  of  speech  act,  an  assertion  about  when  the 
meeting  ought  to  occur.  A  speech  act  has  a  central  concept 
which  the  speech  act  is  about. 
In  this  paper  this  central 
concept  is  called  the  topic;  here  the  topic  is  the  meeting.  A 
basic  problem  of  speech  act  interpretation  is  to  determine 
what  topic  a  particular  speech  act  refers  to.  Once  a  topic  can 
be  chosen  for  a  speech  act,  the  topic  becomes  the  focal  point 
of  reference  resolution.  Topic  choice  is  difficult  because  two 
different  speech  acts  may  be  related  only  by  reference  to  the 
same  topic,  and  yet  the  topic  may  not  be  explicitly  stated  in 
both.  The  references  in  this  example  range  from  easily 
resolvable  ones  like  /  and  a  meeting,  to  simple  anaphora  (it) 
and  to  references  requiring  some  database  search  (Bruce, 
Bruce's  office). 
representation  will  be 
presented  to  permit  reference  and  anaphor  resolution  with  a 
minimum  of, or  no, search. 

Later  a 

frames 

(2)  I  want  to  schedule  a  meeting  with  Prof.  Goldstein. 
The  time  should  be  4  p.m.  on  Thursday.  We  can 
meet  in  his  office. 

In  (2),  the  speech  acts  are  the  same  as  in  (1),  but  an 
object  associated  with  the  meeting,  the  time,  is  not  clearly 
stated  as  referring  to  the  time  of  the  meeting. 
Instead  this  is 
assumed  to  be  determinable  from  the  context  and  the  hearer's 
knowledge  of  meetings.  Also  in  (2),  the  referent  of  his  ought 
to  be  resolvable  with  a  minimum  of  search. 

(3a)  Ira  wants  to  have  a  party  at  his  house. 

It's  going 
to  be  at  8  o'clock  p.m.  Invite  [everyone  at  the 
lab;  Mitch,  Dave,  Candy,  Bruce  and  Beth}  to 
attend. 

(3b)  Ira  wants  to  have  a  party  at  his  house. 

It's  at  25 
Wildwood  St. 
Invite  {everyone  at  the  lab; 
Mitch, Dave, Candy, Bruce  and  Beth}  to  attend. 

In  (3a)  and  (3b),  a  new  speech  act,  invite,  has  been 
introduced.  This  speech  act  makes  a  request,  and  there  is  no 
clear  indication  of  what  the  inviting  has  to  do  w i th  the 
previous  context.  Again  it  is  left  to  the  hearer  to  determine 
from  what  s/he  knows  about  meetings  and  scheduling  a 
meeting  to  decide  what  the  connection  is. 

(3a)  and  (3b)  add  further  complexity  to  the  use  of 
anaphora  disambiguation.  The  It's  in  sentence  2  of  (3a)  and 
(3b)  refers  to  party.  Most  existing  systems  misinterpret  the 
anaphoric  reference  in  (3b)  because  house  occurs  between  the 
pronoun  and  its  referent.  Correct  disambiguation  requires 
some  knowledge  of  what  has  been  talked  about  so  far,  which  is 
the  topic,  and  how  sentence  2  relates  to  this  topic.  Sentence 
3  of  (3a)  and  (3b)  shows  two  alternative  ways  to  tell  who  is  to 
be 
disambiguated  just  as  all  the  previous  examples  of  names  are. 
The  other  uses  a  quantifier  over  a  set.  While  the  current  work 
does  not  claim  a  solution  to  the  quantifier  problem,  it 
is 
introduced  here  to  show  what  complexity  can  be  expressed  in 
the  most  simple  looking  discourses.  Finally,  the  ellipsis  of  what 

i n v i t e d.  One  is  a  s t r i ng  of  names  w h i ch  can  be 

is  being  attended  by  everyone  must  be  resolved  to  determine 
what  relation  the  people  have  to  the  invitation. 

(4a)  I  want  to  get  together  with  Bruce.  Our  meeting 
should  be  before  Friday.  We  can  meet  in  my 
office.  Can  Mitch  attend  also? 

(4b)  I  want  to  get  together  with  Bruce.  Our  meeting 
should  be  before  Friday.  We  can  meet  in  my 
office.  Can  I  also  attend  the  staff  meeting  this 
week? 

Example  (4a)  points  out  two  new  problems.  The  first  3 
sentences,  though  similar  to  those  above,  offer  a  new 
reference  problem.  The  first  sentence  implies  a  meeting  to 
which  the  phrase  our  meeting  in  sentence  2  refers.  By  the 
use  of  topic,  this  relationship  can  be  determined  without 
searching  the  database  of  all  meetings  for  the  referent.  The 
last  sentence  of  (4a)  points  out  another  feature  of  speech  acts. 
It  requests  the  answer  to  a  question  which  is  not  independent 
of  the  context. 
In  general,  questions  may  or  may  not  take  this 
form.  An  acceptable  alternative  discourse  which  does  not  have 
this  form  would  be  one  like  (4b). 

(5)  I  want  to  re-schedule  the  pa-meeting.  Change  it  to 

Thursday. 

In  example  (5)  a  new  speech  act  is  used,  but 

this 
speech  act  is  not  significantly  different  from  the  speech  act  of 
schedule.  This  example  illustrates  the  reference  problem  of 
the  pa-meeting.  While  no  previous  discourse  exists  in  which  to 
find  the  referent  of  this  term,  the  term  may  have  a  unique 
referent  even  when  several  pa-meetings  have  been  scheduled 
(due  to  the  participants,  places  and  times).  This  suggests  that 
previous  discourses  must  be  saved  in  a  form  suitable  for 
providing  necessary  information  to  disambiguate  the  reference. 

(6)  I  want  to  schedule  two  meetings.  One  should  be  on 
Thursday  at  3  with  Ira.  The  other  is  with  Bill  on 
the  14th  at  4.  The  Thursday  one  may  last  quite  a 
while  so  schedule  2  hours  for  it. 

(7)  Next  week  on  Monday,  I  want  to  meet  with  Bruce. 
Please  arrange  it  for  us.  Also  you  scheduled  a 
meeting  on  Monday  at  8  a.m.  That's  too  early. 
Make  it  10  a.m.  at  the  earliest. 

for  showing  contrast  between 

The  next  several  discourses  present  examples  of  speech 
acts  which  have  different 
topics  and  different  discourse 
structure,  and  yet  the  speech  acts  being  requested  are  the 
same.  The  first  of  these,  (6),  has  a  structure  w i th  two 
different  parallel  requests  about  the  same  kind  of  events. 
It 
uses  a  kind  of  contrastive  referencing,  the  one.the  other,  that 
is  often  used 
two  similar 
In  addition  there  is  an  assertion  about  the  first 
notions. 
request  after 
the  second  request.  The 
second  example,  (7),  also  requests  two  separate  scheduling 
events,  but  the  requests  have  a  sequential  form.  These 
discourses  suggest 
to 
the 
s t r u c t u re  speech  act 
request 
to  convey 
completely  but  w i th  minimal  repetition  of 
information. 
Consideration  of  discourse  structure  when  interpreting  these 
requests  assists 
the  structure 
shows  whether  one  or  more  objects  are  being  discussed  within 
the  context. 

that  there  may  be  several  ways 

in  anaphora  disambiguation: 

the  statement  of 

requests 

In  addition  to  the  speech  act  structure,  example  (7) 
points  to  an  interesting  problem.  There  is  no  previous 
referent  for  the  use  of  it  in  sentence  2  of  (7)(2).  This,  as  well 
as  other  examples  not  reproduced  here,  suggest  that  special 
techniques  are  needed  for  finding  anaphoric  referents  that  fail 
to  r e f er  to  some  syntactic  object.  Such  anaphora  are 

generally  understood. 
the 
context  as  a  nominal  similar  to  those  in  (4a)  will  permit  the 
correct  association. 

Inferencing  about  the  topic  of 

(8)  Dave,  Bruce  and  I  are  working  on  a  new  program 
together.  We  need  to  meet  once  a  week  for  a 
month.  Schedule  a  regular  meeting  time  for  us. 

Example  (8)  contains  two  speech  acts,  one  a  fact  about 
some  work  being  done  and  the  other  a  request  for  a  meeting 
time.  The  two  speech  acts  are  related  because  the  first  is  a 
reason  for  the  second.  A  similar  relation  exists  between  the 
clauses  of  sentence  4  of  example  (6).  As  with  (6)  and  (7), 
determination  of  the  possible  structures  of  discourse  aids  in 
the  interpretation  of  the  speech  acts  of  (8). 

(9)  The  PA  group  will  want  to  meet  next  week.  The 
meeting  should  be  on  Wednesday.  The 
last 
meeting,  which  was  at  5,  was  too  late,  so  schedule 
this  one  earlier. 

finder 

for  a  reference 

In  the  last  example  above,  the  phrase  the  last  meeting 
bears  an  important  relation  to  the  phrase  the  meeting. 
In 
last 
the 
order 
meeting  refers  to,  it  is  necessary  to  know  that  a)  the  meetings 
are  related  along  some  linear  dimension  to  which  last  can 
apply,  and  b)  that  the  last  meeting  was  a  meeting  of  the  PA 
group.  This  example  suggests  that  semantic  knowledge  and 
some  pragmatic  assumptions  must  be  available  to  an  anaphora 
disambiguation  program. 

to  determine  what 

Sentence  3  shows  another  difficulty: 

the  focus  of  the 
discourse  shifts  to  the  last  meeting  and  then  back  to  meeting 
via  the  use  of  this  one.  The  use  of  this  and  that  to  point  to 
different  foci  of  a  discourse  appears  to  be  similar  to  the  use 
of 
three 
examples, contains  the  use  of  an  assertion  serving  as  a  reason 
for  some  other  request. 
In  (9),  the  link  between  assertions 
and  requests  is  needed  to  resolve  the  ellipsis  associated  with 
earlier. 

the  one.Jhe  other.  Example  (9),  like 

the  previous 

Components  of  Discourse 

Now  let  us  turn  our  attention  to  describing  components 
of  a  discourse.  Here  I  will  use  the  old  notion  of  topic  {3}  and 
describe  a  computational  model  of  discourse  which  uses  this 
notion. 
I  will  also  describe  the  notion  of  theme,  not  in  the 
sense  of  Kuno  [1975]  or  Halliday  [1967],  but  in  the  sense  of 
the  theme  of  a  paragraph,  discourse  or  story. 

Discourse  organization  centers  around  the  theme  and 
the  topic.  The  theme  of  the  discourse  is  the  speech  act 
request  or  assertion  which  is  being  made  by  the  discourse. 
It 
is  not  necessarily  the  verb  in  a  sentence; 
it  is  the  request  or 
assertion  being  made  using  a  particular  verb.  Discourse 
themes  can  be  difficult  to  identify,  but  generally  in  the  kinds  of 
discourses  discussed  here,  the  leading  sentence  suggests  the 
discourse  theme.  To  illustrate,  note  that  in  example  (1),  the 
theme  is  a  scheduling  request  since  the  discourse  is  taken  to 
It  is  the  use  of  a  want  modality 
be  a  request  for  scheduling. 
together  with  schedule  which  suggests 
theme.  The 
combination  of  the  two  are  necessary,  for  in  example  (10) 
below,  a  variation  of  (1),  the  use  of  schedule  in  the  second 
sentence  suggests  an  assertion,  not  a  request  for  scheduling. 

this 

(10)  I  have  a  meeting  with  Mitch. 

10  a.m. on Monday. 

It  is  scheduled  for 

overall  discourse  speech  act  may  be  recognized. 
In  (1)  as  we 
have  seen,  the  first  speech  act  is  a  scheduling  request.  This 
becomes  the  discourse  theme.  The  second  sentence  has  an 
assertion  as  its  speech  act.  To  relate  the  two  speech  acts  and 
sentences,  one  must  recognize  that  the  assertion  gives 
additional  information  about  the  event  for  which  scheduling  is 
In  general,  any  discourse  theme  can  have 
requested. 
associated  to 
it  certain  speech  acts  such  as  assertions, 
questions  or 
further  requests.  The  speech  acts  can  be 
assumed  to  be  related  because  they  are  about  the  same 
requested  event. 

In  (1) that  event  is  a  meeting. 

Topic 

Every  speech  act  is  assumed  to  be  about  something, 
that  is,  a  speech  act  has  a  central  concept  it  states.  This 
concept  is  the  topic.  A  request  for  scheduling  makes  the 
request  about  a  meeting.  The  assertion  of  information  is  an 
assertion  about  some  object  or  event.  The  topic 
is  not 
necessarily  assumed  to  be  the  neutral  case  of  the  sentence 
case  frame  (or  direct  object  of  the  sentence).  Often  the 
neutral  case  may  contain  the  topic.  However,  this  is  an  artifact 
of  the  kinds  of  sentences  that  are  considered  in  this  article. 
Most  of  them  are  requests  by  a  speaker  for  some  action  to  be 
performed.  Since  the  speaker  as  agent  is  well-identified  (the 
hearer  knows,  in  some  sense,  who  the  speaker  is),  the  neutral 
or  temporal  or  locative  are  candidates  for  the  topic,  the 
neutral  being  preferred  over  the  other  two. 
In  discourses, 
notably  stories,  the  agent  may  contain  the  topic.  However, 
even  in  such  discourses,  the  teller  of  the  tale  may  include 
him/herself  as  agent,  and  then  the  topic  will  be  the  neutral  or 
some  other  non-agent  case. 

When  a  theme  of  discourse  is  chosen,  the  topic  of  its 
related  sentence  becomes  the  discourse  topic.  Once  a  topic  is 
chosen  for  a  discourse,  subsequent  sentences  provide  more 
information  about  the  topic.  They  may  use  any  of  the  case 
frame  slots  associated  with  their  own  sentence  predicates. 
Very  often,  as  in  the  examples  above,  a  reference  to  the  topic 
will  appear  in  the  agent  slot.  This  is  consistent  with  the 
old/new  distinction  [Moore,  1967]  because  a  reference  to  the 
topic,  which  is  old  information  after  one  sentence,  often 
appears  at  the  beginning  of  a  succeeding  sentence. 

Sub-topics 

A  discourse  may  expand  various  aspects  of  a  topic  and 
then  end  the  discussion  of  that  topic.  Alternatively,  it  may 
mention  one  aspect  of  the  topic  and  describe  it  in  detail.  For 
example,  in  a  discourse  about  meetings,  we  may  want  to  spend 
several  sentences  specifying  the  time  for  the  meeting,  why 
that  time  is  best  and  so  on. 

At  the  point  in  the  discourse  where  time  is  being 
discussed  instead  of  the  topic  meeting,  one  would  like  to 
declare  a  change  of  topic  so  that  the  assertions  or  requests  in 
the  subsequent  sentences  will  be  taken  to  be  about  time. 
However,  the  meeting  should  not  be  "forgotten"  entirely 
because  the  discourse  may  eventually  return  to  it. 
In  this 
case,  the  meeting  topic  can  be  said  to  have  a  background  role 
to  the  new  topic  of  time.  To  maintain  both  topics,  one  in  the 
foreground,  and  the  other  in  the  background,  the  topic  of 
meeting  can  be  thought  of  as  being  stacked  so  that  it  can  be 
retrieved  for  later  use  {4}.  This  process  of  switching  from  a 
discourse  topic  to  a  concept  that  is  related  to  the  topic  will  be 
called  sub-topic  shift,  and  the 
is 
referred  to  as  the  stacked  topic. 

topic  which  is  stacked 

Each  sentence  of  a  discourse  has  its  own  speech  act. 
These  must  be  determined  from  sentential  verbs,  so  that  the 

Recognizing  the  occurrence  of  sub-topics  can  be  a 
difficult  task.  One  might  choose  the  following  criterion  for 

N a t u r al 

L a n u a ge 
US 

R u l l w l n k le 

determining  sub-topic  shift:  A  sub-topic  shift  occurs 
whenever  a  sentence  has  as  its  topic  a  concept  which  is  not 
identical  to  the  existing  discourse  topic. 
In  example  (2),  listed 
as  (11)  below,  this  criterion  would  cause  sub-topic  shift  to 
time,  and  then  to  office,  since  these  noun  phrases  are  the 
topics  of  the  individual  sentences. 

(11)  I  want  to  schedule  a  meeting  with  Prof.  Goldstein. 
The  time  should  be  4  p.m.  on  Thursday.  We  can 
meet  in  in  his  office. 

However,  discourse  (11)  is  about  a  meeting,  and  sentences  2 
and  3  provide  additional  information  about  it.  Shifting  the 
disourse  topic  to  time  and  then  to  office  loses  this  connecting 
thread. 

As  the  reader  may  have  seen,  the  problem  of  sub-topic 
shifts  is  that  they  cannot  be  predicted; 
they  are  detectable 
only  after  they  occur.  Consider  the  first  two  sentences  of 
(12a)  below: 

(12a)  I  want  to  schedule  a  meeting  with  George,  Jim, 
Steve  and  Mike.  We  can  meet  in  my  office. 
It's  kind  of  small,  but  the  meeting  won't  last 
very  long  anyway. 

it 

topic  since 

In  this  discourse,  after  sentence  2,  the  discourse  topic  is  still 
meeting.  Sentence  2  has  provided  information  about  one 
aspect  of  the  meeting.  The  first  clause  of  sentence  3  changes 
is  an  assertion  about  my  office.  To 
the 
determine  the  relation  of  the  sentence  to  the  discourse,  and  to 
interpret  the  anaphor  correctly,  one  must  be  aware  that  a 
sub-topic  shift  has  occurred.  The  skeptical  reader  may  begin 
in  order  to  interpret  it's  kind  of 
to  suspect  a  contradiction: 
smell,  one  must  know  a  shift  has  occurred,  but  to  do  the  shift 
one  must  have  interpreted  the  sentence! 

The  solution  to  this  problem  is  to  be  aware  that  a  sub-
topic  shift  is  possible  once  sentence  2  of  (12a)  is  interpreted. 
Office  is  a  potential  object  of  further  discussion  (as  are  any 
concepts  associated 
to  meetings).  However,  sentence  2 
introduces  office  as  a  potential  anaphoric  referent  while  other 
concepts  related  to  meeting do  not  have  this  property. 
In  this 
way,  the  first  clause  of  sentence  3  can  be  interpreted  as 
referring  to  my  office.  Of  course,  the  nature  of  the  assertion 
on  which  it  centers  is  signficant. 
It  must  be  possible  for  an 
assertion  of  smallness  to  be  made  about  my  office  before  a 
referential  connection  can  be  assumed  and  the  sub-topic  shift 
made.  This  implies  the  need  for  semantic  knowledge  about 
what  can  be  predicated  of  objects  in  the  domain.  The 
knowledge  is  fairly  limited,  however,  because  the  decision  is 
strictly  a  yes-no  question  about  a  particular  object,  not  a 
decision  among  competing  objects.  Should  semantic  knowledge 
reject  such  an  association,  as  in  (12b)  below,  the  discourse 
topic  it  immediatedly  available  as  the  referent  of  the  anaphor. 

(12b)  I  want  to  schedule  a  meeting  with  George,  Jim, 
It 

Steve  and  Mike.  We  can  meet  in  my  office. 
won't  take  more  than  20  minutes. 

However,  semantic  marker 

type  checks  are  not 
sufficient  to  conclude  that  the  sentence 
it's  Kind  of  small  is 
•bout  an  office.  The  speech  act  of  asserting  must  also  fit 
within  the  context.  For  (12s),  the  distinction  of  speech  acts 
rests  on  subtle  criteria,  the  use  of  present  tense  with  no 
modality.  Since  meeting  has  been  discussed  only  in  a  modal 
context  in  (12a),  a  non-modal  assertion  about  meeting  would 
be  unacceptable  whereas 
is 
acceptable  for  office.  Were  the  first  part  of  sentence  3  in 
(12a)  it  wilt  be  kind  of  smell,  the  hearer  is  likely  to  associate 

the  non-modal  assertion 

meeting  with  the  anaphor  It. 

Potential  sub-topics  have  a  short  lifetime. 

If  a  potential 

the 

the  sentence 

topic  as 
following  the  one 

the  result  of 
sub-topic  does  not  become 
processing 
the 
in  which 
potential  is  seen,  it  is  dropped  as  a  potential  sub-topic.  Thus 
in  (12b)  by  the  end  of  the  third  sentence,  my  office  is  dropped 
as  a  potential  sub-topic.  Hereafter  if  office  is  discussed,  it 
cannot  be  referred 
introduces  office  as  a  potential  anaphoric  referent. 

it  until  some  sentence 

to  using 

r e(cid:173)

Naturally,  a  sub-topic  must  eventually  be  popped  when 
In  (12a),  the  meeting  is  a  reference  to 
the  topic  shifts  back. 
the  stacked  topic.  Generally  whenever  a  reference  to  the 
stacked  topic  occurs,  the  sub-topic  is  popped,  and  the  stacked 
topic  becomes  the  topic  again. 

Sub-topic  shifting  is  only  one  way  to  delineate  the 
In  some  discourses,  the  topic  is  not 
references  in  a  discourse. 
shifted  to  a  sub-topic. 
In  such  a  discourse,  the  topic  and  a 
second  object,  which  can  be  related  to  the  topic  in  one  of 
several  ways,  are  discussed  in  parallel.  To  distinguish 
between  the  topic  and  the  second  object,  a  different  set  of 
this-that  or  the 
anaphora  are  used,  generally  of  the  class  of 
one...the  other.  The  topic  is  referred  to  as 
this  while 
the 
second  object  as  that.  Similarly  for  the  one.the  other,  as  can 
be  seen  in  example  (6). 

Discourses  for  the  Personal  Assistant 

As  part  of  the  Personal  Assistant  project  at  the  A.I.  lab 
at  M.I.T.,  a  natural  language  understanding  program, called  PAL, 
is  being  developed  to  understand  discourses  such  as  those  in 
examples  (1)  to  (9).  The  remainder  of  this  paper  will  describe 
how  the  notion  of  speech  act,  topic,  theme  and  discourse  are 
used  in  a  frames  representation,  and  how  the  frames  structure 
can  be  used  to  model  sentences  of  the  discourse. 
In  this 
discussion,  the  author  will  assume  the  reader  has  a  knowledge 
of  some  of  the  concepts  of  case  frame  semantics.  A  brief 
discussion  of  how  these  are  currently  implemented  may  be 
found 
[1977].  The  mapping  of  constituent 
phrases  into  case  frames,  and  to  instantiated  frame  format  will 
also  not  be  discussed  here  and  can  be  found  in  Bullwinkle. 
This  article  wilt  instead  concentrate  on  concepts  and  processes 
that  can  be  described  with  frames  and  which  make  anaphora 
disambiguation  and  speech  act  interpretation  possible. 

in  Bullwinkle 

The  notion  of  frames  used  here  refers  to  the  frames 
representation  language  (FRL)  developed  by  Goldstein  and 
Roberts  [1977]. 
In  this  system  a  frame  is  a  generalized 
property  list  where  each  generalized  property  is  called  a  slot. 
The  slot  has  several  properties,  called  keys,  the  most 
important  of  which  is  the  value  (IVALUE)  key.  When  this  key 
is  filled,  attached  procedures  are  run  to  produce  "automatic" 
additional  results.  A  frame  for  a  meeting,  such  as  the  one 
below,  gives  common  sense  information  about  meetings  for  use 
by  various  database  procedures.  Frames  like  this  exist  in  the 
database  before  discourses  are  introduced.  They  act  as 
prototypes  for  constructing  additional  frames.  The  frame  gives 
a-kind-of  (AKO),  default  and  preference  information  about  the 
times,  places,  and  participants  that  are  associated  with  the 
frame  as  well  as  some  details  about  what  to  do  when  a  slot  is 
filled  (sif-added),  what  INSTANCES  of  meeting  exist,  and  the 
default  of  the  semantic  relation  of  POSSESSIVEs. 

(MEETING 

(AKO  (IVALUE  (COMMUNICATION))) 

3  scheduling  has  several  default  options 

(SCHEDULE (SDEFAULT 

(CANCEL) 

N a t u r al 

L a n g u a g e - 3:  R u M w i n k le 

(RESCHEDULE) 
(BEGIN-LATER) 
(END-EARLIER) 
(POSTPONE) 
(ADVANCE) 
(CHANGE-PARTICIPANT))) 

(PARTICIPANT 

(•PREFERENCE  ((EXISTS-CHAIRMAN?))) 
(SIF-ADDED  ((SELECT-CHAIRMAN)))) 

(INSTANCE  (IVALUE  (PA-MEETING))) 

8  the  marker  «>  means  "look  in  the 
R  frame-slot-key  listed  here  for  the 
R information  needed," i.e.  -> is  a 

pointer 

(TIME  (IPREFERENCE 

((->  PA-PROJECT  (MEETING  TIME)  SPREFERENCE)) 
((->  IRA  (MEETING TIME)  SPREFERENCE)) 
((->  RBR  (MEETING TIME)  SPREFERENCE)))) 

(PLACE  (IDEFAULT 

((->  PA-PROJECT  (MEETING  PLACE)  IDEFAULT)) 
((->  IRA  (MEETING  PLACE)  IDEFAULT)) 
((->  RBR (MEETING  PLACE)  IDEFAULT))) 

(•PREFERENCE 

((->  IRA (MEETING PLACE) SPREFERENCE)))) 

(POSSESSIVE  (IDEFAULT  ((PARTICIPANT))))) 

Frames  exist  for  actions  as  well  as  objects.  The  frame 
for  schedule  given  below  contains  information  about  how  it  is 
used  in  discourse  (in  the  synonomy  and  discourse  slots,  which 
are  discussed  later)  as  well  as  some  pragmatic  information 
which  is  discussed  in  Bullwinkle  [1977]. 

(SCHEDULE 

(AKO  (IVALUE  (ACTION))) 
(PRAMATICS 

(•REQUIREMENT  (PRAGMATICS-FOR-SCHEDULE))) 

(SYNONOMY  (IVALUE  (((ASSERT  ACTIVITY))))) 
(DISCOURSE  (IVALUE  (((ASSERT  ACTIVITY)))))) 

The  discourse  topic  as  it  is  used  in  PAL  is  an  extra-
It  is  used  for  finding  referents  that  cross 
Intra-sentential  referencing  is  needed 

sentential  device. 
sentence  boundaries. 
•s  (SI)  and  (S2)  below  show. 

(s1)  He  said  he was going. 
(S2)  John  washed  himself. 

Without 
intra-sentential  referencing,  the  co-referentiality  of 
himself  to  John  and  possible  co-reference  of  the  two  uses  of 
he  in  (SI)  would  be  impossible.  Sentential  referencing  rules 
following  the  work  of  Ross  [1967],  Lasnik  [1976]  and  Keyser  & 
Postal  [1976]  are  used. 

As  defined  previously,  the  theme  is  the  overall  request 
which  is  invoked  in  the  discourse.  Each  theme  is  represented 
as  a 
frame  which  contains  in  the  discourse  slot  some 
information  about  what  kinds  of  speech  acts  can  be  used  to 
extend  the  discourse.  This  information,  which  I  will  call  the 
discourse  description,  allows  the  frame  for  the  theme  to  "see" 
an  additional  sentence  as  making  an  assertion  about  some  slot 
of  the  topic  or  as  introducing  an  additional  request.  A  theme 
can  have  potentially  many  different  kinds  of 
topics,  e.g. 
schedule  as  a  theme  can  have  meetings,  parties,  lectures,  etc. 
as  topics.  The  theme  does  not  keep  a  list  of  all  the  slots  of 
each  one  of  these  on  its  own  frame.  Rather  it  computes  the 
topic  slots  from  the  topic  itself  which  is  also  represented  as  a 
frame.  The  results  of  this  computation  are  expectations  of 
what  the  remaining  sentences  of  the  discourse  are  likely  to 
discuss. 
Inferences  made  about  sentences  using  these 
expectations  are  surface  inferences  since  they  use  the  slot 

structure  of  the  topic  to  make  the  inference. 

The  frames  structure  limits  the  type  and  number  of 
concepts  that  can  be  discussed  for  a  given  topic. 
It  limits  the 
concepts  to  those  that  are  slot-values  for  the  topic  frame. 
Rosenberg  [1977]  call  this  limited  set  the  context  horizon  of 
the  topic.  This  structural  limitation  has  a  useful  effect  since  it 
provides  a  limited  number  of  ways  to  interpret  subsequent 
sentences.  This  limitation  makes  necessary  the  process  of 
sub-topic  shift  so  that  a  sentence  about  one  of  the  slot-values 
(for  example,  size)  of  the  slot-value  (for  example,  place)  of  the 
topic  (for  example,  meeting)  can  be  processed.  Yet  while  the 
context  horizon  limitation  forces  the  additional  mechanism  of 
sub-topic  shift  to  be  used  in  discourse  interpretation,  it  also 
focuses  the  sub-topic  shift  to  a  limited  set  of  concepts,  i.e.  the 
slots  of  the  topic.  Hence,  while  the  context  horizon  limitation 
is  a  limit  on  the  structure  of  frames  and  discourse,  it  is  a 
productive  limitation. 

the 

language  understanding  modules  {5}. 

Since  the  initial  stages  of  this  research  project,  I  have 
used  the  notion  of  context  in  one  way  or  another.  At  first, 
context  was  simply  a  list  of  all  frames  that  were  built  at  any 
one  of 
It  was 
believed  that  this  data  structure  provided  a  list  of  what  could 
and  could  not  be  referenced  by  anaphora  and  definite  noun 
phrases.  However,  further  research  suggests  that  the  topic 
itself  provides  the  structure  for  anaphoric  references,  while 
the  topic  as  a  frame  together  with  expectations  computable 
from  the  theme  and  topic  provide  for  most  definite  references. 
Thus,  the  topic  and  the  theme  serve  as  a  context  mechanism  in 
and  of  themselves.  To  see  why  a  simple  list  of  frames  is 
inadequate  as  a  context, consider  example  (14)  below. 

(14)t  George  wants  me  to  have  a  meeting  with  Sally 
this  Tuesday. 
It  will  be  at  3  p.m.  We  can  meet 
in  my  office.  Before  the  meeting,  Bill  will  ask 
him  to  speak. 

Most  informants  tell  me  that  they  do  not  immediately 
have  a  referent  for  the  phrase  him  in  the  last  sentence,  and 
that  they  have  to  re-read  the  discourse  for  something 
that 
could  be  the  referent. 
If  a  simple  list  of  frames  is  used,  a 
frame  for  George  will  be  on  the  list  of  possible  referents  and 
be  chosen  as  referent  since  Bill  will  be  excluded  due  to  intra-
sentential  reflexivization  rules.  However,  if  a  theme-topic 
model  is  used,  the  topic  is  the  meeting  and  George  does  not 
appear  in  any  of  the  slots  of  meeting,  thereby  making  it 
difficult  to  refer  to  him  with  an  anaphoric  reference. 

Solutions  to  Examples 

Using  the  topic  and  theme  notions,  and  frames  as 
described  above,  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  references  of 
noun  and  pronoun  phrases  in  the  examples  (1)  to  (9)  above,  as 
well  as  interpret  the  speech  acts  of  these  examples. 
In  finding 
referents  a  miminum  of  search  is  done,  and  the  search  is 
directed  by  knowledge  of  what  the  discourse  is  about.  To  see 
how  this  is  done,  examples  (1)  and  (2)  will  be  sketched  in 
detail,  and  then  a  briefer  sketch  of  the  solution  to  some 
problems  in  the  remaining  examples  will  be  given. 

(1)  I  want  to  schedule  a  meeting  with  Ira. 

It  should  be 
tomorrow.  We  can  meet  in  Bruce's 

at  3  p.m. 
office. 

From  case  frame  information  and  parse  tree  information, 
frames  for  words  of  sentence  1  are  created.  Below  are  two  of 
the  several  frames  which  are  built  by  this  process.  The  self 
slot  of  these  frames  carries  most  of  the  parse  information 
about  the  frame  while  the  other  slots  contain  much  of  the 

N a t u r al 

L a n g u a g e *-

3: 

B u l l w i n k le 

frame 

interpreted  case 
information.  The  abbreviation  siv" 
stands  for  linguistic-value  and  contains  a  caseframe  or  parse 
tree  node  for  that  slot.  Details  of  case-frame  interpretation 
may  be  found  in  Bullwinkle  [1977]. 

(FRAME2 

(SELF  (IDETERMINER  (FRAME3)) 

(IHEAD  (MEETING)) 
(INODE ((N0DE6  .  1)))) 

(AKO  (IVALUE  (MEETING))) 
(PARTICIPANT  (IVALUE  (REFERENCED) 
($LV  ((N0DE23  .  1))))) 

(FRAME 1 

(SELF  (ITENSE  (INFINITIVE)) 

(STYPE  (UNFINITIVE-S))) 
(IHEAD  (SCHEDULE)) 
(INODE ((N0DE4  .  1)))) 

(AKO  (IVALUE  (SCHEDULE))) 
(ACTOR  (IVALUE  (REFERENCE5)) 

(ILV ((N0DE25  .  1)))) 
(ACTIVITY  (IVALUE  (FRAME2)) 
(ILV  (CASEFR3)))) 

During  the  case-frame  interpretation  of  sentence  1,  a 
referent  for  Ira  is  chosen  from  the  instances  of  people  vta  a 
program  that  Knows  the  syntax  and  semantics  of  proper 
names.  Following  interpretation  of  sentence  1  of  (1),  the 
theme  is  set  to  the  frame  of  schedule  and  the  topic  to  meeting. 

is 

interpreted 

After  sentence  2 

for  case-frame 
information,  discourse  and  reference  interpretation  is  done.  A 
referent  for  /  is  assumed  to  be  the  speaker  while  the  referent 
of  it  is  chosen  to  be  the  topic  because  the  topic  passes 
gender,  number  and  simple  semantic  agreement  checks. 
In 
general,  the  discourse  topic  is  used  for  determining  anaphoric 
references,  either  because  it  is  the  referent  of  pronouns  like  it 
or  because 
for 
pronouns  like  we,  she,  he  or  they. 

its  slot  structure  contains 

the  referents 

for 

the 

The  discourse  description 

theme  schedule 
accepts  assertions  which  provide  additional  information  about 
the  discourse  topic.  The  second  sentence  is  accepted  as  an 
assertion  about  the  discourse  topic  because  it  contains  a  time 
phrase  which  the  discourse  module  determines  can  be  used  to 
talk  about  meetings  and  because  sentences  with  be  verbs  are 
taken  as  assertions  by  the  SYNONOMY  slot  of  that  verb  as 
shown  in  the  frame  below. 
In  general  the  SYNONOMY  slot  of  a 
verb  contains  the  list  of  speech  acts  which  can  be  associated 
to  a  verb  within  some  discourse  context.  Since  the  list  of 
speech  acts  can  be  greater  than  1,  it  is  the  job  of  the 
discourse  module  to  determine  which  speech  act  can  be  used 
in  the  given  context. 

(BE (AKO  (IVALUE  (ACTION))) 
(WHEN (IREQUIREMENT 

((AKO-REF?  :VALUE  FINTERVAL)))) 

(PLACE  (IREQUIREMENT 

((AKO-REF?  :VALUE  'PLACE)))) 

(SYNONOMY  (IVALUE  (((ASSERT  THING)))))) 

By  the  above  discourse  information,  sentence  2 

is 
judged  to  be  part  of  the  schedule  discourse.  Likewise, 
sentence  3  is  an  assertion  of  information  that  can  be 
associated  with  the  discourse  topic,  and  this  sentence  is  taken 
to  assert  the  place  of  the  discourse  topic.  Sentence  3 
exemplifies  PAL's  ability  to  use  speech  acts  that  do  not 
directly  specify  the  topic  to  which  they  refer. 

The  resolution  of  Brace's  office  in  (1)  occurs  in  two 

found  via 

for  Bruce  is 

first  a  referent 

parts; 
the  name 
program  mentioned  above.  Second,  if  Bruce's  office  is  not 
mentioned  as  a  slot  in  the  frame  for  Bruce,  then  an  office  is 
searched  for  among  the  instances  of  offices  in  the  frames 
database  such  that  this  office  has  Bruce  as  an  occupant  or 
owner.  The  search  is  minimal  because  it  occurs  among  a 
relatively  small  collection  of  likely  objects  rather  than  ail  the 
objects  that  exist  in  the  database. 

(2)  I  want  to  schedule  a  meeting  with  Prof.  Goldstein. 
The  time  should  be  4  p.m.  on  Thursday.  We  can 
meet  in  his  office. 

finds  the  latter 

to  be  the  case 

The  processing  for  example  (2),  sentence  1  proceeds  as 
in  (1),  sentence  1.  In  processing  sentence  2,  the  reference 
finder  expects  the  discourse  topic  either  to  be  the  referent  of 
the  time  or  to  contain  a  slot  to  which  the  time  refers.  The 
reference  finder 
two 
reasons:  1)  time  is  not  the  same  as  meeting,  and  2)  meetings 
can  potentially  have  a  time  slot.  This  use  of  surface 
inferencing  for  definite  noun  phrases  is  possible  because  of 
the  slot  structure  of  frames  and  the  use  of  the  ako  hierarchy 
of  a  frame  to  find  its  potential  form.  Processing  of  sentence  3 
is  similar 
disambiguation  of  his.  The  referent  is  found  by  considering 
instantiated  slots  in  the  topic  frame  which  contain  additional 
information  about  the  topic,  namely,  the  time  and  participant 
slots.  Since  time  slots  fail  a  simple  gender  check,  a  referent  is 
found  among  the  values  listed  on  the  participant  slot. 

the  a n a p h o ra 

to  example 

(1)  except 

for 

for 

From  example  (2)  it  can  be  seen  that  the  semantics  of 
the  reference  finder  are  somewhat  limited. 
Ideally,  a 
reference  finder  should  consider  only  those  slots  of  a  frame 
which  can  be  filled  by  objects  of  the  same  semantic  type  as 
the  pronoun.  This  is  possible,  however,  only  if  there 
is 
knowledge  in  a  frame  about  what  kinds  of  objects  could 
potentially  fill  a  slot  of  the  frame.  This  knowledge  has  not  yet 
been  incorporated  into  the  frames  for  PAL  and  the  reference 
finder. 

(3)  Ira  wants  to  have  a  party  at  his  house. 

It's  at  25 
Wildwood  St. 
Invite  {everyone  at  the  lab; 
Mitch, Dave, Candy, Bruce  and  Beth}  to  attend. 

Example  (3)  shows  the  first  use  of 

intra-sentential 
referencing  for  determining  the  co-reference  between  his  and 
Ira  by  means  of  a  procedure  based  on 
the  precede  and 
kommand  rule  of  Lasnik  [1976].  PAL  chooses  the  party  of 
sentence  1  as  the  referent  of  the  it  in  sentence  2  because 
party  is  the  discourse  topic.  The  house  as  a  referent 
is 
entirely  overlooked  because  it  plays  no  part  as  the  topic  and 
because  it  is  not  a  potential  topic. 

To  understand  the  last  sentence  of  (3),  PAL  is  currently 
being  programmed  to  understand  requests  within  a  schedule 
request.  This  will  permit  PAL  to 
for 
invitations  as  well  as  re-statements  of  the  initial  discourse 
request,  which  often  occur  in  short  discourses.  Using  the 
discourse  description  in  this  way,  PAL  will  be  able  to  conclude 
that  the  invitation  request  is  a  request  for  the  guests  to 
attend  the  event  denoted  by  the  topic.  This  same  method, 
when  applied  to  questions,  will  create  the  link  between  the 
scheduling  discourse  and  the  question  in  example  (4a). 

interpret  requests 

Example  (5)  requires  the  addition  of  other  speech  act 
requests  to  PAL,  using  frames  and  discourse  descriptions  in 
the  same  manner  as  a  scheduling  request. 
It  also  requires,  as 
was  pointed  out  earlier  in  this  paper,  that  previous  discourse 
be  saved  in  some  organized  fashion.  This  requirement  is 
currently  handled  in  the  following  way.  Any  topic  instantiated 

N a t u r al  Lnnpuae;e-3  :  R u ll  w i n k le 

U8 

examples  are  insightful  and  convinced  me  that  the  notion  ought 
to  be  explicit  in  my  work. 
I  have  not  retained  his  term  for  the 
notion,  as  topic  is  more  in  line  with  older  notions  of  topic  (such 
as  that  of  Moore  [1967]). 

{4}  Deutsch  [1975]  first  showed  that  this  sort  of  phenomena 
occurrred  in  discourse. 

(5}  The  modules  include  building  frames  from  case  frames, 
resolving 
intra-sentential  reference  and  pragmatics.  See 
Bullwinkle  [1977]. 

{6}  Pragmatic  rules  used  in  PAL  are  rules  of  common  sense 
knowledge.  They  include  rules  such  as  "the  speaker  who 
requests  a  meeting  to  be  scheduled 
to  be  a 
participant."  Pragmatic  rules  are  discussed  in  Bullwinkle 
[1977} 

likely 

is 

References 

Bullwinkle,  C.  [1977]  The  Semantic  Component  of  PAL: 

the 
Personal  Assistant  Language  Understanding  Program,  MIT 
AI  Laboratory  Working  Paper,  March. 

Charniak,  F. 

[1972]  Toward  a  Model  Of  Children's  Story 

Comprehension,  M.I.T.  A.I.  Lab  TR-266. 

Deutsch,  B. 

[1975]  Establishing  Context 

In  Task-Onented 
Dialogues,  Proceedings  of  the  13  Annual  Meeting  of  ACL, 
A XL  Microfiche  35. 

Goldstein,  I.  P.  and  R.  B.  Roberts. 

[ 1 9 7 7]  NUDGE,  A 

Knowledge-based  Scheduling  Program,  M.I.T.  A.I.  Lab  memo 
405. 

Halliday,  M.A.K.  [1967]  Notes  on  Transitivity  and  Theme,  Part  2, 

Lasnik,  Howard. 

[1976]  Remarks  on  Co-reference,  Linguistic 

Journal  of  Linguistics, Vol.  3. 

Analysis, Volume  2, Number  1. 

Keyser,  S J.  and  P.  M.  Postal. 

[ 1 9 7 6]  Beginning  English 

Grammar,  Harper  and  Row,  New  York. 

[1975]  Three  Perspectives  in  the  Functional 
Kuno,  Susumo. 
from 
to  Syntax,"  Papers 
the  Parasession  on 
Approach 
Functionalism,  Grossman  et  al. 
(eds.),  Chicago  Linguistics 
Society. 

Moore,  T. 

[1967]  The  topic-comment  function:  a  performance 
constraint  on  a  competence  model.  University  of  California 
at  Los  Angeles  dissertation. 

Rosenberg,  S.  [1976]  Discourse  Structure,  Working  paper  130, 

Rosenberg,  S.  [1977]  Frames-based  Text  ProcessingMA.J.  A.I. 

M.I.T.  lab. 

lab  memo. 

Ross,  J.R. 

[ 1 9 6 7]  Constraints  on  Variables 

in  Syntax, 
unpublished  MIT  doctoral  dissertation,  Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 

Searle,  J.R.  [1969]  Speech  Acts  An  Essay  in  the  Philosophy  of 

Language,  Cambridge  University  Press. 

by  a  discourse  is  an  instance  of  the  prototype  frame  of  which 
it  is  a  Kind.  Thus  a  pa-meeting  frame  was  generated  in  the 
discourse  which  occurred  sometime  before  discourse  (5).  That 
pa-meeting,  call  it  pa-meeting35,  is  an  instance  of  the  general 
pa-meeting  frame.  When  a  referent  is  sought  for  the  pa-
meeting  in  (5),  because  there  is  no  previous  discourse,  the 
database  pa-meetings  (which 
includes  pa-meeting35)  are 
searched.  By  use  of  pragmatic  rules  {6},  which  associate  the 
speaker  with  a  meeting  as  a  participant,  the  possible  matches 
for  the  pa-meeting  in  (5)  are  small  and  pa-meeting35  can  be 
selected.  One  experimental  hypothesis  not  fully  tested  is  that 
for  any  definite  noun  phrase  in  discourse  which  presupposes 
•n  existing  object,  the  database  will  have  a  frame,  like  pa-
meeting  35,  which  uniquely  matches  that  noun  phrase. 

Further  Work 

From  these  examples  and  the  description  of  reference 
finding  with  sub-topics,  what  remains  to  be  done  for  PAL  to 
understand  examples  (6)  through  (9)  can  be  clearly  stated.  A 
notion  of  parallel  topics  must  be  included  in  the 
topic 
recognition  and  the  use  of  assertions  as  reasons  must  be 
incorporated 
the 
complexities  in  these  examples. 

to  discourse  descriptions 

to  deal  with 

The  discourses  which  have  been  presented  are  a  step 
along  the  way  to  understanding  the  complexities  of  reference 
and  speech  acts  that  occur  in  stories  like  the  one  below  from 
Rosenberg  [1976} 

(15)  John  murdered  his  wife.  The  day  before,  a  load 

of  rat  poison  was  delivered  to  the  house. 

that  appear  unconnected  at 

It  appears  that  story  telling,  which  is  largely  assertional  and 
contains  sentences 
the  surface 
level,  consists  of  many  deep  inferences  that  tie  the  assertional 
forms  together.  To  understand  "simple"  stories,  where  one 
must  be  able  to  infer  that  poison  can  be  a  weapon,  that  John 
had  to  have  a  weapon  to  commit  the  murder,  and  so  on,  the 
complexities  described  in  this  paper  must  first  be  resolved. 
PAL's  approach  to  understanding  the  example  discourses 
indicates  how  the  first  step  in  the  levels  of  complexity  for 
anaphora  disambiguation  and  speech  act  interpretation  can  be 
reached. 

Acknowledgements 

I  want  to  thank  Gretchen  Brown,  Ira  Goldstein,  Beth 
Levin  and  Steve  Rosenberg  and  the  I X AI  referees  for  their 
constructive  comments  on  various  revisions  of  this  paper. 

This  report  describes  research  done  at  the  Artificial 
Intelligence  Laboratory  of  the  Massachusetts 
Institute  of 
Technology.  Support  for  the  laboratory's  artificial  intelligence 
research 
the  Advanced  Research 
Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  Defense  under  Office  of 
Naval  Research  under  Contract  Number  N00014-75-C-O643. 

is  provided  in  part  by 

Notes 

{1}  The  term  speech  act  here  harks  back  to  the  classic  work  of 
Searle  [1969] on  the  definition  and  use  of  speech  acts. 

{2}  The  referent  of  it  cannot  be  the  sentence  verb  phrase 
because  the  verb  phrase  is  want  to  meet  and  this  cannot  be 
arranged. 

{3}  I  mean  here  by  topic  a  notion  similar  to  the  notion  of 
theme  of  Kuno  [1975]: 
theme  is  what  the  rest  of  the  sentence 
it  about.  While  Kuno's  definition  is  somewhat  vague,  his 

N a t u r al  L a n g u a r e -3 

:  B u l l w i n k le 

