ON  SEMANTIC  NETS,  FRAMES  AND  ASSOCIATIONS 

P h i l ip  J.  Hayes 

Department  of  Computer  Science 

The  University  of  Rochester 
Rochester,  NY  14627,  U.S.A. 

Abstract 

language  system  f or  f i n d i ng  the  correct 

A  knowledge  representation  system  is  present(cid:173)
ed,  based  on  the  use  of  a  semantic  net  on  which  a 
higher  level  structure  of  frames  has  been  super-
imposed.  The  system  was  designed  for  use  with  a 
natural 
senses  of  ambiguous  words 
t i on  of  several 
representation  system 
searches  of  context 
senses  of  ambiguous  words,  and  how  the  results  of 
such  searches  can  often  provide  d e f i n i te  r e f e r(cid:173)
ents.  The  system  also  embodies  novel  approaches 
to  the  representation  of  m u l t i p le  subparts,  and 
of  s i m i l a r,  but  d i f f e r e n t,  e n t i t i e s. 

in  context.  An  examina(cid:173)
l i n g u i s t ic  examples  shows  how  the 

f or  p o t e n t i a l ly  appropriate 

f a c i l i t a t es  associative 

I 

Introduction 

Recently, 
[ 2 ],  and  [ 4 ]) 

there  have  been  several  attempts 

to  make  semantic  nets  more 

these  projects  have  depended  on  use  of  frame-
i s, 
introduced  a 
is  on  a  higher  level 

( [ 1 ], 
useful  as  a  method  of  knowledge  representation. 
A ll 
l i ke  structures  ( [ 5 ] ); 
that 
u n it  of  representation  that 
than  the  nodes  and  l i n ks  of  more  t r a d i t i o n al 
semantic  nets 
[ 7 ] ), 
the  information  contained 
several  nodes  and  l i n k s. 

in 
in  a  c o l l e c t i on  of 

it  stands 

( [ 6 ], 

they 

that 

for 

is 

in  the  others 

These  frame-like  structures  allow  a  notion  of 
In  any 

relevance  or  viewpoint  to  be  implemented. 
given  use  of  the  semantic  net,  only  some  of  the 
frames  are  deemed  a c t i v e,  and  the  information  con(cid:173)
tained 
ignored; 
information  apparently  contained 
be  made  dependent  on  the  point  of  view  of  the  pro(cid:173)
cess  accessing  the  net.  As  the  several  reports 
mentioned  above  show,  t h is  basic  technique  can  be 
used  very  e f f e c t i v e ly  to  a  number  of  d i f f e r e nt 
purposes, 
f i c a t i o n,  of  variable 
d i c t o ry  hypotheses,  and  of  d i f f e r e nt  aspects  of 
the  same  object. 

including  the  representation  of  quanti(cid:173)
levels  of  d e t a i l,  of  contra(cid:173)

in  t h is  way, 
in  the  net  can 

the 

This  paper  describes 

the  application  of  the 
technique  to  a  more  specialised  problem,  that  of 
word-sense  disambiguation  by  association.  By  an 
a s s o c i a t i o n, 
a t ic  r e l a t i on  between  two  concepts; 
i n: 

I  w i ll  mean  some  d e f i n i te  and  system(cid:173)

for  example, 

When  Fred  a r r i v e d,  his  arm  was  covered  in 
bandages. 
The  woman  went  to  the  clock,  and  looked  at  the 
face. 
The  gambler  looked  at  his  hand. 

the  appropriate  senses  of  "arm",  " f a c e ",  and 
"hand",  respectively  have  associations  with  the 
appropriate  senses  of  "man",  " c l o c k ",  and  "gamb(cid:173)
l e r ".  Superimposing  a  frame-like  structure  on 
top  of  a 
search  steps 
in  a d d i t i o n,  defining  several  d i f(cid:173)
to  be  reduced; 
ferent  classes  of  relationships  between 
frames, 
and  making  the  search  sensitive  to  them,  allows 
the  search  to  be  controlled  very  t i g h t l y. 

large  semantic  net  allows  the  number  of 

f i n d i ng  such  associations 

involved 

in 

These  associative  techniques  have  been  imple(cid:173)

the  .senses  of  ambiguous  words 

mented  in  CSAW,  a  working  computer  system  for 
choosing 
in  context. 
The  associations  they  provide  are  used  to  f i nd  the 
appropriate  senses  and  referents 
f or  ambiguous 
words  in  examples  l i ke  those  above.  Of  course, 
association,  by  i t s e l f,  cannot  resolve  a ll  ambi(cid:173)
guous  words,  and  CSAW,  described  in  d e t a il 
incorporates  a  number  of  other  disambiguating 
techniques.  What  follows  w i l l,  however,  deal  only 
with  association. 

in  [ 3 ], 

In  p a r t i c u l a r, 

representational  point  of 

in  the  data  base  of  CSAW  are  i n t e r e s t i ng 

the  subset-superset  relation 
the  representation 

Besides  allowing  associative  searches  to  be 
t i g h t ly  c o n t r o l l e d,  some  of  the  r e l a t i o ns  between 
frames 
from  a  more  general 
view. 
allows  s i g n i f i c a nt  economies 
of  s i m i l a r,  but  d i f f e r e n t,  objects;  while 
ideas 
part-whole  r e l a t i on 
on  the  representation  of  m u l t i p le  subparts.  These 
two  relationships  are  of  fundamental 
importance 
in  the  knowledge  representation  system  of  CSAW, 
providing  a  basic  framework  f or  the  data  base 
through  the  classes  of  orthogonal  hierarchies  that 
they  generate. 

incorporates  some  novel 

the 

in 

II  Depictions  and  Binders 

Rather  than  use  the  word  "frame", 

I  have 

f u r t h e r,  and 

the  higher  level  units 

in  my  repre(cid:173)
This  both  avoids  t i r i ng  an 
is  more 

chosen  to  c a ll 
sentation  depictions. 
already  overworked  word  s t i ll 
suggestive  of  the  r o le  such  e n t i t i es  play.  A 
depiction 
l i n k s, 
which  forms  a  subnet  of  a  large  semantic  net.  One 
i d e n t i f i ed  as  the 
of  the  nodes 
is 
depictee;  depictions  describe 
in 
t h e ir  depictee 
terms  of  t h e ir  other  nodes,  which  are  known  as 
depicters. 

is  a  c o l l e c t i on  of  nodes  and 

in  a  depiction 

As  an  example,  consider  the  very  simple  phy(cid:173)

sical  depiction  of  a  human  shown 
The  s o l id  node  N-HUMAN  is  the  depictee,  while  the 
hollow  nodes  are  the  depicters. 
D-HUMAN,  consists  of  a ll 
large  closed  dashed  l i n e,  plus  a ll 

the  nodes  w i t h in  the 

The  d e p i c t i o n, 

in  Figure 

the  l i n ks 

i. 

N a t u r al 

Language-5 

99 

Hayes 

between  those  nodes,  plus  both  the  links  leading 
out  of  the  enclosed  area.  The  two  nodes  outside 
the  dashed  line  are  not  in  the  depiction,  even 
though  they  are  part  of  the  description  of  the 
depictee. 

once,  this  method  of  property  inheritance  allows 
us  to  keep  track  of  which  instance  nodes  are  re(cid:173)
lated  to  each  other;  for  instance,  if  we  wished 
to  create  instance  nodes  for  Bill  and  B i l l 's  arm, 
we  would  create  a  new  binder  of  D-HUMAN,  and  use 
it  to  link  the  new  instance  nodes  to  their  generic 
nodes;  this  ensures  that  B i l l 's  arm  will  be  PARTOF 
B i l l,  but  not  PARTOF  Fred. 

This  last  observation  is  an  important  point 

because  of  the  quantification  implied  by  depic(cid:173)
tions.  All  nodes  in  D-HUMAN  are  generic  nodes  in 
the  sense  that  they  represent  archetypal  bodies, 
legs,  torsos,  etc.  However,  they  cannot  all  be 
universally  quantified,  otherwise  the  representa(cid:173)
tion  would  say,  e.g.,  that  all  arms  were  connected 
to  all  bodies. 
versally  quantified,  and  all  the  depicters  are 
existentially  quantified  within  the  scope  of  that 
universal  quantifier. 

Instead  only  the  depictee  is  uni(cid:173)

While  depictions  are  generic,  they  can  be 

instantiated  to  produce  descriptions  of  particular 
objects.  Depictions  are  always  instantiated  as  a 
whole  by  a  binder.  A  binder  is  a  data  structure 
containing,  among  other  things,  the  name  of  the 
depiction  it  instantiates,  and  a  l i st  of  corre(cid:173)
spondences  between  generic  nodes  in  that  depiction 
a nd  instance  nodes. 
Instance  nodes  represent  spe(cid:173)
c i f ic  rather  than  generic  objects,  and  as  their 
name  implies,  these  specific  objects  are  instances 
of  the  generic  objects  with  which  they  are  paired 
by  their  binder.  Figure  ii  shows  an  instantiation 
of  D-HUMAN.  The  binder,  D-HUMAM1,  is  diagrammed 
by  the  square  box,  and  the  double-lined  arrow  from 
it  to  D-HUMAN  shows  that  it  is  a  binder  of  D-HUMAN. 
Fred,  Fred's  torso,  and  Fred's  arm,  are  all  in(cid:173)
stance  nodes  which  are  paired  in  D-HUMAN#1  with 
the  generic  nodes  in  D-HUMAN  to  which  they  are 
connected.  The  line  intersecting  these  connexions 
in  dots  and  pointing  at  D-HUMAN#1  indicates  the 
presence  of  these  pairings  in  D-HUMAN#1. 

Instance  nodes  inherit  properties  from  their 

In  particular,  they  inherit  the 

generic  nodes. 
relations  of  their  generic  nodes  with  other  nodes. 
Of  course,  the  inherited  relations  are  not  with 
other  generic  nodes,  but  are  rather  with  the  ap(cid:173)
propriate  instance  node.  Thus  in  Figure  i i,  Fred's 
arm  inherits  from  D-HUMAN  the  relation  not  of 
being  PARTOF  the  generic  body,  but  of  being  PARTOF 
Fred. 

If  a  depiction  is  instantiated  more  than 

Figure  ii 

An  instantiation  of  the  depiction 
for  a  human 

While  binders  instantiate  depictions  as  a 

whole,  it  is  not  necessary,  in  any  given  binder, 
to  provide  instance  nodes  for  every  depicter;  in 
particular,  not  all  the  nodes 
in  D-HUMAN  are  in(cid:173)
stantiated  by  D-HUMAN#1. 
I f,  however,  an  instan(cid:173)
tiation  of  N-HEAD  were  added  to  D-HUMAM1,  it 
would  represent  Fred's  head,  and  both  Fred  and 
Fred's  torso  would  inherit  relations  with  i t. 

At  this  point,  we  can  examine  a  f i r st  simple 

example  of  how  depictions  can  help  in  finding 
disambiguating  associations.  Consider: 

(1)  Fred  walked  into  the  room;  his  arm  was 

covered  in  bandages. 

"Arm"  is  a  word  with  many  senses,  but  in  this 
example  it  means  a  human  arm,  and  furthermore 
Fred's  arm. 
In  the  course  of  constructing  a  re(cid:173)
presentation  for  the  f i r st  sentence,  CSAW  would 
produce  a  binder  of  D-HUMAN  to  represent  Fred; 
the  correct  representation  for  "his  arm"  is  an 
instance  node  connected  to  N-ARM  by  the  same 
binder.  CSAW  selects  this  instance  node  by  using 
the  fact  that  a  node  representing  one  sense  of 
"arm"  is  in  a  depiction  that  has  just  been  in(cid:173)
stantiated.  A  more  general  rule  i s: 

(2)  A  node  is  associated  with  a  depiction,  if 

the  node  is  in  the  depiction. 

Natural  Language-5:  Hayes 

100 

In  the simple  example  given  here,  not  much 

the  piece  of  information  we  were  trying  to  ab(cid:173)
stract. 
information  is  duplicated;  in  a  more  realistic 
example,  there  might  be  much  more.  Thus,  besides 
a  leg  being  PARTOF  an  animal,  it  is  also  used  by 
the  animal  for  locomotion. 
It  would  certainly  be 
undesirable  to  store  all  this  information  as  many 
times  as  there  were  subclasses of  animal. We  need  a 
method  of  making  the  specialised  leg  nodes  inherit 
all  the  relations  postulated  of  the  more  general 
leg  nodes.  This  difficulty  is  part  of  what  Fahlman 
[2]  has  called  the  symbol-mapping  problem. 

One  straightforward  approach  is  to  adopt 

the  idea  of  binders.  This  requires  that  information 
about  legs  of  animals  be  contained  in  an  animal  de(cid:173)
piction,  D-CREATURE, and  that  the  depictions  of  the 
various  animal  subclasses  contain  binders  of 
D-CREATURE  as  shown  in  Figure  iv.  The  notation  is 
essentially  the  same  as  before;  note  that  the  two 
binders  of  D-CREATURE  are  respectively  inside 
D-HUMAN  and  D-DOG.  To  indicate  the  different  role 
played  by  binders  of  this  type,  I  will  call  them 
internal  binders.  Note  also  that  there  is  no 
PARTOF  relation  between  N-HUMAN  and  N-HUMAN-LEG. 
This  relationship  and  all  others  between  N-CREATURE 
and  N-LEG  are  inherited  through  precisely  the  same 
mechanism  as  used  for  instance  nodes. 

D-CREATURE 

Since  a  context  is  defined  in  CSAW  by  a  set  of 
bound  depictions,  and  since  word-senses  are  repre(cid:173)
sented  by  nodes,  this  rule  also  defines  associa(cid:173)
tions  between  word-senses  and  context.  Rule  (2) 
is  only  a  f i r st  attempt  at  a  definition  of  asso(cid:173)
ciation,  and  will  be  much  expanded  below. 

If  the  association  of  a  node  with  a  depiction 

is  used  to  disambiguate  an  ambiguous  word,  then 
it  i s,  of  course,  necessary  to  instantiate  the 
node  in  a  way  that  involves  the  binder  which 
caused  the  depiction  to  be  in  the  context.  In  the 
case  of  Rule  (2),  the  involvement  is  straightfor(cid:173)
ward;  the  node  is  simply  instantiated  in  the  same 
binder;  this  clearly  provides  the  correct  referent 
for  "his  arm"  in  Example  (1).  The  expansion  of 
Rule  (2)  will  also  involve  an  expansion  of  the 
corresponding  instantiation  procedure. 

As  mentioned  above,  association  cannot  always 

provide  a  unique  referent,  or  even  the  correct 
sense;  this  point  is  illustrated  by: 

When  I  handed  the  hammer  to  the  man,  the  (my, 
his)  head  f e ll  off. 

Nevertheless,  Rule  (2)  and  its  elaborations,  des(cid:173)
cribed  below,  have  proved  extremely  useful  when 
used  in  combination  with  CSAW's  other  disambigu(cid:173)
ating  techniques,  as  described  in  [3]. 

I ll  Generalizer  Structure 

One  of  the  major  advantages  of  semantic  nets 

as  a  knowledge  representation  system  is  their 
a b i l i ty  to  use  hierarchies  of  ISA  links  to  avoid 
duplication  of  information. 
If  a  particular  fact 
is  true  of  all 
the  subsets  of  some  particular  set, 
then  it  need  not  be  stored  with  each  subset,  but 
only  with  the  superset.  Thus  Figure  i ii  shows  how 
the  fact  that  horses,  birds,  humans,  and  dogs, 
all  have  legs  can  be  represented  by  attaching 
that  piece  of  information  to  the  node  for  animal. 

Figure  i ii 

A  primitive  property  inheritance 
hierarchy 

Problems  arise,  however,  when  the  shared  in(cid:173)

formation  has  to  be  modified  in  some  way.  Suppose 
we  want  to  represent  how  many  legs  each  type  of 
animal  has.  The  obvious  answer  is  to  make  a  new 
node  for  the  legs  of  each  type  of  animal.  An  ISA 
link  from  each  of  these  new  nodes  to  the  original 
leg  node  could  indicate  that  they  represent  legs, 
but  this  is  not  enough;  there  must  also  be  some  way 
of  telling  which  specialized  leg  node  is  associa(cid:173)
ted  with  each  animal  subset.  The  obvious  solution 
is  a  PARTOf-  link  between  the  appropriate  nodes, 
but  in  doing  this  we  have  duplicated  precisely 

Figure  iv 

A  property  inheritance  hierarchy  of 
depictions 

Common  information  can  be  shared  between  the 

depictions  of  several  different,  but  similar,  ob(cid:173)
jects  in  a  much  more  efficient  way:  by  using  de(cid:173)
pictions  as  viewpoints.  By  making  the  links  appar(cid:173)
ently  attached  to  a  node  dependent  on  which  depic(cid:173)
tion  the  node  is  viewed  from,  it  is  possible  to  use 
the  same  node  to  represent  several  different  enti(cid:173)
ties.  Thus  it  is  possible  to  use  one  fixed  node 
to  represent  a  human,  a  dog,  or  any  other  animal, 
and  one  other  node  to  represent  the  leg  of  a  human, 
or  of  a  dog,  or  of  any  other  creature. 

This  multiple  use  of  nodes  is  implemented  in 
CSAW  in  terms  of  a  generalizer  hierarchy  of  depic(cid:173)
tions.  A  generalizer  hierarchy  is  a  tree  of  de-

Natural  Lan*uape-5:  Hayes 

101 

pictions  in  which  the  parent  depictions  are  said 
to  be  generalizes  of  their  children.  When  one 
depiction  is  a  generalizer  of  another,  the  off(cid:173)
spring  depiction  automatically  inherits  all 
the 
links  and  nodes  of  the  parent  depiction. 
If  any 
links  or  nodes are  inappropriate  for  the  offspring 
depiction,  they  can  and  must  be  specifically  ex(cid:173)
cluded. 
In  addition,  the  offspring  depiction  can 
have  extra  nodes  and  links  of  its  own,  which  are 
invisible  from  the  parent  depiction,  even  if  they 
are  links  which  involve  nodes  present  in  the  par(cid:173)
ent  depiction.  The  mechanism  is  thus  similar  to 
the  one  popularised  by  CONNIVER  [ 8 ];  the  differ(cid:173)
ence  lies  in  its  intended  purpose:  in  CONNIVER  the 
trees  of  data  environments  were  meant  to  represent 
alternative  interpretations  of  some  situation;  in 
this  system,  depictions  in  a  generalizer  tree  des(cid:173)
cribe  related  but  different  objects.  Depictions 
on  the  same  branch  of  a  tree  will  generally  be 
more  or  less  specific  descriptions  of  objects  that 
could  be  the  same  (animals  and  dogs):  the  nearer 
the  root  of  the  tree,  the  less  specific  the  entity; 
while  depictions  on  different  branches  of  the  tree 
describe  entities  which  are  different,  and  could 
not  be  the  same,  but  are  more  or  less  related 
(humans  and  dogs). 

Figure  v 

A  generalizer  hierarchy  of  depictions 

To  make  this  refinement  clearer,  let  us  con(cid:173)

sider  how  Figure  iv  would  be  transformed  by  it  into 
Figure  v.  The  crossed  lines  in  Figure  v  indicate 
that  D-CREATURE  is  a  generalizer  of  D-HUMAN  and 
D-DOG.  Note  that  the  PARTOF  link  in  D-CREATURE  is 
not  written  down  again  in  D-HUMAN  or  D-DOG,  since 
it  is  automatically  inherited;  this  is  also  the 
case  with  N-CREATURE.  N-LEG  is  also  automatically 
inherited,  but  it  is  written  down  again  in  both 
D-HUMAN  and  D-DOG  since  it  is  involved  in  new 
links  in  both  depictions.  Note,  however, 
N-LEG  in  D-HUMAN  and  D-DOG  is  the  self-same  node 
as  in  D-CREATURE;  it  appears  three  times  in  Fig(cid:173)
ure  v  only  because  of  typographical  considerations. 
The  one  point  that  Figure  v  fails  to  indicate  is 
that  the  NUMBER  link  in  D-CREATURE  is  not  present 
in  D-HUMAN  or  D-DOG  because  there  is  a  specific 

that 

directive  to  that  effect  associated  with  both  de(cid:173)
pictions. 

In  the  sense  that  there  is  an  obvious  trans(cid:173)

lation  of  representations  of  ISA  relations  between 
depictions  using  the  single-role  node  technique 
as  exemplified  by  Figure  iv  and  those  using  the 
multi-role  node  technique  as  exemplified  by  Figure 
v,  the  two  approaches  are  equivalent.  What  then 
is  the  point  in  introducing  the  extra  complexity 
of  the  latter  approach?  There  are  three  reasons, 
given  below  in  order  of  increasing  importance. 
First,  less  space  is  used,  since  the  number  of 
nodes  needed  is  considerably  reduced,  and  there 
is  no  need  to  store  pairings  between  nodes  as  in 
the  single-role  approach.  Secondly,  search  time 
is  reduced  when  trying  to  decide  whether  two  nodes 
are  connected  by  a  given  relation  in  a  given  de(cid:173)
piction. 
In  the  former  approach,  besides  looking 
in  the  depiction  specified,  it  is  necessary  to 
make  the  enquiry  recursively  by  translating  it 
into  an  enquiry  about  the  depiction  which  is  bound 
in  the  lower  depiction,  changing  the  nodes  enquired 
about  according  to  the  node  pairings  of  the  bind(cid:173)
er. 
necessary;  it  is  enough  to  make  the  same  enquiry 
in  successively  senior  depictions  of  the  general(cid:173)
izer  hierarchy. 

In  the  latter  approach  no  translation  is 

The  third  advantage  does  not  concern  general 

efficiency,  but  instead  is  specific  to  natural 
language  applications  and,  in  particular,  the  re(cid:173)
presentation  of  word  senses. 
technique,  the  sense  of  "leg"  as  leg  of  an  animal 
corresponds  to  exactly  one  node,  whereas  in  the 
single-role  approach,  it  corresponds  to  many 
nodes:  one  for  each  type  of  animal  represented. 
Consider  the  effect  of  this  on  the  processing  of: 

In  the  multi-role 

The  dog  was  lying  in  the  grass;  one  leg  was 
bent  in  an  odd  direction. 

According  to  Rule  (2),  the  way  to  find  possible 
referents  for  "one  leg"  in  the  second  clause  is 
to  look  in  recently  instantiated  depictions  for  a 
generic  node  which  can  represent  that  sense. 
If 
we  use  the  single-role  approach,  we  have  two  op(cid:173)
tions.  First,  we  could  store  under  the  dictionary 
entry  for  "leg"  all  the  leg  nodes  in  all  the  de(cid:173)
pictions  of  animals,  and  then,  when  a  referent 
was  sought  in  this  way,  compare  all  these  nodes 
with  nodes  in  recently  instantiated  frames.  This 
would  certainly  find  the  right  answer,  but  the 
number  of  comparisons  that  would  have  to  be  made 
seems  absurdly  large.  Alternatively,  we  could 
store  in  the  dictionary  entry  only  the  node  for 
"leg"  that  appears  in  D-CREATURE.  The  search  for 
potential  referents  would  then  require  that  for 
each  node  in  each  recently  instantiated  depiction, 
we  run  up  all  the  binder  chains  to  see  if  they 
ended  in  the  representative  leg  node.  This  is 
probably  better,  but  s t i ll  requires  a  lot  of  work. 
I f,  however,  the  multi-role  node  approach  is  used 
there  is  virtually  no  work  to  do.  The  appropriate 
sense  of  "leg"  would  be  represented  by  N-LEG, 
and  N-LEG  appears  in  the  depiction  of  dog,  just 
as  it  appears  in  the  depiction  of  every  animal 
with  legs. 

Natural  Lanfcuage-5:  Hayes 

102 

One  small  complication  arises 
the  m u l t i - r o le  approach,  senses  mu 
by  a  depiction  as  well  as  a  node, 
necessary  because  without 
there 
to  t e ll  which 
l i n ks  were  attached 
therefore  no  way  to  t e ll  what  the 
Such  a  combination  of  a  node  and  a 
view  it  from  is  called  a  VNODE  (vi 
VNODE  of  N-CREATURE  viewed  from  D-
$<N-CREATURE,D-DOG. 

it 

because,  with 
st  be  specified 
The  depiction  is 
would  be  no  way 
to  the  node,  and 
node  represented. 
depiction 
ewed  node);  the 
DOG  is  w r i t t en 

to 

in 

In  terms  of  f i n d i ng  associations, 

the  depiction  of  a  context  binder, 

t h is  means 
that  a f t er  f i n d i ng  that  the  node  part  of  a  VNODE 
is 
necessary  to  check  that  that  depiction 
i b le  with  the  depiction  of  the  VNODE.  They  are 
compatible 
izer  of  the  other.  Consider, 

i n d i r e ct  general-

is  a  d i r e ct  or 

f or  example: 

is  compat(cid:173)

if  one 

is 

it 

Fred  was  in  the  room.  His  leg  was  covered  in 
bandages. 

the 

f i r st  sentence, 

is  $<N-LEG,D-CREATURE;  because  N-LEG  is 

After  the  processing  of  the 
context  w i ll  contain  a  binder  of  D-HUMAN  with  an 
instance  node  f or  N-CREATURE  to  represent  Fred. 
The  d i c t i o n a ry  entry  f or  the  appropriate  sense  of 
" l e g" 
in 
D-HUMAN,  and  D-CREATURE  is  a  generalizer  of 
D-HUMAN, 
VNODE  and  D-HUMAN.  The  instance  node  which  results 
from  using  t h is  association 
of  N-LEG 
the 
is 

f i r st  sentence.  The  generalizer  r e l a t i o n s h ip 

the  binder  of  D-HUMAN  constructed  f or 

there  is  an  association  between  t h is 

i n s t a n t i a t i on 

is  an 

i n: 

in 

the  other  way  round 
I  called  the  dog; 

the  poodle  refused  to  come. 

This  example  seems  s l i g h t ly  forced,  and, 
examples 
comes  a f t er  the  less  general  one  are  much  more 
common  than  vice-versa. 

in  which  the  more  general  depiction 

in  f a c t, 

We  can  sum  up  the  extension  of  Rule  (2)  to 

deal  with  VNODES  as: 

(3)  A  VNODE  is  associated  with  a  depiction  if 

i ts  de(cid:173)
is 

in  the  d e p i c t i o n,  and 

is 
is  e i t h er  a  generalizer  of  or 

In  the 
the  node  should  be  instantiated 

i ts  node 
p i c t i on 
generalized  by  the  given  depiction. 
f i r st  case, 
in  the  binder  of  the  given  depiction. 
the  second  case,  the  binder  should  be  con(cid:173)
verted 
the  VNODE,  and  the  node  i n s t a n t i a t ed  in  the 

i n to  a  binder  of  the  depiction  of 

In 

.  converted  d e p i c t i o n. 

This  procedure 

is  s i g n i f i c a n t ly  less  work 
than  the  procedure  described  above  f or  use  with 
the  s i n g l e - r o le  approach,  because  the  check  f or 
the  node  part  of  the  VNODE  being  part  of  the  con(cid:173)
t e xt  description  acts  as  a  f i l t er  on  which  gene(cid:173)
ral izer  hierarchies  need  to  be  searched. 
In  the 
s i n g l e - r o le  approach  any  node  in  any  depiction 
might  p o t e n t i a l ly  be  connected  to  a  given  node 
through  a  chain  of  internal  binders, 
the  nodes  con(cid:173)
to  f i nd  out 
nected  in  t h is  way. 
In  the  m u l t i - r o le  approach, 
only  those  nodes  which  are  the  same  as  the  node 
of  a  given  VNODE  need  be  considered  f or  the  sub(cid:173)
sequent  generalizer  check. 

investigate  a ll 

the  only  way 

is  to 

N a t u r al 

Lan^ua 
103 

IV  M u l t i p le  Subparts  and  SQN  Structure 

Next  to  the  subset-superset  r e l a t i o ns  ex(cid:173)

It 

is  best  to 

introduce  CSAW's 

is 
to  the  generalizer 

in  generalizer  s t r u c t u r e,  part-whole 

pressed 
r e l a t i o ns  are  the  most  important  s t r u c t u r al  com(cid:173)
ponent  of  CSAW's  data  base.  As  explained  below, 
part-whole  r e l a t i o n s,  both  physical  and  logical 
(a  hand  is  part  of  a  card  game),  can  generate  a 
new  type  of  r e l a t i on  between  d e p i c t i o n s,  which 
independent  of  and  orthogonal 
t r e a t(cid:173)
r e l a t i o n. 
ment  of  part-whole  r e l a t i o ns 
independently  of 
generalizer  s t r u c t u r e,  and  so  for  the  moment, 
senses  w i ll  again  correspond  to  single  nodes  and 
nodes  w i ll  again  have  single  r o l e s.  The  treatment 
does,  however,  require  the  use  of  depictions  as 
viewpoints;  so  that  the  l i n ks  attached  to  a  node 
w i ll  s t i ll  depend  on  which  depiction 
is  viewed 
from. 
Instead  of  using  t h is  t r i ck  to  l et  a  single 
node  represent  several  d i f f e r e nt  but  related  en(cid:173)
t i t i e s, 
it  w i ll  be  used  to  allow  d i f f e r e nt  pieces 
of  information  about  a  single  e n t i ty  to  be  acces(cid:173)
sible  independently.  Figure  vi  shows  a  depiction 
D-ARM  which  contains  the  node  N-ARM  which  also 
appeared 
the  depictee  of  D-ARM,  whereas 
in  D-HUMAN.  Note  that  the  l i n k s: 

In  f a c t,  N-ARMis 
it  was  a  depicter 

in  D-HUMAN  in  Figure  i. 

it 

(PARTOF  N-ARM  N-HUMAN) 
(CONNECTED  N-ARM  N-TORSO) 

in  Figure  i  are  not  shown  in  Figure 

that  appeared 
vi  since  they  are  not  v i s i b le  when  N-ARM  is 
viewed  from  D-ARM.  However,  a  number  of  other 
l i n k s,  which  are  s i m i l a r ly 
i, 
in  Figure 
are  shown  in  Figure  v i.  The  l i n ks  shown  in  Figure 
vi  are  the  l i n ks  present 

in  D-ARM. 

i n v i s i b le 

Figure  vi 

An  SQN  depiction  of  an  arm 

Why  make  D-ARM  a  d i f f e r e nt  depiction  from 

the  information  about 

D-HUMAN?  Why  should  a ll 
N-ARM  not  be  put  in  D-HUMAN?  There  are  two  rea(cid:173)
sons.  The  f i r st  concerns 
if  a ll 
the  information  about  N-ARM  is  put  i n to  D-HUMAN, 
there  seems  no  reason  to  stop  t h e r e;  a ll 
formation  about  bodies  from  eyebrows  to  t o e n a i ls 
would  be  put  in  D-HUMAN,  and  in  any  given  context 

levels  of  d e t a i l; 

the  i n(cid:173)

K e - 5:  Hayes 

most  of  that  information  would  be  irrelevant. 
Since  it  is  clear  from  Rule  (2)  that  instantiation 
of  a  depiction  corresponds  to  an  activation  of  all 
the  information  it  contains,  an  instantiation  of 
D-HUMAN,  thus  enlarged,  would  merely  provide  a 
confusing  mass  of  irrelevant  information. 
If  in(cid:173)
stead  such  information  is  distributed  over  a  col(cid:173)
lection  of  depictions  chosen  according  to  the 
"natural"  division  of  a  body  into  its  various  sub(cid:173)
parts,  then  only  that  information  about  bodies 
which  is  strictly  relevant  to  a  given  context  need 
be  activated  in  that  context. 

The  second  reason  is  much  more  clear-cut, and 

concerns  the  representation  of  multiple  parts.  A 
normal  body  has  two  arms,  but  Figure  i  contains 
only  one  node,  N-ARM,  to  represent  them  both;  this 
paradox  is  resolved  by  allowing  N-ARM  to  play  a 
dual  role:  besides  representing  a  generic  arm,  it 
also  represents  the  generic  set  of  all  the  arms 
of  a  body.  Note  that  this  sort  of  dual-role  is 
quite  different  from  the  multiple  roles  used  in 
generalizer  structure;  in  the  latter,  a  node  re(cid:173)
presents  one  of  a  number  of  similar,  but  differ(cid:173)
ent,  entities,  depending  on  which  depiction  it  is 
viewed  from;  in  the  former,  a  node  represents  both 
a  set  of  similar  entities  which  are  all  involved 
in  a  single  depiction,  and  a  typical  member  of 
that  set.  Such  a  node  will  play  one  role  or  the 
other  according  to  which  link  it  is  used  in.  All 
the  links  involving  N-ARM  in  Figure  i  use  it  in 
its  typical  member  role.  D-HUMAN  should,  however, 
be  supplemented  by  other  links  involving  N-ARM  in 
its  role  as  a  set,  in  particular  (NUMBER  N-ARM  2). 
This  link  indicates  the  size  of  the  set  represen(cid:173)
ted  by  N-ARM,  and  thus  limits  the  number  of  in(cid:173)
stance  nodes  which  may  be  paired  with  N-ARM  in any 
given  binder.  Generic  nodes  without  NUMBER  links 
may  be  instantiated  only  once  in  a  given  binder 
(and  the  depictee  will  always  be  in  this  category), 
but  those  generic  nodes  with  NUMBER  links  may  be 
instantiated  as  many  times  in  the  same  binder  as 
their  link  indicates. 

This  method  has  several  advantages  over  the 
alternative  of  using  a  separate  generic  node  for 
If 
each  generic  occurrence  of  a  multiple  subpart. 
the  latter  method  is  used  then: 

a.  If  there  are  a  large  number  of  such  occur(cid:173)

rences  there  will  be  much  wasteful  repetition 
(legs  of  a  centipede). 
b.  Since  there  is  no  single  node  which  repre(cid:173)
sents  the  subpart,  a  natural  language  dic(cid:173)
tionary  entry  for  "arm"  would  have  to  treat 
the  two  generic  arm  nodes  as  two  different 
senses  of  "arm".  This  problem  could,  however, 
be  solved  by  introducing  a  further  generic 
node  representing  the  set  of  arms  of  a  body. 
c.  The  representation  of  "an  arm"  would  require 
an  arbitrary  and  unnecessary  choice  between 
left  arm  and  right  arm. 
d.  In  the  case  of  subparts  which  can  vary  in 
number,  the  maximum  number  would  have  to  be 
represented.  This  could  lead  to  the  same 
problem  as  in  a.  for  potentially  large  num(cid:173)
bers,  and  even  worse  problems  when  there  is 
no  upper  bound  (the  legs  of  a  table). 

Since  there  may  be  different  generic  infor(cid:173)
mation  about  them  -  left  and  right  arms  are  indeed 
different  -  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  be  able 
to  distinguish  between  multiple  subparts.  This  is 
accomplished  through  the  use  of  distinguishes, 
a  set  of  labels  which  span  the  set  of  subparts, 
in  the  sense  that  each  generic  subpart  can  be 
uniquely  identified  by  a  distinguishes  or  a  col(cid:173)
lection  of  distinguishes.  In  the  case  of  N-ARM, 
there  are  just  two  such  labels,  L-LEFT  and 
L-RIGHT,  corresponding  to  left  and  right.  N-ARM 
distinguished  by  L-LEFT  is  written  $!N-ARM(L-LEFT). 
Generic  information  involving  only  one  or  a  sub(cid:173)
set  of  the  subparts  is  handled  by  allowing  links 
which  apply  to  the  node  only  when  it  is  labelled 
by  one  of  these  distinguishes.  An  instance  node 
is  made  specific  by  attaching  the  appropriate 
distinguisher  to  its  pairing  with  its  generic 
node  in  the  appropriate  binder.  Of  course,  it  is 
not  necessary  to  distinguish  if  there  is  no  basis 
for  distinction  (see  c.  above),  and  thus  "an  arm" 
in: 

The  man  raised  an  arm. 

could  be  represented  by  an  undistinguished  in(cid:173)
stantiation  of  N-ARM. 

While  there  are  compelling  advantages  to  di(cid:173)

viding  the  representation  of  a  complex  entity 
such  as  a  body  among  several  depictions,  the 
fragmentation  of  such  intimately  related  infor(cid:173)
mation  results  in  certain  complications.  To  deal 
with  these  complications,  the  relationships  be(cid:173)
tween  the  several  depictions  representing  a  com(cid:173)
plex  entity  are  made  explicit  by  incorporating 
them  into  an  SQN  structure  (for  sine  qua  non 
structure).  The  motivating  idea  is  that  if  the 
depictee  of  a  depiction  is  a  subpart  of,  or  in 
some  other  way  implies  the  existence  of,  another 
entity,  then  that  depiction  is  essentially  incom(cid:173)
Its  completion  requires  the  depiction  of 
plete. 
that  other  entity  in  which  its  own  depictee  is 
presumably  a  depicter.  Thus  D-ARM  does  not  make 
complete  sense  without  D-HUMAN;  we  shall  say  that 
D-HUMAN  is  an  SQN  depiction  of  D-ARM.  An  SQN 
structure  is  a  tree  of  depictions  in  which  the 
parent  depictions  are  SQN  depictions  of  their 
children.  All  the  depictions  involved  in  repre(cid:173)
senting  a  complex  entity  are  typically  tied  to(cid:173)
gether  into  an  SQN  structure.  Clearly,  SQN  and 
generalizer  structures  are  orthogonal  in  the  sense 
that  SQN  structure  is  independent  of  and  comple(cid:173)
mentary  to  generalizer  structure;  the  two  types 
of  structure  are,  however,  similar  in  that  they 
both  create  numerous  separate  trees,  each  of  which 
groups  a  number  of  related  depictions  together. 

SQN  structure  has  important  implications  for 

depiction  instantiation;  whenever  a  depiction  is 
instantiated,  there  must  be  a  corresponding  in(cid:173)
stantiation  of  any  parent  depiction  it  might  have 
in  an  SQN  hierarchy.  Furthermore,  one  or  more  of 
the  nodes  in  common  between  the  two  depictions 
can  be  designated  as  SQNODES;  such  nodes  are  in(cid:173)
stantiated  by  the  same  instance  nodes  in  both 
binders.  Thus  an  instantiation  of  D-ARM  requires 
the  instantiation  of  D-HUMAN;  furthermore, 
N-SHOULDER  and  N-ARM,  which  are  the  SQNODES  of 

Natural  Lan*ija*e-5:  Hay«s 

10U 

A  depiction  chain  is  a  sequence  of  one  or  more 
depictions  in  which  successive  depictions  are  a l(cid:173)
ways  related  in  one  of  a  limited  number  of  ways 
called  depiction  kin-types.  For  the  moment,  there 
will  be  just  four  kin-types,  indicating  relations 
between  successive  depictions  in  a  depiction  chain 
as  follows: 

SQN 

SQN-1 

GEN 

GEN-1 

the  second  depiction  is  the  SQN-parent 
of  the  f i r s t; 
the  f i r st  depiction  is  the  SQN-parent  of 
the  second; 
the  second  depiction  is  a  direct  or  i n(cid:173)
direct  generalizer-ancestor  of  the  f i r s t; 
the  f i r st  depiction  is  a  direct  or  indi(cid:173)
rect  generalizer-ancestor  of  the  second. 

For  instance,  according  to  Figure  v i i,  D-DOG  and 
D-LEG  are  connected  by  the  depiction  chain 
(D-DOG  D-LEGGED-CREATURE  D-LEG)  in  which  the  kin-
types  are  GEN  and  SQN-1.  The  new  association  rule 
is: 

(5)  A  VNODE  is  associated  with  a  depiction  if 
there  is  a  valid  depiction  chain  between 
the  given  depiction  and  the  depiction  of 
the  VNODE. 

Figure  vii 

Interacting  generalizer  and  SQN 
hierarchies 

If  we  assume  for  the  moment  that  any  depiction 
chain  is  valid,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  above 
rule  subsumes  Rule  (3)  and  Rule  (4),  and  so  will 
work  on  the  previous  examples.  The  corresponding 
instantiation  rule  i s: 

(6)  Given  two  consecutive  depictions  in  a  de(cid:173)

piction  chain  and  a  binder  of  the  f i r st  de(cid:173)
piction,  the  production  of  an  appropriately 
related  binder  for  the  second  is  accom(cid:173)
plished  according  to  kin-type  as  follows: 

D-ARM,  must  be  paired  with  the  same  instance  nodes 
in  both  binders.  Obviously,  not  all  depictions 
have  superiors  in  an  SQN  hierarchy;  in  particular, 
the  depictions  of  stand-alone  entities  such  as 
bodies  do  not.  Such  depictions  w i l l,  in  general, 
be  the  roots  of  SQN  hierarchies.  Thus  D-HUMAN will 
be  the  parent  of  D-ARM,  D-HEAD,  D-LEG,  etc.,  and 
D-ARM  w i ll  in  turn  be  the  parent  of  D-FINGER. 

The  existence  of  SQN  structure  clearly  re(cid:173)

quires  a  revision  of  our  association  rule  (2). 
That  subparts  can  be  buried  several  layers  deep  in 
an  SQN  tree  suggests  the  following  replacement: 

(4)  A  node  is  associated  with  a  given  depiction 

if  it  is  either  in  the  given  depiction,  or 
in  a  depiction  which  has  the  given  depiction 
as  a  direct  or  indirect  ancestor  in  an  SQN 
hierarchy. 

This  rule  would  provide  a  disambiguating  associa(cid:173)
tion  for  "nails" 

i n: 

Fred  walked  into  the  room;  his  nails  were 
cracked  and  dirty. 

in  just  the  same  way  as  Rule  (2)  provided  one  for 
Example  (1). 
It  was  mentioned  above  that  the  bind(cid:173)
ing  of  a  depiction  requires  the  creation  of  cor(cid:173)
responding  binders  for  any  parent  depictions  in 
an  SQN  hierarchy;  this  requirement  relieves  Rule 
(4)  from  concern  with  offspring  or  sibling  depic(cid:173)
tions  in  an  SQN  hierarchy. 

v  Interaction  of  Generalizer  and  SQN  Structures 

A  generalizer  hierarchy  groups  together  de(cid:173)
pictions  of  similar,  but  different,  entities. 
If 
such  entities  are  the  roots  of  SQN-hierarchies, 
their  SQN-offspring  will  be  similar,  and  so  can 
be  grouped  into  generalizer  hierarchies  of  their 
own,  which  (approximately)  parallel  the  top-level 
generalizer  hierarchy.  Figure  v i i,  for  instance, 
shows  a  small  amount  of  knowledge  about  a  small 
number  of  animals.  There  are  two  generalizer  hier(cid:173)
archies  (indicated  by  the  barred  lines):  one  for 
the  top-level  entities,  the  animals  themselves, 
and  the  other  for  the  limbs  of  the  animals.  Each 
animal  depiction,  except  D-QUADRUPED,  is  the  root 
of  an  SQN-hierarchy  (indicated  by  the  ordinary 
lines). 
In  most  cases,  there  is  just  one  offspring 
node  in  these  hierarchies,  representing  a  typical 
leg  of  the  animal  in  question.  D-QUADRUPED  does 
not  have  any  SQN-offspring,  since  the  description 
of  a  typical  leg  for  a  legged  creature  provided  by 
D-LEG  is  quite  adequate  for  the  purposes  of 
D-QUADRUPED.  D-PRIMATE  and  D-HUMAN,  on  the  other 
hand,  each  have  two  SQN-offspring:  one  describing 
their  forelimbs  or  arms,  and  the  other  describing 
their  rear-limbs  or  legs.  That  D-DOG  only  has  one 
SQN-offspring  indicates  a  lack  of  information  in 
this  representation  for  distinguishing  the  front 
and  back  legs  of  a  dog.  These  differences  in  SQN-
offspring  mean  that  the  limb  general izer  hierarchy 
does  not  exactly  parallel  the  one  for  animals. 

Before  extending  the  association  rule  to 

deal  with  both  SQN  and  generalizer  structure,  the 
concept  of  a  depiction  chain  must  be  introduced. 

GEN 
GEN-1 

SON 

the  given  binder  is  used; 
the  given  binder  is  used  after  being 
changed  into  a  binder  of  the  second  de(cid:173)
piction; 
a  new  binder  is  constructed  for  the 
second  depiction  in  which  the  instance 
nodes  for  the  SQNODES  of  the  f i r st  de(cid:173)
piction  are  the  same  as  those  in  the 
given  binder; 

SON-1  a  new  binder  is  constructed  for  the 

Natural  Lan^ua 
105 

* e - 5:  Hayes 

second  depiction  in  which  the  instance 
nodes  for  the  SQNODES  of  the  second  de(cid:173)
piction  are  the  same  as  those  in  the 
given  binder. 

GEN  and  GEN-1  kin-types  if  possible.  Trying  to 
find  an  association  between  D-QUADRUPED  and  D-LEG 
shows  that  this  is  not  always  possible,  but  when 
it  is  not  possible  no  error  results. 

Successive  applications  of  Rule  (6)  will 
instanti(cid:173)
ate  any  depiction  chain  whose  f i r st  member  has  a 
binder.  The  instantiation  of  an  association,  as 
defined  by  Rule  (5),  between  a  VNODE  and  a  context 
depiction  therefore  consists  of  instantiating  the 
depiction  chain  (using  the  binder  of  the  context 
depiction  to  get  started),  and  then  instantiating 
the  node  of  the  VNODE  in  the  final  binder  pro(cid:173)
duced.  To  see  how  this  rule  works  in  practice, 
consider  the  association  between  the  VNODE, 
$<N-F00T,D-LEG,  for  "foot"  and  the  depiction  D-DOG 
that  would  be  required  for  the  example: 

I  looked  at  the  dog;  its  foot  was  swollen. 

Instantiating  this  depiction  chain 

According  to  Rule  (5)  we  need  to  find  a  depiction 
chain  from  D-DOG  to  D-LEG,  the  depiction  of 
$<N-F00T,D-LEG.  One  obvious  one  in  Figure  v ii  is 
(D-DOG  D-DOG-LEG  D-LEG)  with  the  kin-types  SQN-1 
and  GEN. 
according  to  Rule  (6)  would  produce  f i r st  a  binder 
for  D-DOG-LEG  in  which  the  SQNODES  of  D-DOG-LEG, 
say  just  N-LEG,  were  given  the  same  instance 
nodes  as  in  the  given  binder  of  D-DOG.  Since  the 
second  kin-type  is  GEN,  the  binder  of  D-DOG-LEG 
just  constructed  would  then  be  used  unchanged  as 
the  binder  for  D-LEG.  Finally,  N-FOOT,  the  node 
of  the  VNODE,  would  be  instantiated  in  this  same 
binder  to  produce  Figure  v i i i,  which  is  just  what 
is  required. 

Of  course  there  are  other  depiction  chains 

from  D-DOG  to  D-LEG,  such  as  (D-DOG  D-QUADRUPED 
D-HUMAN  D-HUMAN-LEG  D-LEG),  whose  instantiation 
would  produce  less  desirable  results.  Such  chains 
can  be  excluded  by  forbidding  depiction  chains 
with  both  GEN  and  GEN-1  kin-types  or  both  SQN  and 
SQN-1  kin-types.  A  more  subtle  type  of  error 
could  be  caused  by  the  framechain  (D-DOG 
D-LEGGED-CREATURE  D-LEG).  This  would  result  in  a 
diagram  just  like  Figure  v i ii  except  that  D-LEG 
would  be  used  instead  of  the  more  specific  and 
appropriate  D-DOG-LEG.  This  can  be  avoided  by 
insisting  that  SQN  and  SQN-1  kin-types  precede 

VI  Other  Associations 

Using  just  generalizer  and  SQN  structure, 

one  could  produce  a  large  number  of  descriptions 
of  various  stand-alone  entities  like  animals  or 
clocks  or  card  games,  etc.,  but  one  would  have  no 
way  to  relate  these  descriptions  to  each  other. 
One  way  to  increase  the  number  of  relationships 
represented  is  to  increase  the  generality  of  the 
roots  of  the  generalizer  trees;  thus  one  might 
incorporate  the  generalizer  hierarchies  for  ani(cid:173)
mals,  plants,  microbes,  etc.,  into  a  single  gene(cid:173)
ral izer  hierarchy  for  living  things.  However,  such 
amalgamation  must  have  a  l i m i t;  otherwise,  there 
would  be  only  one  generalizer  hierarchy  with  the 
depiction  D-ENTITY  at  its  root,  and  only  one  node, 
N-ENTITY  (or  perhaps  two,  N-ENTITY  and  N-PART). 
Clearly,  this  is  taking  things  too  far. 

Assuming  that  there  must  be  separate  general-

izer  trees  for  entities  which  do  not  display 
"significant"  structural  similarities,  not  all 
set-inclusion  relations  can  be  expressed  by  gene(cid:173)
ral izer  structure;  the  remainder  are  handled  by 
internal  binders  as  described  in  Section  I I I. 
Besides  representing  set-inclusions  for  the  de-
pictee  of  a  depiction,  internal  binders  can  also 
represent  set-inclusions  for  the  depicters  and 
relations  between  the  depicters.  Figure  ix  shows 
internal  binders  performing  all  these  functions; 
one  internal  binder  in  D-SHIP  indicates  that  a 
ship  is  a  vehicle,  and,  in  addition,  relates 
sailors  to  ships  in  the  same  way  as  drivers  are 
related  to  vehicles  in  general;  the  other  binder 
internal 
to  D-SHIP  indicates  that  the  activity  of 
sailing  a  ship  is  a  form  of  disciplined  activity 
involving  the  sailors.  The  diagram  shows  both 
N-BOSS  and  N-MINION  paired  with  N-SAILOR;  in  fact, 
N-BOSS  is  paired  with  N-SAILOR  distinguished  to 
indicate  officer,  and  N-MINION  is  paired  with 
N-SAILOR  distinguished  to  indicate  non(cid:173)
commissioned  sailor.  The  binder  internal  to 
D-VEHICLE  shows  that  N-OPERATOR:VEHICLE  is  a 
human. 

Such  internal  binders  can  provide  important 

associations  as  can  be  seen  from: 

(7)  When  I  visited  the  ship,  the  hands  were  out 

on  deck. 

If  we  use 

Here  "hands"  is  to  be  interpreted  as  the  deck 
hands  of  the  ship. 
$<N-MINION,D-DISCIPLINED-ACTIVITY  to  represent 
the  interpretations  of  "hand"  as  farm  hand,  deck 
hand,  factory  hand,  etc.,  then  the  relation  be(cid:173)
tween  N-SHIP  and  N-COMPLEX-ACTIVITY  would  provide 
exactly  the  right  sort  of  association  to  make  the 
correct  disambiguation. 
therefore,  available  as  a  valid  kin-type,  BIND, 
for  use  in  the  depiction  chains  of  Rule  (5).  The 
association  above  can  be  expressed  by  the  depic(cid:173)
tion  chain  (D-SHIP  D-DISCIPLINED-ACTIVITY)  in 
which  the  kin-type  is  BIND.  The  corresponding 

Internal  binders  are, 

Natural  Lan^ua^e-5:  Hayes 

106 

i n s t a n t i a t i on  r u le  is  provided  by  the  following 
f a i r ly  obvious  supplement  to  Rule  ( 6 ): 

(8)  BIND  a  new  binder  is  constructed  f or  the 
second  depiction  in  which  the  nodes 
paired  by  the  internal  binder  have 
the  same  instance  nodes  as  the  nodes 
they  are  paired  with 
d e p i c t i o n. 

the  f i r st 

in 

f or 

the  system  greatly  f a c i l i t a t es  the  search 
word  senses  that  are  associatively  related  to  the 
In  many  cases, 
preceding  and  surrounding  t e x t. 
it 
can  be  used  to  provide  referents  f or  the  ambigu(cid:173)
ous  (or  unambiguous)  words  which  are  found  to  be 
associated  with  the  representation  of  the  pre(cid:173)
ceding  t e x t.  The  system  is  also  i n t e r e s t i ng  from 
a  more  general 
representational  point  of  view; 
in  p a r t i c u l a r, 
it  embodies  novel 
f or 
the  representation  of  m u l t i p le  subparts,  and  of 
objects  that  are  almost,  but  not  q u i t e, 

techniques 

the  same. 

The  representation  system  has  also  been  used 

it  can  help 

r e s t r i c(cid:173)
In  addi(cid:173)
in  making  disambiguations  based 

f or  simple  actions  and  the  selectional 
tions  they  place  on  t h e ir  p a r t i c i p a n t s. 
t i on 
on  the  more  specific  associations  demanded  by 
simple  actions  and  possessives.  A ll 
t h is  work 
described 

in  d e t a il 

[ 3 ]. 

in 

is 

References 

[ 1]  Bobrow,  D.G.  and  Winograd,  T .,  An  overview 

of  KRL,  a  Knowledge  Representation  Language, 
Xerox  PARC,  1976. 

[ 2]  Fahlman,  S.E.,  A  System  f or  Representing  and 

Using  Real-World  Knowledge,  AI  Memo  331, 
A r t i f i c i al 
I n t e l l i g e n ce  Lab.,  M . I . T .,  Cam(cid:173)
bridge,  MA,  1975. 

[ 3]  Hayes,  P . J .,  Some  Association-Based  Tech(cid:173)

niques  f or  Lexical  Disambiguation  by  Machine, 
doctoral  d i s s e r t a t i o n,  Ecole  Polytechnique 
Federale  de  Lausanne,  forthcoming. 

[ 4]  Hendrix,  G.,  Expanding  the  U t i l i ty  of  Seman(cid:173)
t ic  Networks  through  P a r t i t i o n i n g,  Proc.  4th 
I n t.  Joint  Conf.  on  A r t. 
Georgia,"pp.  TI5-T717T575. 

I n t .,  T b i l i s i, 

[ 5]  Minsky,  M.,  A  Framework  f or  Representing 

Knowledge,  in  Winston,  P.  ( E d . ),  The  Psycho(cid:173)
logy  of  Computer  V i s i o n,  McGraw  H i l l,  1975. 

[ 6]  Q u i l l i a n,  M.R.,  Semantic  Memory, 

in  Minsky, 
M. 
( E d . ),  Semantic  Information  Processing, 
M.I.T.  Press,  Cambridge,  MA,  pp.  216-270, 
1968. 

[ 7]  Simmons,  R.F.,  Semantic  Networks:  Their  Com(cid:173)

putation  and  Use  f or  Understanding  English 
Sentences, 
in  Schank,  R.C.  and  Colby,  K.M. 
(Eds.),  Computer  Models  of  Thought  and 
Language,  W.H.  Freeman,  San  Francisco,  1973. 

[ 8]  Sussman,  G.J.  and  McDermott,  D.V.,  From 

PLANNER  to  CONNIVER  -  A  Genetic  Approach, 
Proc.  Fall  Joint  Computer  Conf.,  AFIPS 
Press",  MontvaTeTNJ,  pp.  1171-1179,  1972. 

Figure 

ix 

Depictions  with 

internal  binders 

Some  r e s t r i c t i o ns  must,  however,  be  placed 

in  p a r t i c u l ar  is  not  useful 

on  the  use  of  the  kin-type  BIND.  Consider,  for 
instance, 
the  depiction  chain  (D-SHIP  D-VEHICLE 
D-HUMAN  D-HUMAN-ARM  D-ARM)  with  kin-types  BIND, 
BIND,  SQN-1,  GEN.  This  chain  provides  an  associa(cid:173)
t i on 
f or  $<N-HAND,D-ARM  with  D-SHIP,  which  could 
be  expressed  as:  a  hand  is  part  of  the  one  or 
more  human  beings  who  act  as  drivers  for  the  sort 
of  vehicle  known  as  a  ship.  This  association  is 
f or  the  purposes  of  d i s(cid:173)
too  tenuous  to  be  useful 
ambiguation,  and 
in 
Example  (7).  There  is  not  enough  space  to  discuss 
t h is  problem  f u l ly  here,  and 
the  solution 
f i c a t i o n ). 
kin-type  corresponding  to  an 
only  one  p a i r i n g, 
the  chain 
instance  node  f or  the  nodes 
sents  something  which  has  been  e x p l i c i t ly  men(cid:173)
tioned 
mentioned  above  is 
i n v a l id  for  Example  ( 7 ),  be(cid:173)
cause  the  BIND  kin-type  between  D-VEHICLE  and 
D-HUMAN  corresponds  to  an 
internal  binder  with 
only  one  p a i r i n g,  and  the  nodes,  N-OPERATOR:VEHICLE 
and  N-HUMAN, 
anything 

I  have  adopted  (see  [ 3]  f or  a  j u s t i(cid:173)
If  a  depiction  chain  contains  a  BIND 

internal  binder  with 
is 
i n v a l id  unless  the 
in  the  pairing  repre(cid:173)

in  t h is  pairing  do  not  represent 
the  t e x t. 

that  appears  e x p l i c i t ly 

in  the  t e x t.  Thus,  the  depiction  chain 

j u st  state 

I  w i ll 

in 

VII  Conclusion 

The  system  of  data  representation  presented 

above  was  s p e c i f i c a l ly  designed  for  a  natural 
language  processing  system  which  concentrates  on 
f i n d i ng  the  appropriate  senses  of  ambiguous  words 
in  context.  The  associative  structure  provided  by 

N a t u r al 

Language' 

107 

• 5:  Hayes 

