Distributive and Collective Readings in Group Protocols

Silvia Rossi

ITC-irst – Povo, Trento, Italy

Istituto di Cibernetica, CNR Napoli – Italy

silvia.rossi@dit.unitn.it

Sanjeev Kumar and Philip R. Cohen
Oregon Health and Science University

Beaverton, OR – USA

{skumar, pcohen}@cse.ogi.edu

Abstract

Collaborative applications require protocols that
specify how distributed entities interact with one
another in order to achieve a speciﬁed behavior.
Many different kinds of relationships can be estab-
lished between these entities as a result of such in-
teractions. Distributive and Collective readings are
two important ways to characterize group interac-
tion. Starting from an attempt-based semantics of
group communicative acts, we distinguish between
these two concepts and evaluate group protocols
with respect to formation of different types of teams
during the interaction.

1 Motivations
Group communication is common in collaborative applica-
tions of all kinds such as clustering, grid computing, transac-
tions and database replication, distance learning, application
sharing, distributed interactive simulations, on-line games
and ﬁnancial markets. In all these applications the empha-
sis shifts to distributed global collaboration rather then a cen-
tralized view of the problem. A protocol deﬁnition speciﬁes
how distributed elements interact with one another in order to
achieve a speciﬁed behavior and therefore, protocols are crit-
ical for the interoperability of the various components. Most
of the protocols presented in multi-agent systems propose bi-
lateral interaction among agents, with few cases of protocols
that try to capture cases involving groups of agents. These
representations of bilateral interactions are very useful in de-
scribing isolated conversation between two agents, but fail
when the structure of the conversation becomes complex or
the number of agents involved within the conversation grows.
One of the most challenging examples in distributed inter-
actions and group communication is represented by the third
generation of grid computing systems [De Roure et al., 2003].
Grid computing enables geographically distributed systems
to form dynamic virtual organizations [Foster et al., 2001]
whose members use shared and private resources to collabo-
rate in order to ﬁnd a solution to a common problem. Given
this situation, according to Jennings [Jennings, 2001], agent-
oriented approaches are well-suited to engineering complex,
distributed software systems. In the case of distributed grid
computing (i.e., when there is no single big computer for

collecting results), it should be possible for each computer
to send messages and results to groups of other components
without knowing in advance who are the recipients and who
actually need such results. In this sense, an agent commu-
nication language should support communication addressed
to individuals as well as to groups, where a group may have
a stable, known membership (i.e.
it can be addressed by a
referring name) or its membership may be unknown. For
example, in a publish/subscribe system, senders label each
message with the name of a topic (”publish”), rather than ad-
dressing it to speciﬁc recipients and the messaging system
then sends the message to all eligible systems that have asked
to receive messages on that topic (”subscribe”).

But complex systems like grids not only require that col-
lections of components be treated as a single conceptual unit
when viewed from a different level of abstraction, they also
involve the changing of relationships between their various
components. Group communicative acts by themselves are
not sufﬁcient to model such situations. The group commu-
nication semantics of speech acts is sufﬁcient to model one-
shot one-to-many communicative interactions - the intended
recipients can be multiple agents and/or groups of agents.
However, we need group protocols in order to enable com-
putational mechanisms for ﬂexibly forming, maintaining, and
disbanding organizations or teams. This is not just a matter
of allowing new groups to appear and then disband, but also
allowing different kinds of groups that have different types
of commitments among the group members themselves. The
use of communicative acts in different contexts and in differ-
ent orders leads to the creation of different types of commit-
ment among the agents. Different commitments imply differ-
ent methods to form and disband teams of agents.

In this paper, starting from an attempt-based semantics of
communicative acts [Cohen and Levesque, 1990] and the se-
mantics of group communication [Kumar et al., 2000], we an-
alyze the concept of distributive reading vs. collective read-
ing [Clark and Carlson, 1982] in group protocols. These types
of group communication will be evaluated with respect to the
formation of different types of teams during interaction. In
the case of a collective reading, we claim that joint commit-
ments and mutual beliefs have to be established among all the
members of the group. We will see that by means of group
communication, one can obtain a joint commitment among
the members of a group that has different properties from the

one achieved by means of single utterances.

2 Formalism
Addressing an utterance to more than one recipient is more
than a convenient way to refer to many people simultane-
ously. For example, it may be that we want to make other
people aware of what is going on say, by using the Carbon
Copy ﬁeld in e-mails. Even if everybody in the ”TO” and
in the ”CC” ﬁelds receives the e-mail, it is clear that the in-
tended recipients of our utterance are just the people in the
”TO” ﬁeld, but, we also want the people in the ”CC” ﬁeld to
be aware of it. So, the reader of an e-mail has to be able to
make certain inferences about the mental state of others who
the e-mail is addressed to or who will be reading the e-mail.
Moreover, consider the utterance: ”Can both of you help me
in lifting this table?”. The main effect of this utterance is
not only that both the recipients are aware of the request, but
also that both of them know that the request was made to all
the recipients as a group and the requested action should be
a joint action. An agent communication language should be
able to properly convey these nuances of a requester’s inten-
tions about the performers of an action.

In a previous paper [Kumar et al., 2000], we introduced
a framework for semantics of group communicative acts and
provided a semantics of the REQUEST communicative act
within this framework. It was demonstrated that this group
communicative act can be performed even when the requester
does not know about the intended actor and when the re-
quester does not know everyone who will get the message.
Even though that paper emphasized the importance of distin-
guishing between a group doing an action as an entity (collec-
tive reading) and everybody in a list of individuals performing
the action (distributive reading), it provided a clear semantics
only for the latter. Furthermore, plurals and utterances ad-
dressed to groups can introduce semantic ambiguities. For
example, there can be a potential ambiguity as to whether
the aggregated entities are to act individually (distributive) or
they are to act together as one (collective). This paper makes
a clear distinction in the semantics of communicative acts to
enable understanding whether an utterance requires a collec-
tive or a distributive reading. In particular, we want the agents
that receive a communicative act to interpret its correct read-
ing (distributive or collective) so that they can act accordingly.
Moreover, group communicative acts have to be inserted and
analyzed in the wider context of protocols, where distributive
and collective reading of an utterance is important in order to
generate the next communicative act of the protocol. How-
ever, in this paper we will not be concerned with how the
action is done and how the agents coordinate in order to per-
form the action.

We regard a group as being deﬁned by a characteristic
function such as the membership property. This can be cap-
tured by a predicate consisting of a free variable that ranges
over individuals. With Greek letters we will represent groups’
names, and we use the same symbol in a functional nota-
tion to denote the associated membership predicate. For ex-
ample, γ is a group having the membership predicate γ(x)
where x is a free variable. We will underline the entities that

represent groups (γ, for example) to indicate the distribu-
tive readings of that group. An entity without an underline
can be either an individual or a group and indicates a col-
lective reading. If ψ is a formula with term γ, and x does
not appear in ψ, and γ(x) is the property predicate that cor-
responds to γ, and ψ(x) is a formula formed by replacing γ
with x in ψ, then ψ(γ) = ∀x γ(x) ⊃ ψ(x). For example:
(BEL γ p) = ∀x γ(x) ⊃ (BEL x p). In other words, ev-
eryone in group γ believes p.
In case of ambiguity in the
determination of the scope, we will mark the group term
that it applies to and the starting bracket with the free vari-
able in the superscript. (yBEL γy (BEL x (zBEL γz p))) =
∀y γ(y) ⊃ (BEL y (BEL x (∀z γ(z) ⊃ (BEL z p)))).

This paper will concentrate on group protocols in which
the intended recipient of a message is a group of (possibly un-
known) agents. The difference between a distributive reading
and collective reading will be shown to depend upon whether
the intended actors are separate individuals or groups. Here,
we summarize the results from literature that this paper builds
upon and redeﬁne semantics for the communicative acts that
we need for our example. The terms α, β, and γ in the fol-
lowing deﬁnitions can represent either groups or individuals.
Here, α is the entity performing the communicative act, β is
the recipient (including the ”Over-hearers”) of the message,
and γ is the intended recipient (or intended actor). The se-
mantics of the communicative acts as described below has the
implicit requirement that the intended recipients of an utter-
ance are a subset of all the recipients. Moreover, the sender
of the utterance is always a single agent that may be an in-
dividual that acts on behalf of the group. The analysis of
authorized representative of groups is left for future work.

A persistent weak achievement goal or PWAG represents
the one-way commitment of one agent directed towards an-
other and it is used to deﬁne the semantics of various com-
municative acts. A PWAG made public via performance of
a communicative act represents a social commitment using
mentalist notions. The deﬁnition of (P W AG α γ p q) states
that an entity α has a PWAG towards another entity γ to
achieve p with respect to q when the following holds: if α
believes that p is not currently true then it will have a persis-
tent goal to achieve p, and if it believes p to be either true, or
to be impossible, or if it believes the relativizing condition q
to be false, then it will have a persistent goal to bring about
the corresponding mutual belief with γ. In the philosophy of
language, it is argued that the illocutionary effect of a speech
act consists of the hearers recognition of the speakers com-
municative intention. A communicative act succeeds when
the hearer successfully recognizes the speakers intention and
it is satisﬁed when the hearer successfully acts on the speak-
ers intention. Communicative acts must be characterized as
attempts because there is a possibility that the act may not
succeed. Accordingly, attempt is deﬁned as having a goal and
an intention. An ATTEMPT to achieve p via q represented
as (AT T EM P T γ e p q t) is a complex action expression in
which the entity γ is the actor of the event e and just prior
to e, the actor chooses that p should eventually became true,
and intends that e should produce at least q relative to that
choice. Mutual belief for groups is deﬁned in terms of unilat-
eral mutual belief, or BMB [Cohen and Levesque, 1990], that

is treated as a semantic primitive [Kumar et al., 2000].
Deﬁnition 2.1 Mutual Belief

(M B γ p) ≡ ∀x γ(x) ⊃ (BM B x γ p)

MB between two groups (M B β γ) is deﬁned similarly.
In this article, we assume that mutual belief is established
by default. Establishing mutual belief by default means that
agents make certain defeasible assumptions if they have no
information to the contrary. If at a later time, the agent hav-
ing a defeasible belief discovers that its belief was incorrect
than it needs to revise that belief1. But until that happens, an
agent can assume the defeasible belief and make inferences
based on that belief. The symbol (cid:96)d represents the deduc-
tion relation and (cid:96)d (ϕ ⇒ ψ) denotes that ψ can always be
derived from ϕ using defeasible rules. In particular, we as-
sume that the sender and the receivers of a communicative
act use the same defeasible rules, like, for example, that i)
the speaker does not change its mental state about the propo-
sitional content of the communicative act immediately after
performing it; ii) the sender of a communicative act is sincere
toward the recipients about its (i.e. sender’s) mental attitude;
iii) if a communicative act has been done successfully then
the sender and the hearer mutually believe that it has been
done [Kumar et al., 2002]. This enables us to deﬁne the other
communicative acts that we require for our example.
Deﬁnition 2.2 Request
(REQU EST α β γ e a q t) ≡ (AT T EM P T α e φ ψ t)
where φ = (zDON E γz a)∧
[P W AG γz α (DON E γz a)(P W AG α γ (wDON E γw a) q)]

and ψ = [BM B β α [GOAL α (BEL γ [P W AG α γ φ q])]]

The goal of the REQUEST is that the intended actor even-
tually does the action a and also has a PWAG with respect to
the requester to do a. The intention of the REQUEST is that
all the recipient β believe there is a mutual belief between
the recipient and the requester that the requester α had a goal
that he (the requester) will have a PWAG with respect to the
intended actor γ about the goal φ of the REQUEST2. It was
shown in [Kumar et al., 2000] that the recipient β and the in-
tended actor γ never quantify into the beliefs of the requester
α - meaning thereby that the requester a does not need to
know who β and γ are. It was also shown how to construct
a model in which a request can be performed even when the
requester does not know the recipients as well as the intended
actors of the request. Therefore, unlike the previous deﬁni-
tions in agent communication languages literature, this deﬁ-
nition of REQUEST allows for the broadcasting of a request.
Theorem 2.1 Successful performance of
the REQUEST
communicative act establishes a mutual belief by default be-
tween the requester α and the intended recipient γ, about the
requester’s PWAG toward the intended recipient γ for doing
the requested action. Formally,

(cid:96)d (DON E(REQU EST α β γ e a q t)) ⇒
where, φ = (DON E γ a)∧

(xM B γx α (yP W AG α γy φ q))

[P W AG γ α (DON E γ a)(P W AG α γ (DON E γ a) q)]

1We do not discuss belief revision in this paper.
2In accordance with the ﬁrst defeasible rule, we have simpliﬁed

the temporal aspects of communicative act deﬁnitions.

Proof Sketch. γ is a subset of β, so the intention part of
the deﬁnition of the REQUEST speech act is also valid by
substituting β with γ. After making these substitutions, the
proof is the same as the one provided in [Kumar et al., 2002].
Deﬁnition 2.3 Inform
(IN F ORM α β γ e p t) ≡ (AT T EM P T α e φ ψ t)
where φ = [BM B γ α p]
and ψ = [BM B β α [GOAL α (BEL γ [BEL α p])]]

The goal of an INFORM is that the intended recipients γ
come to believe that there is mutual belief between γ and the
senders α that the proposition p is true. The intention of the
INFORM is that the recipients (including the over-hearers)
come to believe that there is mutual belief between the recip-
ients and the senders that the senders had the goal that the
intended recipients will believe that the senders belief p.
Theorem 2.2 Successful performance of the INFORM com-
municative act establishes a mutual belief by default be-
tween the sender α and the intended recipient γ,
that
the sender believes the informed proposition. Formally,
(cid:96)d (DON E(IN F ORM α β γ e p t)) ⇒ (M B α γ (BEL α p))
Proof Sketch. Again, by substituting β with γ the proof of

the theorem is the same as in [Kumar et al., 2002].

Starting from the deﬁnition of INFORM and REQUEST,
we can deﬁne some other communicative acts, modifying the
deﬁnitions in [Kumar et al., 2002]. One has to replace the
sender x and the recipients y appropriately by the sender α,
the recipients β, and the intended actors γ.
Deﬁnition 2.4 Agree
(AGREE α β γ e a q t) ≡ (IN F ORM α β γ e φ t)
where φ = (P W AG α γ (DON E α a)

(P W AG γ α (DON E α a) q)
The agreeing entities α inform the intended recipients γ
that they have a PWAG with respect to γ to perform action a
with respect to γ’s PWAG that α do a relative to q.
Deﬁnition 2.5 Refuse
(REF U SE α β γ e a q t) ≡ (IN F ORM α β γ e φ t)
where φ = (¬(cid:164)(P W AG α γ (DON E α a)

(P W AG γ α (DON E α a) q))
The refusing entities α inform the intended recipients γ
that they will never have the PWAG to perform action a with
respect to γ’s PWAG that α do a relative to q. As in the
individual case, the effect of a REFUSE is opposite to that of
the AGREE.

In the next section, we discuss how these group commu-
nicative acts ﬁt together in a group protocol that is described
using the Joint Intention Theory [Kumar et al., 2002]. In par-
ticular, we will see how to obtain the collective and distribu-
tive reading cases just by addressing the utterances to groups
instead of single agents.

3 An Example: The Request for Action

Protocol

For simplicity of exposition, let us consider the Request for
Action protocol that establishes joint commitment(s) between
the requester(s) and the requestee(s) to get an action done.
One of the objectives of this protocol is to create a joint com-
mitment (JPG) among the requester α and the group γ for

a

b

c

d

Distributive Request
+ Distributive Agree

Distributive Reading

Distributive Group Request

Distributive Reading

+ Distributive Agree

Collective Group Request

Collective Reading

+ Collective Agree

Collective Group Request

+ Distributive Agree to Group

Collective Reading

Figure 1: Distributive and Collective behaviors in the Request
for Action protocol.

doing a speciﬁc action a. The discussion that follows applies
equally well to other protocols (such as Contract-Net) that
use communicative acts to create and discharge joint com-
mitments. The simplest (and the most well-studied) case in-
volves an individual REQUEST from one agent to another
who then responds with either an AGREE or a REFUSE.
It has been established in multi-agent literature that this se-
quence of communicative actions is sufﬁcient to establish a
joint commitment between the two agents for doing the re-
quested action. The resulting joint commitment constrains
the mental state and future behavior of both agents such
that they work cooperatively as a team that is robust to a
wide range of failures. However, this simple one-to-one re-
quest/accept protocol is insufﬁcient for many real life scenar-
ios that involve joint commitment not only between two in-
dividuals but between and among individuals and groups that
may possibly be unknown at the start of the protocol. Further-
more, there may be over-hearers in any group communication
that may affect the team creation process.

Even ignoring the effects of over-hearers, there are at least
four different cases of team formation when the request for
action protocol is generalized to account for group commu-
nication as listed in the above table (see Fig. 1). In the ﬁrst
case (a), individual requests are sent to multiple entities (that
may be groups or individuals) for doing the same task. The
requester has to know all the agents to whom it wants to re-
quest. Some of the recipients of that request may agree to the
request, some may reject the request, and others may not re-
spond at all. As a result of this communication, the requester
forms pair-wise joint commitment with every entity that re-
sponded with an AGREE. The second case (b) is similar in
that it also results in pair-wise joint commitments between the
requester and each entity that agreed. However, it achieves
the same effect by using a single group REQUEST that does
not require a requester to be aware of the intended recipients
of the request. This is very common in broadcast communica-
tions, for example, consider a request for helping with a pro-
gramming task that has been posted on a notice board. Both
the above two cases can be used to create competing teams,
and this is not restricted to the request protocol. For exam-
ple, consider a call for proposal from a funding agency for a
competitive project where multiple contracts are awarded to
different universities - each university has a pair-wise joint
commitment with the funding agency for doing the research
but at the same time they compete with each other to produce
the best results for ongoing funding.

In the third case (c), the requester sends a collective RE-
QUEST to a group which then replies collectively to that re-
quest. It is essentially communication from one entity (indi-
vidual or group) to a group treated and addressed as an entity
(such as an organization). An interesting aspect of this com-
munication is to what extent the members of the requested
organization are jointly committed towards the requester for
doing the requested task. We speculate that this has to do
with how that group was created in the ﬁrst place. For ex-
ample, if the bylaws in the articles of incorporation of that
group require that the group makes its decisions by a majority
vote but once a decision has been made then all group mem-
bers are committed to that decision then it may very well be
the case that each member of that organization is individually
committed to seeing the success of the joint commitment.

In this case, we have collective commitment among the
members of the group. This kind of commitment is the same
that we can achieve in the last case (d), where a requester
sends a REQUEST to a number of agents treated as a group
and they reply individually with an AGREE addressed to the
group. The main difference between the cases c and d is that
while in the ﬁrst case the message is addressed to an existing
group (i.e., it has rules for team creation decision even if we
are not aware of and we do not now who are the members of
the group), in the last case the collective REQUEST followed
by individual replies addressed to the group has the effect that
the members of the group are bound together by their com-
mitment and so a team is formed (we have a collaboration).

In the next sections, we will analyze two of the above cases.
In particular, we will discuss the case b for distributive com-
mitment (Sec. 3.1) and the case d for collaborative commit-
ment (Sec. 3.2). Notice that protocols may also require that
teams be disbanded (i.e., they have to discharge their commit-
ment) after the achievement of the goal. The complete study
of the protocol is left for future work.

3.1 Distributive Reading of Request Protocol
The ﬁrst step of the Request protocol consists of a REQUEST
sent from α to the group γ that establishes a MB about
α’s PWAG towards each member of γ in a distributive way:
(REQU EST α β γ e a q t).
In this case the sender α may
not be aware of who are the members of γ, as in the case of
posting a message on a advice board or, in the case of Grids,
the agents may not be aware of who are the other agents con-
nected to the grid. Notice that in this case, the intended ac-
tor of this communicative act is a single (possibly unknown)
agent x.

A subset of the participants that we represent by the group
γagree may agree to do the requested action and another
subset of the participants represented by the group γref use
∀x γagree(x) ⊃
may refuse to the requested action.
(DON E(AGREE x β α e a ψ q t)), and ∀x γref use(x) ⊃
(DON E(REF U SE x β α e a ψ q t)).
In this case the
communication is overheard by all the members of β.
If
we want private agreements, then we have: ∀x γagree(x) ⊃
(DON E(AGREE x α α e a ψ q t)). For example, if we want
to design an auction protocol, the ﬁrst method (with public
communication) describes in a better way what happens dur-
ing the protocol. Note that with the semantics of the FIPA

speech acts, it is not possible to model the same effects. In
fact during an auction, all members of the group have to over-
hear all other bids in order to bid again.

The group property for the group γagree speciﬁes the
agents who chose to agree from a rational choice between
agreeing and refusal. The group γagree is speciﬁed by not-
ing that it consists of those agents who performed an AGREE
within the speciﬁed timeout period after the original request
was performed. In either case, the group predicate is evalu-
ated retrospectively i.e. by looking backwards from a future
point in time to determine which agents ’agreed’. We will
specify γagree using the predicate γagree(x) which is true
(cid:48)
if there exist events e
and e1 such that the event sequence
(cid:48); e1 was done earlier where e is the original REQUEST
e; e
event and e1 is an AGREE event performed by x.
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
γagree(x) ≡ ∃ e
, e1 (EARLIER (DON E e; e
;

Similarly,

(AGREE x β α e1 a q t1)))
the group property for γref use speciﬁes the
agents who refused within the speciﬁed timeout period after
the original REQUEST was performed.

According to these deﬁnitions of group predicates, an agent
executing this protocol may not know all the agents who
agree and all the agents who refuse until the deadline is
reached, that is, when this protocol ends. In fact, the groups
γagree and γref use are dynamic groups because evaluating
the respective group predicates at any time before the dead-
line gives only those agents that have agreed or refused up
to that time. Until the deadline is reached, the member-
ship of these groups increases whenever an agent performs
an AGREE or a REFUSE communicative act.

The goal associated with the protocol is to form teams for
doing an action a relative to some condition q. In other words,
the goal is to establish pair-wise joint commitments between
the initiator α and whoever agreed (i.e. every agent x who
belongs to the group γagree) that x does the action a relative
to the initiator’s original PWAG. The existence of a JPG be-
tween two agents is a sufﬁcient condition for the formation
of a team with respect to that JPG [Levesque et al., 1990].
Mutual beliefs in each other’s PWAG toward the other to
achieve a goal p is sufﬁcient to establish a joint commitment
to achieve p provided that there is a mutual belief that p has
not already been achieved, and the PWAGs are interlocking
(i.e., one PWAG is relative to the other) [Kumar et al., 2002].
Theorem 3.1 (cid:96)d (DON E (REQU EST α β γ e a q t);

⇒ (JP G α γagree (DON E γagree a))

(AGREE γagree β α e a q t

(cid:48)

))

Proof Sketch. Using the deﬁnitions of the group com-
municative acts REQUEST and AGREE (deﬁnitions 2.2
and 2.4) and applying Theorems 2.2 and 2.1 under the
assumptions of mutual belief between about each other’s
sincerity and the reliability of the communication chan-
nel, we establish that
there is a mutual belief in each
other’s PWAG: (xM B γx α (yP W AG α γy (DON E γ a)))∧
∀z γagree(z) ⊃ (M B z α (P W AG z α (DON E z a))).

In distributive reading, the effect of multiple single utter-
ances is the same as that of making group utterances. Notice
that here we are just considering the effects of group com-
munication on the intended actors and not on the overhearers.

Figure 2: a. Case of Distributive Commitment; b. Case of
Collective Commitment.

We will see in the next section that when we are dealing with
collective reading, the effects of group communication are
different from the one obtained with the above utterances.

3.2 Collective Reading of Request Protocol
In the case of collective reading, we need JPG and MB to be
established among all the members of the group. It may be
possible to achieve this with the exchange of pair-wise com-
municative acts resulting in O(n2) messages. On the other
hand, with messages addressed to groups via broadcast com-
munication we would have just O(n) messages. Using the
deﬁnition of group speech acts, it can be shown that the MB
among the group is achieved. Notice that a collective request
is more than sending individual requests to all the members
of the group, i.e. a collective request implies mutual belief in
the group that the intended actor of the request is the whole
group, and so the action should be a joint action for the group.
We claim that one cannot obtain a similar affect by just send-
ing individual requests to the members.

In the case of collective reading, the team that is formed
using group communication has different properties from the
one discussed earlier. These different properties result from
how the team is created. Note that one can also talk about
groups in the case of distributive reading but in that case
the requester and the agents who agree have pair-wise joint
commitment (see Fig. 2 case a). However, in the case of
a collective reading of the Request protocol, the following
property holds in order to establish (JP G γ (DON E γ a))
for the group γ: ∀x γ(x) ⊃ (M B γ (P W AG x γ p)) ∧
(M B γ (P W AG γ x p)) where there is explicitly stated that
the member of the team γ has beliefs about the others agents
or about the team as an entity. This demonstrates that in the
case of a collective reading, the effects of multiple single ut-
terances are different from group utterances.

So in the case of collective REQUEST, the REQUEST
to a single agent:
is addressed to a group and not
Then, each member of
(REQU EST α β γ e a q t).
the group will send an AGREE (or a REFUSE) to α
∀x γagree(x) ⊃
plus the group itself (i.e., γagree+α):
(AGREE x β γagree+α e a ψ q t). Also, in this case each
member of the group γagree may be not aware of who are the
other members.
Theorem 3.2 Successful performance of a REQUEST ad-
dressed to the group for collective reading,
followed by
AGREEs addressed to the requester and the group establishes
a JPG by default among the members of the agree group and

the requester. Formally,

(cid:96)d (DON E (REQU EST α β γ e a q t);

(xAGREE γx

agree β γagree+α e a q t

⇒ (JP G γagree+α (DON E γagree a))

(cid:48)

))

Proof Sketch.

From the deﬁnition of

First, consider agent α who sends
a REQUEST to γ as a group.
Successful perfor-
mance of the REQUEST communicative act establishes
a mutual belief by default between α and γ about
α’s PWAG towards γ for doing the requested action:
(xM B α γx (yP W AG α γy (yDON E γy a) q))). Then,
the agents in γagree reply with a AGREE to the group
γagree+α.
the AGREE com-
municative act and Theorem 2.2 we have that success-
ful performance of the AGREE communicative act estab-
lishes a mutual belief by default between α and γagree
about γagree’s PWAG toward α (i.e., ∀x γagree(x) ⊃
(M B x γagree+α (P W AG x γagree+α (DON E γagree a) q)) ≡
∀x γagree(x) ⊃ (yM B γy
agree+α (P W AG x γagree+α
(DON E γagree a) q)) ≡ (yM B γy
agree α
(DON E γagree a) q))). Using the deﬁnitions of the group
communicative acts and the assumptions of mutual belief
about each other’s sincerity and the reliability of the com-
munication channel, we establish that there is a mutual belief
in each other’s PWAG. Thereafter, the property for JPG for
a collaborative reading is satisﬁed. We note that the key dif-
ference between a collective reading and distributive reading
lies in the AGREEs sent to both the requester and the other
agents as a group. What we argue is that one cannot achieve
the same results sending individual utterances.
Theorem 3.3 Successful performance of a REQUEST ad-
dressed to each individual in the group,
followed by an
AGREE to each individual in the group establishes a JPG
by default among the members of the AGREE group but does
not constitute a collective reading. Formally,

agree+α (xP W AG γx

(cid:48)d (DON E(REQU EST α β γ e a q t);

(xyAGREE γx

agree β γy

agree+α e a q t

⇒ (JP G γagree+α (DON E γagree a))

(cid:48)

))

Proof Sketch. In order to show this is not a theorem, we
provide a counterexample. Consider three agents (namely
the requester a, and b, c ∈ γ) in group γ. After the RE-
QUEST communicative act has been performed, we have that
∀x γ(x) ⊃ (M B α x (P W AG α x p q)). So, for example, in
this case we don’t have that (M B a b (P W AG a c p q)) holds,
because the REQUEST is addressed to individuals and b can-
not see the message addressed to c.

4 Discussion
Group communication is common in collaborative applica-
tions of all kind. There are a variety of distributed ap-
plications that provides group communication. An infras-
tructure supporting group communication can be based on
many different approaches and technologies, whose features
vary signiﬁcantly. Some of them rely on message pass-
ing systems and are implemented as webs of point-to-point
links or through multicast IP. Another common approach for
dealing with group communication is based on distributed

event systems or message queue-based infrastructure for pub-
lish/subscribe systems. Publish/subscribe is a pattern often
used in systems for human-to-human interaction, for exam-
ple, bulletin boards, newsgroups and their more recent Inter-
net incarnations such as blogs, group-chat rooms, and so on.
While their technical characteristic vary among each other,
they share the same objective of allowing direct conversations
among any partners while simultaneously making exchanged
message visible to a large number of destinations, normally
unknown to the conversing parties. In whatever way group
communication systems are implemented, what it is missing
is a clear semantics for the communication.
In this paper
we have shown that by using group communicative acts in
the context of group protocols we can obtain two different
types of commitments among group members. In particular,
just the fact that an agent addresses an utterance to the whole
group instead of to each single member of the group may im-
ply different properties for the group itself. In the future we
would like to expand our work by reasoning about the effects
that group communicative acts my have on the other recipi-
ents, for example overhearers, and their role in the behavior
of the group.

References
[Clark and Carlson, 1982] H. H. Clark and T. B. Carlson.
In Mutual Knowledge,

Speech acts and hearers’ beliefs.
pages 1–36. Academic Press, London, 1982.

[Cohen and Levesque, 1990] Philip R. Cohen and Hector J.
Levesque. Performatives in a rationally based speech act
theory. In Proceedings of the 28th ACL conference, pages
79–88, 1990.

[De Roure et al., 2003] D. De Roure, M.A. Baker, N.R. Jen-
nings, and N.R. Shadbolt. The evolution of the grid. In
Grid computing - making the global infrastructure a real-
ity, pages 65–100. John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2003.

[Foster et al., 2001] Ian Foster, Carl Kesselman, and Steven
Tuecke. The anatomy of the grid: Enabling scalable vir-
tual organizations. International Journal Supercomputer
Applications, 15(3), 2001.

[Jennings, 2001] Nicholas R. Jennings. An agent-based ap-
proach for building complex software systems. Communi-
cations of the ACM, 44(4):35–41, 2001.

[Kumar et al., 2000] S. Kumar, M. J. Huber, D. McGee, P. R.
Cohen, and H. J. Levesque. Semantics of agent commu-
nication languages for group interaction. In Proceedings
of the 17 th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, pages 42–47, 2000.

[Kumar et al., 2002] Sanjeev Kumar, Marcus

J. Huber,
Philip R. Cohen, and David R. McGee. Toward a formal-
ism for conversation protocols using joint intention theory.
Computational Intelligence, 18(2):174–174, 2002.

[Levesque et al., 1990] Hector J. Levesque, Philip R. Cohen,
and Jos´e H. T. Nunes. On acting together. In Proceedings
of the 8th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
AAAI, pages 94–99, 1990.

