Topic and Role Discovery in Social Networks

Andrew McCallum, Andr´es Corrada-Emmanuel, Xuerui Wang

Department of Computer Science

University of Massachusetts Amherst

Amherst, MA 01003 USA

{mccallum, corrada, xuerui}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

Previous work in social network analysis (SNA)
has modeled the existence of links from one en-
tity to another, but not the language content or
topics on those links. We present
the Author-
Recipient-Topic (ART) model for social network
analysis, which learns topic distributions based on
the direction-sensitive messages sent between en-
tities. The model builds on Latent Dirichlet Al-
location (LDA) and the Author-Topic (AT) model,
adding the key attribute that distribution over top-
ics is conditioned distinctly on both the sender and
recipient—steering the discovery of topics accord-
ing to the relationships between people. We give
results on both the Enron email corpus and a re-
searcher’s email archive, providing evidence not
only that clearly relevant topics are discovered, but
that the ART model better predicts people’s roles.

Introduction and Related Work

1
Social network analysis (SNA) is the study of mathemati-
cal models for interactions among people, organizations and
groups. With the recent availability of large datasets of hu-
man interactions [Shetty & Adibi, 2004; Wu et al., 2003], the
popularity of services like Friendster.com and LinkedIn.com,
and the salience of the connections among the 9/11 hijackers,
there has been growing interest in social network analysis.

Historically, research in the ﬁeld has been led by social
scientists and physicists [Lorrain & White, 1971; Albert &
Barab´asi, 2002; Watts, 2003; Wasserman & Faust, 1994],
and previous work has emphasized binary interaction data,
with directed and/or weighted edges. There has not, how-
ever, previously been signiﬁcant work by researchers with
backgrounds in statistical natural language processing, nor
analysis that captures the richness of the language contents
of the interactions—the words, the topics, and other high-
dimensional speciﬁcs of the interactions between people.

Using pure network connectivity properties, SNA often
aims to discover various categories of nodes in a network.
For example, in addition to determining that a node-degree
distribution is heavy-tailed, we can also ﬁnd those particular
nodes with an inordinately high number of connections, or
with connections to a particularly well-connected subset of

the network. Furthermore, using these properties we can as-
sign “roles” to certain nodes, e.g. [Lorrain & White, 1971;
Wolfe & Jensen, 2003]. However, it is clear that network
properties are not enough to discover all the roles in a social
network. Consider email messages in a corporate setting, and
imagine a situation where a tightly knit group of users trade
email messages with each other in a roughly symmetric fash-
ion. Thus, at the network level they appear to fulﬁll the same
role. But perhaps, one of the users is in fact a manager for the
whole group—a role that becomes obvious only when one
accounts for the language content of the email messages.

Outside of the social network analysis literature, there has
been a stream of new research in machine learning and natural
language models for clustering words in order to discover the
few underlying topics that are combined to form documents
in a corpus. Latent Dirichlet Allocation [Blei et al., 2003] ro-
bustly discovers multinomial word distributions of these top-
ics. Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes [Teh et al., 2004] can
determine an appropriate number of topics for a corpus. The
Author-Topic Model [Steyvers et al., 2004] learns topics con-
ditioned on the mixture of authors that composed a document.
However, none of these models are appropriate for SNA, in
which we aim to capture the directed interactions and rela-
tionships between people.

The paper presents the Author-Recipient-Topic (ART)
model, a directed graphical model of words in a message gen-
erated given their author and a set of recipients. The model is
similar to the Author-Topic (AT) model, but with the crucial
enhancement that it conditions the per-message topic distri-
bution jointly on both the author and individual recipients,
rather than on individual authors. Thus the discovery of top-
ics in the ART model is inﬂuenced by the social structure in
which messages are sent and received. Each topic consists of
a multinomial distribution over words. Each author-recipient
pair has a distribution over topics. We can also easily calcu-
late marginal distributions over topics conditioned solely on
an author, or solely on a recipient, in order to ﬁnd the topics
on which each person is most likely to send or receive.

Most importantly, we can also effectively use these person-
conditioned topic distributions to measure similarity between
people, and thus discover people’s roles by clustering using
this similarity. For example, people who receive messages
containing requests for photocopying, travel bookings, and
meeting room arrangements can all be said to have the role

“administrative assistant,” and can be discovered as such be-
cause in the ART model they will all have these topics with
high probability in their receiving distribution. Note that we
can discover that two people have similar roles even if in the
graph they are connected to very different sets of people.

We demonstrate this model on the Enron email corpus
comprising 147 people and 23k messages, and also on about
10 months of incoming and outgoing mail of the ﬁrst author,
comprising 825 people and 23k messages. We show not only
that ART discovers extremely salient topics, but also gives
evidence that ART predicts people’s roles better than AT and
SNA. Furthermore we show that the similarity matrix pro-
duced by ART is different from both the SNA matrix and the
AT matrix in several appropriate ways.

We also describe an extension of the ART model that ex-
plicitly captures roles of people, by generating role associa-
tions for the authors and recipients of a message, and con-
ditioning the topic distributions on role assignments. The
model, which we term Role-Author-Recipient-Topic (RART),
naturally represents that one person can have more than one
role. We describe several possible RART variants, and de-
scribe preliminary experiments with one of these variants.

2 Author-Recipient-Topic Models
Before describing the ART model, we ﬁrst describe three
related models. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is a
Bayesian network that generates a document using a mixture
of topics [Blei et al., 2003]. In its generative process, for each
document d, a multinomial distribution θ over topics is ran-
domly sampled from a Dirichlet with parameter α, and then
to generate each word, a topic z is chosen from this topic
distribution, and a word, w, is generated by randomly sam-
pling from a topic-speciﬁc multinomial distribution φz. The
robustness of the model is greatly enhanced by integrating out
uncertainty about the per-document topic distribution θ.

The Author model (also termed a Multi-label Mixture
Model) [McCallum, 1999], is a Bayesian network that simul-
taneously models document content and its authors’ interests
with a 1-1 correspondence between topics and authors. For
each document d, a set of authors ad is observed. To generate
each word, an author, z, is sampled uniformly from the set,
and then a word, w, is generated by sampling from an author-
speciﬁc multinomial distribution φz. The Author-Topic (AT)
model is a similar Bayesian network, in which each authors’
interests are modeled with a mixture of topics [Steyvers et al.,
2004]. In its generative process for each document d, a set of
authors, ad, is observed. To generate each word, an author x
is chosen uniformly from this set, then a topic z is selected
from a topic distribution θx that is speciﬁc to the author, and
then a word w is generated from a topic-speciﬁc multinomial
distribution φz. However, as described previously, none of
these models is suitable for modeling message data.

An email message has one sender and in general more than
one recipients. We could treat both the sender and the recip-
ients as “authors” of the message, and then employ the AT
model, but this does not distinguish the author and the recipi-
ents of the message, which is undesirable in many real-world
situations. A manager may send email to a secretary and vice

Figure 1: Three related models, and the ART model.
In
all models, each observed word, w, is generated from a
multinomial word distribution, φz, speciﬁc to a particular
topic/author, z, however topics are selected differently in each
of the models.

versa, but the nature of the requests and language used may
be quite different. Even more dramatically, consider the large
quantity of junk email that we receive; modeling the topics of
these messages as undistinguished from the topics we write
about as authors would be extremely confounding and unde-
sirable since they do not reﬂect our expertise or roles.

Alternatively we could still employ the AT model by ig-
noring the recipient information of email and treating each
email document as if it only has one author. However, in this
case (which is similar to the LDA model) we are losing all in-
formation about the recipients, and the connections between
people implied by sender-recipient relationships.

Thus, we propose an Author-Recipient-Topic (ART) model
for message data. The ART model captures topics and the di-
rected social network of senders and recipients by condition-
ing the multinomial distribution over topics distinctly on both
the author and one recipient of a message. Unlike the AT, the

αθzwLatent Dirichlet Allocation(LDA)[Blei, Ng, Jordan, 2003]NDxzwAuthor-Topic Model(AT)[Rosen-Zvi, Griffiths, Steyvers, Smyth 2004]NDθφαβTAφβTxzwAuthor-Recipient-Topic Model(ART)[This paper]NDθφαβTA,AzwAuthor Model(Multi-label Mixture Model)[McCallum 1999]NDφβAadadrdadddddART model takes into consideration both author and recipi-
ents distinctly, in addition to modeling the email content as a
mixture of topics.

The ART model is a Bayesian network that simultaneously
models message content, as well as the directed social net-
work in which the messages are sent. In its generative pro-
cess, for each message d, an author, ad, and a set of recip-
ients, rd, are observed. To generate each word, a recipient,
x, is chosen uniformly from rd, and then a topic z is chosen
from a multinomial topic distribution θad,x, where the distri-
bution is speciﬁc to the author-recipient pair (ad, x). Finally,
the word w is generated by sampling from a topic-speciﬁc
multinomial distribution φz. The result is that the discovery
of topics is guided by the social network in which the collec-
tion of message text was generated.

The Bayesian network for all models is shown in Figure 1.
In the ART model, given the hyperparameters α and β, an
author a, and a set of recipients r, the joint distribution of the
topic mixtures θ, the word mixtures φ, a set of recipients x, a
set of topics z and a set of words w in the corpus is given by:
p(θ, φ, x, z, w|α, β, a, r)
=p(θ|α)p(φ|β)

p(xdn|rd)p(zdn|θad,xdn)p(wdn|φzdn).

DY

NdY

d=1

n=1

Integrating over θ and φ, and summing over x and z, we

get the marginal distribution of a corpus:

DY

ZZ
X
· p(zdn|θad,xdn )p(wdn|φzdn )dφdθ.

p(θ|α)p(φ|β)

X

NdY

xdn

zdn

n=1

d=1

p(xdn|rd)

p(w|α, β, a, r) =

3 Experimental Results
We present results with the Enron email corpus and the per-
sonal email of the ﬁrst author of this paper (McCallum).
After preprocessing, the Enron corpus we use contains 147
users and 23,488 emails, and the McCallum dataset consists
of 23,488 messages written by 825 authors, sent or received
by McCallum during Jan.-Oct., 2004. Gibbs sampling is em-
ployed to conduct all experiements (as detailed in [McCallum
et al., 2004]).

3.1 Topics and Prominent Relations from ART
Table 1 shows the highest probability words from six topics in
an ART model trained on the 147 Enron users with 50 topics.
(The quoted titles are our own interpretation of a summary
for the topics.) The clarity and speciﬁcity of these topics are
typical of the topics discovered by the model.

Beneath the word distribution for each topic are the three
author-recipient pairs with highest probability of discussing
that topic—each pair separated by a horizontal line, with the
author above the recipient. For example, Hain, the top author
of messages in the “Legal Contracts” topic, was an in-house
lawyer at Enron. In the “Operations” topic, it is satisfying
to see Beck, who was the Chief Operating Ofﬁcer at Enron.
In the “Government Relations” topic, we see Dasovich, who
was a Government Relation Executive, Shapiro who was Vice

Topic 17

“Doc. Review”

Topic 5

“Legal Contracts”
attached
section
0.0299
agreement
0.0265
party
review
0.0226
language
questions
0.0203
contract
draft
0.0155
date
letter
enron
0.0151
comments
0.0149
parties
copy
0.0126
notice
revised
0.0112
days
0.0111
include
document
0.0549 G.Nemec
M.Hain
J.Steffes
J.Dasovich
R.Shapiro
D.Hyvl
K.Ward

0.0377 G.Nemec
M.Whitt

0.0362 B.Tycholiz

B.Tycholiz

G.Nemec

Topic 27

ofﬁce

0.0742
0.0493
0.0340 morning
0.0257 monday
0.0245
0.0239 wednesday
0.0207
0.0165
0.0161
0.0156
0.0737

“Time Scheduling”
day
0.0419
0.0418
friday
0.0369
0.0282
0.0282
0.0267
0.0261
0.0218
0.0214
0.0191
0.0340

tuesday
time
good
thursday
J.Dasovich
R.Shapiro
J.Dasovich
J.Steffes
0.0325 C.Clair

0.0289

0.0175

0.0551

M.Taylor

Topic 34

“Operations”

Topic 37

“Power Market”

Topic 41

“Gov. Relations”

operations
team
ofﬁce
list
bob
open
meeting
gas
business
houston
S.Beck
L.Kitchen
S.Beck
J.Lavorato
S.Beck
S.White

0.0321 market
power
0.0234
0.0173
price
system
0.0144
prices
0.0129
high
0.0126
based
0.0107
0.0107
buy
customers
0.0106
costs
0.0099
J.Dasovich
0.2158
J.Steffes
J.Dasovich
R.Shapiro
0.0530 M.Taylor

0.0826

E.Sager

0.0567
0.0563
0.0280
0.0206
0.0182
0.0124
0.0120
0.0117
0.0110
0.0106
0.1231

0.1133

0.0218

state
california
power
energy
electricity
davis
utilities
commission
governor
prices
J.Dasovich
R.Shapiro
J.Dasovich
J.Steffes
J.Dasovich
R.Sanders

0.0404
0.0367
0.0337
0.0239
0.0203
0.0183
0.0158
0.0136
0.0132
0.0089
0.3338

0.2440

0.1394

Table 1: An illustration of several topics from a 50-topic run
for the Enron Email Dataset. Each topic is shown with the top
10 words and their corresponding conditional probabilities.
The quoted titles are our own summary for the topics. Below
are prominent author-recipient pairs for each topic.

President of Regulatory Affairs, and Steffes, who was Vice
President of Government Affairs. Results on the McCallum
email dataset are reported in Table 2.

3.2 Stochastic Blockstructures and Roles
The stochastic equivalence hypothesis from SNA states that
nodes in a network that behave stochastically equivalently
must have similar roles. In the case of an email network con-
sisting of message counts, the natural way to measure equiva-
lence is to examine the probability that a node communicated
with other nodes. If two nodes have similar probability distri-
bution over their communication partners, we should consider
them role-equivalent. We can measure a similarity symmetri-
cally by calculating the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence, and
inverting it.

Standard recursive graph-cutting algorithms on this matrix
can be used to cluster users, rearranging the rows/columns to

Topic 5
“Grant

Proposals”
proposal
data
budget
work
year
glenn
nsf
project
sets
support
smyth
mccallum
mccallum
stowell
mccallum
lafferty
mccallum
smyth
pereira
lafferty

Topic 38

“ML

Models”

inference
conditional
methods
number
sequence
learning
graphical
random
casutton

Topic 31
“Meeting
Setup”
today
model
tomorrow models
time
ll
meeting
week
talk
meet
morning
monday
ronb
mccallum mccallum
wellner
mccallum icml04-chairs
casutton
mccallum casutton
mccallum nips04workﬂow
casutton
mccallum
mccallum weinman
wellner
mccallum

mccallum

Topic 41
“Friendly
Discourse”
great
good
don
sounds
work
wishes
talk
interesting
time
hear
mccallum
culotta

casutton
mccallum
ronb
mccallum
saunders
mccallum
pereira

icml04-webadmin mccallum

Table 2: The four topics most prominent in McCallum’s email
exchange with smyth (Padhraic Smyth), from a 50-topic run
of ART on 10 months of McCallum’s email. The topics pro-
vide an extremely salient summary of McCallum and Smyth’s
relationship during this time period: they wrote a grant pro-
posal together; they set up many meetings; they discussed
machine learning models; they were friendly with each other.
Below are prominent author-recipient pairs for each topic.
The people other than smyth also appear in very sensible as-
sociations: stowell is McCallum’s proposal budget adminis-
trator; McCallum also wrote a proposal with lafferty (John
Lafferty) and pereira (Fernando Pereira); McCallum also sets
up meetings, discusses machine learning and has friendly dis-
course with his graduate student advisees: ronb, wellner, ca-
sutton, and culotta; he does not, however, discuss the details
of proposal-writing with them.

form approximately block-diagonal structures. This is the fa-
miliar process of ‘blockstructuring’ used in SNA. We perform
such an analysis on two datasets: a small subset of the Enron
users consisting mostly of people associated with the Tran-
swestern Pipeline Division within Enron, and the entirety of
McCallum’s email.

Beginning with the Enron data, Figure 2 shows the results
from traditional SNA (in this case, JS divergence of distri-
butions on recipients from each sender), ART (JS divergence
of recipient-marginalized topic distributions for each sender)
and AT (using the topics distributions from AT instead of
our ART). Darker shading indicates higher similarity between
people.

Consider Enron employee Geaccone (user 9 in all the ma-
trices in Figure 2). According to the traditional SNA role
measurement, Geaccone and McCarty (user 8) have very sim-
ilar roles, however, both the AT and ART models indicate no
special similarity.
Inspection of the data reveals that Gea-
conne was an Executive Assistant, while McCarty was a Vice-

Figure 2: Top: SNA Inverse JS Network. Left Bottom: ART
Inverse JS Network. Right Bottom: AT Inverse JS Network.
Darker shades indicate higher similarity.

President—rather different roles—and, thus output of ART
and AT is more appropriate. Thus, SNA analysis shows that
they wrote email to similar sets of people, but the ART anal-
ysis illustrates that they used very different language.

Here ART and AT provide similar role distance, but they
show their differences elsewhere. For example, AT indicates
a very strong role similarity between Geaconne and Hayslett
(user 6), who was her boss (and CFO & Vice President in
the Division); on the other hand, ART more correctly desig-
nates a low role similarity for this pair—in fact, ART assigns
low similarity between Geaconne and all others in the ma-
trix, which is appropriate because she is the only executive
assistant in this small sample of Enron employees.

Another interesting pair is Blair (user 4) and Watson (user
14). ART predicts them to be role-similar, while the SNA and
AT models do not. ART’s prediction seems more appropriate
since Blair worked on “gas pipeline logistics” and Watson
worked on “pipeline facility planning”, two very similar jobs.
Based on the above examples, and other similar examples,
we would claim that the ART model is clearly better than the
SNA model in predicting role-equivalence between users, and
somewhat better than the AT model in this capacity.

We also carried out this analysis with the personal email
for McCallum to further validate the difference between the
ART and SNA predictions. There are 825 users in this email
corpus. Table 3 shows the closest pairs, as calculated by the
ART model and SNA model. The difference in quality be-
tween the ART and SNA halves of the table is striking.

Almost all the pairs predicted by the ART model look rea-
sonable while many of those predicted by SNA are not at
all. For example, ART matches mike and mikem are actu-
ally two different email addresses for the same person. (Most

123456789101112131415161:joe.stepenovitch2:larry.campbell3:paul.thomas4:lynn.blair5:stanley.horton6:rod.hayslett7:shelley.corman8:danny.mccarty9:tracy.geaccone10:drew.fossum11:kevin.hyatt12:bill.rapp13:paul.y’barbo14:kimberly.watson15:steven.harris16:teb.lokey12345678910111213141516123456789101112131415161234567891011121314151612345678910111213141516Pairs considered most alike by ART

Description
User Pair
Both journal review management
editor reviews
mike mikem
Same person! (manual coref error)
aepshtey smucker Both students in McCallum’s class
coe laurie
mcollins mitchell

Both UMass admin assistants
Both ML researchers on SRI project

Pairs considered most alike by SNA

User Pair
aepshtey rasmith
donna editor
donna krishna
donna ramshaw
donna reviews

Description
Both students in McCallum’s class
Spouse is unrel. to journal editor
Spouse is unrel. to conf. organizer
Spouse is unrel. to researcher at BBN
Spouse is unrel. to journal editor

Table 3: Pairs considered most alike by ART and SNA on
McCallum email. All pairs produced by the ART model
are accurately quite similar. This is not so for the top SNA
pairs. Many users are considered similar by SNA merely be-
cause they appear in the corpus mostly sending email only to
McCallum. However, this causes people with very different
roles to be incorrectly declared similar—such as McCallum’s
spouse (donna) and the JMLR editor.

other correferent email addresses were pre-collapsed by hand
during preprocessing; here ART has pointed out out a mis-
taken omission, indicating the potential for ART to be used
as a helpful component of an automated coreference system.)
Users coe and laurie are both UMass CS Department admin-
istrative assistants; they rarely send email to the same people,
but they write about similar things. On the other hand, the
pairs declared most similar by the SNA model are mostly ex-
tremely poor. Most of the pairs include donna, and indicate
pairs of people who are similar only because in this corpus
they appeared mostly sending email only to McCallum, and
not others. User donna is McCallum’s spouse.

4 Role-Author-Recipient-Topic Models
To better explore the roles of authors, an additional level of
latent variables can be introduced to explicitly model roles.
Of particular interest is capturing the notion that a person can
have multiple roles simultaneously—for example, a person
can be both a professor and a mountain climber. Each role is
associated with a set of topics, and these topics may overlap.
For example, professors’ topics may prominently feature re-
search, meeting times, grant proposals, and friendly relations;
climbers’ topics may prominently feature mountains, climb-
ing equipment, and also meeting times and friendly relations.
We incorporate into the ART model a new set of vari-
ables that take on values indicating role, and we term this
augmented model the Role-Author-Recipient-Topic (RART)
model.
In RART, authors, roles and message-contents are
modeled simultaneously. Each author has a multinomial dis-
tribution over roles. Authors and recipients are mapped to
some role assignments, and a topic is selected based on these
roles. Thus we have a clustering model, in which appear-
ances of topics are the underlying data, and sets of corre-

Figure 3: Two possible variants for the Role-Author-
Recipient-Topic (RART) model.

lated topics gather together clusters that indicate roles. Each
sender-role and recipient-role pair has a multinomial distribu-
tion over topics, and each topic has a multinomial distribution
over words.

As shown in Figure 3, different strategies can be employed
to incorporate the “role” latent variables. First in RART1,
role assignments can be made separately for each word in a
document. This model represents that a person can change
role during the course of the email message. In RART2, on
the other hand, a person chooses one role for the duration of
the message. Here each recipient of the message selects a role
assignment, and then for each word, a recipient (with corre-
sponding role) is selected on which to condition the selection
of topic. Some other variants are possible, for example (not
shown in Figure 3), the recipients together result in the selec-
tion of a common, shared role, which is used to condition the
selection of every word in the message. This last model may
help capture the fact that a person’s role may depend on the
other recipients of the message, but also restricts all recipients
to a single role.

The generative process of RART models is similar to that
for ART, as described in Section 2. The Gibbs sampling for-
mulae for RART models can be derived in the same way as
for ART, but in a more complex form.

5 Experimental Results with RART
Preliminary experiments have been conducted with the
RART1 model. Because we introduce two sets of additional
latent variables (author role and recipient role), the sampling
procedure at each iteration is signiﬁcantly more complex. To
make inference more efﬁcient, we can instead perform it in
two distinct parts. One strategy we have found useful is to
ﬁrst train an ART model, and use a sample to obtain topic
assignments and recipient assignments for each word token.
Then, in the next stage, we treat topics and recipients as ob-
served (locked). Although such a strategy may not be rec-
ommended for arbitrary graphical models, we feel this is rea-

zwRole-Author-Recipient-TopicModel 1(RART1)NDθφαβTR,RrdghzwRole-Author-Recipient-TopicModel 2(RART2)NDθφαβTR,RrdaghhdψγAψγAdadxdddsonable here because we ﬁnd that a single sample from Gibbs
sampling on the ART model to yield good assignments. The
following results are based on a 15-group, 50-topic run of
RART1 on McCallum email dataset.

Our results show that the RART model indeed clearly dis-
covers automatically person-role information by its explicit
inclusion of a role variables. For example, the users most
prominent in Role 3 include, (in probability order): olc, gau-
thier, irsystem, system, allan, valerie, tech, and steve. They
are all employees (or mailing lists) of the IT support staff
at UMass CS, except for allan, who, however, was the pro-
fessor chairing the department’s computing committee. Role
4 seems to represent “working on the SRI CALO project.”
Its most prominent members include (in probability order):
pereira, claire, israel, moll, mgervasio, melinda.gervasio, ma-
jordomo, and colin.evans. Most of them are researchers work-
ing on CALO project, many of them at SRI. The sender ma-
jordomo sends messages from an SRI CALO mailing list.
The users mgervasio and melinda.gervasio are actually the
same person; satisfyingly RART found that they have very
similar role distributions.

One objective of the RART model is to capture the multi-
ple roles that a person has. For example, user allan (James
Allan) mentioned above has a role in “IT support,” but also
has a role as “researcher.” Consider also user pereira (Fer-
nando Pereira); his top ﬁve role assginments are Role 2 “NLP
research”, Role 4 “SRI CALO”, Role 6 “proposal writing,”
Role 10 “grant issues,” and Role 8 “guests at McCallum’s
house”—all exactly appropriate, as viewed through McCal-
lum’s email. Note that the difference between roles can be
subtle, for example, Role 6 and Role 10 overlap.

As expected, one can observe interesting differences in
the sender versus recipient topic distributions associated with
each role. For instance, in Role 4 “SRI CALO,” the top three
topics for a sender role are Topic 27 “CALO information,”
Topic 11 “mail accounts,” and Topic 36 “program meetings,”
but for its recipient roles, most prominent are Topic 48 “task
assignments,” Topic 46 “a particular CALO-related research
paper,” and Topic 40 “java code”. Space limitations prevent
inclusion of tables showing the full distributions associated
many topics, roles and people, however these will be avail-
able in an accompanying technical report.

6 Conclusions
We have presented the Author-Recipient-Topic model, a
Bayesian network for social network analysis that discov-
ers discussion topics conditioned on the sender-recipient re-
lationships in a corpus of messages. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this model combines for the ﬁrst time the direction-
alized connectivity graph from social network analysis with
the clustering of words to form topics from probabilistic lan-
guage modeling.

The model can be applied to discovering topics conditioned
on message sending relationships, clustering to ﬁnd social
roles, and summarizing and analyzing large bodies of mes-
sage data. The model would form a useful component in
systems for routing requests, expert-ﬁnding, message recom-
mendation and prioritization, and understanding the interac-

tions in an organization in order to make recommendations
about improving organizational efﬁciency.

The Role-Author-Recipient-Topic (RART) models explic-
itly capture the multiple roles of people, based on messages
sent and received. Additional work on other models that ex-
plicitly capture roles and groups is ongoing.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Center for Intelli-
gent Information Retrieval, the Central Intelligence Agency,
the National Security Agency, the National Science Founda-
tion under NSF grant #IIS-0326249, and by the Defense Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency, through the Department of
the Interior, NBC, Acquisition Services Division, under con-
tract #NBCHD030010.

References
Albert, R., & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2002). Statistical mechanics of
complex networks. Reviews of Modern Physics, 74, 47–97.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. J. (2003). Latent Dirich-
let allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3,
993–1022.

Lorrain, F., & White, H. C. (1971). The structural equivalence
of individuals in social networks. Journal of Mathematical
Sociology, 1, 49–80.

McCallum, A. (1999). Multi-label text classiﬁcation with a
mixture model trained by EM. AAAI Workshop on Text
Learning.

McCallum, A., Corrada-Emmanuel, A., & Wang, X. (2004).
The author-recipient-topic model for topic and role discov-
ery in social networks: Experiments with enron and aca-
demic email (Technical Report). University of Massachus-
sets, Amherst, UM-CS-2004-096.

Shetty, J., & Adibi, J. (2004). The Enron email dataset
database schema and brief statistical report (Technical Re-
port). Information Sciences Institute.

Steyvers, M., Smyth, P., Rosen-Zvi, M., & Grifﬁths, T.
(2004). Probabilistic author-topic models for information
discovery. The Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Confer-
ence on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.

Teh, Y. W., Jordan, M. I., Beal, M. J., & Blei, D. M. (2004).
Hierarchical dirichlet processes (Technical Report). UC
Berkeley Statistics.

Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis:

Methods and applications. Cambridge University Press.

Watts, D. J. (2003). Six degrees: The science of a connected

age. Norton.

Wolfe, A. P., & Jensen, D. (2003). Playing multiple roles:
Discovering overlapping roles in social networks. Proceed-
ings of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.

Wu, F., Huberman, B. A., Adamic, L. A., & Tyler,
Information ﬂow in social groups.

J. R.
http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0305305.

(2003).

