The Altricial-Precocial Spectrum for Robots ∗

Aaron Sloman

http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/˜axs/
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham. UK

Jackie Chappell

http://www.biosciences.bham.ac.uk/staff/staff.htm?ID=90

School of Biosciences

University of Birmingham, UK

Abstract

linguists,

researchers,

psychologists

Several high level methodological debates among
and
AI
philosophers, appear to be endless, e.g.
about
the need for and nature of
representations,
about
the role of symbolic processes, about
embodiment, about situatedness, about whether
symbol-grounding is needed, and about whether
a robot needs any knowledge at birth or can start
simply with a powerful
learning mechanism.
Consideration of the variety of capabilities and
development patterns on the precocial-altricial
spectrum in biological organisms will help us to
see these debates in a new light.

Introduction

1
Attempts to design intelligent systems often encounter two
objections: (a) for non-trivial systems the task is impossibly
difﬁcult, and (b) a system that has been designed is not
intelligent since everything it does is a result of the designer’s
decisions, not its own. These and similar arguments lead
some people to the conclusion that intelligent systems must
start off without any knowledge, and acquire what knowledge
and skills they need by interacting with the environment,
possibly guided by a teacher, using only general learning
capabilities.

This view assumes that something like human adult intel-
ligence could be a product of neonates born with very little
innate knowledge, but possessing a powerful general-purpose
learning mechanism, e.g. reinforcement learning using pos-
itive and negative reinforcement based on drives, needs, and
aversions. Then all knowledge would gradually be built up
by continual shaping of internal and external responses to
various combinations of internal and external stimuli. There
have been several AI robotics projects and synthetic agent
[Grand, 2004;
projects based on this line of thought (e.g.
McCauley, 2002; Weng, 2004], among others.)

This view ignores some powerful genetic inﬂuences in
biological organisms. Most species show a mosaic of skills
and abilities some of which develop mainly under genetic
inﬂuence, while others grow (usually gradually) as a result of

∗Many thanks to colleagues on the EC CoSy project.

learning and experience. Even learning mechanisms can have
constraints tailored by natural selection to the probability
of certain events co-occurring in their environment. For
example, Domjan and Wilson [1972] showed that rats readily
learned to associate the taste of water with sickness, and
ringing bells with electric shock, but could not learn to
associate noise with sickness or taste with shock.

Our ability to design artiﬁcial systems could beneﬁt from
a better understanding of the very varied spectrum of cases
found in nature. At one extreme are biological species,
often labelled ‘precocial’, whose young are born or hatched
relatively well developed and able to cope with tasks that are
far beyond what our current robots can do: newly hatched
chickens look for food which they peck, and new-born deer
can, within hours, ﬁnd a nipple to feed from, and run with
the herd. At another extreme (often labelled ‘altricial’),
animals are born or hatched helpless and underdeveloped,
yet sometimes grow into adults with far more impressive
cognitive skills than their precocial cousins, e.g. humans,
hunting mammals and nest-building birds. How?

Precocial skills that appear in a relatively constant form
in different environments can be ﬁne-tuned by the individual
experience of the animal.
In contrast, altricial capabilities
can vary widely within a species, as languages do between
cultures, and as many kinds of competence do from one
generation to another within a culture. Many children now
have knowledge and skills beyond the wildest dreams of
their parents at the same age.
It is implausible that a
combination of environmental differences and some simple
general learning mechanism, or any known learning algo-
rithms, could produce such variation. Evolution seems to
have found something more powerful, which supports and
enhances cultural evolution.

We propose that in addition to knowledge-free reinforce-
ment learning mechanisms and the unlearned kinds of knowl-
edge acquisition (like maturation, and peri-natally generated
precocial skills), there are capabilities produced by powerful
mechanisms characteristic of the altricial end of the spectrum,
that explain how adult members of the same species can have
hugely varying knowledge and skills. These mechanisms
(a) aquire many discrete chunks of knowledge through play
and exploratory behaviour which is not directly reinforced,
and (b) combine such chunks in novel ways both in solving
problems and in further play and exploration. This process

depends on a collection of very abstract ‘internal’ skills and
knowledge with a strong innate component – though the
collection can develop over time, especially in humans.

So evolution provides much information that animals do
not have to learn: some used in overt behaviour in precocial
skills and some in more abstract internal behaviour (e.g.
skill-bootstrapping behaviour) towards the altricial end. We
present a number of conjectures about how this happens and
discuss implications for robot designers.

1.1 Precocial vs. altricial developmental mode
Conjecture 1: There is no sharp altricial/precocial dis-
tinction between species, nor a continuum of cases, but a
spectrum of capabilities, with many discontinuities. Each
species exhibits a unique collection of skills from different
parts of the spectrum. A similar variety of designs may be
useful in robots.

A number of factors determine the extent to which a
behaviour or skill is modiﬁed by the animal’s own experience.
The outcomes of these factors map very approximately on
to the precocial and altricial developmental modes, though
altricial species may have some precocial skills and vice
versa. Analysis of these issues will prove valuable in deciding
which sorts of robots will need ‘precocial’ capabilities, which
‘altricial’ capabilities, and what sorts of mechanisms are
needed.

Factors promoting precocial skills and knowledge
The following will tend to favour evolution of precocial skills
over altricial ones (if both are possible).
• Opportunity:

If it would be very difﬁcult for the animal to
learn a skill given the constraints of its environment the skill
has to be precocial. e.g. young blackcaps migrating for the
ﬁrst time on their own [Helbig, 1996], and the species-speciﬁc
‘password’ vocalisation in a brood parasite, the brown-headed
cowbird [Hauber et al., 2001], which is raised by other species.
• Risk: Learning depends on exposure to certain stimuli at the right
time. If failing to perform a vital skill correctly would result in
animals dying before reproduction, the skill is more likely to be
precocial. e.g. predator recognition in Atlantic salmon, [Hawkins
et al., 2004], ﬂight in cliff-nesting altricial birds.

• Time constraints: If learning would take too long to meet a need,
a skill is more likely to be precocial. e.g. running in wildebeest
calves, who must keep up with the herd soon after birth.
The young of species with many precocial skills start
highly competent, requiring little or no parental care other
than a degree of protection from predators.1 They appear to
have a great deal of information about structures in the world,
how to perceive them, and how to behave in relation to them,
even if they can be changed later in subtle ways as a result of
adaptive processes, reinforcement learning or the like.

Since evolution can, and often does, provide huge amounts
of information in the form of knowledge and skills. should
not a large amount of precocial information be the norm, if
all those millions of years of evolution are not to be wasted?

1Note, however, that species with precocial young may have to

invest more resources in their young pre-natally.

Factors promoting altricial skills and knowledge
In conditions opposite to those outlined above (abundant op-
portunity for learning, low risk outcome, no time constraints),
altricial skills will tend to be favoured.
In addition, the
following factors are also important:
• Unpredictability: If the environment is very variable or unpre-
dictable, there will be no consistent pattern for natural selection
to act on. The fact that ﬂeeing prey are relatively unpredictable,
while grass tends to be highly predictable might explain why
predatory mammals and birds tend to have altricial developmen-
tal patterns, while grazers have many precocial skills.

• New niches: This is related to unpredictability.

If an animal
encounters conditions which have never been encountered before
in the evolutionary history of its species, individual learning
will be the only possible response. Some niche variation can
be accommodated by individual adaptation and calibration. But
not when quite new concepts and new behavioural structures are
required, e.g.
if opponents often invent new weapons, or new
defences against old weapons and strategies.
If altricial skills provide so much ﬂexibility and diversity
of responses, why don’t more animals show altricial skills?
A partial answer is cost: neural tissue is expensive to build
and maintain (in humans, the brain consumes about 20% of
the basal metabolic rate). Learning can be time-consuming
and risky. Young animals need to be protected from the harsh
realities of life while acquiring altricial skills, so the intensity
and duration of parental care can also be signiﬁcant. The
extended commitment of resources by parents to guarding,
feeding, and in some cases helping their offspring to gain
hunting skills, can both endanger the adults (make them more
vulnerable to predation, deprive them of food given to the
offspring), and reduce their breeding frequency.

1.2 The altricial-precocial spectrum for robots
Analysis of the altricial/precocial trade-offs already explored
by evolution can provide a basis for a new understanding
of the varied requirements and tradeoffs in robot design.
Applications where tasks and environments are fairly static
and machines need to be functional quickly, and where
mistakes during learning could be disastrous (e.g. ﬂight
control) require precocial skills (with some adaptation and
self-calibration), whereas others require altricial capabilities,
e.g. where tasks vary widely and change in complex ways
over time, and where machines need to learn to cope without
being sent for re-programming (e.g.
robots caring for the
elderly). Architectures, mechanisms, forms of representation,
and types of learning may differ sharply between the two
extremes. And the end results of altricial learning by the same
initial architecture may differ widely, as happens in humans.

1.3 Combining precocial and altricial skills
Precocial
skills can provide sophisticated abilities at
birth. Altricial capabilities add the potential to adapt to
changing needs and opportunities. So it is not surprising
that many species have both. However evolution seems
to have discovered something deeper than just a mixture
of some innate modules and some learning capabilities.
Humans, and presumably some other animals, seem to have
a hybrid architecture where the mechanisms for learning are

themselves a mixture of precocial and altricial mechanisms.

Conjecture 2: Evolution ‘discovered’ and deployed the
power of an architecture towards the more sophisticated, al-
tricial, end of the spectrum, based not on speciﬁc knowledge
about the environment, but on mechanisms using abstract
knowledge about ways in which physically possible environ-
ments can differ. So powerful altricial learning arises from
sophisticated genetically determined (i.e. precocial) learning
mechanisms, which may be expanded during development.

Instead of starting off able to recognise and react to speciﬁc
stimuli, an altricial learner might have mechanisms that use
knowledge about how to generate varied exploratory actions
and how to seek recognisable patterns.2
Such ‘playful’
actions reveal which among possible patterns are instantiated
in the environment, and which ways of combining various
kinds of pre-programmed or learnt action capabilities have
effects that are ‘interesting’ not merely in terms of useful
or harmful effects, but also according to criteria such as
symmetry, elegance and power (e.g. producing big effects
with little effort, or making something work that previously
failed), thereby bootstrapping a wide variety of competences
through interactions with the environment.3

2 What are the mechanisms?
This may sound like standard reinforcement learning, ex-
cept for some innate biases to learn about certain classes
of things only a subset of which are actually learnt under
the inﬂuence of any particular environment [Cummins and
Cummins, 2005]. But such mechanisms produce only gradual
changes in behaviour, and it seems that at least some species,
including humans, apes, and some corvids are — in addition
— capable of kinds of discontinuous learning where hard
problems are solved creatively by recombining previously
acquired concepts, knowledge chunks and action chunks.

2.1 Gradual change vs learning chunks.
Conjecture 3: Altricial learning is not always driven by
biological needs and desires (e.g.
for food, shelter, escape,
mating, etc.) using rewards and punishments to drive gradual
change through positive and negative feedback; instead the
key feature is constant (often unmotivated) experimentation
with external and internal actions during which re-usable
chunks of information are learnt about what can be done and
what can occur, and the preconditions and effects. Chunks
are discovered both in passively perceived inputs (e.g. using
self-organising classiﬁers to chunk sensory inputs) and also
in behaviour patterns and their consequences.

Re-use, in new combinations, of previously stored chunks,
might explain the creative problem-solving of New Caledo-
nian crows [Chappell and Kacelnik, 2004; Weir et al., 2002])
and chimpanzees [Kohler, 1927], the ability of social animals
to absorb a culture; and, in humans, the ability to learn and
use a rich and highly structured language. A key feature of

2Manuela Viezzer’s PhD research on discovery of affordances

illustrates this. See http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/˜mxv

3For more on interestingness see [Colton et al., 2000]

such processes is learning new ontologies (discussed further
below.)

2.2 Combinatorics: the origins of syntax
For these kinds of learning, mechanisms that gradually
change weights or probabilities do not sufﬁce: instead some
chunks once learnt are explicitly referenced and available
to be combined with other chunks, so as immediately to
produce external and internal states and processes that are
qualitatively (e.g. structurally) novel for the individual.4
Conjecture 4: Some altricial species can not only store, label
and categorise input and output ‘chunks’ that can be re-used
later, but can also combine them to form larger chunks that
are explored, and if found ‘interesting’ also stored, labelled,
categorised, etc. so that they become available as new, larger
units for future actions. A simple example would be picking
something up and transferring something to one’s mouth,
being combined to form a new unit to pick up an object
and bring it to one’s mouth. Another example is combining
moving right and moving left in a repeated sequence which
can produce changes of visual input that provide useful
information about 3-D structure [Philipona et al., 2003].

A simple demonstration of how this can enormously reduce
search spaces, originally suggested by Oliver Selfridge over
20 years ago can be found in a tutorial program ﬁle provided
with the Poplog system.5
In that example the ‘agent’ is
given tasks which it attempts to solve using its primitive
actions, previously learnt useful actions, and combinations
of primitive and previously learnt actions formed by simple
syntactic operations, including use of a ‘repeat construct’. If
it is given a complex task initially it searches for a solution
and gives up after a certain length of search. But as it
gradually builds up useful re-usable chunks the space of
actions in which it searches in a given number of steps gets
more and more complex. If suitably trained by giving it the
right problems to ‘play’ with it can suddenly become able to
solve a class of quite difﬁcult ‘counting’ problems.

This is a very simple example, but it illustrates a general
that an altricial learning agent may need to be able
point:
to learn many things that are not intrinsically rewarding, but
which are stored as a result of innately driven exploratory
drives and then provide a basis for newer more complex ex-
plorations and learning – which could be specially well suited
to the environment in which the simpler chunks (including
perceptual and action chunks) have been learnt.

We have here a kind of syntactic competence which gener-

ates structures with compositional semantics.
Conjecture 5: Not only external, but also internal actions
– e.g. actions of goal formation, problem-solving, concept
formation – may be composed, forming layers of complexity.
If the methods of syntactic composition are themselves
subject to the same process then the result may be production
of ontological layers in many parts of the system including
perceptual layering, action layering and various kinds of
internal layering of control and description. Different kinds
of competence may produce different kinds of layering.

4[Boden, 1990] distinguishes historical and personal creativity.
5http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/research/poplog/teach/ﬁnger

2.3 Possible beneﬁts of the hybrid design
There may be several different biological advantages gained
by the hybrid architecture over the more obvious ‘precocial’
and ‘altricial’ architectures, which can be framed in terms of
ways of overcoming resource limitations.

Advantage over precocial strategies
• The capabilities required in adults of some species may be too
rich to be encoded in the genome if there is a ‘space’ limitation).
(Genetic information capacity as a scarce resource)

• The evolutionary history of some species may not have provided
any contexts in which certain currently useful capabilities could
have been selected for, or may constrain the direction in which
evolution can proceed (i.e. phylogenetic constraints) (Evolution-
ary history is a biological resource, and may have limitations like
any other biological resource.)

Advantage over altricial strategies
• Although rapid, one-trial reinforcement learning is possible,
reinforcement generally requires multiple exposures to a pairing
of stimulus and reinforcer, and such slower forms of learning
(involving gradual, adaptive, shaping, processes) may not be able
to cope with the very varied environments and challenges facing
adults of some species. (Time to learn as a limited resource)

• For some new problems an individual may have to produce
a discontinuous change from previous behaviours, i.e. novel,
creative behaviour, as opposed to interpolating or extrapolating
in a space that is already well explored. That is because prior
learning does not always take the individual ‘close’ to problems
that can occur.
(Individual learning opportunities as a limited
resource)

• The beneﬁts of precocial strategies may be outweighed by the
risks of over-commitment in a particular direction.
If there
are constraints on types of learning that make certain sorts of
developmentally ﬁxed competence incompatible with kinds of
learning e.g. because the prior commitment provides the wrong
building-blocks for the required new competence and because
it is difﬁcult to re-wire or otherwise re-implement the required
building blocks. In that case, the advantages of being precocial
may be best abandoned in favour of the advantages of ﬂexibility:
provided that parents are available to care for helpless young.
(Flexibility as a limited resource.)
All this points to the need for learning, decision-making,
and acting capabilities that support discontinuous develop-
ment either in the evolution of the species, or in learning by
the individual, without adversely affecting ﬁtness.

2.4 Effect of body and physical environment
Although innate altricial bootstrapping mechanisms encode
a great deal of abstract know-how enabling speciﬁc kinds of
development, the space of possible learnt concepts and action
schemas permitted by such mechanisms (the ‘epigenetic land-
scape’) may be very large, leaving the environment scope to
determine which subset of that space is actually learnt in both
early and late development. Even within one environment,
different kinds of bodies and different kinds of initial brain
mechanisms will produce variation: (a) in the kinds of chunks
that can be learnt, (b) in the number of different chunks that
can be learnt (c) in the variety of forms of combination of
previously learnt chunks.

Having two hands with ﬁve ﬁngers each with several (more
or less independently controllable) joints can produce huge
combinatorial possibilities. Having grippers that can move
independently of the eyes (i.e. hands vs beaks) can make a
huge difference to perceivable patterns. Different designs for
mouths (or beaks) and tongues or vocal mechanisms may also
produce different combinatorial spaces to be explored.

A ﬁxed learning mechanism may be able to acquire dif-
ferent sorts of reusable chunks and perhaps even different
ways of combining chunks, when it is combined with dif-
ferent physical bodies, or different physical environments.
Compare the different behavioural and conceptual results
of exploratory play in children surrounded by rocks, sand,
sticks, stones, mud and water, on the one hand and children
surrounded by stackable blocks and cups, dolls, toy animals,
meccano sets, lego sets, computers with mice and keyboards,
on the other.6

Such learners start with both a control system that performs
systematically varied internal and external operations driving
these mechanisms, as well as mechanisms for learning, stor-
ing, labelling and re-using various kinds of chunks. (Compare
macro-formation mechanisms in planners, e.g. HACKER
[Sussman, 1975] and SOAR’s chunking.)

So the variety of sensory and motor chunks learnt will de-
pend on (a) the physical design of the organism or robot, e.g.
having independently movable limbs, digits, jaws, tongue,
neck, head, eyeballs, ears, with motion changed in various
ways, such as accelerating, decelerating, changing direction
etc. (b) the richness of the organism’s environment, partic-
ularly during development (e.g.
learning in rats improves
with environmental enrichment [Iuvone et al., 1996]).
(c)
the genetically determined collection of internal operations
on data-structures, especially (d) the ‘syntactic’ mechanisms
available for combining old chunks into new structures7 in
perception (e.g. parsing), or in action (e.g.
synthesising
plans), and (e) whether those syntactic mechanisms can be
applied not only to representations of external actions, but
also to representations of internal actions such as operators
used in problem formation, plan construction and debugging
(as in Sussman’s HACKER).

So different altricial species will differ in many ways
In particular some may have

related to these differences.
much richer combinatorial competence than others.

Some of the processes are clearly amenable to cultural
inﬂuences: e.g. what sorts of toys and games are found in the
environment during early development will make a difference
to which ontologies can be acquired. The processes could
lead to different kinds of understanding and representation
of space, time, motion and causality in different species, and
perhaps in different cultures within a species.

After mechanisms for chunking and composing evolved
in forms that we share with some other mammals, further

6An example of such exploration can be seen in this video of a
child aged 11 months exploring affordances in a world with yogurt:
http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/˜axs/ﬁg/josh23 0040.mpg

7Arp [2005] has recently made a similar point, but citing only
the special case of visualisation. [Cummins and Cummins, 2005]
propose only innate learning biases not these innate meta-level
modules.

typical evolutionary processes of duplication plus differen-
tiation could have produced variants that were particularly
suited to human language, which, if used internally, would
have enormously ampliﬁed all the effects discussed above.
But our discussion implies that a powerful form of internal
language developed earlier, to support processes of altricial
bootstrapping that we appear to share with some non-verbal
altricial species [Sloman, 1979].

3 Symbol ‘attachment’, not ‘grounding’
The existence of precocial species demonstrates that sophis-
ticated visual and other apparatus need not be learned, imply-
ing that the semantic content of the information structures is
somehow determined by pre-existing structures and how they
are used. This eliminates, at least for such precocial species,
one of the supposed explanations of where meaning comes
from (“There is really only one viable route from sense to
symbols: from the ground up” [Harnad, 1990]).

How then can innate abstract structures determine mean-
ing, as we claim happens for precocial species? Our answer,
presented in [Sloman, 1985; 1987], is inspired by ideas about
models in meta-mathematics and proposals in philosophy of
science about scientiﬁc terms that could not possibly get
their meaning by abstraction from perceptual processes, (e.g.
‘electron’, ‘quark’, ‘neutrino’, ‘gene’, ‘economic inﬂation’,
‘grammar’).

A (consistent) formal system determines a non-empty class
of possible (Tarskian) models, which may be either abstract
mathematical objects or collections of objects, properties, re-
lations, events, processes etc. in the world. For a given formal
system not every such collection can be a model, though
it may have many different models. As (non-redundant)
axioms are added the set of possible models decreases. So
the meaning becomes increasingly speciﬁc. A formal system
can determine precise meanings for its theoretical terms, by
ruling out the vast majority of possible things in the universe
as referents.

There is typically residual ambiguity, but, as Carnap [1947]
and other philosophers have shown, this residual indetermi-
nacy of meaning may be eliminated, or substantially reduced,
by the use of bridging rules or ‘meaning postulates’. As
Strawson [1959] noted, further ambiguity in reference to
individuals can in some cases be eliminated or reduced by
causal relations between the event of use of symbols and the
things referred to.

We can call this process ‘symbol attachment’, because it is
a process in which a complex symbolic structure with rich
structurally-determined meaning can be pinned down to a
particular part of the world. This is very different from the
theory of symbol grounding which requires all meaning to
be derived bottom up by abstraction from sensory experience
of instances, which is actually a very old philosophical
theory (concept empiricism) put forward hundreds of years
ago by empiricist philosophers and refuted by Kant. Our
impression is that many of the AI researchers who now
use the phrase ‘symbol grounding’ have ignored its original
meaning (arising out of concept empiricism) and actually use
it, unwittingly, to refer to something like what we have called

There are many intermediate cases between pure symbol grounding
and extreme symbol-attachment. Arrows on the left indicate ab-
straction of concepts from instances or sub-classes. On the right
arrows indicate a mixture of constraints that help to determine
possible interpretations (models) of the whole system and/or make
predictions that enable the system to be used or tested.

‘symbol attachment’. We suggest that in altricial species:
(a) symbol attachment, in which structures produced by a
combination of evolution, and exploratory ‘play’ and problem
solving, acquire most of their meaning from their formal
structure, with perceptual/action bridging rules to reduce their
ambiguity, is far more important than what is normally called
‘symbol grounding’, and
(b) learning of chunks and combinatory procedures tailored
to the current environment but constrained by powerful innate
boot-strapping mechanisms that evolved to cope with general
features of the environment (e.g. concerning space, time,
motion, causation, etc.) is far more powerful than most forms
of learning now being studied.

4 Conclusion
The rapid, automatic, non-need-driven collection/creation of
a store of labelled, reusable, perceptual and action chunks,
along with ‘syntactic’ mechanisms for combinatorial exten-
sions of those ‘basic’ chunks, provides a rich and extendable
store of rapidly deployable cognitive resources, using mecha-
nisms that will already sound familiar to many AI researchers
who have worked on planning, problem solving, reasoning, 3-
D vision, and language understanding, though we have said
very little about how they might work.

It may be that if some of this happens while the brain
is still growing the result can be ‘compiled’ into hardware
structures that support further development in powerful ways,
explaining why the process needs to start while the infant is
still physically under-developed. (This is very vague.)

We are not saying that precocial species cannot learn
and adapt but that the amount of variation of which they
are capable is more restricted and the processes are much
slower (e.g.
adjusting weights in a neural net trained by
reinforcement learning, as contrasted with constructing new
re-usable components for combinatorially diverse perceptual
and action mechanisms).

So we suggest that in addition to the experiments where we
pre-design working systems with combinations of different
sorts of competence in order to understand ways in which
such competences might work and cooperate, we should also

begin the longer term exploration of architectures and mech-
anisms for a robot towards the altricial end of the spectrum
described above, growing its architecture to ﬁt opportunities,
constraints and demands provided by the environment. Some
further details regarding requirements for such architectures
can be found in [Sloman et al., 2005].

Readers with some knowledge of the history of philosophy
will recognise all this as an elaboration of ideas put forward
by I. Kant in his Critique of Pure Reason around 1780. He
would have loved AI. Future tasks include relating this work
to the ideas Piaget was trying to express, in his theories about
a child’s construction of reality. using inadequate conceptual
tools (group theory, truth tables), and to the taxonomy of
types of cognitive evolution in [Heyes, 2003].

Application domains where tasks and environments are
fairly static and machines need to be functional quickly, re-
quire precocial skills (possibly including some adaptation and
self-calibration), whereas others require altricial capabilities,
e.g. where tasks and environments vary widely and change in
complex ways over time, and where machines need to learn
how to cope without being sent for re-programming. Ar-
chitectures, mechanisms, forms of representation, and types
of learning may differ sharply between the two extremes.
And the end results of altricial learning by the same initial
architecture may differ widely.

If all this is correct, it seems that after evolution discov-
ered how to make physical bodies that grow themselves, it
discovered how to make virtual machines that grow them-
selves. Researchers attempting to design human-like, chimp-
like or crow-like intelligent robots will need to understand
how. Whether computers as we know them can provide the
infrastructure for such systems is a separate question.

References
[Arp, 2005] Robert Arp. Scenario visualization: One explanation
of creative problem solving. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
12(3):31–60, 2005.

[Boden, 1990] M. A. Boden. The Creative Mind: Myths and

Mechanisms. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 1990.

[Carnap, 1947] R. Carnap. Meaning and necessity: a study in

semantics and modal logic. Chicago University Press, Chicago,
1947.

[Chappell and Kacelnik, 2004] J Chappell and A Kacelnik. New

Caledonian crows manufacture tools with a suitable diameter for
a novel task. Animal Cognition, 7:121–127, 2004.

[Colton et al., 2000] Simon Colton, Alan Bundy, and Toby Walsh.

On the notion of interestingness in automated mathematical
discovery. Int. Journ. of Human-Computer Studies,
53(3):351–375, 2000.

[Cummins and Cummins, 2005] D Cummins and R Cummins.

Innate modules vs innate learning biases. Cognitive Processing:
International Quarterly Journal of Cognitive Science,
3(3-4):19–30, 2005.

[Domjan and Wilson, 1972] M Domjan and N E Wilson.

Speciﬁcity of cue to consequence in aversion learning in the rat.
Psychonomic Science, 26:143–145, 1972.

[Grand, 2004] Steve Grand. Growing Up with Lucy: How to Build

an Android in Twenty Easy Steps. Weidenfeld & Nicolson,
London, 2004.

[Harnad, 1990] S. Harnad. The Symbol Grounding Problem.

Physica D, 42:335–346, 1990.

[Hauber et al., 2001] M E Hauber, S A Russo, and P W Sherman.

A password for species recognition in a brood-parasitic bird.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B, 268:1041–1048,
2001.

[Hawkins et al., 2004] L A Hawkins, A E Magurran, and J D
Armstrong. Innate predator recognition in newly-hatched
atlantic salmon. Behaviour, 141:1249–1262, 2004.

[Helbig, 1996] A J Helbig. Genetic basis, mode of inheritance and

evolutionary changes of migratory directions in palearctic
warblers (aves: Sylviidae). Journal of Experimental Biology,
199:49–55, 1996.

[Heyes, 2003] C.M. Heyes. Four routes of cognitive evolution.

Psychological Review, 110(713-727), 2003.

[Iuvone et al., 1996] L Iuvone, M C Geloso, and E Dell’Anna.

Changes in open ﬁeld behavior, spatial memory, and
hippocampal parvalbumin immunoreactivity following
enrichment in rats exposed to neonatal anoxia. Experimental
Neurology, 139:25–33, 1996.

[Kohler, 1927] W. Kohler. The Mentality Of Apes. Routledge &

Kegan Paul, London, 1927. 2nd edition.

[McCauley, 2002] L. McCauley. Neural Schemas: Toward a

Comprehensive Mechanism of Mind. PhD thesis, University of
Memphis, 2002.
http://csrg.cs.memphis.edu/mccauley/McCauley-Dis.pdf.
[Philipona et al., 2003] D. Philipona, J.K.O’Regan, and J.-P.
Nadal. Is there something out there? Inferring space from
sensorimotor dependencies. Neural Computation, 15(9), 2003.
http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/Philipona/space.pdf.

[Sloman et al., 2005] A. Sloman, R.L. Chrisley, and M. Scheutz.

The architectural basis of affective states and processes. In
M. Arbib and J-M. Fellous, editors, Who Needs Emotions?: The
Brain Meets the Machine. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
New York, 2005. Online at
http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/research/cogaff/0-
INDEX03.html#200305.

[Sloman, 1979] A. Sloman. The primacy of non-communicative

language. In M. MacCafferty and K. Gray, editors, The analysis
of Meaning: Informatics 5 Proceedings ASLIB/BCS Conference,
Oxford, March 1979, pages 1–15, London, 1979. Aslib. Online
at http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/research/cogaff/.

[Sloman, 1985] A. Sloman. What enables a machine to

understand? In Proc 9th IJCAI, pages 995–1001, Los Angeles,
1985.

[Sloman, 1987] A. Sloman. Reference without causal links. In
J.B.H. du Boulay, D.Hogg, and L.Steels, editors, Advances in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence - II, pages 369–381. North Holland,
Dordrecht, 1987.

[Strawson, 1959] P. F. Strawson. Individuals: An essay in

descriptive metaphysics. Methuen, London, 1959.

[Sussman, 1975] G.J. Sussman. A computational model of skill

acquisition. American Elsevier, 1975.

[Weir et al., 2002] A A S Weir, J Chappell, and A Kacelnik.

Shaping of hooks in New Caledonian crows. Science, 297(9
August 2002):981, 2002.

[Weng, 2004] J. Weng. SAIL and Dav Developmental Robot

Projects, 2004.
http://www.cse.msu.edu/˜weng/research/LM.html.

