Towards More Intelligent Mobile Search

Karen Church, Mark T. Keane and Barry Smyth

Adaptive Information Cluster,

Smart Media Institute, Department of Computer Science,

University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
{Karen.Church, Mark.Keane, Barry.Smyth}@ucd.ie

Abstract

As the mobile Internet continues to grow there is
an increasing need to provide users with effective
search facilities.
In this paper we argue that the
standard Web search approach of providing snippet
text alongside each result is not appropriate given
the interface limitations of mobile devices. Instead
we evaluate an alternative approach involving the
use of related queries in place of snippet text for
result gisting.

Introduction

1
The mobile world is growing at an astonishing rate. In 2004,
the number of mobile users worldwide reached 1.52 billion,
in Europe alone the number of users exceeded 340 million
and the volume of pages viewed on the Mobile Web continues
to rise [CellularOnline, 2004]. Five years has passed since the
publication of the renowned WAP usability report, which de-
tailed the various limitations of both WAP (as a means of mo-
bile Web access) and mobile devices [Ramsay and Nielsen,
2000]. However, the Mobile Internet has since been success-
fully re-branded by leading mobile operators like Vodafone
and O2, thus encouraging users to take advantage of next-
generation mobile devices.

If we examine current mobile devices, we can divide them
into three classes. At the lowest level we have standard WAP
enabled phones. Although the screen real-estate of these de-
vices is still very small, most of them come equipped with
high-resolution color interfaces and predictive text input ca-
pabilities - a signiﬁcant improvement over 1st generation
WAP-handsets. The second class of device includes next-
generation smart phones with 3G capabilities. The majority
of these devices encompass larger screens, higher-resolution
interfaces, enhanced Web-browser support and multiple input
options. For example, most of these phones support XHTML,
(e.g. Nokia 6630, Siemens SX1) and some of the phones in-
corporate ﬂip-out messaging keyboards, (e.g. Nokia 6820,
Siemens SK65). The ﬁnal class of mobile device includes
PDA’s, XDA’s and other small handhelds. These devices have
much larger screens, higher-resolution interfaces, integrated
Web-browsers supporting standard HTML as well as a multi-
tude of input options including full messaging keyboards and

stylus. So while previous incarnations of the Mobile Inter-
net were not viewed as a success there is increasing optimism
about the future of this important information medium. These
new handsets, coupled with improved content, more attractive
billing arrangements and greater bandwidth appear to be at-
tracting more and more users to the Mobile Internet on a daily
basis. This in turn is likely to lead to a need for improved
search facilities, facilities that we argue need to be carefully
adapted to the features of the Mobile Internet, its devices and
the differing needs of its users

2 Characteristics of Mobile Search
We do acknowledge that even current mobile devices suffer
from inherent limitations that can greatly effect the usabil-
ity of many mobile applications [Ramsay and Nielsen, 2000].
This is largely due to the fact that very little effort has been
made to cater for the unique requirements of the Mobile Inter-
net. Such limitations can be especially problematic for mo-
bile search applications. Small displays restrict the number
of results that can be displayed on a single screen and input
limitations impact the type of queries that are provided. Most
mobile search engines offer only simple adaptations to stan-
dard Web search interfaces. For example, fewer results are
returned per page and the snippet text associated with each re-
sult may be truncated or simply removed [Jones et al., 2002].
We believe that more fundamental adaptations are necessary.
In particular we believe that displaying snippet text along-
side each search result is not feasible in the mobile realm.
However we also think that displaying just a title or a url to
represent each search result does not provide the user with
meaningful information about the context of a given result.
Instead we propose the use of related queries in place of snip-
pet text as a more economical form of result gisting. Econ-
omy of screen-space is a major concern in mobile search and
the use of related queries can signiﬁcantly increase the num-
ber of results displayed per screen on mobile devices. More-
over, in this paper we also show that the terms in these related
queries can be more informative, when it comes to capturing
the content of an associated page, than the page’s snippet text.
Similar work has also been carried out in [Jones et al., 2004],
where key phrases, automatically extracted from web pages
are used to provide users with accurate, meaningful represen-
tations of search results on mobile devices.

3 Towards Intelligent Result Gisting
A personalized search engine called I-SPY, [Smyth et al.,
2003], can provide these related queries by tracking and
recording past queries that have resulted in the selection of
a given result page. I-SPY is a community-based meta search
engine that records the search histories of communities of
like-minded users [Smyth et al., 2003; Forthcoming]. Each
time a user selects a result, p, for a query, q, I-SPY updates a
counter in a hit-matrix to reﬂect this selection. This informa-
tion is used to adapt future result-lists for similar queries by
promoting results that have been selected in the past.

One of I-SPY’s distinguishing features is that it can rec-
ommend related queries alongside a search result. For each
search result p, that is associated with some target query q , I-
SPY can generate a set of related queries from those queries,
q1, ...qn, that have also led to the selection of p [Smyth et
al., Forthcoming]. These related queries can also be ranked
according to the likelihood that they match a user’s current re-
quirements. These ranking strategies are described in [Balfe
and Smyth, ]. Figure 1 illustrates these related queries in ac-
tion. If we take, for example, the query ’MP3’ we can see that
the ﬁrst search result, ’mp3.com’ is associated with queries
such as ’music’ and ’charts’. These related queries can in-
form the user as to the context of the search result in question.

Figure 1: Query ’MP3’ on a mobile phone

It is interesting to consider whether these related queries
could be used as an alternative to snippet text to gist search
results, especially given the interface limitations of mobile
devices. Preliminary empirical evidence generated from a
similar evaluation we carried out suggests that these related
queries may be as informative as snippet text [Church et al.,
2005]. In our previous evaluation we used a smaller dataset
and a different independent search engine, namely Google.
In order to validate our earlier ﬁndings, we decided to carry
out a more in-depth evaluation using a different independent
search engine, namely HotBot and a larger dataset. The de-
tails of this evaluation are described in the following section.

4 Evaluation
The data for this evaluation was collected by mining the
search logs of I-SPY. Speciﬁcally we collected a set of 684
result-pages that were selected by searchers in response to
various queries. Each of these pages was associated with at
least 2 related queries and a unit of snippet text generated
by Google. The purpose of our experiment was to consider
how well these related queries represented the page in ques-
tion, relative to its snippet text. To do this we supposed that

the representativeness of a set of terms relative to some page
could be measured by the position of the page in the result-
list generated by some search engine when using these terms
as a query. Hence, in our evaluation we transformed each set
of related queries and piece of snippet text into a new search
engine query, submitted the queries to HotBot and compared
the position of the target page, p, in the two result-lists pro-
duced. We compared a number of variations of this approach
by constructing our search queries in different ways.

4.1 Query Generation
Probably the most important part of our evaluation was the
generation of the test queries from both the related queries
and snippet text. In all, six query generation strategies were
tested: two that produced queries from the terms contained in
the related queries for a page and four that used terms from
the page’s snippet text. Strategy RQ1 produces a test query
by concatenating the related query terms into a single query.
Strategy RQ2 uses a similar approach but duplicate terms are
removed.

The snippet text conversion was slightly more complicated.
To ensure a fair evaluation, we generated a test query from
the snippet text using the same number of terms as the test
queries produced from the related queries. To generate the
test queries we parsed the snippet text to remove stop-words
and special characters and then selected terms from the re-
maining snippet text using four different strategies. In strat-
egy S1 we select a random set of k terms, where k is the
number of terms in the test query produced by RQ1. Strat-
egy S2 selects the top k most common terms in the snippet
text, where k is the number of terms in the test query pro-
duced by RQ2. For strategy S3 we again select a random set
of k terms but this time k is the number of terms produced
by RQ2. Finally, strategy S4 selects the top k most com-
mon terms in the snippet text, where k is the number of terms
produced by RQ1.

4.2 Relevance Assessment
After submitting each test query to the HotBot search engine,
we examined the top 500 HotBot results only and compared
the position of p, the target result-page, in the result-lists pro-
duced for each test query. The higher p is in the result-list
the more representative the test query must be as an indicator
of p0s content and hence the more representative the related
queries or snippet text. Along with this positional information
we also examined the percentage of results matched by each
test query strategy as well as the average length in number of
terms of the related queries vs. snippet-based strategies.

4.3 Results
First we looked at the average position of each p in the result-
lists produced by HotBot, see Figure 2. When calculating the
average position, a penalty is applied when the target result
cannot be found for the query in question. If the target result
cannot be found, p is given a default position value of 501
(because we are only examining the ﬁrst 500 HotBot results).
Both related query strategies, RQ1 and RQ2, perform very
well. RQ2 locates p at an average position of 39 in the result-

QueryResultRelated Querieslist compared to the best performing snippet-based strategy
which locates p at an average position of 103.

Figure 2: Average position of p in result-lists

The poor showing for the snippet text strategies could have
been due to frequent penalties being incurred when p was not
present in the top 500 results. To understand this we exam-
ined the percentage of results found for each test query strat-
egy in the top 500 HotBot results, see Figure 3. The related
query strategies succeed in producing result-lists that contain
p for between 92% and 94% of queries, a signiﬁcant improve-
ment when compared to the snippet text strategies which re-
turn p for between 66% and 80% of the test queries.

Figure 3: Percentage found in the top 500 HotBot results

These results suggest that the terms contained in the related
queries are more representative of the pages they refer to than
an equivalent number of terms taken from the snippet text
associated with these pages. And by using related queries
instead of snippet text we can achieve a signiﬁcant saving in
display-space. For example, as shown in Figure 4, our related
queries contained only 4 unique terms on average, compared
to snippet texts with an average of 35 terms (words), or 21
terms with stop-words removed.

5 Conclusion
One of the main issues with mobile search engines concerns
the manner in which search results are displayed. In this pa-
per we have suggested using related queries as an economical
alternative to snippet text for result gisting. Our evaluation
suggests that the terms in related queries have the potential
to better capture the essence of their associated pages than
the terms in the snippet texts, and so may serve to be a more

Figure 4: Average number of terms in test queries

informative gisting approach. Moreover, related query terms
take up a small fraction of the screen space associated with
the display of snippet text, which is a major advantage for the
provision of mobile search.

6 Acknowledgements
This material is based on works supported by the Science
Foundation Ireland under Grant No. 03/IN.3/I361.

References
[Balfe and Smyth, ] E. Balfe and B. Smyth. Collaborative
Query Recommendation for Web Search. In Proceedings
of 16th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
pages 268–272, Valencia, Spain.

[CellularOnline, 2004] CellularOnline.

http://www.cellular.co.za/, 2004.

See,

[Church et al., 2005] K. Church, M. T. Keane, and B. Smyth.
An Evaluation of Gisting in Mobile Search. In Proceed-
ings of the 27th European Conference on Information Re-
trieval, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2005.

[Jones et al., 2002] M. Jones, G. Buchanan, and H. Thim-
bleby. Sorting out Searching on Small Screen Device.
In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on
Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices, Pisa,
Italy, 2002.

[Jones et al., 2004] S. Jones, M. Jones, and S. Deo. Using
Keyphrases as Search Result Surrogates on Small Screen
International Journal of Personal and Ubiqui-
Devices.
tous Computing, 8(1):55–68, 2004.

[Ramsay and Nielsen, 2000] M. Ramsay and J. Nielsen. The

WAP Usability Report, 2000.

[Smyth et al., 2003] B. Smyth, E. Balfe, P. Briggs, M. Coyle,
and J. Freyne. Collaborative Web Search. In Proceedings
of the 18th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence, pages 1417–1419, Acapulco, Mexico, 2003.

[Smyth et al., Forthcoming] B. Smyth, E. Balfe, J. Freyne,
P. Briggs, M. Coyle, and O. Boydell. Exploiting Query
Repetition & Regularity in an Adaptive Community-Based
Web Search Engine. User Modeling and User Adapted
Interaction, Forthcoming.

1031801181443946050100150200RQ1RQ2S1S2S3S4Test Query StrategyAverage Position949273786680020406080100RQ1RQ2S1S2S3S4Test Query Strategy% Found in Top 500 Results213546010203040RQ1RQ2SnippetParsed SnippetAverage Number of Terms