A Study of Selection Noise in Collaborative Web Search∗

Ois´ın Boydell and Barry Smyth

Adaptive Information Cluster

Smart Media Institute, Department of Computer Science,

University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland

{oisin.boydell, barry.smyth}@ucd.ie

Cathal Gurrin and Alan F. Smeaton

Adaptive Information Cluster, Centre for Digital Video Processing,

Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland
{cathal.gurrin, alan.smeaton}@computing.dcu.ie

Abstract

Collaborative Web search uses the past search be-
haviour (queries and selections) of a community of
users to promote search results that are relevant to
the community. The extent to which these promo-
tions are likely to be relevant depends on how re-
liably past search behaviour can be captured. We
consider this issue by analysing the results of col-
laborative Web search in circumstances where the
behaviour of searchers is unreliable.

Introduction

1
Traditional approaches to Web search are term-based; they
assume that relevance is best understood from the terms
within documents. It has been shown that typical Web users
are not experts when it comes to searching for documents
- they routinely provide ambiguous queries [Lawrence and
Giles, 1998], making it difﬁcult for search engines to predict
their needs.
In such an environment, query and document
terms are not always a good indication of relevance and so
content-based approaches often fail [Furnas et al., 1987]. Re-
cent innovations have seen the introduction of new sources
of relevance knowledge. For example, the work of [Brin
and Page, 1998] has famously demonstrated the usefulness of
inter-document relationships by exploiting link-connectivity
information. More recently researchers have also focused on
ways to exploit context in Web search as a way to disam-
biguate vague queries, either by explicitly establishing the
search context up-front or by implicitly inferring the con-
text as part of the search process (see [Lawrence, 2000]).
Yet others have focused on leveraging knowledge about the
query-space to directly address the correspondence problem,
by mining query logs in order to identify useful past queries
that may help the current searcher (e.g., [Glance, 2001;
Raghavan and Sever, 1995; Wen et al., 2002]). The work
∗This material is based on works supported by Science Founda-

tion Ireland under Grant No. 03/IN.3/I361.

of [Smyth et al., In Pressb] has suggested another source
of relevance knowledge:
in the Collaborative Web Search
(CWS) approach patterns of queries and result selections
from a community of users are used to re-rank the results of
an underlying search engine. A community can be a well-
deﬁned group of users, such as the employees of a given
company, or it can be an ad-hoc group of individuals, such
as the users of some topical Web site, for example a motor-
ing Web site. The point is that many searches can be traced
back to communities of users and our research indicates that
these communities are likely to submit similar queries and se-
lect the same types of results [Smyth et al., In Pressb]. In a
recent analysis of search logs from a variety of sources we
have found that within communities of searchers up to 70%
or more of queries share at least 50% of their query terms
with past queries from the community; see [Smyth et al., In
Pressb]. For example, in [Smyth et al., In Pressa] we de-
scribe the results of a recent trial of CWS within a corporate
context and a community of about 50 searchers (the employ-
ees of an Irish software company). The data collected as part
of this trial indicates that 57% of queries share half of their
query terms with previous queries. The results of this trial go
on to show that CWS can take good advantage of this type of
repetition and regularity to signiﬁcantly enhance search per-
formance.

CWS relies on a relevance assumption—that the selection
of a page for some query is a reliable indicator of page rel-
evance—which cannot be fully relied upon. Search engines
often return pages that turn out not to be relevant, and users
often mistakenly select them. The question is: how sensitive
are the results of CWS to selection noise? We will answer this
question in what follows by analysing the impact of selection
noise on result precision.

2 Collaborative Web Search
CWS is a form of meta-search, relying on the search services
of a set of underlying search engines, but manipulating their
results in response to the learned preferences of a given com-
munity of users. A key data structure in CWS is the hit ma-

trix, H. It represents the search behaviour of a given commu-
nity of users and each time a member of a community selects
a result pj in response to some query qi the entry in cell Hij
is incremented. In turn, the relevance of a page pj to qi can be
estimated as the relative number of selections pj has received
in the past for qi; see Equation 1.

Relevance(pj, qi) = Hij(cid:80)
(cid:80)
(cid:80)
i=1...n Relevance(pj, qi) • Sim(qT , qi)
i=1...n Exists(pj, qi) • Sim(qT , qi)

W Rel(pj, qT , q1, ..., qn) =

∀j Hij

(1)

(2)

More generally, the relevance of a page pj to some query qT
can be calculated as the weighted sum of its relevance to a
set of queries that are similar to qT , namely q1, ..., qn, with
each individual relevance value discounted by the similarity
between qT and the query in question; see Equation 2. The
similarity between qT and the query in question, qi is calcu-
lated as in Equation 3; it is worth noting that we have recently
evaluated a variety of alternative and more sophisticated simi-
larity metrics, the results of which are presented in [Balfe and
Smyth, 2005; In Press].

Sim(qT , qi) =

|qT ∩ qi|
|qT ∪ qi|

(3)

Thus on receipt of some target query, qT , CWS dispatches
it to a set of underlying search engines and their results are
combined to form a meta-search result-list, RM . At the same
time, qT is compared to other queries in the hit-matrix to
select a set of similar queries, q1, ..., qn, that are selected if
their similarity to qT exceeds some set threshold. The re-
sults selected for these queries in the past are ranked by their
weighted relevance to qT , according to Equation 2, to pro-
duce a new promoted result-list, Rp. RP is combined with
RM to produce RT , which is then returned to the user; in our
implementation RT = RP ∪ RM . For further detail on the
technical details of the CWS architecture and operation see
[Smyth et al., In Pressb].

3 Evaluation
The success of CWS depends on the quality of its promoted
results, RP , and their quality in turn depends on the re-
liability of the user selections that underpin the core rele-
vancy calculations. In this evaluation we will assess the qual-
ity of these promotions under different degrees of selection
noise with an experiment using the TREC Terabyte collec-
tion (see http://www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/terabyte) and the
F´ısr´eal search engine [Blott et al., In Press].

3.1 The TREC Terabyte Collection
This collection consists of over 25 million Web pages (ap-
prox, 426GB) crawled from the .gov domain during early
2004. The TREC Terabyte track included 50 random topics
as target search topics. Each topic included a short textual de-
scription and during the evaluation competing search engines

were evaluated with respect to their ability to locate pages rel-
evant to these topics. After the evaluation a relevance engine
was made available to help with the evaluation of new search
techniques. This engine provides ground-truth relevance for
the topics and allows for the detailed analysis of result-lists in
relation to the test queries.

3.2 Training the Hit-Matrix
Normally in CWS the hit-matrix is trained by the searches
of a given community of users, but we need a mechanism
for manipulating selection noise and so we need a more con-
trolled experimental framework. For this we require a set of
queries and a method for judging the relevance of the results
that are returned and that might be selected by users. We gen-
erate queries by extracting subsets of terms from the TREC
topic descriptions, after ﬁrst removing commonly occurring
stop words; for each topic we generate 50 queries with be-
tween 2 and 8 terms each. To simulate the action of a searcher
we use the ofﬁcial TREC relevance engine, which is capable
of identifying all result pages that are relevant for a given
topic. Thus, for a training query q generated from topic t, we
can identify the k pages returned by a baseline search engine
(see [Blott et al., In Press]) that are relevant to t as the basis
for updating our hit-matrix for topic t. During the update we
use two types of noise. T ypeA noise occurs when additional
non-relevant results are selected and thus during training we
assume that the user selects all k retrieved documents that
are relevant and an additional n% of k non-relevant pages.
T ypeB noise occurs when users fail to select all of the rele-
vant results returned and thus during training we assume that
the user only selects (100 − n)% of the k relevant results and
n% of k irrelevant results returned for each query.

3.3 Precision Analysis
To assess the precision of CWS we use the ofﬁcial TREC
test queries that formed the basis of the TREC 2004 evalua-
tion; none of these queries were used in training. Two dif-
ferent versions of CWS are used for query similarity thresh-
olds of > 0 and >= 0.5, with different types and levels of
selection noise introduced. Each test query is replayed and
the percentage of relevant results for different result-list sizes
is computed. The average of these precision values is com-
puted to produce an overall mean average precision (MAP)
for each version of CWS. We also compute a baseline MAP
for the TREC Benchmark search engine used in [Blott et al.,
In Press], which serves as the underlying engine for CWS.

The results are presented in Figures 1 and 2. Each graph
shows the MAP for the baseline and for CWS with Type A
and B noise. They show that CWS offers signiﬁcant preci-
sion increases over the baseline. For example, for the > 0
threshold, at the 0% noise level, CWS delivers over twice
the precision of the baseline (0.34 vs. 0.15). We also see
that these precision beneﬁts degrade gracefully as noise is in-
creased, and the beneﬁts are preserved even for high noise
levels. For instance, even with 100% Type A noise we see that
CWS delivers a MAP of 0.17, which is greater than the cor-
responding baseline MAP (0.14). We see that CWS is more
sensitive to Type B noise, especially for the >= 0.5 thresh-
old. Here, CWS MAP falls below the baseline for 80% noise;

References
[Balfe and Smyth, 2005] Evelyn Balfe and Barry Smyth. An
analysis of query similarity in collaborative web search. In
Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on Informa-
tion Retrieval, pages 330–344, 2005.

[Balfe and Smyth, In Press] Evelyn Balfe and Barry Smyth.
A Comparative Analysis of Query Similarity Metrics for
Community-Based Web Search. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning, (In
Press).

[Blott et al., In Press] Stephen Blott, Ois´ın Boydell, Fabrice
Camous, Paul Ferguson, Georgina Gaughan, Cathal Gur-
rin, Noel Murphy, Noel O’Connor, Alan F. Smeaton,
Barry Smyth, and Peter Wilkins. Experiments In Terabyte
Searching, Genomic Retrieval And Novelty Detection For
TREC-2004.
In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Text RE-
trieval Conference, (In Press).

[Brin and Page, 1998] Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. The
Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search En-
gine. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 30(1–
7):107–117, 1998.

[Furnas et al., 1987] George W. Furnas, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, Louis M. Gomez, and Susan T. Dumais. The vocab-
ulary problem in human-system communication. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 30(11):964–971, 1987.

[Glance, 2001] Natalie S. Glance. Community Search As-
sistant.
In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces, pages 91–96. ACM Press,
2001.

[Lawrence and Giles, 1998] Steve Lawrence and C. Lee
Giles. Context and Page Analysis for Improved Web
Search.
IEEE Internet Computing, July-August:38–46,
1998.

[Lawrence, 2000] Steve Lawrence. Context in Web Search.

IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 23(3):25–32, 2000.

[Raghavan and Sever, 1995] Vijay V. Raghavan and Hayri
Sever. On the reuse of past optimal queries. In Proceedings
of the 18th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 344–350. ACM Press, 1995.

[Smyth et al., In Pressa] Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Ois´ın
Boydell, Keith Bradley, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, and
Jill Freyne. A Live-User Evaluation of Collaborative Web
Search.
In Proceedings of the 19th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-05, (In Press).
[Smyth et al., In Pressb] Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Jill
Freyne, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, and Ois´ın Boydell.
Exploiting Query Repetition & Regularity in an Adaptive
Community-based Web Search Engine. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction: The Journal of Personal-
ization Research, (In Press).

[Wen et al., 2002] Ji-Rong Wen, Jian-Yun Nie, and Hong-
Jiang Zhang. Query clustering using user logs. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems, 20(1):59–81, 2002.

Figure 1: Similarity Threshold > 0

Figure 2: Similarity Threshold ≥ 0.5

this corresponds to a situation where in many search sessions
no relevant results are selected by users.

4 Conclusions
CWS personalizes search results for a community of like-
minded searchers based on their prior search histories.
It
is appropriate in a wide variety of search scenarios because
many Web searches are initiated within a community context;
for example, the searches initiated from a search box on some
themed Web site or the searches of some online social group.
When responding to a new search query, CWS exploits the
results of searches for similar queries that have taken place in
the past (for a given community) and actively promotes those
results. Thus, results that are consistently selected for queries
will tend to be promoted, although care must be taken to limit
the inﬂuence of promotional biases as a result of selection
noise or malicious users.

In this paper we have evaluated the performance of CWS
when search histories contain result selections that are un-
reliable. Obviously, if users select results that are not rel-
evant to their query then there is the risk that these results
will be promoted in the future. The question that we have at-
tempted to answer is the degree to which CWS is sensitive to
such noisy selections. Our results indicate that CWS is rela-
tively robust to noise with signiﬁcant precision beneﬁts avail-
able even for very high levels of selection noise. This bodes
well for CWS and is in agreement with the performance ben-
eﬁts witnessed in live-user trials, in which noisy selections
are likely to occur. In ﬁnishing, it is worth highlighting that
the CWS approach has been fully implemented in the I-SPY
system which can be accessed at http://ispy.ucd.ie.

