Session No.  1 Scene Analysis I Robot Project Papers 

1 

AN ACCOMMODATING EDGE FOLLOWER 

by 

Karl  K.  Pingle  and  Jay  M.  Tenenbaum* 

Computer  Science  Department 

Stanford  University 

Stanford,  California  USA 

We  describe  an  operational  program  that  lo(cid:173)
cates  objects  in  a  television  image  and  traces 
their  edges.  The  program  accommodates  the  tele(cid:173)
vision  camera,  maximizing  dynamic  range  during 
acquisition  and  sensitivity  during  tracing,  to 
obtain  the  most  appropriate  image  for  each 
phase. 
If  the  trace  routine  loses  an  edge, 
various  heuristics  diagnose  the  d i f f i c u l ty  and 
tune  both  the  camera  and  software  to  recover  con(cid:173)
trast  at  the  point  of  d i f f i c u l t y.  Experimental 
evidence  of  the  effectiveness  of  accommodation 
is  provided. 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

At  IFIPS  '68,  the  Stanford  A r t i f i c i al  I n t e l(cid:173)
ligence  Project  described  a  system  which  used  a 
mechanical  arm  to  stack  cubes  that  had  been  lo(cid:173)
cated  by  an  edge  tracing  program  (1).  This 
edge  follower  could  easily  find  the  outlines  of 
white  cubes  on  a  black  table,  but  was  prone  to 
error  in  less  carefully  controlled  environments. 
Our  studies  of  i ts  inadequacies  have  stimulated 
the  development  of  a  more  powerful  edge  follower, 
which  overcomes  most  of  the  limitations  of  the 
old  one. 

This  program  is  currently  the  i n i t i al  stage 

of  visual  processing  in  the  Stanford  hand-eye 
system  (2). 
It  has  demonstrated  an  ability  to 
track  weak  edges  under  adverse  lighting  conditions 

2.  HARDWARE 

The  edge  follower  uses  a  standard  vidicon 
television  camera,  modified  to  provide  computer 
control  of  orientation  (a  pan-tilt  head), 
focal 
length  (a  lens  t u r r e t ),  color  f i l t e r,  focus,  and 
target  voltage.  The  lens  i r is  is  set  manually. 
The  p a n - t i lt  head,  lens  turret,  and  focus  motor 

*This  research  was  supported  by  the  Advanced  re(cid:173)
search  Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  De(cid:173)
fense  under  Contract  No.  SD-183.  The  views  and 
conclusions  contained  in  this  document  are  those 
of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as 
necessarily  representing  the  o f f i c i al  policies, 
either  expressed  or  implied,  of  the  Advanced 
Research  Projects  Agency  of  the  U.S.  Government. 

**Now  with  the  Lockheed  Palo  Alto  Research 
Laboratory. 

drive  are  standard  manufacturer  options  that  were 
augmented  with  feedback  pots  and  control  logic  to 
allow  computer  servoing.  Three  color  f i l t e rs  and 
one  neutral  density  f i l t er  are  mounted  on  a  " f i l(cid:173)
ter  wheel"  located  between  the  lens  turret  and 
vidicon.  Any  f i l t er  can  be  selected  in  1/5 
second.  The  camera's  "Auto-target"  circuit  was 
modified  to  allow  computer  selection  of  64  dis(cid:173)
crete  target  voltages  between  0  and  50  volts. 
From  1/A  to  1/2  second  (about  10  television  frames) 
are  required  before  an  image  stabilizes  after  a 
change  of  target  voltage.  The  auto-target  o r i(cid:173)
ginally  provided  automatic  exposure  control  by 
servoing  the  target  voltage  to  maintain  a  uni(cid:173)
form  average  signal  current.  The  modified  c i r(cid:173)
cuit  w i ll  not  allow  the  computer  selected  target 
voltage  to  exceed  this  internal  reference,  thus 
protecting 
the  vidicon  from  programming  errors. 
The  internal  voltage  can  also  be  used  to  set  the 
target  voltage  when  the  computer  has  no  knowledge 
about  the  scene. 

The  vidicon  provides  a  333  x  256  array  of 
intensity  samples  in  1/60  second.  The  capacity 
of  the  computer's  high  speed  data  channel  (also 
used  by  the  swapping  disk)  is  24  million  b i t s/ 
second.  Thus,  without  local  buffering  each  sample 
can  be  encoded  as  a  4  b it  number.  For  f l e x i b i l i ty 
the  width  of  this  16  level  quantization  window 
can  be  adjusted  within  one  milli-second  to  trade 
off  dynamic  range  and  resolution.  For  maximum 
dynamic  range,  the  16  quantization  levels  are 
spread  over  the  1  volt  working  range  of  the  video 
amplifier,  while  for  maximum  resolution,  they 
are  concentrated  into  a  1/8  volt  sub-window. 
In(cid:173)
tensities  in  this  selected  range  can  thus  be  re(cid:173)
solved  to  the  equivalent  of  128  levels  (7  bits) 
over  the  maximum  lv.  range. 

3.  BASIC ALGORITHM 

If  nothing  is 

The  basic  algorithm,  used  by  both  the  old 
and  new  edge  follower,  begins  by  scanning  in  a 
coarse  horizontal  raster  for  an  intensity  dis(cid:173)
continuity.  An  operator  is  applied  between  the 
points  of  discontinuity  to  determine  the  exact 
center  and  direction  of  the  edge.  The  operator 
is  then  moved  a  short  distance  along  the  edge 
to  find  the  next  edge  point. 
detected,  the  operator  is  scanned  back  over  sym(cid:173)
metrical  arcs  towards  the  previous  edge  point 
u n t il  the  edge  is  reacquired.  The  image  co(cid:173)
ordinates  of  the  new  edge  point  are  added  to  an 
ordered  l i st  representing  the  object's  topology 
and  the  operator  again  moved  along  the  current 
direction  of  the  edge.  The  program  normally 
terminates  when  it  returns  to  the 
saw.  Straight  lines,  f it  through  the  edge  points, 
provide  the  line  drawings  used  for  scene  analysis. 
A  detailed  description  of  the  old  edge  follower 
and  i ts  line  f i t t i ng  algorithm  can  be  found  in 
(3). 

f i r st  point  it 

4.  LIMITATIONS  OF PREVIOUS  SYSTEM 

The  old  edge  follower  worked  well  only  with 
highly  contrasting  objects,  viewed  under  strong 

2 

Session No.  1 Scene Analysis I Robot Project Papers 

Its  major  limitation  was 

uniform  illumination. 
that  it  processed  only  one  image,  obtained  by 
manually  tuning  the  camera  to  maximize  average 
contrast  over  the  f i e ld  of  view.  Unfortunately, 
with  16  levels  of  quantization,  it  is  seldom  pos(cid:173)
sible  to  combine  adequate  intensity  resolution 
for  low  contrast  edges  with  enough  dynamic  range 
to  see  a ll  edges.  Thus,  in  the  computer's  view 
of  a  typical  hand-eye  scene  (figure  1),  the 
interior  detail  of  the  left-hand  cube  (labeled 
B)  is  cut  off  by  inadequate  dynamic  range  while 
the  rear  exterior  edge  of  the  wedge  (labeled  A) 
is  not  resolved  by  the  available  quantization 
density. 

Figure  1  Typical  Hand-eye  Workspace 
(Three  levels  of  overprinting  were  used  to  ob(cid:173)
tain  simulated  grey  tones  with  conventional  line 
printer  characters.  About  8  of  the  actual  16 
levels  are  visible.) 

In  the  past,  we  overcame  these  limitations 
by  tuning  the  camera  and  lighting  to  emphasize 
those  objects  actually  involved  in  a  task. 
Figure  2,  for  example,  shows  the  effects  of  i n(cid:173)
tentionally  narrowing  the  quantization  window  to 
enhance  the  contour  of  the  wedge  (lower  l e ft  cor(cid:173)
ner)  at  the  expense  of  other  features  in  the 
scene. 

There  are  severe  drawbacks  to  this  approach. 

First,  an  autonomous  robot  should  decide  for  i t(cid:173)
self  when  an  image  is  inadequate  and  how  it  can 
be  improved.  Many  crucial  aspects  of  perception 
are  masked  by  using  an  image  which  has  already 
been  filtered  by  human  recognition  to  emphasize 
selected  objects.  Secondly,  the  effectiveness 
of  this  method  is  restricted  to  tasks  in  which 
all  objects  are  of  similar  brightness  or  of 
sufficiently  high  contrast  that  a ll  can  be  seen 
in  a  single  image.  The  d i f f i c u l ty  of  seeing 
both  the  exterior  and  interior  of  an  object  fur(cid:173)
ther  limits  applicability  to  scenes  simple  en(cid:173)
ough  to  be  interpreted  solely  on  the  basis  of  ob(cid:173)
ject  outlines. 

Figure  2  Accommodation  for  Contour  of  Wedge 

The  old  edge  follower  and  i ts  data  structure 

If  a  closed  outline  was  not  found,  or 

I ts  one  level  of  processing  could  not  re(cid:173)

were  only  designed  to  handle  simple  closed  con(cid:173)
tours. 
cover  from  the  simplest  of  failures,  such  as  a 
trace  that  looped  around  a  small  shadow  or  sharp 
corner. 
if  line  f i t t i ng  did  not  produce  a  reasonable 
number  of  corners,  the  object  was  purged 
the  data  structure  and  the  global  scan  resumed. 
Occasionally,  such  an  object  would  be  reacquired 
at  a  different  point  on  i ts  contour  and  traced 
successfully. 

from 

The  new  edge  follower  has  a  better  operator, 

a  more  general  data  structure  and  heuristics  to 
help  it  recover  from  trouble.  The  largest  single 
improvement  in  performance,  however,  comes  from 
the  edge  follower's  a b i l i ty  to  'tune' 
the  camera 
for  optimum  sensitivity  at  a  particular  point  in 
the  image  where  an  edge  is  expected  but  not  seen. 

5.  CAMERA  ACCOMMODATION 

Figures  1  and  2  graphically  demonstrate  the 
importance  of  camera  adjustments  for  successful 
edge  following;  what  is  seen  depends  strongly  on 
how  the  parameters  of  the  sensory  channel  are 
tuned.  Unless  adequate  edge  information  is 
available,  sophisticated  processing  cannot  help. 

We  have  already  described  the  c r i t i c al 

limitation  on  intensity  resolution  imposed  by 
channel  bandwidth.  Similar  conflicts  are  found 
in  each  dimension  of  the  camera's  response.  For 
example,  the  combination  of  spatial  resolution 
and  f i e ld  of  view  available  in  any  image,  which  is 
s t r i c t ly  constrained  by  the  number  of  available 
raster  samples,  w i ll  provide  coarse  coverage  of 
a  wide  f i e ld  of  view  or  high  resolution  in  a 
small  area. 

Since  no  single  image  can  contain  a ll  of  the 

information  available  in  a  scene,  the  sensory 
channel  must  be  tuned  to  concentrate  a ll  avail(cid:173)
able  resolution  on  that  information  currently 

Session No.  1  Scene Analysis I Robot  Project Papers 

3 

required  by  a  particular  perceptual  task.  This 
requires  that  the  parameters  of  the  visual  sensor 
be  controlled,  not  by  a  person,  but  directly  by 
the  perceptual  process  (6). 

We  name  this  concept  "Accommodation",  a 

term  borrowed  from  physiology  where  it  specifi(cid:173)
cally  denotes  the  role  of  the  lens  in  focusing 
the  human  eye. 
In  man,  there  are  may  examples 
of  accommodation  in  this  wider  sense,  for  example, 
the  use  of  neural  adaption  and  an  adjustable  i r is 
to  achieve  vision  over  an  extraordinary  range  of 
brightness.  Since  the  performance  of  present 
a r t i f i c i al  sensors  falls  considerably  below 
the  standard  established  by  nature,  the  need 
to  accommodate  them  is  correspondingly  more 
acute. 

The  accommodation  requirements  of  edge 
acquisition  are  quite  different  from  those  of 
tracing;  during  the  coarse  raster  scan,  the 
computer  usually  ha6  no  preferences  about  where 
to  look,  and  no  expectations  about  what  it  w i ll 
find.  To  f a c i l i t a te  a  thorough  search,  the 
quantization  window  is  opened  as  wide  as  pos(cid:173)
sible,  sacrificing  resolution  to  obtain  wide 
dynamic  range.  On  the  other  hand,  once  an 
edge  is  acquired,  the  tracing  program  knows 
precisely  what  it  is  looking  for  and  where  to 
find  i t; 
the  camera  should 
be  tuned  to  emphasize  intensity  discontinuities 
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  where  it  was  last 
seen. 

if  the  edge  is  lost, 

The  appropriate  accommodations  for  this 

tracing  mode  were  deduced  by  examining  the 
effects  of  each  accommodation  parameter  on  con(cid:173)
trast  and  signal/noise,  the  primary  requisities 
for  successful  edge  detection. 

Target  voltage 

The  effect  of  target  voltage  (ET)  on  the 

transfer  characteristics  of  a  vidicon  camera  is 
expressed  by  Equation  1. 

VS  is  the  output  signal  voltage  corresponding  to 
a  light  flux  of  L  foot  candles  incident  on  the 
face  plate  of  a  vidicon.  This  surprisingly 
obscure  equation  was  inferred  from  more  commonly 
available  vidicon  specifications  (6).  The  values 
of  g  and  were  obtained  by  f i t t i ng  Equation  1 
to  data  observed  with  our  RCA-8507A  vidicon.  ET 
bounds  the  range  of  illumination  that  w i ll  yield 
signals  within  the  one  volt  window  of  the  quantizer. 
It  also  determines  the  minimum  edge  contrast, 
that  can  be  resolved  by  a  given  quantization 
density. 

The  principal  noise  in  normal  operation  is 

s t a t i s t i c al  fluctation  in  the  bias  current  of 
the  preamplifier's  input  stage.  Since  this 
noise  is  independent  of  target  voltage  and  light 
level,  the  signal/noise  of  weak  edges  is  maxi(cid:173)
mized  by  raising  target  voltage  until  the  signal, 
corresponding  to  the  brighter  side  of  the  edge, 
is  just  inside  the  one  volt  limit  of  the  quanti(cid:173)
zation  window.  This  target  voltage  is  known  as 

E  sat 
sat 

dam 

The  target  voltage  may  be  limited,  in  prac(cid:173)
t i c e,  by  the  possibility  of  damaging  the  vidicon. 
The  autotarget  circuit  provides  a  maximum  safe 
)  which  is  also  an  inverse 
target  voltage  (E, 
function  of  light  level.  Although  E  sat  is  a l-
ways  less  than  E, 
in  uniform  illumination, 
Edam' 
for  a  lowlieht  in  which 
be  lower  than  the  E 
we  are  interested.  An  empirical  rule  for  maxi(cid:173)
mizing  detection  confidence  is  thus  to  set  tar(cid:173)
get  voltage  to  the  minimum  of  E 
Quantization  Window 

imposed  because  of  a  scene  highlight,  may 

and Edam' 
dam 

dam 

sat 

sat 

sat 

Edge  following  requires  a  quantization  win(cid:173)
dow  that  is  narrow  enough  to  resolve  weak  inten(cid:173)
sity  discontinuities  yet  wide  enough  to  encompass 
the  range  of  intensities  found  over  the  length  of  a 
contour.  To  satisfy  these  incompatible  demands, 
the  quantization  window  is  adjusted  to  bracket 
the  range  of  intensities  currently  covered  by 
the  operator.  This  optimizes  contrast  where  an 
edge  is  expected. 

Focus 

Defocus  increases  the  transition  width  of 
an  edge,  reducing  the  gradient  ( i . e .,  the  dif(cid:173)
ference  of  intensities  at  a  fixed  separation) 
calculated  at  the  transition.  Focus  is  suspect 
when,  in  spite  of  adequate  contrast  across  a 
suspected  boundary,  there  is  no  distinct  gradient 
peak.  When  focusing  is  required,  the  vidicon  is 
moved  relative  to  a  fixed  lens,  u n t il  a  focus 
criterion  is  maximized.  Since  focusing  is  intended 
to  increase  the  local  gradient,  this  function  is 
the  natural  criterion  by  which  to  measure  image 
sharpness  (6),  (7). 

Focal  length 

The  wider  the  f i e ld  of  view,  the  less  need 

for  re-orienting  the  camera  to  track  a  long 
edge.  Since  spatial  resolution  usually  is  not  a 
limiting  factor  in  detecting  step-type  edges,  a 
short  (1")  lens  is  commonly  used  to  obtain  a  broad 
view. 
longer  lens  if  one  is  needed  to  see  textural 
detail.) 

(The  computer  can  switch  the  turret  to  a 

I r is 

Shc_  noise  in  the  vidicon's  dark  current, 
usually  a  second  order  disturbance,  increases 
faster  than  the  signal  with  target  voltage  and 
can  be  significant  when  a  weak  edge  is  sought  in 
a  dark  region.  A  wide  i r is  minimizes  this  noise 
by  reducing  the  target  voltage  required  to  obtain 
a  f u ll  signal  from  the  available  l i g h t. 

A  wide  i r is  also  decreases  depth  of  f i e l d, 
which  could  increase  the  amount  of  re-focusing 
required  along  an  edge.  Fortunately,  since  the 

depth  of  f i e ld  of  a  f/1.4  one  inch  lens  includes 
the  camera's  entire  f i e ld  of  view  when  looking 
obliquely  down  from  above  the  hand-eye  table,  the 
i r is  can  be  l e ft  wide  open.  Focusing  is  neces(cid:173)
sary  only  when  camera  orientation  changes. 

Color 

f i l t e rs 

Color  f i l t e rs  can  restore  the  contrast  be(cid:173)

tween  differently  colored  surfaces,  that  is  often 
lost  in  a  grey  scale  image.  Since  the  colors 
are  usually  unknown  during  edge  following,  the 
f i l t e rs  must  be  randomly  tried  to  find  the  best 
one.  To  avoid  this  expense,  the  edge  follower 
uses  only  the  clear  f i l t er  which  maximizes 
available 

l i g h t. 

Effectiveness  of  accommodation 

The  edge  follower  was  instructed  to  look  for 

edges  in  the  interior  of  the  black  cube  at  the 
l e ft  of  Figure  1.  Figure  3  was  the  image  it  used 
while  tracing  the  diagonal  interior  edges  be(cid:173)
tween  the  top  and  front  faces  of  this  cube.  This 
image  shows  the  practical  effects  of  raising  tar(cid:173)
get  voltage  and  narrowing  the  quantization  win(cid:173)
dow  to  enhance  the  contrast  in  a  specific  local 
region,  namely  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the 
l e ft  diagonal  interior  edge. 

We  learned  that  contrast  is  optimized  when 
the  bright  side  of  an  edge  is  almost  saturated. 
That  the  top  of  the  cube  is  not  lighter  is 
therefore  an  indication  that  the  target  voltage 
was  limited  by  Edam  to  prevent  damage  to  the 
vidicon  by  the  brighter  background.  Because 
of  this  constraint,  the  vertical  interior  edge, 
which  (without  benefit  of  direct  overhead  i l(cid:173)
lumination  on  one  side)  is  both  darker  and  of 
lower  contrast  than  the  diagonals,  was  not  de(cid:173)
tected  by  the  edge  follower. 

Session No.  1 Scene Analysis I Robot Project Papers 

strategies  of  other  perceptual  s k i l ls  utilized 
by  our  hand-eye  system  (6).  One  such  program 
is  the  edge  v e r i f i er  which  utilizes  a ll  of  these 
accommodations  in  an  exhaustive  effort  to  find 
a  specific  edge.  When  requested  to  find  the 
missing  vertical  edge,  this  program  eliminated 
the  limiting  highlight  by  using  a  longer  lens 
to  restrict  the  f i e ld  of  view  to  the  v i c i n i ty 
of  the  edge.  The  target  voltage  was  then  raised 
to  obtain  sufficient  contrast  (figure  4).  Note 
that  the  top  of  the  cube  has  become  f u l ly  satu(cid:173)
rated  and  now  limits  target  voltage. 

Figure  4  Vertical  Interior  Edge  Viewed  with  3" 

Lens 

6.  THE  NEW  EDGE  FOLLOWER 

The  new  edge  follower  begins  by  accommodating 
for  the  coarse  i n i t i al  scan.  A  wide  quantization 
window  and  short  lens  provide  broad  coverage  of 
the  scene.  The  resulting  low  spatial  and  inten(cid:173)
sity  resolution  makes  the  system  p a r t i al  to  strong 
edges  and  helps  minimize  the  chance  of  detecting 
irrelevant  fine  d e t a i l,  such  as  specks  of  dust. 

A  goal  oriented  strategy  program,  interested 
in  a  specific  area  of  the  table  or  in  a  specifi(cid:173)
cally  colored  object,  could  bias  the  search  with 
a  more  selective  accommodation  window.  A  longer 
lens  or  color  f i l t er  would  restrict  the  class  of 
intensity  discontinuities  that  could  be  detected 
during  the  coarse  scan. 

The  accommodation  routine  monitors  the  sampled 
intensities,  adjusting  the  target  voltage  whenever 
necessary  to  keep  the  values  within  the  dynamic 
range  of  the  camera  and  quantizer. 
If  no  edges 
are  found,  the  scan  is  repeated  with  the  quanti(cid:173)
zation  window  and  target  voltage  adjusted  for 
maximum  intensity  resolution  at  each  sample 
point. 

Figure  3  Accommodation  for  Diagonal  Interior  Edges 

Although  focus,  focal  length,  i r i s,  and 

color  f i l t e rs  play  passive  roles  in  edge  following, 
they  are  actively  involved  in  the  accommodation 

Session No.  1 Scene Analysis I Robot Project Papers 

5 

After  acquisition,  but  before  beginning  the 

trace,  it  is  prudent  to  verify  that  the  discon(cid:173)
tinuity  was  not  the  result  of  random  noise  or 
an  isolated  surface  anomaly.  An  effective  re(cid:173)
quirement  is  that  the  discontinuity  have  a  suf(cid:173)
ficient  spatial  extent;  i.e. 
that  a  significant 
difference  also  be  observed  in  the  average  of 
intensities  obtained  from  small  neighborhoods 
about  the  original  detection  points.  Other 
requirements,  such  as  a  desired  color,  can  also 
be  checked  at  this  time. 

To  prepare  for  tracing,  the  accommodation 
is  changed  to  maximize  intensity  resolution  at 
the  point  of  acquisition.  This  involves  peaking 
the  target  voltage,  narrowing  the  quantization 
window,  and  checking  focus,  as  discussed  earlier. 

The  normal  trace  progresses  by  applying 

an  edge  operator  at  a  point  extrapolated  along 
the  edge.  The  edge  follower  uses  a  powerful 
regional  operator  (4)  which  makes  a  global 
judgement  of  the  best  edge  in  a  circular  neigh(cid:173)
borhood  (selected  to  encompass  between  32  and  177 
raster  points). 

It  can  detect  weak  edges  (or  those  with 
in  the  presence  of  sub(cid:173)

This  operator  has  several  advantages  over 
the  3 x3  gradient  operator  used  in  the  old  sys(cid:173)
tem. 
i ll  defined  gradients) 
stantial  noise,  allowing  it  to  take  f u ll  ad(cid:173)
vantage  of  the  sensitivity  gained  with  accom(cid:173)
It  also  determines  the  center  of  an 
modation. 
edge  with  more  accuracy,  resulting  in  slightly 
better  line  f i t t i n g.  Since  the  operator  responds 
to  edges  over  a  sizeable  area,  scanning  is  not 
needed  as  often  to  recover  the  edge  when  it 
changes  direction. 

The  camera  accommodation  need  not  be  changed 

during  the  trace,  unless  the  edge  is  lost.  The 
edge  follower  then  repeats  the  accommodation 
sequence  it  evoked  at  the  start  of  the.  trace  to 
optimize  accommodation  at  the  operator's  present 
position.  The  failure  of  accommodation  is  thus 
the  ultimate  criterion  used  to  reject  a  suspected 
edge  point;  the  success  of  the  operator,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  the  criterion  by  which  and  for 
which  accommodation  is  optimized. 

If  accommodation  f a i l s, 

to  the  recovery  heuristics  described  later. 
might  also  consider  trying  more  costly  accommo(cid:173)
dations,  such  as  changing  color  f i l t e r s .) 

the  program  resorts 
(One 

and  linked  to  a  circular  l i s t,  or  ring,  of 
SEGMENT  blocks  representing  the  edge  segments 
found  for  that  object.  Each  SEGMENT  block  points 
at  a  ring  of  POINT  blocks,  containing  the  coordin(cid:173)
ates  of  the  individual  edge  points.  The  SEGMENT 
block  of  any  segment  that  is  not  a  closed  outline 
is  marked.  The  POINT  blocks  at  each  end  of  the 
segment  are  also  marked  to  indicate  the  cause 
of  the  termination;  lost  edge,  out  of  the  cam(cid:173)
era's  f i e ld  of  view,  or  intersected  the  middle 
of  another  edge. 

The  edge  follower  must  be  able  to  rapidly 
determine  whether  an  edge  point  has  been  seen 
before  and,  if  so,  which  object  it  belongs  to. 
The  world  model  divides  the  scene  into  a  square 
grid.  Associated  with  each  square  is  a  pointer 
to  a  ring  of  WORLD  blocks,  one  for  each  object 
with  an  edge  passing  through  the  square.  The 
WORLD  block  points  at  a  ring  linking  a ll  the 
POINT  blocks  with  coordinates  in  the  area. 

When  a  trace  intersects  a  previously  seen 

edge  point,  the  data  structure  Is  consulted. 
If  the  edge  point  is  the  opposite  end  of  the 
current  segment,  a  closed  outline  has  been 
traced. 
If  the  current  segment  intersects  a 
previously  traced  one  at  an  endpoint,  the  two 
are  merged.  Otherwise,  the  current  segment  is 
added  to  the  ring  linking  the  other  segment  with 
an  object.  Thus,  a ll  edges  need  not  be  traced 
at  the  same  time,  but  can  be  added  to  the  data 
structure  of  the  appropriate  object  as  found. 
Whenever  a  new  segment  is  added  to  or  merged 
with  an  object  which  has  already  had  lines  f it 
to  i t,  the  operation  is  repeated  to  obtain  a 
better,  more  complete  f i t. 

the  data  structure 

When  the  high  level  programs  no  longer  re(cid:173)
quire  detailed  edge  data,  they  can  instruct  the 
edge  follower  to  'compact' 
by  deleting  the  POINT  blocks  and  associated 
SEGMENT  blocks  for  subsequent  garbage  collection. 
These  are  replaced  by  a  ring  of  CORNER  blocks 
containing  the  coordinates  of  each  corner  of  the 
associated  object  and  the  equations  of  the  edges 
connecting  them.  The  WORLD  blocks  are  flagged 
and  linked  to  these  CORNER  blocks.  Thereafter, 
when  the  object  is  encountered  while  scanning, 
the  scan  line  is  extended  u n t il  it  intersects 
the  furthest  edge  of  the  object  and  the  scan  con(cid:173)
tinues  from  that  point. 

7.  THE  INTERNAL  DATA  STRUCTURE 

8.  HEURISTICS 

As  it  traces  objects,  the  edge  follower 

builds  a  data  structure  to  describe  their  topology. 
The  data  structure  is  generated  by  a  l i st  proces(cid:173)
sing  language  (5)  that  resembles  CORAL  (8)  and 
is  created  by  assembly  language  macro  statements 
which  set  up  calls  to  l i st  processing  subroutines. 
The  basic  language  unit  is  a  block  of  contiguous 
core  containing  status  b i t s,  data,  and  pointers 
to  other  blocks.  The  parameters  for  each  block 
type  are  given  to  the  processor,  along  with  a 
symbolic  name,  at  the  start  of  the  program. 
Copies  of  these  blocks  are  then  generated  as 
needed. 

For  each  object,  an  OBJECT  block  is  created 

The  old  edge  follower  would  often  f a il  to 
complete  a  contour  because  small  sections  were 
slightly  noisy  or  of  marginal  contrast.  The 
heuristics  described  in  this  section  combat  the 
most  common  of  these  failure  modes.  The  new  edge 
follower  attempts  to  diagnose  the  nature  of  i ts 
current  d i f f i c u l t y,  and  recover  i n t e l l i g e n t l y. 

A  patch  of  noise  or  shadow  can  cause  a  trace 
to  loop  back  in  the  direction  from  which  it  came. 
The  program  maintains  a  stack  containing  the 
coordinates  of  the  last  few  points  found. 
If 
one  of  these  is  encountered  again,  the  program 
tries  to  resume  i ts  original  direction,  using  a 
If 
larger  increment  to 

jump  over  the  bad  area. 

6 

Session No.  1 Scene Analysis I Robot Project  Papers 

the  edge  has  not  turned  a  corner,  it  is  often  re-
acquired  on  the  far  side. 
If  the  loop  persists, 

the  trace  returns  to 
the  point  of  acquisition  and  tries  to  close  the 
contour  in  the  opposite  direction. 
If  it  gets 
close  enough  to  the  failure  point  the  outline  is 
considered  closed.  Otherwise,  high  level  pro(cid:173)
grams  can  try  to  extend  the  ends  u n t il  they  meet 
These  heuristics  are  also  used  when  edges  are 
simply  lost  and  when  they  intersect  other  edges 
or  boundaries  of  the  image. 

When  tracing  is  finished,  a  fine  horizontal 
and  vertical  raster  scan  is  performed  with  care(cid:173)
f ul  accommodation  to  find  additional  edges  near 
unconnected  ends  of  a  segment.  The  tracing 
routine  is  called  to  pursue  any  that  are  found. 
Occasionally  an  object  is  traced  in  such  a 
way  that  although  the  entire  outline  is  found, 
the  ends  of  the  lines  f it  to  the  edge  points  do 
not  meet  (figure  5).  A  post-processor  tries 
to  correct  such  errors  to  obtain  closed  outlines 
for  simpler  scene  analysis. 
closest  to  each  unconnected  endpoint  is  close 
enough,  the  open  line  is  extended  toward  the  cor-
ner. 
If  this  extension  intersects  an  extension 
of  a  line  belonging  to  the  corner  sufficiently 
close  to  the  corner,  the  unconnected  end  is 
attached  to  the  corner  in  the  data  structure. 

If  the  corner 

Figure  5  A  Complete  but  Unclosed  Outline 

To  determine  whether  a  set  of  lines  consti(cid:173)
tutes  a  closed  outline,  the  program  picks  up  the 
endpoints  of  a  line  and  tries  to  find  one  other 
line  that  meets  each  endpoint. 
If  both  are  not 
found,  the  chosen  line  is  deleted.  This  test  is 
then  repeated  on  a ll  remaining  lines.  When  a 
complete  pass  through  the  set  of  lines  pro(cid:173)
duces  no  new  deletions,  the  process  terminates. 
Any  remaining  lines  form  a  closed  outline  which 

is  indicated  by  links  added  to  the  data  structure. 
Once  an  outline  is  found,  high  level  strategy 
determines  whether  to  look  for  other  near-by  edges 
which  may  have  missed.  The  edge  follower  can  be 
instructed  to  look  carefully  for  new  edges  in  a 
specified  area. 

9.  DISCUSSION 

The  performance  of  an  edge  follower  can  be 
improved  by  applying  more  sophisticated  proces(cid:173)
sing  to  a  given  image  or  by  accommodating  to  ob(cid:173)
tain  a  more  appropriate  image.  Most  researchers 
have  followed  the  former  course,  relying  on  so(cid:173)
phisticated  processing  to  cope  with  inadequate 
images. 

These  efforts  have  ranged  from  d i g i t al  spatial 

f i l t e r i ng  techniques  for  image  enhancement  (9) 
to  syntax  directed  analyses  which  u t i l i ze  high 
level  context  to  infer  missing  detail  (10,  11). 
Of  particular  relevance  is  the  work  of  G r i f f i th 
(12)  and  Binford  (13)  at  MIT  who  have  developed 
pre-processors  which  organize  an  array  of  locally 
probable  intensity  discontinuities  into  a  meaning(cid:173)
f ul  line  drawing,  and  of  Fennema  and  Brice  (14) 
at  SRI,  who  have  abandoned  edges  in  favor  of  re(cid:173)
gions,  because  missed  edges  frequently  prevented 
them  from  finding  properly  closed  regions.  The 
problem  that  almost  a ll  of  these  workers  attacked, 
was  to  analyze  a  'given'  image.  This  image  was 
usually  made  available  to  the  program  only  as  a 
fixed  array  of  intensities  that  had  been  pre(cid:173)
(Some  programs  did  have 
viously  digitized. 
direct  access  to  a  camera,  but  since  the  para(cid:173)
meters  weren't  controlled  by  the  computer,  this 
was  equivalent  to  using  a  fixed  image). 

We  feel  that  because  of  the  inherent  l i m i(cid:173)

tations  of  a  single  image,  the  acquisition  of 
information  should  be  treated  as  an  integral 
part  of  the  perceptual  process.  Thus,  the  edge 
follower  optimizes  accommodation  when  it  does 
not  see  an  edge  where  one  was  expected. 
effect,  many  images  are  used,  each  best  for  a 
particular  part  of  the  scene. 

In 

By  using  the  loss  of  an  edge  as  a  pragmatic 
indication  to  accommodate,  the  computer  is  u t i l i(cid:173)
zing  what  it  already  knows  to  see  more.  This 
strategy  is  economical  because  accommodation  is 
optimized  only  at  a  few  problem  points.  The 
machine  time  involved  i s,  in  many  cases,  con(cid:173)
siderably  less  than  would  be  necessary  to  achieve 
comparable  performance  with  "smarter"  tracing 
algorithms.  Furthermore,  the  expectation  pro(cid:173)
vided  by  edge  continuity  significantly  reduces 
the  attendant  risk  of  responding  to  isolated 
noise. 

These  considerations  are  equally  applicable 
to  sensors  like  image  dissectors  and  photo  multi(cid:173)
p l i er  (flying  spot)  scanners,  which  are  not  dy(cid:173)
namic  range  limited.  Since  these  devices  measure 
brightness  by  the  time  taken  to  observe  a  fixed 
number  of  photons,  intensity  resolution  can  be 
traded  off  against  measurement  time  by  changing 
the  required  count.  For  efficiency,  this  count 
should  be  kept  low,  except  when  resolution  is 
needed  to  recover  a  lost  edge.  A  fixed  count  is 

A r t i f i c i al  Intelligence  Memo  No.  160, 
May,  1968. 

8.  W.  R.  Sutherland,  "On-line  Graphical  Speci(cid:173)

fication  of  Computer  Procedures",  Tech. 
Report  405,  Lincoln  Laboratory,  MIT, 
Lexington  Massachusetts,  May,  1966. 

9.  A.  Rosenfeld,  "Picture  Processing  by  Computer", 

Computing  Surveys,  Vol.  1,  No.  3,  Sept. 
1969,  pp.  147-176. 

10.  W.  Miller  and  A.  Shaw,  "Linguistic  Methods 

In  Picture  Processing-A  Survey",  Proc. 
FJCC,  pp.  279-290,  Dec.  1968. 

11.  M.  Fischler,  "Machine  Perception  and  Descrip(cid:173)

tion  of  Pictorial  Data",  Proc.  1st  Inter(cid:173)
national  Joint  Conference  on  A r t i f i c i al 
Intelligence,  Washington,  1969. 

12.  A.  K.  G r i f f i t h,  "Computer  Recognition  of 

Prismatic  Solids",  Ph.D.  Thesis,  Dept.  of 
Mathematics,  MIT,  June,  1970. 

13.  T.  0.  Binford,  "A  Visual  Preprocessor", 

MIT  Project  MAC,  A r t i f i c i al  Intelligence 
Memo,  1970. 

14.  C.  Brice  and  C.  Fennema,  "Scene  Analysis 
Using  Regions",  A r t i f i c i al  Intelligence, 
Vol.  1,  No.  3,  Fall,  1970. 

Analyst 

likely  to  result  in  too  much  or  too  l i t t le  re(cid:173)
solution  at  any  particular  point. 

The  accommodating  edge  follower  has  demon(cid:173)

strated  that  it  can  detect  low  contrast  edges 
over  a  wide  range  of  brightnesses,  routinely 
finding  most  of  the  interior  and  exterior  edges 
in  typical  hand-eye  scenes  (e.g.  figure  1).  How(cid:173)
ever, 
it  is  misleading  to  quantitatively  assess 
the  worth  of  accommodation  as  one  might  a  new 
edge  operator,  in  terms  of  a  numerical  value 
like  the  signal/noise  of  the  weakest  edge  that 
can  be  detected.  By  this  criterion,  the  new  edge 
follower  does  not  perform  significantly  better 
than  the  old  one  did  when  its  accommodation 
happened  to  be  best  for  the  particular  edge. 
The  worth  of  accommodation  should  instead  be 
judged  in  the  qualitative  sense  that  performance 
is  no  longer  dependent  on  manual  intervention 
and  on  the  environmental  constrainst  previously 
required  to  balance  dynamic  range  and  resolution 
in  a  single  image;  in  figures  3  and  4  it  is  easy 
to  find  interior  edges  that  are  impossible  to 
detect  in  figure  1.  Accommodation  attacks  the 
fundamental  limitation  of  image  inadequacy 
rather  than  the  secondary  problems  caused  by  i t. 
We  view  the  significance  of  accommodation 

less  as  a  means  of  overcoming  sensor  limitations 
than  as  a  way  to  match  the  capabilities  of  a 
sensor  with  the  information  requirements  of  a 
specific  task.  The  success  of  this  edge  f o l(cid:173)
lower  can  be  attributed  to  a  careful  evaluation 
of  how  the  characteristics  of  a  vidicon  sensor 
could  be  used  most  effectively  in  this  appli(cid:173)
cation.  Similar  success  has  been  found  applying 
this  accommodation  philosophy  to  perceptual 
functions  as  diverse  as  range  finding  and  color 
recognition  (6). 

REFERENCES 

1.  K.  K.  Pingle,  J.  A.  Singer,  and  W.  W.  Wichman, 

"Computer  Control  of  a  Mechanical  Arm 
Through  Visual  Input",  Proceedings  IFIPS 
'68,  pp.  1563-1569,  North  Holland,  1969. 

2.  J.  M.  Tenenbaum  et  a l,  "A  Laboratory  for  Hand-

Eye  Research",  Proceedings,  IFIPS  '71. 

3.  K.  K.  Pingle,  "Visual  Perception  by  a  Com(cid:173)
puter",  Automatic  Interpretation  and  Clas(cid:173)
sification  of  Images,  pp.  277-284,  Academic 
Press,  1969. 

4.  M.  Hueckel,  "An  Operator  Which  Locates  Edges 

in  Digitized  Pictures",  JACM  Vol.  18, 
No.  1,  Jan.  1971,  pp.  113-125. 

5.  K.  K.  Pingle,  "A  List  Processing  Language  for 

Picture  Processing,  Stanford  A r t i f i c i al 
Intelligence  Project  Operating  Note,  1968. 

6.  J.  M.  Tenenbaum,  "Accommodation  in  Computer 

Vision",  Stanford  A r t i f i c i al  Intelligence 
Project  Memo,  AIM-134,  1970 

7.  B.  Horn,  "Focusing",  MIT  Project  MAC, 

