88 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis II General  Papers 

ASPECTS  OF THE  DETECTION OF SCENE 
CONGRUENCE* 

Martin  A.  Fischler 
Lockheed  Palo  Alto  Research  Laboratory 
Palo  Alto,  California  94304 

ABSTRACT 

The problem of matching two  scenes,  one  contained  in 
the  other,  arises  in  many  practical  picture  processing 
tasks  including  stereocompilation,  classification of 
photographic data,  and  map  matching for  navigation 
and  guidance.  Because  the  images  are  not exact rep(cid:173)
licas,  but  rather  noisy  and  perhaps  geometrically  dis(cid:173)
torted  versions  of the  original  scenes,  it  is  necessary 
to develop a body of theory  capable of providing an(cid:173)
swers  to  questions  concerning  effects  of various  types 
of error,  and  means  for  minimizing the  effects  of such 
errors.  This  paper  presents  a  "decision space" ap(cid:173)
proach  to  the problem  for  dealing  with  small  amounts 
of noise and  distortion,  and  a promising new  technique 
for  dealing  with  "rubber  sheet"  distortion. 

INTRODUCTION 

Assume we are given images  of two  scenes,  one  scene 
contained  in the other,  and  we  wish to determine where 
the  contained  scene  appears  (i.e.,  has  a best match)in 
the  containing scene.  We  further  assume  that the  im(cid:173)
ages  are  not  exact replicas  of either  of the  scenes,  but 
rather  noisy  and  perhaps  geometrically  distorted  ver(cid:173)
sions  of each.  The  solution to this problem  (the de(cid:173)
tection of scene  congruence)  has  applications  in  many 
practical  picture  processing tasks  including  stereo-
compilation,  classification  of photographic  data,  ter(cid:173)
rain  change detection,  map matching  for  navigation 
and guidance,  etc. 

In  many of  these  tasks  it  is  possible  to  assume  that the 
noise  and  distortion processes  result  in  relatively 
small  random differences  between  the  contained  and 
containing  scenes.  Under  these  conditions,  it  is both 
possible  and desirable  to  employ  mathematical  tech(cid:173)
niques  in  contrast  to  the  heuristic  approach  currently 
used  for  general  scene analysis.  [Reference  (1)  is  a 
recent  survey  which  considers  much of the  general 
scene analysis  work.)  This  allows  the  formulation of a 
comprehensive  mathematical  model  which can  provide 
the  insight needed  to estimate  system performance  for 
different proposed  configurations. 
In particular,  such 
a  model  must address  itself to the  generic noise  and 
distortion processes  peculiar  to  scene  imaging de(cid:173)
vices,  and  characterize  the  effects  of simplifications 
and  uncertainties  which will  necessarily be  inherent in 
any practical  system. 

This  paper  is  a  summary of  Fischler  (2)  and  is  con(cid:173)
cerned  with the development of a body  of theory  needed 
to  implement  (especially  using digital  techniques) 
practical  systems  for  tasks  given  above. 
such questions  as: 
decision procedures  for  the  detection of scene 

[1]  What is  the nature of optimal 

It considers 

*Work sponsored by  the  Lockheed  Independent 
Research  Program. 

congruence  under  fairly  general  noise  assumptions?, 
[2]  How do error processes,  such as  scale change,  ro(cid:173)
tation  error,  sensor  amplitude gain  and bias  varia(cid:173)
tions,  etc.,  affect system performance,  and how  can 
the  effects  of these  errors  be  minimized  without pay(cid:173)
ing an excessive  cost penalty?,  [3)  How do various 
scene  properties  or  characteristics  influence  system 
accuracy?,  and  [4)  What procedures  are  available  for 
situations  in  which the  small  error  model  is  not 
realistic ? 

In any practical  situation,  the  instruments used  to 
view,  process,  and  store  scene  information have finite 
resolution or bandwidth.  Therefore,  invoking  the 
Shannon Sampling Theorem,  we  can restrict our atten(cid:173)
tion to scenes  which can be  characterized by  a finite 
array  of bounded  integers,  each  integer  representing 
the  sensed  scene  attribute  (such as  light intensity  for 
a  photographic  sensor,  or  radiometric  temperature  if 
we  are employing an  infrared  sensor,  etc.) at some 
specified  geometric  location  in the  given  scene.  Ques(cid:173)
tions  concerning  the  analog-digital  interface  are dis(cid:173)
cussed  in  Fischler  (2) but will  be omitted  from  this 
summary. 

The  framework  for  much of  the  analysis  presented  in 
this  paper  is  established  by  considering  each  match 
location in the  containing scene  (a  point  of potential 
match between the containing and  contained scenes) as 
being associated  with a distinct class.  The  "ideal" 
representative  of each  class  is  the  fixed  size  segment 
of the  containing scene  centered  at  the  corresponding 
match location.  The  containing scene  is  called  the 
reference  map  (RM),  and  the  contained  scene  is  called 
the  sensed map (SM).  Any given SM is now assumed 
to be  some  (ideal)  RM segment which has  been  per(cid:173)
turbed by  a  specified  set of noise  and distortion proc-
cesses.  Match point  determination  is thus  reduced to 
a classification  task. 

(See  Fig.  1.) 

Each map,  represented  by a  collection of  N  discrete 
numbers,  is  considered  to be a point in  a  "signal 
space" of N-dimensions.  Using decision  theory  con(cid:173)
cepts  [see  Refs.  (3) through  (12)],  we show that satis(cid:173)
fying  a  minimum  error  criterion  for  match point de(cid:173)
termination  corresponds  to  measuring  some  weighted 
distance  function between the  signal  space  image of the 
SM and each of the RM segments. 

To present  results  having the greatest degree  of gen(cid:173)
erality  and  intuitive  appeal, geometric  arguments  form 
the  basis  for  most of the development presented  here. 
These  geometric  arguments  are  supported by  a paral(cid:173)
lel  algebraic  development given  in  Fischler  (2). 

After developing the decision theoretic  model,  we  con(cid:173)
sider  the  effect of scale  and  rotation error  (due  to un(cid:173)
certainties  in  sensor position and  orientation)  on our 
decision metric.  This  analysis  is  followed by  a discus(cid:173)
sion of amplitude  gain  and  bias  errors,  i.e.,  linear 
transformations  of the  resolution  element  values  which 
might be introduced by  changes  in the  medium between 
the  scene  and  the  sensor,  or  by  variations  in the  sens(cid:173)
ing  system  itself. 
In particular,  we  consider  how  the 
effects  of these  errors  can be  eliminated  (through 
"normalization")  without  specifically  detecting  their 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis n General Papers 

89 

The  final  section of this  paper  is  concerned  with the 
question of extreme distortion. 
In spite  of their  ap(cid:173)
parent generality,  unaugmented  statistical  decision 
theory  techniques  are  useful  only  in  situations  where 
error  and distortion processes  are  held  under  reason(cid:173)
ably tight control.  When this  is  not the  case,  a differ(cid:173)
ent approach to decision making is  required.  A  new, 
efficient,  algorithmic  technique  for  locating one  scene 
in  another  is  presented  for  cases  of extreme distor(cid:173)
tion.  This  algorithm is  an important development  in 
that  it has  a  computation time  requirement which 
grows  linearly  with  map  size,  even  though  it performs 
a  combinatorial  search  for  a best fit using a decom(cid:173)
posed SM.  For  intermediate distortion problems,  a 
simpler  technique  also  involving  SM decomposition is 
shown to be an effective solution. 

As  noted  in  the  introduction,  this  section will first 
establish a decision  theoretic  model  for  match point 
determination;  it  then  considers  the  effects  of various 
noise  and distortion  mechanisms on the decision proc(cid:173)
ess,  as well as the significance and consequences of 
normalization.  A  scene  characterization technique 
based on expressions  devised  for expected  error  is 
offered  together  with  some  supporting experimental 
data. 

Since  this paper  is  actually  a  contracted  version of 
Fischler  (2),  figure and  equation numbers  from the 
original  version will be  retained  where possible to 
facilitate  cross-reference.  One  effect of this  conven(cid:173)
tion will  be the omission of figure numbers  2,  3,  and 
8.  References  to appendices  refer  to  the original 
paper  although abbreviated  appendix  material  is  in(cid:173)
cluded  where deemed  necessary  for  comprehension. 

c.  RM Segments  and  Sensed  Map Depicted  in Signal 

Space 

A  Decision  Theoretic  Model  for  Match  Point 
Determination 

Fig.  1  Formulation of the  Scene  Congruence  Problem 

as  a  Classification  Problem With Its  Associ(cid:173)
ated  Signal  Space  Representation 

presence.  The  viewpoint  of minimizing error  effects, 
rather  than detecting and  correcting for  them,  is  re(cid:173)
lated  to  system  cost considerations. 

The  question of remote  error  (RE)  is  considered  next. 
RE  is defined as  the  occurrence of two or  more  RM 
segments  which are  essentially  identical to the SM,  bu 
are  (typically)  separated  by  some nontrivial physical 
distance  in the  RM.  The  relation of probability  of RE 
to such physical quantities  as  signal-to-noise ratio an< 
map spatial  frequency  spectrum  is  developed. 
also  shown that normalization  increases  the probabilifr 
of  RE. 

It is 

In  many applications,  especially  those  concerned  with 
scene matching for guidance and navigation,  the  RM 
(and possibly the SM) may be freely  chosen.  A discus 
sion of the factors  affecting this  choice  is  given,  to(cid:173)
gether  with  some  supporting  experimental  data. 

Let the vector  X  =  (x1  , X2 , 
.  ,  xN)  designate the 
SM.  Associated  with  the  ith  possible digital  match 
location in  the  RM is  a SM-sized  subset of the  RM 
which we designate as 

Thus  (see  Fig.  1) the RM is decomposed  into a set of 
R  "N-tuples"  (i.e.,  vectors  with  N  components).  The 
SM is a single N-tuple,  which we assume  is one of the 
RM(i)  which has been perturbed by a specified  set of 
noise  and distortion processes. 

We would now like to assign  X  (the SM)  to some 
RM(i)  according to a scheme which will  minimize  the 
resultant probability of error.  That  is,  we will use  a 
minimum  error  criterion. 

To  minimize  error,  we  must assign  X  to  that  RM(i) 
such  that  Pr[Yf|X] 
is  maximized.  The Bayes  rule 
for  computing the  a posteriori probability  is 

90 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis  II  General  Paper 

If we  assume  that all  Yi  are  equally  likely to  occur 
(i.e.,  the  SM  is  equally  likely  to have  been derived 
from any location in the  RM),  then we have: 

and assign(cid:173)
is  maxi(cid:173)

for  all  values  of  i  

Our  decision procedure  then  consists  of evaluating 
Pr[X|Yi] 
ing  X  to  that  RM(i)  for  which  Pr|X|Yi) 
mum. 
To obtain results  having the  greatest degree  of gener(cid:173)
ality,  and  still  leave  our  reasoning open to  intuitive 
appraisal,  we  will  employ  geometric  analysis  in a 
suitably defined  "signal  space."  Appendix  B  contains 
a parallel  algebraic development which  will  be used  to 
verify  geometrically  derived  conclusions,  and  give 
some  insight  into  the  form  of  the  "expected  error" 
expressions  under  more  specific  noise  assumptions. 

Let us  consider  an  N-dimensional  Euclidean  Hyper-
space  (EN)  in which  each of the  N  coordinate  axes 
corresponds  to  one of the  N  components of a vector 
representing a  RM(i)  or  SM.  Thus,  any given  map 
will be represented by a  single point in  EN.  Figure  1 
illustrates  this  concept  for  the  case  of  E2  and  five 
arbitrarily  contrived  maps. 

A  number of observations  can be  made  about "distance" 
in signal  space  (see  Appendix  A).  Given points  Yi  = 
Yj 
(yi1  . 
Euclidean distance 
between  them  is  dij  ,  where: 

AND 

yi2 

yiN) 

[representing 

will be  called  the  energy of  RM(i),  and  in Appendix A 
the justification  for  this  designation  is  given.  Thus, 
the  square  of the  distance  of a point  Yi 
RM(i)) 
from  the  origin  is  equal  to its  "energy"  and 
proportional  to  its  average power.  All  RM(i)  with 
average power  less  than or  equal  to  d2/N  lie  within 
the  circle  centered at the origin with radius  d .  Simi(cid:173)
larly,  a  RM(i)  disturbed  by additive  noise  with  aver(cid:173)
age power 
would  lie  somewhere on  a circle of 
radius  dn  centered  at  Yi  . 
special  knowledge  or  assumptions  about noise  favoring 
one  cell  of a  RM(i)  over  another,  or one  RM(i)  over 
another,  it  is  reasonable  to assume  that the  noise  af(cid:173)
fects  each  yik.  equally  and  independently  for  all  (i,k)  ; 
that the  noisenas  zero  mean value; and  that the proba(cid:173)
bility  of a  specific  disturbance  is  inversely  related  to 
the  magnitude  or  power  associated  with  the  disturb(cid:173)
ance.  That  is,  the noise  is  spherically  symmetric with 
the  same  noise  power  for  all  map elements.  This  situ(cid:173)
ation is  illustrated  (for  N  =  2) in  Fig.  4a.  The equi-
probability  contours  of a noise-disturbed  signal, 

In the  absence of any 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis  II  General  Papers 

91 

Assume we are given a sensed map  X  =  (x1  , X2),  and 
we must decide  whether  it should  be assigned to  RM(i) 
represented by 
Given the situation described above,  a  minimum  error 
decision procedure would be to  compute 

or  RM(j)  represented by 

and 

In terms  of the  signal  space  representation,  we  can 
partition signal  space  by a hyperplane  (dashed  line  in 
Fig.  4a) which  is  the perpendicular bisector  on the 
line  joining 
Then  if  X  falls  on  the 
same  side  of the hyperplane as 
to 

we  assign  it 

and 

Figure 4b depicts  a  situation  in which we know or as(cid:173)
sume  that our  measurement of  X2  is  less  reliable (or 
subject to  more  variation)  than  x1  .  Note  that in  this 
case  the  equiprobability  contours  are  elliptical  with 
the long axis  in the  X2  direction.  We  can restore  the 
situation of  Fig.  4a  if we  scale each  Xi  by a quantity 
inversely  related  to  our  uncertainty  in  its  true  or nom(cid:173)
inal  value.  This  scaling  results  in a modified  distance 
measure: 

We then have an optimal decision procedure identical 
in form to that given  in  relation  [ 2]  with  d  replaced 
by  d'  . 

In 

Figure  4c  illustrates  the  situation in which  the disturb(cid:173)
ances  affecting  x1  and  X2  are not  independent. 
this  case,  since  an  error  in  x1(X2)  implies  something 
about  the  error  affecting  x2(X1),  the  symmetry  axes 
of our  equiprobability  contours  will  no longer  be paral(cid:173)
lel  to  the  coordinate  axes.  We  note  that if  X1  and  x2 
are  positively  correlated,  and 
,  the  major 
axis  of the  equiprobability  contours  will  have  a 45° 
angle  to the  x1  coordinate  axis.*  To  retain  the de(cid:173)
cision rule given in  [ 2] ,  we  must further revise  the 
distance  measure  to  effectively  eliminate  the  inter(cid:173)
active  effects. 
In particular,  a general  linear  trans(cid:173)
formation  is  required  to  rotate  the  coordinate  frame 
so that its  axes  are parallel  to those of the  ellipsoids. 
The  coefficients  TJK  for  this  transformation  can be 
approximated by the  elements  of a  matrix  which  is  the 
inverse of the  covariance  matrix  of the  Xi  . 
tional form,  we then have: 

In func(cid:173)

Thus,  we see  that under rather general  conditions,  the 
optimal decision procedure  (given by  [ 2])  in deciding 
how  to assign an unknown object to one of two possible 
categories  is  to  measure  the  adjusted  signal  space 
distance  (given by  f 1),  [3],  or  [4]) between the ob(cid:173)
ject  (SM)  and  the  expected  values  of the  ideals  repre(cid:173)
senting the two categories  [ RM(i)  and  RM(j)J  .  To 
decide between  R  possible categories,  we can make 
(R  -  1)  binary decisions,  each time eliminating the 
least  likely  alternative. 

The  conceptual  generality of the  signal  space approach 
has  a number of practical  limitations.  To  a large  ex(cid:173)
tent,  these  can be summarized by saying that the 
model  is  useful  only  in  reasonably  well  controlled  sit(cid:173)
uations  where  the  errors  are  small  and  random.  Be(cid:173)
cause  these  conditions  can be  met in  many applications 
involving the detection of scene  congruence,  the  signal 
space  approach  is  very  powerful. 

,  the expected 

Let us  now  consider  the  significance  of the  quantities 
that appear  in  the  "distance"  expressions.  The  first 
quantity  we  wish to consider  is 
value of  RM(i) .  The  noise-free representation of 
RM(i)  has been defined as  Yi  =  (yi1  ,  yi2  . . . . .  yiN) 
However,  as  we  shall  observe shortly,  most of the 
error  processes  to be  considered  have  a biasing**  ef(cid:173)
fect on the expected  signal  space location of  RM(i) . 
Further,  it  is  desirable  to normalize  RM(i)  when we 
expect  to  encounter  significant  signal  variations  (such 
as  amplitude gain  and bias variation) whose parame(cid:173)
ters  we  will  not or  cannot  estimate.  Normalization 
changes  the  expected  signal  space  location of  RM(i) 
in a known way. 

The  quantity 
associated  with  the  kth  sample  of 
any  SM,  is  a  measure  of the  total unbiased  variation 
we  can expect to encounter  in attempting to measure 
yy^ . 
In a more general formulation,  we could con(cid:173)
sider  this  variation to be  a function of the  RM(i)  as 
well as  the  sample index  (k) .  However,  in  this 
treatment we assume  that the functional dependence  of 
a  on  RM(i)  is  unknown  and  thus  heuristically  as(cid:173)
sumed  to be  uniform over  all  RM(i) 
of scale and  rotation  error, 
in a  manner derived  in  Appendix  C. 

In  the presence 
will be a function of  k 

is  a  measure of the  linear depend(cid:173)

The quantity 
ence of the noise  acting on the  ith  sample to the noise 
acting on  the  kth  sample. 
(It in no way  reflects on 
the  relationship between  the expected  values  of the 
samples  themselves.) 

Given the  orientation of the  applications  to  which this 
paper  is directed,  it will  not be practical  in general  to 
attempt  to determine  the  values  of the 
appearing 
in  [4) .  Thus,  we will  typically  ignore the  interactive 
effects  and  pay  the  associated  error  penalty; or  we will 
assume  some  simple  structure  for  the 
and at(cid:173)
tempt  to  compensate  for  the  interaction.  For  exam(cid:173)
ple,  a  reasonable assumption might be that the noise 

**We  will define  biased  noise  as  any  noise  or distor(cid:173)
tion process  that has  the  effect of shifting the  ex(cid:173)
pected  location of  RM(i)  in  signal  space. 

92 

interaction between any  two samples  in the  SM  falls 
off exponentially  with  their  separation.  This  assump(cid:173)
tion  is  discussed  in  Ref.  (4). 

Scale  Change and  Rotation  Error 

Analysis  of the  effects  of scale  and  rotation errors  is 
a  major  theme  in this  paper. 
If the  SM  and  its  corre(cid:173)
sponding  RM(t)  are  translated  into  best alignment 
under  scale  and  rotation  error,  it  is  obvious  that  cells 
near the  map centers  (i.e. ,  the  true  match point) will 
be  in better  registration  than the  cells  on the  map 
periphery.  This  point is  illustrated  in  Fig.  5a,  and a 
method  for  computing overlap  is  presented  in  Appen(cid:173)
dix  C.  The  two  main  consequences  of this  phenomenon 
are: 

(1)  There  is  an upper  limit on the  effective  size  of 
(This point is discussed  in Appendixes B 

a  SM. 
and  C and the section on  Extreme  Distortion.) 

(2)  The  reliability  of  measurements  falls  off as 

distance  from  the  map  center  increases.  Thus, 
distance  metric  [3]  should  be  employed  in  ap(cid:173)
plying optimal decision  rule  [2] .  This  result 
is  formally  derived  for  the  Gaussian  case  in 
Appendix  B. 

Another  result  of  the  inability  to  completely  align  the 
SM  with  its  RM(t)  is  the  introduction of biased  noise. 
That is,  to  the  extent that two  corresponding  cells (one 
in the  SM  and one  in the  RM) do not overlap,  a ran(cid:173)
dom  component having the  same  statistics  as  the  com(cid:173)
posite  RM  is added  to the  SM  (see  Eq.  [B.1])  and 
thus  the  expected value  of every  individual  RM(i)  is 
biased  toward  the  point  in  signal  space  corresponding 
to 

as  illustrated  in  Fig.  5b.  The  result of this  biasing is 
to  reduce  the  signal  space distance between any  two 
RM(i)  and  thus  increase  the  probability  of  error  in 
distinguishing between them. 
In the discussions  on 
map normalization  in  the  following sections,  it is  im(cid:173)
portant to  note  that it  is  the  expected  value 
RM(i),  and  not  Yi, 

that is being normalized. 

of 

Amplitude  Gain  Error 

and 

,  be alternative match point 

Figure  6a  illustrates  the  effect of an  amplitude gain 
change on expected  match point error.  For  no gain 
variation  (G  =  1),  let  RM(1)  and  RM(2),  with ex(cid:173)
pected  values 
possibilities.  Assuming that  the  sample  variables 
have been properly  scaled  to  equalize  their  variation, 
the  hyperplane  which  is  the perpendicular  bisector  of 
the  line joining 
is  chosen as  the decision 
surface  corresponding  to optimal  decision rule  (2) with 
distance  metric  (1).  Under  a gain change 
,  all vec(cid:173)
are  extended  radially  out from the  origin to 
tors 
new locations 
The  optimal decision  surface 
now  becomes  the hyperplane which is  the perpendicu(cid:173)
lar  bisector  of the  line 
In 
general,  the new and old decision  surfaces  will not 
coincide,  and any  SM  falling into the region between 

j o i n i n g a nd 

and 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis II General  Papers 

93 

them  (shaded in  Fig.  6a) will be classified in a 
nonoptimal  manner. 

Figure  6b  illustrates  the  effect of  "energy"  normaliza(cid:173)
tion on  amplitude gain error. 
are  normalized by dividing each of their  sample values 

If  RM(1)  and  RM(2) 

by 

and 

, where 

then they  will have  expected values 

and 

lie on  the  same hypersphere  centered  at 

the  origin of the  signal  space  coordinate  system.  The 
optimal decision surface  in  this  case  can be  seen to 
If  a 
bisect the  angle 
gain  change 
-origin-
in  still 

-origin- 
occurs,  the angle between 
and  the  new optimal decision  surface 

formed by 

coincides  with the  old.  Thus,  the optimal  decision 
surface  chosen  for  energy-normalized  maps  remains 
invariant under  a gain  change. 
It can also be  shown 
that  the  expected  error  for  energy-normalized  maps 
is  invariant under  gain  change.  These  assertions  are 
verified  for  the  case  of  Gaussian  noise  in  Appendix  B. 
However,  in  Appendix  A  it  is  shown  that energy  nor(cid:173)
malization  itself  raises  the  probability  of  error  over 
the unnormalized  case when no gain variation is 
possible. 

Amplitude  Bias  Error 

and 

Figure  7  illustrates  the  effect of an amplitude bias 
error.  For  no bias  variation,  let  RM(1)  and  RM(2), 
with  expected values 
match  point possibilities.  Assuming  that  the  sample 
variables  have been properly  scaled  to  equalize  their 
variation,  the  hyperplane  which  is  the perpendicular 
bisector  of the  line  joining 
is  chosen as 
the  decision  surface  corresponding to  rule  (2)  with 
distance  metric  (1).  Under  a uniform  bias  error 

be  alternative 

and 

=  b ( l,  1 , . . .,  1),  all vectors 

are  displaced  in 
makes  a 45°  angle with 

a  direction parallel  to 
each  of the  coordinate  axes)  to new  locations 
The  optimal  decision  surface  now becomes  the  hyper(cid:173)
plane  which  is  the  perpendicular  bisector  of  the  line 
joining 
In general,  the new 
and old decision surfaces  will not coincide,  and  any 
SM  falling in  the  region between them  (shaded  in 
Fig.  7) will be  classified  in a nonoptimal  manner. 

which  is  the  perpendicular 

and 
The  effect of 
then  is  simply  to  move  , 
and thus leave 

Thus,  the hyperplane 
bisector  of the  line  joining 
any  bias  vector 
and 
paths  parallel  to 
Thus,  the  optimal decision  surface  chosen  for  maps 
with  zero  mean  value  remains  invariant under  a 
uniform  bias  change. 

acting on 
and 
unaltered. 

along 

is  parallel  to 

In  the limiting case,  this  could  result in a two-

It  is  worth  noting  at  this  point  that under  nonuniform 
bias  change,  the  appropriate  normalization  is  to 
spatially  differentiate  (perhaps  more  than  once)  the 
maps. 
level  binary  map  in  which  intensity  contours  would 
provide  the necessary  information.  For  such  a 
scheme to be effective,  noise  cleaning techniques 
which  eliminate  high-frequency  noise  without blurring 
edges  would  have  to be  applied  to the differentiated 
maps  prior  to  match point determination. 

Remote  Error 

It  is  useful  to  consider  two  distinct  types  of error 
processes.  The  first type,  which we  shall  call  "Ac(cid:173)
curacy  Errors"  (AE),  are  local deviations  about  the 
"true" match point,  and  reflect the  fact that physically 
adjacent  maps  will  have  small  signal  space  separation 
due  to system bandwidth limitations.  We define a sec(cid:173)
ond  class  of errors,  called  "Remote  Errors"  (RE), 
which  correspond  to  falsely  detecting a match at a 
point typically  remote  from  the  true  match point.  An 
RE  can arise due  to the  chance occurrence of more 
than one area in  the  RM  closely  resembling the  SM. 

Thus,  we define  Remote  Error  (RE)  as the  chance 
occurrence  of a  RM(g)  sufficiently  close  (in  signal 
space)  to  the  "true"  RM(t)  so  that  RM(g)  falls  into 
the  expected  sphere  of error  surrounding  RM(t). 

94 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis II General  Papers 

We  can now determine  that probability  of a remote 
error as  follows:  Let us  assume  that  the  maximum 
number  of distinct  RM(i)  is  DM  (see  Appendix A)  * 
Then  the probability  of a  remote  error  for  a  RM  with 
R  components  is: 

By  the  statement of the problem,  Pr(g| t)  =  Pr(g) 
For  the  case  where  all  distinct  RM(i)  are  equally 
likely  to occur,  we have: 

is  the  maximum  value  of the  average  signal 
where 
power  in a  RM(i), 
is  the  average  noise power,  N 
is  the number  of independent samples  in  a  SM,  and  R 
is  the  number  of elements  in  the  RM  less  the  number 
of elements  in the  SM . 

Thus,  we  see  that the  approximated probability  of a 
RE  is  proportional  to the  size  of the  RM,  but  in a 
stronger  sense  is  inversely  related  to  the  size  of the 
In particular,  a 
SM  and  the signal-to-noise ratio. 
large number  of independent samples  can  assure  a 
very  low  probability  of  remote  error. 

In  some  applications,  it  may be  possible  to  reduce  the 
probability of  RE  by  rejecting  any  match point deci(cid:173)
sion which does  not exceed  a confidence level based  on 
the  relative  "cost" of a  RE  versus  the  "cost" of no 
decision  (or  reject).  Reference  (5)  presents  an 
analysis  of this  situation. 

Scene  Characterization and  Scene Selection 

Scene  characterization is  defined  as  a number  associ(cid:173)
ated  with a scene  which  rates  the probable  effective(cid:173)
ness  of the  scene  in  terms  of its  ability  to  minimize 
match point  error.  The  importance  of such  a  charac(cid:173)
terization derives  from  the  fact that  in  many  applica(cid:173)
tions  in  which  the  scene  congruence  problem  arises, 
scene  selection  is  a parameter which  can be opti(cid:173)
mized.  For  example,  in  map  matching  for  navigation 
and guidance,  the ground  reference  scene  (RM)  may 
be freely chosen,  and we  might even have some 
latitude in choosing the  SM . 

Based on the definition given above,  one appropriate 
scene  characterization measure would  be the  expected 
probability  of digital  match  point  error  using  the  given 
scene. 
used for  scene characterization.  We note  that any use(cid:173)
ful  measure  tor  scene  characterization  is  meaningful 

In this  sense,  Eq.  [ B . l l]  or[B.13]  can be 

*It  is  important to  distinguish between  the  RM(i) 
which  are  the  components  of some  given  Reference 
Map (and not necessarily distinct),  and a catalog of 
all  possible  RM(i)  which  are distinct. 

only  with  respect to  a  particular  decision  procedure 
and  noise  environment. 
If the  noise  environment  is 
assumed  constant,  then  the  "average weighted  signal 
space distance  (D')" between  a  RM(i)  and  one of its 
immediate neighbors  (see  Eq.  [B. 14]) can be com(cid:173)
puted directly from a given  scene and used as  the 
desired  metric. 

In a situation in  which we can choose among a large 
selection of possible  scenes,  the  computational  com(cid:173)
plexity of a  scene  characterization  measure  can be  a 
critical  factor.  For  rough  or  initial  screening. 
Eq.  [B.14]  can be  approximated  by  simply  measuring 
the  sum of the  squared  difference  of adjacent  samples 
in  the  x  and  y  directions. 
(These  measures  will  be 
called  the  x  and  y  Variation while  the  measures 
corresponding to  Eq.  IB. 14]  will be  called  the 
Weighted  Variation.)  The  following  table  gives  the 
results  of  some  preliminary  experiments**  on  the 
correspondence between Weighted  Variation and  match 
point  error  for  a  fixed  error  package  and  decision 
rule  Eq.  [B.6] . 

It  can be  seen  that  for  the  particular  error  package 
employed,  a map with a  (squared) Weighted  Variation 
of  50  or  more  in the  x  or  y  direction  had  no dis(cid:173)
placement  error  in  the  corresponding direction. 

To a  large  extent,  Variation  measures  are  also  meas(cid:173)
ures  of the  high  frequency  content of a  map. 
It  is  in(cid:173)
tuitively  reasonable  to  expect that  a  potential  for  very 
accurate positioning should be dependent on the pres(cid:173)
ence  of a  significant  amount of high  (spatial)  frequency 
energy  in  the  scene.  Further,  for  a given  sampling 
rate,  the  relative  independence  of the  measurements 
increases  as  a  function of the  high  frequency  content 
of the  map.  Thus,  a high  Variation  measure  also  im(cid:173)
plies  a  lower  probability  for  remote  error. 

As  noted  earlier,  errors  due  to gain  or bias  changes 
can be  minimized by  either  normalizing the  scenes 
(both  SM  and  RM)  with respect to average value and 
to  "energy"  content,  or by  choosing  scenes  which are 
relatively uniform  in  these  quantities.  Thus,  in  addi(cid:173)
tion to the proposed  Variation measures,  additional 
measures  relating  how  statistically  uniform  the  scene 
is  can provide useful  information. 

**Data used  in  these  experiments  were  obtained  from 
aerial  photography  of the  San  Francisco  Bay Area. 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis  II  General Papers 

95 

EXTREME  DISTORTION 

It has been  noted  that one  effect of scale  change  and 
rotation error  is  to produce a  "decorrelating" phenom(cid:173)
enon as  scene or map size  increases.  Thus,  under 
scale  and  rotation error,  there  is an upper  limit to  the 
useful  size of a coherent map (see Appendix  C).  Un(cid:173)
fortunately,  SM  size  is  the parameter  that offers  the 
greatest  latitude  for  maintaining  or  improving  match 
accuracy  in  the  presence  of excessive  noise. 

The  Concept of  SM  Decomposition 

One  solution to the problem of extreme distortion is  to 
acquire  a large  sensed  map,  and  decompose  it into 
segments  of not greater  than  critical  size.  Each  of 
these  segments  is  applied  separately  to locate  a  match 
point,  and  the  set of match points then  combined  (by a 
curve-fitting technique,  such  as  direct or  weighted 
averaging,  least  squares,  etc.) either to  derive  a best 
estimate  match point or  to  estimate  the  actual  scale 
and  rotation error. 
In the  latter  case,  the  sensed  map 
can be  computationally adjusted  to  eliminate  the  exist(cid:173)
ing scale  and  rotation factors,  thus  allowing the  entire 
sensed  map to be applied  coherently.  (The process  of 
error estimation and  correction  can be  applied 
iteratively  as  many  times  as desired.) 

In  Fig  9b we  see  that if the  SM  is  treated  as  a 

Figure  9  illustrates  some of the  above concepts. 
In 
Fig.  9a we depict a situation in which the  SM  is a ro(cid:173)
tated  contracted version of  its  intended  image  in  the 
RM 
coherent  entity,  and  if region  A  of the  SM  is  in 
proper  registration,  then  region  B  of the  SM  will be 
correlated  with  the  top left  corner  of  the  RM ,  result(cid:173)
ing  in a low  correlation  score.  However,  it the  SM  is 
decomposed  into  subregions  (nine  are  shown  in  this 
example) and  each  subregion  independently  correlated, 
a pattern of match  points  similar  to  that  shown  in 
Fig  9c will  be obtained.  From this pattern we  can 
estimate  the  desired parameters  (i.e.,  match point, 
rotation  error,  scale  factors). 

The  Linear  Case* 

Given  a  correlation pattern  similar  to  that  of  Fig.  9c, 
a  curve-fitting technique  such as  least squares  forces 
us  to  assume  something about the distortion process 
which produced  the given pattern.  The  simple  assump(cid:173)
tion  made  up to  this  point is  that  the  distortion  process 
is  linear  and  thus  we  would  look  for  the  best  rectangu(cid:173)
lar  (or  square)  grid  which  fits  the pattern  in  Fig.  9c  in 
a  least squares  sense.  The  center of the grid  is  the 
desired  match point,  while  the  slope  and  stretching of 
the  grid  specify  the  corresponding  rotation and  scale 
errors  in the associated  SM . 

If a  remote  error  occurred  in  one  or  more  of  the 
match points  in the  correlation pattern given  in Fig.  9c, 
a  rather  large  error  could be  introduced  into  our 

T he  concept of  SM  decomposition and  its  use  in 
linear  parameter  estimation  were  independently  ar(cid:173)
rived  at by  Lynn Quam of Stanford  University.  He is 
currently  preparing  a  Ph.D.  dissertation which  will 
include  his  results  in  this  area. 

c.  Set of  Match  Points  Obtained  for 

Independently  Correlated  SM 
Subregions 

Fig.  9  Decomposition of the Sensed  Map To Reduce 

Scale and  Rotation  Error 

96 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis  II  General  Papers 

Consider an  M x  N  tableau where the rows  are  in(cid:173)
dexed by the elements of  Y  and  the  columns  by  suc(cid:173)
cessively  larger  subsequences  of the  elements  of  X . 

We now define the following quantities: 

parameter  estimates.  Therefore,  it  is  desirable  to 
employ  some  type  of  "clustering" technique  which  will 
permit us  to eliminate  "wild" points  prior  to  making 
the  least  squares  estimate. 

The  "Rubber  Sheet"  Case 

In  many  problems  of interest,  the  linear  distortion  as(cid:173)
sumption of the preceding section would  not be ade(cid:173)
quate.  More  to the point,  we are  frequently  faced with 
a  situation  in which  it  is  not possible  to  offer  a  com(cid:173)
pletely  defined  distortion  mechanism  suitable  for  prob(cid:173)
abilistic  analysis. 
In this  case,  we  must first offer  a 
procedure for  locating the  SM  image  in  the  RM ;  and 
then provide  a second  procedure  for  finding  the  match 
point as  a  function of this  RM  image. 

Without a model  for  probabilistically  relating a  SM  (or 
segment thereof)  to a  RM,  we must (heuristically)  se(cid:173)
lect a distance  measure  to be used  as  the basis  for 
classification.  Consider  some  metric 
defines  the  "distance" between the  kth  element of the 
SM  and  the  jth  element of the  R M*  Let us  now  con(cid:173)
sider  the  use  of this  metric  with  the  rather  general 
class  of distortion  processes  which  sequentially  con(cid:173)
strain the  elements  of the  SM .  That  is,  for  any given 
SM  element  xk,  a constraint  (ft)  is  placed  on  the  re(cid:173)
gion in which  xk+1  can lie.  We  now define  the  RM 
image  of the  SM  to be  that  collection of  yj 

for  which 

which 

[15] 

is  minimized  subject to a  sequential  constraint on  the 
xk. 
Evaluation of metric  Eq.  [5]  can be accomplished  con(cid:173)
ceptually  (but not practically) by  selecting  N  elements 
at a  time  from  the  RM  and  determining  if they  satisfy 
the  constraint 
For  those  N-tuples  which do  sat(cid:173)
isfy 
Eq.  [5]  as  the  required  RM  image of the  SM . 

,  we  select the  one which  minimizes  metric 

A  procedure  (which  is  comparable  in  computation time 
to  conventional  correlation),  has  been devised  for  find(cid:173)
ing the  RM  image of the  SM,  and  is presented below. 

Let the  RM  be  represented by  the  sequence 

and  let the  SM  be  represented by  the sequence 

Assume we are given a distance function 
tial  constraint set 
best  (according to 

;  and  we are asked to find  the 
and 

embedding of  X  in  Y . 

;  a sequen(cid:173)

can also be  a function of the physical 
*In general, 
distance between  the embedded  locations  of  xk  and 
Xk-1' Xk-2 ....,X1 

The  "best"  embedding is  then given by 
the  "distance" between  X  and  its  image  in  Y  is 
given by 

,  and 

The  example presented  in  Fig.  10  illustrates  the oper(cid:173)
ation of the  above  algorithm.  The  constraint set se(cid:173)
lected  for  this  example  would  include  the  case  where 
the  scene was  stretched by pulling outward on the up(cid:173)
per  left  and  lower  right  corners  of a  rubber  sheet 
containing the  scene. 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis  II  General  Papers 

97 

Given that we have successfully embedded  the dis(cid:173)
torted  RM  in the  SM,  the  need to locate a specific 
match point  (i.e.,  the point in the  RM  at which the 
sensor  is  pointing)  might not be relevant and,  in  fact, 
might not  even be  meaningful.  However,  if this  re(cid:173)
quirement does  exist,  then  the  match point can be de(cid:173)
termined by  comparing the  resulting configuration  to 
a number  of stored  models  for distortion,  all  of which 
are  subsumed by 
A  best fit to one of these  mod(cid:173)
els  would  then determine  the  specific  procedure  which 
derives the match point from the embedded  SM . 

The  algorithm for  rubber  sheet distortion  has  a one-
dimensional  version  which  offers  significant  simplifi(cid:173)
cations .  Let us  consider  the  constraint set 

i.e.,  we have  a situation in which the  sequence  repre(cid:173)
senting the  RM  is  stretched  relative to  the  SM . 
In 
a practical  situation,  if it is  not  clear  whether  the  SM 
has  shrunk or expanded,  the desired  situation  can be 
obtained by linearly  "stretching" the  RM  sequence. 

Fig.  10  An Example of Two-Dimensional  Embedding 
For  some applications,  we  might expect parts of the 
scene  to  remain  coherent  while  other  parts  undergo 
"rubber  sheet" distortion.  This  situation  can be han(cid:173)
dled by  the preceding algorithm by  simply  allowing 
certain  of the  xi 
resolution  elements,  rather  than  single  elements. 
This point is  illustrated  in the  example of  Fig.  11. 

to  represent  fixed  arrangements  of 

Fig.  11  An  Example of Two-Dimensional  Embedding 

With  Coherent  Objects  and  Rubber  Sheet 
Distortion 

For a  RM  with  M  elements  and a  SM  with  N  ele(cid:173)
ments,  simple  correlation would  require on  the order 
of  kMN  computations  where  k  is  a  constant of pro(cid:173)
portionality  which  takes  into  account one  multiplication 
and one or  more  additions  and  subtractions.  For  the 
algorithm given above,  the  number of computations  is 
still proportional  to  MN,  where  the  constant of pro(cid:173)
portionality  is  now determined  by both the distance 
metric 

and  the  constraint set 

Fig.  12  An Example of One-Dimensional  Embedding 

SUMMARY 

It is  shown that the  scene  congruence problem  can be 
formulated  as a classification problem in a suitably 
defined signal  space; this  allows both geometric  anal(cid:173)
ysis,  and the application of decision theoretic  method(cid:173)
ology. 
It  is  then shown that an optimal procedure  for 
match point determination will  typically be based  upon 
a weighted  Euclidean distance  metric. 
(See  section on 
decision procedures and  Eq.  [B. 6] .) 

The  principal  effect of scale  and  rotation error  is 
shown to be a  "decorrelating" effect as map size in(cid:173)
creases .  This  in turn results  in an upper bound on 
the  effective  size of a sensed  map which is  a  function 
of scale  factor  and  rotation. 

(Match accuracy can 

98 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis II General Papers 

[A.6) 

[A.7) 

[A.8] 

decrease  if map size  exceeds  this  critical  size.)  Fur(cid:173)
ther,  the  reliability of a sensed  measurement de(cid:173)
creases as  its distance from the sensed  map center 
It is  this  nonuniformity  which must be 
increases. 
accounted  for  in the  signal  space distance  metric. 
(See section on scale and rotation,  Eq.  [B.20]  and 
Appendix  C.) 

Normalization techniques  to minimize the effects of 
amplitude gain and bias error  are presented,  and their 
significance  is  geometrically analyzed. 
In particular, 
normalization involves  the  effective  reduction of signal 
space dimensionality  (and  the consequent increase  in 
remote error probability)  to produce a  situation where 
the  corresponding error process  no longer affects 
either  the decision procedure  or  the  error  probability. 
(See sections on gain and bias  error,  remote  error, 
and  Appendix A.) 

An analysis  of the  remote error  problem shows  that 
for  signal-to-noise  ratios  greater  than  1,  the number 
of independent scene  measurements  is  the predominant 
factor  in assuring protection against  remote  error. 
(See section on remote  error  and  Appendix A.) 

It is  shown that a scene property,  closely  related to 
the high spatial energy content of the scene,  is a good 
indicator  of the quality of the  scene  with respect to po(cid:173)
tential  match point error,  (See section on scene 
characterization and  Eq.  (B.14) .) 

For  the  "large error"  case,  two  alternatives  are of(cid:173)
fered :  sensed  map decomposition in the case of linear 
distortion; and a new highly efficient algorithm which 
can be applied to  "rubber sheet" distortion.  (See 
section on extreme distortion.) 

Appendix A  (Abbreviated) 

SIGNAL SPACE RELATIONS 

If  v(t)  has duration  T  and bandwidth  W  then 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis II General Papers 

99 

corresponding  RM  element when the  SM  and  corre(cid:173)
sponding  RM  are  in best registration under  the  con(cid:173)
straints  imposed by scale  change and  rotation factors. 
Appendix  C gives  a procedure  for  evaluating 

Assuming that the  SM  is  equally  likely  to have  been 
derived  from any  location in the  RM,  the decision 
procedure  for  minimum  error  is  to  assign  X  to 
RM(t) 

if: 

=0 

Note  that all  for  k*  such that 
(i.e.,  the  k* 
elements in the  SM  and  RM  no longer have any area 
of overlap),  the  expected value of the  summation  in 
the  numerator  of  Eq.  [B.20]  over  the  k*  terms  is 
zero.  However,  the  contribution of these  terms  to the 
denominator  is positive.  This  means  that  if the  SM 
is  made large enough so that 
becomes  zero  for 
part of the  map,  the  resultant expected  error  is 
larger  than  that which would  have  resulted  from using 
a smaller  SM . 

Consider  a situation  in which scale and  rotation errors 
are absent,  but assume that an uncompensated ampli(cid:173)
tude gain  change  can  occur.  The  error  probability  in 
this  case is  (G  =  1  for no gain error): 

where 
function: 

is  the  Gaussian  cumulative  distribution 

For  the  case  where  RM(t)  and  RM(i)  have  equal 
energy 

a gain error  can be  ignored  since  it will  not cause  a 
change in the value of Eq.  [B. 28] . 

Appendix  C  (Abbreviated) 

THE  GEOMETRY  OF SCALE AND ROTATION  ERROR 

[B.13] 

The  Overlap 

Between  Corresponding  Elementary 

where  M  is  an empirical  constant and 

[B.14] 

Decision  rule  Eq.  [B.6]  takes  into account the biased 
noise  effect produced by  scale  change and  rotation 
errors.  For  practical  reasons,  it  is  sometimes  de(cid:173)
sirable  to  ignore  these  effects  and  assume  that 
for  all  k .  This  simplification  results  in  error 
probability  (compare  with  Eq.  [B.10]): 

= 1 

in  the x-direction and 

Areas  in  SM  and  RM  Under  Scale and  Rotation 
Suppose  the  Cartesian plane  is  subjected  to scale  and 
rotation  changes.  That  is.  it is  expanded by a  multi(cid:173)
plying  factor  of 
in the  y 
direction  (the origin being the  fixed point  in both  oi 
these  expansions),  and  then  rotated  counterclockwise 
about the origin by an angle of  0 .  Suppose  further 
that  R  is  a square  centered  at  the point  (x,y).  which 
has  sides parallel  to the  axes  of the unexpanded,  unro-
tated  Cartesian plane and of length one,  and  that  R' 
is  R  subjected  to the  above  scale  and  rotation 
changes.  We derive an expression approximating the 
area of 

Let  R"  be  the  square whose  sides  are  of length one 
and  are parallel  to the axes  oi  the unexpanded 

100 

Session No.  3 Scene Analysis  II  General  Papers 

unrotated  Cartesian  plane,  and  whose  center  is 
(u.v). 

Scale  Factor 

Rotation (deg) 

0 

2 

4 

1.00 
1.02 
1.04 
1.06 
1.08 
1.10 

>50 
>50 
>50 
34 
26 
21 

>50 
>50 
>50 
40 
30 
25 

30 
33 
33 
30 
26 
23 

6 

21 
21 
22 
22 
21 
19 

Note: 

(1)  The  values given in the  above table  are 

(2) 

upper  bounds  rather  than  least upper 
bounds on map size. 
If the  map  samples  are  not  independent 
measurements,  then the  table  entries 
should be  scaled upward.  Thus,  if sam(cid:173)
pling occurs  at  r  times  the  Shannon  rate, 
the  table  values  can be  r  times  their 
listed  values. 

Acknowledgment 

The  author  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  many  techni(cid:173)
cal  contributions  to  this  paper  made  by  R.  A. 
Elschlager.  Thanks  are  also due  to O.  Firschein, 
J.  M.  Tannenbaum,  and  R.  D.  Merrill  for  helpful 
comments.  The  author's  interest  in the  scene  con(cid:173)
gruence problem was  inspired  by  the  work of 
W.  G.  Eppler  [Ref.  (13)] . 

Bibliography 

(1)  W.  Miller  and  A  Shaw,  "Linguistic  Methods  in 

Picture  Processing,"  AFIPS  (FJCC)  Proceed(cid:173)
ings,  Vol  33.  1968.  pp  279-290. 

(2)  M.  A.  Fischler.  "The  Detection  of Scene  Con(cid:173)

gruence,"  6-83-71-2.  Lockheed  Palo  Alto 
Research  Laboratory,  Jan 1971. 

(3)  T.  W.  Anderson,  An Introduction  to  Multivariate 

Statistical  Analysis,  Wiley.  1958. 

(4)  A.  Arcese,  P  H.  Mengert,  and  E.  W. 

Trombini,  "Image  Detection  Through  Bipolar 
Correlation,"  IEEE  Trans,  on  Information 
Theory.  IT-16(5),  Sep 1970,  pp.  534-541. 

(5)  C.  K.  Chow,  "An  Optimum  Character  Recogni(cid:173)

tion  System  Using  Decision  Functions,"  IRE 
Trans,  on  Electronic  Computers,  EC-6.  Dec 
1957,  pp.  247-254. 

(6)  P.  W.  Cooper,  "The  Hyperplane  in  Pattern 

Recognition,"  Cybernetica,  Vol.  4.  1962. 

(7)  S.  Goldman,  Information Theory,  Prentice-

(10)  G.  S.  Sebestyen,  Decision-Making Processes  in 

Pattern Recognition,  Macmillan,  1962. 

(11)  J.  M.  Wozencraft and  I.  M.  Jacobs,  Principles 

of Communication  Engineering,  Wiley,  1965. 

(12)  W.  B.  Davenport,  J r .,  and  W.  L.  Root,  Random 

Signals and Noise,  McGraw-Hill,  1958. 

(13)  W.  G.  Eppler and  G.  A.  Simas,  "A  Theory of 
Map  Matching,"  5-26-68-2,  Lockheed  Missiles 
& Space  Company,  Mar  1968. 

(8)  C.  W.  Helstrom,  Statistical  Theory  of Signal 

Detection,  Pergamon  Press,  1960. 

(9)  N.  J.  Nilsson,  Learning Machines,  McGraw-

Hall,  1953. 

Hill.  1965. 

Based  on  the  results  ot  the  preceding section,  it is 
possible  to compute an upper limit on the  size of a  SM 
beyond  which  its  area of overlap  (with  respect to  reso(cid:173)
lution  cells)  with  its  original  image  in  the  RM  ceases 
to  increase.  The  entries  in the  following  table give 
this  limit  as  the dimension  of one  side  of a square 
array  of cells,  as  a function of rotation and  uniform 
x,y  scale  factor. 

*Note  that  if  the  map  samples  are  not  independent 
measurements,  then  the effective value  of 
will 
be  larger than  the value  given above.  We  are  cur(cid:173)
rently  examining  the  heuristic  of  making 
ponentially decreasing function  of the  distance between 
(x. y)  and  (u. v). 

an ex(cid:173)

