Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

111 

AN ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY FOR AUDITORY RECALL 

Richard  J.  Reid 

Computer  Science  Department 
Michigan  State  University 

East  Lansing,  Michigan  U.S.A. 

Abstract.  A  model  of  auditory  temporal  recall 
based  on  correlographic  recording  and  Inter(cid:173)
rogation  by  convolution  is  presented.  Complex 
tree  and  loop  structured  memory  sequences  can 
be  recorded,  with  selective  recall  based  on 
fragmentary  cues.  The  sequences  are  "re(cid:173)
membered"  by  proceeding  through  a  recorded  net 
of  associations  u n t il  the  coherence  of  the 
retrieved  signals  f a l ls  to  a  sufficiently  low 
level.  This  indicates  no  further  significant 
recall  is  possible  without  an  additional  exter(cid:173)
nal  cue. 

A  computer  simulation  of  this  model  using 
digitised  speech  has  produced  variable-length 
and  cyclic  sound-segment  recall  from  fragmen(cid:173)
tary  cues. 

Introduction.  The  problem  of  recording  infor(cid:173)
mation  in  a  manner  so  as  to  associate  it  with 
other  recently  received  information  and/or  old 
information  recalled  by  the  present  environment, 
appears  to  be  at  least  a  prerequisite  to  I n t e l(cid:173)
ligent  behavior. 

*  We  are  concerned  here  with  presenting  a 

model  of  paired-associate  recording  and  recall 
that  may  have  the  necessary  potential. 

The  possibility  of  recall  based  upon  holo(cid:173)
graphic  techniques  was  presented  by  Stroke  (1) 
as  a  compensation  or  f i l t er  effect,  and  later 
by  Collier  and  Pennington  (2)  as  recall  based 
upon  fragments  (possibly  displaced)  of  the  orig(cid:173)
inal  scene.  This  verified  Van  Heerden's  (3) 
earlier  prediction  made  on  a  theoretical  basis. 
The  experimental  setup  for  displaying  this 

phenomena  is  shown  In  Figures  1  and  2. 

An  interesting  possibility  of  using  this 

as  a  model  of  an  associative  memory  comes  from 
the  fact  that  multiple  exposures  can  be  made  on 
the  same  hologram  and,  after  development,  illum(cid:173)
ination  by  a  fragment  from  one  of  the  scenes 
w i ll  recall  that  original  scene  provided  suit(cid:173)
able  circumstances  are  insured. 

In  the  following  discussion  we  shall  be 

primarily  concerned  with  auditory  signals  rather 

than  visual,  but  thay  are  generally  Just  a  re(cid:173)
striction  to  one  dimension  rather  than  two. 

The  possibility  of  recording  the  auditory 

analog  to  Figures  1  and  2  was  suggested  by 
Longuet-Hlggins  (4)  and  extended  to  a  neural 
model  by  Chopping  (5). 
In  the  auditory  model  a 
given  time  signal  is  considered  to  be  made  up  of 
two  successive  fragments,  a(t)  and  b ( t ).  Then 
the  magnitude  of  the  power  spectral  density  is 
recorded  as 

|Ffa(t)}  +  F { b ( t ) }|  «  (A  +  B)(A  +  B) 

where 

A  =  F{a(t)} 

is  the  Fourier  transform  of  a(t)  and  (  ) 
complex  conjugate. 

is  the 

112 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive  Models 

Then  upon  recall  the  illumination  by  A 

would  give 

A(A  +  B)(A  +  B)  =  AAA*  +  AAB*  +  ABA*  + ABB* .  f l] 

it  represents 

[1],  say  ABA  , 

If  we  examine  a  single  one  of  these  four  sum 
terms  in  Equation 
the  convolution  of  the  signal  b(t)  with  the 
autocorrelation  of  the  signal  a ( t ).  Assuming 
the  autocorrelation  peak  at  t  -  0  is  much  great(cid:173)
er  than  at  any  of  the  other  registrations, 
then 
the  convolution  of  this  with  b(t)  w i ll  reproduce 
b ( t ).  Further  assume  that  for  a  term  such  as 
AAB  ,  there  are  no  peaks  in  the  cross  correla-
that  are  comparable  to 
tion  represented  by  AB 
the  autocorrelation  peaks. 
the 
convolution  with  a(t)  would  act  to  severely 
attenuate  a ( t ). 

In  this  case, 

For  the  above  assumptions  then,  the  four 
[1]  give  the  approximation 

terms  in  Equation 

AAA  +  AAB  +  ABA  +  ABB  =  a(t) + n + b(t) + a ( t) 

where  n  represents  noise  as  an  attenuated  and 
multiply-echoed  a ( t ). 

The  reconstruction  sequence  above  does 

contain  the  recall  of  b(t)  and  by  a  property  of 
the  Fourier  transform, 
relative  time  displacement  from  a(t) 
the  original  exposure. 

it  w i ll  have  the  same 

it  had  in 

Thus,  by  recording  the  power  spectrum  of 

the  original  sequence  and  illuminating  that 
recording  with  the  spectrum  of  a  fragment  and 
inverse  transforming  the  transmitted  spectrum, 
and  f i n a l l y,  playing  the  resulting  sequence,  one 
hears  the  recall  fragment  followed  by  the remain(cid:173)
der  of  the  original  sequence. 

It  is  similarly  possible  to  use  the  cueb(t) 

If  the  simula(cid:173)

then  the  multiplications  of  the  spec(cid:173)

to  recall  the  entire  sequence. 
tion  is  performed  using  the  discrete  Fourier 
transform, 
tra  correspond  to  circular  correlations  or  con(cid:173)
volutions.  Thus, 
the  recalled 
segment  a(t)  would  follow  after  the  cue  b ( t ). 
Multiple  exposures  can  be  made  and  each 

in  the  replay, 

exposure  can  be  composed  of  more  than  two  frag(cid:173)
ments.  However, 
there  is  some  d i f f i c u l ty  in 
overcoming  the  noise  that  is  added  from  these 
additional  terms.  For  example,  suppose  we  have 
made  two  exposures,  the  f i r st  using  the  frag(cid:173)
ments  a,  and  a2  and  the  second  using  a3  and  a.. 

3 

4 

12 

Then  upon  attempted  recall  using  a.  we  obtain 

where  the  n's  represent  the  noise  contributions, 
and,  of  course,  the  a4'a  and  a3  have  the  imper(cid:173)
fections  caused  by  their  recalling  autocorrela(cid:173)
in  any  case,  the  recalled  seg(cid:173)
tion  terms.  But, 
ment  a3  is  present  and  experimentally  is  discero-
able. 

A  study  of  the  signal-to-noise  ratios  that 
can  be  expected  based  upon  various  numbers  of 
exposures  and  fragment  length  to  total  signal 
length  has  been  reported  by  Wlllshaw  and  Longuet-
Higgins  (6). 

Proposals  have  been  made  by  Gabor  (7)  and 

Willshaw,  Buneman  and  Longuet-Higgins  (8)  to 
eliminate  a  significant  amount  of  noise  by  re(cid:173)
cording  only  the  necessary  correlographic  terms 
rather  than  the  power  spectral  density.  This 
enhancement  is  included  in  the  sections  below. 
The  very  peaked  nature  of  the  autocorrela(cid:173)
tion  assumed  above  does  not  occur  in  practical 
signals,  especially  speech  signals.  And,  a l(cid:173)
though  some  have  assumed  that  visual  scenes  w i ll 
have  this  property  if  they  are  composed  of  very 
narrow  line  segments, 
property  in  only  one  direction.  The  correlation 
can  s t i ll  be  quite  broad  for  translations  along 
the  direction  of  the  lines  and  may  give  severe 
undulating  ghosts  in  those  directions. 

this  w i ll  insure  that 

The  next  sections  also  include  a  method  for 

sharpening  this  autocorrelation  peak  without 
having  to  r e s t r i ct  the  nature  of  the  primary  i n(cid:173)
put  signals. 

A  form  of  sequential  recall  was  proposed  by 

Longuet-Higgins  (9),  but  it  is  not  possible  in 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive  Models 

113 

holographic  recording  without  receding  the  infor(cid:173)
mation  between  successive  cues. 

The  model  to  be  discussed  w i ll  allow  the 
sequences  to  be  tied  back  upon  themselves  to 
give  continuing  circular  recall. 
In  the  simu(cid:173)
l a t i o n,  an  estimate  is  made  of  the  signal-to-
noise  r a t i o,  and  as  this  falls  to  a  small  value, 
the  recall  is  terminated  pending  the  next  exter(cid:173)
nal  cue. 

Sound  Segments.  Experimental  f a c i l i t i es  have 
been  established  for  obtaining  digitized  speech. 
This  is  accomplished  by  low-pass  f i l t e r i ng  the 
speech  input  to  less  than  half  the  sampling  fre(cid:173)
quency  (to  prevent  aliasing).  This  filtered  i n(cid:173)
put  is  then  sampled  periodically  and  converted 
via  an  analog-to-digital  converter  and  stored  in 
digitized  form. 

To  minimize  the  amount  of  d i g i t al  storage 
required,  various  sampling  rates  and  numbers  of 
quantization  levels  have  been  considered.  After 
some  experimentation,  a  sampling  frequency  of 
4000Hz.  and  three  bits  of  quantization  were adopti(cid:173)
ed  as  nearly  the  minimum  quality  suitable. 

After  the  speech  signals  were  in  d i g i t al 

form  they  were  disected  into  elements  for  a  cata(cid:173)
log  of  sound  segments.  These  segments  included 
spoken  d i g i t s,  phonemes  and  some  complete  words. 
These  sound  segments  can  be  referenced  by  a  dic(cid:173)
tionary  process  and  concatenated  for  subsequent 
processing  or  digital-to-analog  conversion. 

Using  this  standard  set  of  auditory  signals 
obviates  some  of  the  severe  problems  dealing with 
the  v a r i a b i l i ty  of  actual  speech  such  as  changes 
In  amplitude,  pitch  and  time  registration.  A l(cid:173)
though  a  neuronal  model  has  been  proposed  by  Roy 
(9)  for  accommodating  these  variations, 
not  been  included  in  the  present  work. 

it  has 

to  transform  the  digitized  speech  segments  x(k) 
to  the  frequency  domain  X(J).  Each  segment  is 
padded  to  be  4096  samples  long  (one  second  of 
speech)  and  the  fast  Fourier  transform  is  used. 
Associates  come  in  pairs,  but  they  each  re(cid:173)
present  a  separate  one-second  sound  interval  and 
they  are  transformed  separately.  Their  associa(cid:173)
tion  is  recorded  as  the  product  of  the  conjugate 
of  the  f i r st  transform  and  the  second  transform, 
and  this  product  is  added  to  any  previously  ac(cid:173)
cumulated  correlographic  sum  as 

[3] 

If  the  above  second  sound  segment  were  to  be 

followed  by  a  segment  c ( t ),  then  c  would  be  sep(cid:173)
arately  transformed,  associated  with  b  and  accum(cid:173)
ulated  as 

This  sequence  of  paired-associations  can  be 
continued  down  a  chain  of  successive  speech  seg(cid:173)
ments  and/or  new  paired-associate  sequences  can 
be  added.  For  example,  the  correlogram 

[4] 

records  the  associations  a-b,  b-c,  and  d-e. 

The  individual  paired-associates  are  equi(cid:173)
valent  to  the  discrete  Fourier  transform  of  the 
circular  cross-correlation  between  the  sound  seg(cid:173)
ment  pairs, 

i.e. 

where  k  is  the  index  of  the  transform  summation, 
DFT  is  the  discrete  Fourier  transform,  and  the 
Index  (1+k)  is  evaluated  modulo  N. 

Recall*  Unlike  the  bidirectional  recall  proper(cid:173)
the  cues  in 
ties  of  the  holographic  recording, 
correlographic  recording  w i ll  recall  only  their 
successors.  This  directional  characteristic  has 
been  likened  to  human  recall  which  can  go  through 

114 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

domain,  then  a  sharp  single  peak  in  the  auto(cid:173)
correlation  produces  a  relatively  uniform  spec(cid:173)
trum  which  then  f u l ly  illuminates  the  recall  ele(cid:173)
ment  spectrum.  However,  the  multiple-peaked 
autocorrelation  produces  more  of  an  irregular 
"comb-like"  spectrum,  which  only  p a r t i a l ly  (at 
illuminates  or  f i l t e rs  the 
certain  frequencies) 
recall  element  spectrum.  This  gives  the  recalled 
sound  the  characteristic  that  it  has  been  passed 
through  a  drain-pipe  acoustic  f i l t e r. 

The  desired  autocorrelation  properties  can 

be  produced  by  the  following  techniques. 

In  order  to  avoid  the  successive  reinforcing 

registrations  of  the  periodic  components  during 
autocorrelation, 
their  periodicities  must  be  re(cid:173)
moved  during  the  recording  process.  This  can  be 
done  by  permuting  the  d i g i t al  samples  within  a 
sound  segment,  and  if  the  permutation  gives  the 
signal  a  sufficiently  noise-like  character, 
the 
autocorrelation  w i ll  produce  the  single  peak  at 
t-0,  and  the  associated  spectrum  w i ll  be  rela(cid:173)
tively  uniform.  The  reverse  of  this  permutation 
can  be  carried  out  on  the  recalled  element  to 
restore  i ts  periodic  properties. 

This  permutation  coding  seems  rather  simi(cid:173)
lar  to  the  f i r st  layer  transformation  in  a  multi(cid:173)
layer  perceptrem  as  discussed  by  Minsky  and 
Pappert  (10),  and  the  cortical  layered  calcula(cid:173)
tions  proposed  by  Kabrisky  (12). 

The  following  permutation  is  easy  to  visual(cid:173)

ize  and  implement  and  does  not  require  a  permu(cid:173)
tation  table.  Given  an  original  sample  of  N  -  2 
points,  and  suppose  we  are  going  to  take  points 
from  this  sample  but  that  our  selector  runs  at 
linearly  increasing  tempo.  Then  the  i ' th  o r i g i(cid:173)
nal  sample  goes  into  the  b ' th  c e ll  as 

the  alphabet,  weekday  names,  etc.,  readily  in  the 
forward  direction  but  poorly  in  reverse. 

This  recall  is  accomplished  from  a  cue  by 

taking  its  transform,  passing  the  transform 
through  the  correlogram  (multiplication),  and 
inverse  transforming  the  result.  For  instance, 
assume  the  previous  recording  given  in  Equation 
[4],  then  using  b  as  a  cue  gives 

subject  to  the  previous  assumptions  about  the 
auto  and  cross-correlations.  Here  then,  the 
desired  recalled  element  c  may  be  obtained  in 
a  relatively  unencumbered  manner  as  opposed  to 
the  recall  of  a3  given  in  Equation  [2]. 

The  recalled  element  in  [5]  was  obtained  as 
the  convolution  of  the  segment  c  with  the  auto(cid:173)
correlation  of  b, 

i.e. 

where  k  is  the  summation  index  of  the  transform, 
*  is 
(k-1)  are  evaluated  module  N. 

the  correlation  operator,  and  the  indices 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  correlations 
and  convolutions  could  be  carried  out  in  the 
time  domain,  but  it  is  about  an  order  of  magni(cid:173)
tude  faster  to  carry  it  out  in  the  transform 
plane  in  d i g i t al  simulation  when  N  =  4096. 

In  dealing  with  speech  signals  it  is 

the  autocorrelation  has  a  multi(cid:173)

t=0.  Because  of  the  periodic  components 

true 
that  the  autocorrelation  is  not  a  single  sharp 
peak  at 
of  speech  signals  (the  periods  vary,  but  rela(cid:173)
tively  slowly), 
tude  of  relatively  high  and  somewhat  broad  peaks. 
In  the  convolution  then,  each  of  these  peaks  con(cid:173)
tributes  a  copy  of  the  convolved  signal,  with 
each  copy  delayed  by  the  interval  between  the 
autocorrelation  peaks.  The  reconstructed  signal 
is  thus  highly  reverberative  and  is  not  easily 
identified. 

If  this  phenomena  is  viewed  in  the  frequency 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive  Models 

115 

This  can  be  shown  to  be  true. 

itself. 

While  the  above,  or  a  random  permutation, 
does  give  the  desired  autocorrelation  result, 
it  is  at  the  expense  of  a  rather  desirable  fea(cid:173)
ture  of  the  original  recorded  transforms.  Pre(cid:173)
viously, 
if  a  cue  had  been  displaced  from  the 
registration  it  had  during  recording,  the  recall 
phenomena  would  s t i ll  be  intact  although  the  re(cid:173)
called  fragment  would  have  been  similarly  dis(cid:173)
placed  in  time.  For  a  cue  displacement  of  1 
sampling 

intervals 

Sequential  Recall.  The  possibility  of  recalling 
a  l i st  of  items  occurs  when  one  considers  using 
a  recall  production  as  a  cue  for  a  further  inter(cid:173)
rogation.  This  is  a  possibility  in  correlo-
graphic  recording  whereas  it  is  not  with  the 
hologram  or  holophone  because  they  reproduce  the 
cue  as  part  of  the  recall  which  could  not  then 
be  directly  recycled  for  further  r e c a l l.  Time 
division  selection  also  would  not  be  satisfactory 
in  a  discrete  system  because  of  the  periodicity 
requirement. 

Now  consider  the  recording 

the  same  spectral  magnitude  for  illumina(cid:173)

i . e ., 
ting  the  fragment  to  be  recalled,  with  the  phase 
change  causing  a  uniform  time  delay  in  each  of 
the  spectral  components--thus  the  delay  in  the 
r e c a l l. 

With  an  arbitrary  permutation  encoding, 

it 
is  not  sufficient  to  be  quite  close  to  the  regis(cid:173)
tration,  the  registration  must  be  exact. 

A  further  desirable  property  of  possible 

In  order  for  the  various 

improvements  to  t h is  f i r st  level  encoding  should 
be  mentioned  here. 
it  is  necessary  that 
noise  terms  to  be  minimal, 
the  cross-correlation  between  recorded  signals 
have  quite  low  peaks,  by  comparison. 
In  a  par(cid:173)
ticular  sample,  over  the  range  of  spoken  d i g i t s, 
phonemes,  and  several  short  words,  the  ratio  of 
autocorrelation  peaks  to  maximum  cross-correla(cid:173)
tion  peaks  varies  from  three  or  four-to-one  to 
50-to-one.  Of  course,  this  depends  greatly  upon 
the  samples,  and  the  time  and  amplitude  quanti(cid:173)
sation.  The  important  point  to  be  made  here  is 
that  the  permutation  coding  discussed  above  was 
done  solely  to  enhance  the  autocorrelation  prop(cid:173)
erties,  while  the  cross-correlation  properties 
are  hardly  affected. 
It  may  be  true  that  both 
properties  cannot  be  further  improved  unless  the 
permutation  encoding  is  dependent  upon  the  signal 

116 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

Unfortunately, 
the  convolution  of  the  two  same 
cross-correlations  tends  to  enhance  the  peaked 
nature  of  their  convolution.  This  adds  more  co(cid:173)
herence  to  their  (the  peaks')  selections  of  time 
.  Fortunate(cid:173)
displaced  copies  of  the  signal  a 
l y, 
although  frequently  one  is  somewhat  larger  than 
the  rest  at  the  outset. 

the  multiple  peaks  are  not  conglomerated, 

It  is 

interesting  to  note  that  frequently 

Again,  some  detection  as  to  when  the  re(cid:173)

cycling  is  to  be  terminated  is  implied. 

These  cyclic  sequences  can  be  longer  and 
they  may  be  preceded  by  a  linear  (non-cyclic) 
preamble. 

If  the  various  possibili 

Composite  Recording. 
ties  of  the  preceding  sections  are  combined, 
the  composite  correlogram  corresponding  to  the 
sequential  patterns  of  Figure  3  is  possible. 

the  cross-correlation  between  any  a  and  b  as 
is 
above,  enhanced  by  the  f i r st  convolution, 
sufficient  to  produce  an  i n t e l l i g i b le  n'  «  a 
if  no  other  components  are  present.  This  is 
true  of  the  n3  term  also,  and  it  is  only  the  rel(cid:173)
atively  strong  recall  of  c 
weaker  secondary  effect. 

that  masks  this 

, 

If  variable  length  sequences  are  recorded, 

important  to  be  able  to  recognize 

then  it  is 
when  the  recycling  of  productions  as  cues  is  to 
be  terminated,  so  one  can  return  for  an  external 
cue  for  the  next  interrogation.  This  w i ll  be 
considered  below. 

If  sequences  can  be  recorded  and 

Cyclic  Recall. 
retrieved  as  consecutive  elements,  then  the  se(cid:173)
quence  could  also  produce  an  item  that  was  used 
as  a  cue  somewhere  previously  in  the  l i s t.  This 
w i ll  then  allow  a  loop  through  this  sub-sequence 
As  the  simplest  example  consider 

which  is  cyclic  if  i n i t i a t ed  by  either  the  cue 
the  r ' th 
a  or  b  . 
recall  w i ll  produce 

If  furnished  the  cue  a, 

Figure  3. 

A  composite  of  sequential  paired-associates 

recorded  on  a  single  correlogram. 

Each  of  these  paired  associations  is  recorded 
individually,  and  the  order  is  immaterial;  a l(cid:173)
in  the  simulation  it  is  convenient  to 
though, 
give  sequences  rather  than  individual  pairs. 
An  interesting  property  of  how  a  single 

new  association  can  modify  the  overall  behavior 
is  illustrated  by  considering  the  recording 
shown  in  Figure  3  before  the  association  n-k 
was  recorded  (N  K  added  to  the  correlographic 
accumulation)  versus  the  behavior  after  this 
single  addition. 

Termination  Condition.  With  the  provision  for 
variable-length  and  cyclic  sequences, 
necessary  to  determine  an  ending  point  for  the 
recycling  of  productions  as  cues.  For  non-cyc-

it  becomes 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

117 

l ie  sequences  this  should  happen  after  the  last 
element  Is  recalled.  Last  elements  could  pos(cid:173)
sibly  be  especially  marked  for  recognition  as 
such,  but  that  would  not  solve  the  cyclic  ter(cid:173)
mination  problem. 
Instead,  we  attempt  to  use 
every  production  as  a  cue  and  notice  that  Its 
production  may  be  t o t a l ly  noise-like.  This  ap(cid:173)
proach  has  been  somewhat  successful  In  simula(cid:173)
tion  and  proceeds  as  follows. 

After  a  particular  production  Is  available, 
the  Inverse  transform  of  the  convolution 

that  Is, 
has  been  performed,  the  recalled  sequence  must 
be  permuted  In  an  Inverse  manner  to  the  encoding 
permutation.  Then  the  spectrum  of  this  correct(cid:173)
ly  sequenced  recall  segment  is  examined  for  con(cid:173)
centrations  of  power  which  would  indicate  the 
presence  of  a  coherent  signal. 

If  this  spectrum 

a  legitimate  sequence.  An  improvement  would  un(cid:173)
doubtedly  result  if  small  clusters  of  exception(cid:173)
al  power  were  identified. 

For  cyclic  sequences  the  same  termination 

mechanism  is  employed.  This  works  because 
there  are  more  and  more  convolutions  of  auto(cid:173)
correlations  convolved  with  the  desired  sequence 
in  one  particular  term  of  the  recall  sum  and  the 
number  of  noise  terms  is  increasing.  So,  as 
contrasted  to  non-cyclic  recall  dropping  off  the 
end  of  the  initiated  sequence,  cyclic  recall 
fades  into  the  noise  and  is  ultimately  aborted. 

Typical  Correlogram  Composition.  The  entries  in 
Table  1  indicate  the  present  range  of  sequences 
that  can  be  recorded  on  a  single  correlogram  and 
give  i n t e l l i g i b le  r e c a l l. 

as  the  standard  deviation. 

Then  the  original  signal  is  judged  to  be 

other  than  noise  if  at  least  several  of  the 

* 

X(j)X  ( j)  terms  are  more  than  a  few  standard 
In  the  pre(cid:173)
deviations  greater  than  the  mean. 
sent  experiments  with  4096  spectral  components, 
six  were  required  to  be  greater  than  five  stan(cid:173)
dard  deviations  from  the  mean. 

As  might  be  expected,  this  detection  is 

rather  imperfect,  and  is  set  to  accept  possibly 
several  recalls  of  noise  rather  than  interrupt 

Typical  lengths  and  numbers  of  sequences  and 

cycles  that  can  be  recorded  on  a  single 
correlogram  and  give  i n t e l l i g i b le  recall. 

The  sound  elements  are  each  of  one  second  dura(cid:173)
tion  and  correspond  to  4096  samples  of  3  bits 
each.  The  correlogram  is  recorded  as  two  real 
values  and  2047  complex  values  where  the  expo(cid:173)
nents  are  11  bits  and  the  mantissas  37  bits  long. 

It  has  been  shown  that  it  is  possible 
Summary. 
to  record  several  sequences  of  aural  information 
in  a  single  correlogram  and  retrieve  the  i n d i-

118 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

vidual  sequences  by  furnishing  the  appropriate 
cues. 

The  variable-length  sequences  are  "re-mem(cid:173)
bered"  by  cycling  a  production  as  the  next  cue 
until  the  output  contains  no  further  signals. 
As  can  be  seen  from Table  1,  the  present 

simulation  is  rather  limited  in  terms  of  the 
total  amount  of  information  that  can  be  recorded 
before  the  noise  produced  masks  the  desired  re(cid:173)
call  elements.  A  practical  improvement  in  this 
aspect  can  probably  be  obtained  by  filtering  the 
output  to  consist  only  of  the  same  exceptional 
spectral  components  that  are  used  to  identify  the 
fact  that  there  is  actually  a  signal  present. 

Further  improvement  may  be  made  by  making 

the  permutation  (or  other)  encoding  dependent 
upon  some  well-preserved--preserved  through  re(cid:173)
cording  and  recall--property  of  each  individual 
signal. 

Of  great  interest  is  how  the  memory  mech(cid:173)

anism  can  be  made  more  dynamic.  That  is,  succes(cid:173)
sive  recordings  should  be  made  as  associations 
with  recent  external  inputs  and  the  internal  re(cid:173)
call  they  may  have  triggered.  Also,  recall  i t(cid:173)
self  should  be  done  so  as  to  modify  the  infor(cid:173)
mation  retained. 

References 

1.  G.  W.  Stroke,  R.  Restrick,  A.  Funkhouser 

and  D.  Brumm,  Resolution-retrieving  compen(cid:173)
sation  of  source  effects  by  correlative  re(cid:173)
construction  in  high-resolution  holography, 
Physics  Letters,  18,  3  (1965)  274-275. 

2.  R.  J.  Collier  and  K.  S.  Pennington,  Ghost 

imaging  by  holograms  formed  in  the  near 
field,  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  8,  2  (1966)  44-66. 
3.  P.  J.  Van  Heerden,  A new  optical  method  of 

storing  and  retrieving  information,  Appl. 
Optics,  2t  4  (1963)  387-393. 

4.  H.  C.  Longuet-Higgins,  Holographic  model  of 
temporal  recall,  Nature,  217  (1968)  781-782. 

5.  P.  T.  Chopping,  Holographic  model  of  temporal 

recall,  Nature,  211  (1968)  781-782. 

6.  D.  J.  Willshaw  and  H.  C.  Longuet-Higgins, 

The  holophone  -  recent  developments,  Machine 
Intelligence  IV,  349-357. 

7.  D.  Gabor,  Associative  holographic  memories, 

IBM  Jour.  Res.  Dev.,  13  (1969)  156-159. 
8.  D.  J.  Willshaw,  0.  P.  Buneman  and  H.  C. 

Longuet-Hlggsin,  Non-holographic  associative 
memory,  Nature,  222  (1969)  960-962. 

9.  op.  cit.  -  4. 
10.  A.  E.  Roy,  Certain  pattern  recognition  prob(cid:173)

lems,  private  communications,  (1970). 

11.  M.  Mlnsky  and  S.  Papert,  Perceptrons,  MIT 

Press  (1969)  228-232. 

12.  M.  Kabrisky,  A  proposed  model  for  visual  in(cid:173)

formation  processing  in  the  human  brain, 
University  of  Illinois  Press,  1966. 

