140 

Session No.  4  Associative and Adaptive Models 

TRANSFORMATIONS AND SOMATOTOPY 

IN  PERCEIVING  SYSTEMS* 

Michael  A.  Arbib 

Department  of  Computer  and  Information  Science 

University  of  Massachusetts 

Amherst,  Massachusetts  01002  U.S.A. 

Descriptors:  Brain  theory,  robotics,  b a l l i s t ic 
and  tracking  movements,  transformations,  somato-
topy,  pattern  recognition. 

ABSTRACT:  We  present  the  notion  of  distributed 
computation  in  a  layered  somatotopically 
organized  computer,  present  the  Pitts-McCulloch 
scheme  for  obtaining  standard  forms,  provide 
anarchic  networks  for  b a l l i s t ic  and  tracking 
modes  of  behaviour,  and  relate  this  to  the  visu-
omotor  activity  of  the  frog. 

1.  INTRODUCTION  TO  SOMATOTOPY 

Much  research  in  a r t i f i c i al  intelligence 

seeks  efficient  ways  to  implement  certain 
" i n t e l l i g e n t"  activities  on  computers,  with 
l i t t le  concern  for  the  correspondence  between 
the  resultant  mechanisms  and  those  of  the  human 
brain.  The  present  paper,  on  the  contrary, 
belongs  to  that  line  of  research  which  designs 
i ts  artefacts  as  models  to  be  used  in  increasing 
our  understanding  of  brain  mechanisms.  By  this 
we  preclude  attempts  to  implement  pattern-
recognition,  say,  in  the  manner  which  is  most 
efficient  on  existing  machines,  but  may  nonethe­
less  hope  that  our  studies  w i ll  offer  clues  for 
the  design  of  future,  highly  p a r a l l e l,  computers 
for  use  in  the  control  systems  of  robots. 

To  give  a  concrete  example  of  our  emphasis 

on  parallelism,  consider  the  problem  of  model­
ling  the  visual  tracking  of  a  moving  object. 
Many  authors,  in  applying  control  theory  to  the 
special  case,  say,  of  fixing  the  gaze  upon  a 
stationary  or  slowly  moving  object  would  note 
that  two  crucial  parameters  were  involved  -  the 
present  angle  of  gaze  6,  and  the  desired  angle 
of  gaze,  6d.  They  would  then  analyze  the 
problem  in  terms  of  such  a  control  system  as 
shown  in  Figure  1,  asking  what  function  of  the 
desired  and  actual  gaze  is  computed  to  determine 
the  rotational  acceleration  0  of  the  eye. 

Preparation  of  this  report  was  supported  in 
part  by  the  U.S.  Army  Research  Office  Durham 
under  contract  No.  DAHC  04-70-C-0043  and  in  part 
by  the  Public  Health  Service  under  grant  No. 
NS  09755-01  COM  from  the  National  Institute  of 
Neurological  Diseases  and  Stroke,  and  in  part  by 
the  University  of  Massachusetts  under  Faculty 
Research  Grant  S12-71(l). 

Such  an  approach  has  proved  f r u i t f ul  in 
analyzing  behavior  of  biological  systems,  but 
may  be  dangerously  misleading  when  it  comes  to 
unravelling  the  details  of  neural  c i r c u i t r y,  for 
it  suggest8  that  we  view  the  brain  in  terms  of  a 
central  executive  which  manipulates  a  few  v a r i­
ables  such  as  6  and  6<j  to  issue  such  directives 
as  the  current  value  of  6. 

However,  0d  is  not  immediately  available  to 

the  brain,  but  is  instead  encoded  in  terms  of 
peaks  of  activity  in  a  whole  layer  of  neurons— 
the  rods  and  cones  of  the  eye.  Again,  in  the 
case  of  eye  dynamics,  $  cannot  be  effective  as 
a  single  control  signal  for  a  rotary  actuator 
but  must  rather  control  the  opposed  activities 
of  at  least  one  agonist-antagonist  pair  of 
muscles  -  and  even  here,  two  signals  are  not 
enough,  for  the  contraction  of  each  muscle, 
i t s e lf  a  population  of  muscle  fibres,  must 
result  from  the  overall  activity  of  a  whole 
population  of  motoneurons. 

Thus,  although  it  would  be  possible  to 

design  a  robot  with  a  "brain"  structured  like 
the  centralized  (0d,0)  -►  0  converter  of  Figure  1 
it  would  require  special  preprocessors  to 
"funnel  down"  the  whole  input  array  of  retinal 
activity  to  provide  the  single  number  04. 
Indeed,  this  scheme  might  make  sense  in  a  robot 
whose  task  was  to  track  single  targets  rather 
than  interact  with  complex  environments,  and 
whose  effector  was  a  single  rotary  actuator  for 
which  0  was  an  appropriate  control  signal. 
But  if  the  output  must  be  played  out  upon  a 
whole  array  of  motoneurons,  as  in  the  biological 
case,  so  that  0  would  have  to  be  fed  into  an 
elaborate  processor  to  be  "parcelled  out",  then 
one  begins  to  doubt  the  u t i l i ty  of  the  central­
ized  processor. 
In  Section  2  we  shall  recall  a 
scheme,  due  to  Pitts  and  McCulloch,  whose 
beauty  lies  in  the  simplicity  of  i ts  demonstra­
tion  that  -  at  least  in  the  case  under  discus­
sion  -  a  centralized  processor  may  be  dispensed 
with,  and  a ll  computation  may  be  carried  out  in 
distributed  fashion  in  the  layer  or  layers 
between  the  input  and  output  arrays. 
4,  we  shall  outline  a  related  model  of  frog 
visumotor  a c t i v i t y.  Some  data  about  the  frog 
visual  system  may  help  make  our  point: 

In  Section 

Lettvin,  Maturana,  McCulloch  and  Pitts  (1) 

found  that  most  ganglion  cells  of  the  frog's 
retina  could  be  classified  as  being  one  of  four 
types  -  such  as  "moving  spot  detectors"  and 
"large  moving  object  detectors".  What  we  want 
to  emphasize  here  is  the  way  in  which  the 
information  from  the  four  types  of  detectors  is 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

141 

there  exists  a  direction 

distributed  in  the  brain.  Their  axons  terminate 
(among  other  places)  in  a  brain  structure  called 
the  tectum,  with  the  terminations  forming  four 
separate  layers,  one  atop  each  other,  with  the 
properties  that  (a)  different  layers  correspond 
to  different  types  of  detector;  (b)  each  layer 
preserves  the  spatial  relations  between  the 
original  cells  ( i . e. 
along  the  layer  corresponding  to  moving  across 
the  retina);  (c)  terminations  stacked  above  one 
another  in  the  four  layers  come  from  ganglion 
cells  with  overlapping  receptive  f i e l d s.  This 
is  another  dramatic  case  of  the  neural  specifi­
city  that  provides  the  structural  substrate  for 
brain  function  (see  also  Sperry  (2)). 
It  should 
be  noted  that  such  relationships  between  two 
layers  may  preserve  rough  spatial  relationships 
(up  and  down  versus  across),  without  preserving 
relative  sizes.  For  example,  in  the  layer  in 
the  human  brain  which  receives  touch  information 
from  the  body,  the  fingers  occupy  a  larger  area 
than  the  trunk,  since  the  brain  needs  detailed 
sensory  information  from  the  fingers  if  it  is 
control  fine  manipulation.  Such  relationships 
between  two  layers  of  cells  are  called  somato-
topic,  from  the  Greek  soma  (body)  and  topos 
(place),  since  it  preserves  information  about 
place  on  the  body  as  we  move  from  receptors  to 
the  central  nervous  system.  As  we  move  further 
from  the  periphery,  the  relationships  become 
less  d i s t i n c t i v e,  but  may  s t i ll  guide  our 
investigation  of  adjacent  layers.  What  we  are 
saying  is  that  a  useful  way  to  structure  the 
apparent  chaos  of  many  parts  of  the  brain  is  to 
describe  such  parts  in  terms  of  interconnected 
layers,  where  position  within  the  layer  is  a 
crucial  indicator  of  the  functional  significance 
of  a  c e l l 's  a c t i v i t y,  and  where  an  analysis  of 
one  patch  of  such  a  layer  may  yield  an  under­
standing  of  the  function  of  the  layer  as  a 
whole. 

to 

In  the  input 

In  discussing  somatotopy  in  the  layers  of 
such  a  distributed  computer,  the  reader  should 
take  note  that  we  shall  use  the  word  somatotopy 
in  an  extremely  broad  fashion. 
pathways  of  the  visual  system,  position  encodes 
position  in  visual  space  relative  to  the  eye;  in 
the  auditory  system  it  encodes  frequency  of 
stimulation;  and  in  the  tactile  system,  position 
on  the  body. 
It  is  only  in  the  last  case  that 
the  term  somatotopy  is  s t r i c t ly  appropriate  -
retinotopy  and  tonotopy  may  better  connote  the 
respective  situations  in  the  f i r st  two  cases. 
Again,  in  output  pathways,  position  in  a  layer 
may  encode  the  location  of  the  target  of  a 
movement.  As  we  move  away  from  the  periphery  to 
layers  of  the  brain  far  removed  from  any  pre­
dominant  commitment  to  sensory  modality  on 
particular  mode  of  action,  we  can  expect  position 
in  the  layer  to  have  l i t t le  direct  correlation 
with  bodily  position  -  yet  we  hypothesize  that 
position  in  the  layer  w i ll  s t i ll  encode  a 
crucial  parameter  of  the  c e l l 's  function. 
It 
is  in  this  somewhat  over-extended  sense  of  a 
positional  code  that  we  shall  speak  of  somato-

topy  even  in  layers  far  from  the  periphery. 
There  are  structures  in  the  brain  -  the 
reticular  formation  may  be  one  -  where  the 
notion  of  layering  is  not  useful. 

We  do  not  fanatically  claim  the  universal 
truth  of  the  statement  "the  brain  is  a  layered 
somatotopic  computer".  Rather  we  use  it  as  a 
convenient  slogan  to  remind  us  that  it  is  high 
time  that  somatotopy  -  so  long  an  important 
property  for  anatomists  and  physiologists  -
played  i ts  f u ll  role  in  our  theories  of  brain 
function.  Even  in  structures  which  are  not 
layered,  the  positions  of  neurons  w i ll  play  a 
role  that  we  cannot  neglect  in  modelling  their 
contribution  to  the  overall  function  of  the 
structure. 

2.  PITTS  AND  MCCULLOCH  REVISITED 

In  the  latter  part  of  their  paper,  Pitts 

and  McCulloch  (3)  presented  a  feedback  scheme 
designed  to  find  a  transformation  T,  from 
among  a  group  G  of  possible  transformations  of 
patterns  which  are  played,  say,  upon  the  retina, 
which  w i ll  transform  a  pattern 
form 
case  in  which  we  also  use  transformations  of 
output  a c t i v i t y,  to  assure  that  the  relation 
between  input  and  output  is  in  standard  form.] 

to  a  standard 
[Arbib  and  Didday  (A)  consider  the 

They  generate  the  transformation  in  two 

steps: 
(i)  Associate  with  each  pattern 

vector"  E 
if 

such  that 

is  in  standard  form, 

an  "error 

■  0  if  and  only 

( i i)  Provide  a  schemeW  which  w i ll  associate  with 
each  error  vector  a  transformation  which  is 
error-reducing  -  that  i s, 

for  a ll  patterns 

we  demand  that 

is  applied  to 

be  reduced  after 

(1) 
■  0.  Hence­

with  equality  only  in  case  E  
f o r t h,  let  us  use 
There  are  two  main  implementations  of  such 
a  feedback  scheme,  only  the  second  of  which  was 
considered  by  Pitts  and  McCulloch. 

to  abbreviate 

In  a  b a l l i s t ic  scheme  W  is  so  structured 
as  to  v i r t u a l ly  reduce  the  error  to  zero  in  one 
step: 

for  a ll  patterns 

A  controller  would  then  proceed  as  follows: 

1.  Given 
2.  Form 
3.  Proceed  on  the  assumption  that  

compute  E 

and  thus 

ntly  close  to  standard  form. 

is  s u f f i c i e­

Such  a  scheme  is  that  used  in  b a l l i s t i cs 

is  the  displacement  of  a  bullet  from 
where E 
i ts  target,  and  W,  is  determined  by  the  i n i t i al 
aim  when  the  shot  is  fired  -  there  is  no  pos­
s i b i l i ty  of  making  mid-course  corrections.  This 
is  in  distinction  to  a  guided  missile  in  which 
repeated  corrections  can  be  made. 

142 

Session No.  4  Associative and Adaptive  Models 

Figure  2 

A  Generalization  of  the  Pitts-McCulloch 
Scheme  for  Transforming  a  Pattern  to 
Standard  Form.  (6) 

The  transform  application  box  is  memoryless-

at  i ts  output.  The 

and  transform  T  at  i ts  input 

input  pattern 
yield  transformed  pattern  
error  computer  box  is  memoryless  -  an  input 
pattern  at  i ts  input  yields  the  corresponding 
error  at  i ts  output.  The  transform  computer  box 
is  a  sequential  machine  -  if  i ts  state  at  time  t 
is  the  transform  T,  and  i ts  input  at  time  t  is 
the  error  vector  e,  then  i ts  new  state  and  out­
put  at  time  t  +  1  w i ll  both  be  the  transform 

(e)-T. 

The  hard  work  in  such  a  scheme  is  actually 
defining  an  appropriate  error  measure  E  and  then 
finding  a  mapping  which  can  make  use  of  error 
feedback  to  properly  control  the  system  so  that 
it  w i ll  eventually  transform  the  input  to  stand­
ard  form. 

Let  us  see  here  how  Pitts  and  McCulloch 

exemplified  their  general  scheme  in  a  plausible 
reflex  arc  from  the  eyes  through  the  superior 
colliculus  to  the  oculomotor  nuclei  to  so  control 
the  muscles  which  direct  the  gaze  as  to  bring  the 
point  of  fixation  to  the  centre  of  gravity  of 
distribution  of  brightness  of  the  visual  input. 
[With  our  current  knowledge  of  retinal  "pre­
processing"  we  might  now  choose  to  substitute  a 
term  such  as  "general  contour  information"  -  or 
any  "feature"  for  "brightness"  in  the  above  pre­
scription.  But  that  does  not  affect  the  model 
which  follows]. 

Julia  Apter  (7,8)  showed  that  each  half  of 

the  visual  f i e ld  of  the  cat  (seen  through  the 
nasal  half  of  one  eye  and  the  temporal  half  of 
the  other)  maps  topographically  upon  the  contra­
lateral  colliculus. 
In  addition  to  this  "sensory" 
map,  she  studied  the  "motor"  map  by  strychinizing 
a  single  point  on  the  collicular  surface  and 
flashing  a  diffuse  light  on  the  retina  and 
observing  which  point  in  the  visual  f i e ld  was 
affixed  by  the  resultant  change  in  gaze.  She 
found  that  these  "sensory"  and  "motor"  maps  were 
almost  identical. 

P i t ts  and  McCulloch  noted  that  excitation 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

143 

to  the  right 

at  a  point  of  the  l e ft  colllculus  corresponds 
to  excitation  from  the  right  half  of  the  visual 
f i e l d,  and  so  should  induce  movement  of  the  eye 
to  the  right.  Gaze  w i ll  be  centred  when 
excitation  from  the  l e ft  is  exactly  balanced  by 
excitation  from  the  right.  Their  model  (3, 
Figure  6)  is  then  so  arranged,  for  example,  that 
each  motoneuron  controlling  muscle  fibres  in  the 
l e ft  medial  rectus  and  right  lateral  rectus 
muscles,  which  contract  to  move  the  l e ft  and 
right  eyeballs,  respectively, 
should  receive  excitation  summing  the  level  of 
activity  in  a  thin  transverse  strip  of  the  l e ft 
colllculus.  This  process  provides  a ll  the 
excitation  to  the  right  lateral  and  medial 
rectus, 
tight.  Reciprocal  inhibition  by  axonal  col­
laterals  from  the  nuclei  of  the  antagonist  eye 
muscles,  which  are  excited  similarly  by  the 
other  colllculus  serve  to  perform  subtraction. 
The  computation  of  the  quasi-centre  of  gravity's 
vertical  coordinate  Is  done  similarly. 
course,  computation  may  be  performed  by  com-
mlsural  fibres  linking  similar  contralateral 
tectal  points.  instead  of  In  the  oculomotor 
nuclei.]  Eye  movement  ceases  when  and  only 
when  the  fixation  point  is  the  centre  of  gravity. 

the  muscles  turning  the  eye  to  the 

i.e., 

[Of 

It  must  be  emphasized  that  the  reflex  for 
which  we  have  just  summarized  a  crude,  though 
instructive,  model  would  be  subject  to  "higher 
control"  in  normal  function  (5).  For  example, 
"interest"  might  be  the  criterion  for  determin­
ing  which  area  of  the  visual  f i e ld  to  examine, 
with  the  reflex  determining  the  fixation  point 
within  the  region  (cf.  the  fine  tuning  servo  on 
a  radio  receiver)  -  gaze  may  then  remain  fixed 
at  that  point  u n t il  it  is  "adequately"  per­
ceived.  Conversely,  a  sudden  flash  may  usurp 
the  averaging  operations  to  dominate  the  reflex 
control  of  gaze  momentarily,  forcing  the 
organism  to  attend  at  least  briefly  to  a  novel 
stimulus. 

In  the  context  of  this  conference, 

it 

seems  well  worth  noting  that  the  general  scheme 
of  Figure  2  is  essentially  that  suggested 
independently  more  than  a  decade  after  (3)  by 
Newell,  Shaw  and  Simon  (9)  for  their  GPS 
(General  Problem  Solver).  The  correspondence 
between  GPS'  general  framework  for  solving 
problems  and  the  Pitts-McCulloch  scheme  is  as 
follows: 
1.  GPS  is  given  a  set  of  objects  [This  cor­

responds  to  our  set  of  patterns]. 

2.  GPS  is  given  a  f i n i te  set  of  differences, 

and  a  means  to  determine  which  differences 
obtain  between  a  pair  of  objects. 
[This 
corresponds  to  our  error  function  E,  but 
since  the  set  of  differences  is  f i n i t e,  can 
only  give  rough  indications  as  to  "what  is 
wrong"]. 

3.  GPS  is  given  a  f i n i te  set  of  operators,  and 

an  operator-difference  table,  which  l i s ts 
for  each  difference  the  operators  likely  to 

reduce  i t. 
form  generatorW]  . 

[This  corresponds  to  our  trans­

4.  GPS  is  given  an  i n i t i al  object  (say  the  l i st 

of  axioms  in  a  propositional  logic)  and  a 
f i n al  object  (say  a  statement  we  should  like 
to  prove  to  be  a  theorem)  and  is  to  find  a 
sequence  of  operators  which  w i ll  transform 
the  i n i t i al  object  into  the  f i n al  object. 
( If  the  operators  correspond  to  rules  of 
inference,  then  in  our  example,  the  desired 
chain  of  operators  would  provide  the  desired 
proof  of  the  given  statement.) 

The  catch  here  is  that  since  the  difference 

only  gives  us  very  partial  information  about 
what  needs  to  be  changed,  we  cannot  guarantee 
that  applying  a  recommended  operator  w i ll 
indeed  transform  the  latest  object  into  one  that 
is  genuinely  closer  to  our  goal.  Further,  a 
given  operator  w i ll  not  be  applicable  to  a ll 
objects,  and  so  preliminary  transformations  may 
be  required  to  place  an  object  in  a  form  to 
which  an  indicated  operator  can  be  applied. 
Because  of  this  one  cannot  proceed  a  step  at  a 
time  as  In  the  Pitts-McCulloch  scheme.  Rather, 
one  must  develop  a  "decision  tree"  in  which  we 
keep  track  of  the  application  of  various  pos­
sible  operators  at  various  stages.  The  aim  of 
the  general  supervisory  part  of  the  GPS  program 
is  to  ensure  that  we  put  most  effort  into 
"growing"  those  branches  of  the  tree  which  seem 
to  be  leading  towards  the  goal.  For  each  node 
we  could  find  the  differences  between  it  and 
the  goal,  and  then  determine  which  operators 
are  suggested  by  the  difference  table.  Some  of 
them  may  not  be  applicable.  At  each  stage  we 
must  decide  which  is  the  most  promising  node  to 
next  operate  upon,  and  which  of  the  possible 
operators  we  should  apply. 

[An 

Thus  GPS  involves  a  supervisory  control 
with  memory  of  various  paths  which  may  yet  be 
found  to  lead  to  the  goal  -  it  is  the  design 
of  this  control  program  that  really  sets  GPS 
off  from  the  Pitts-McCulloch  scheme. 
approach  which  merges  such  considerations  of 
"heuristic  search"  with  an  application  closer 
to  that  of  (3)  may  be  found  in  (4).]  The  claim 
of  GPS  to  generality  is  that  it  can  solve  any 
problem  -  such  as  proving  theorems  in  proposl­
tional  logic  -  which  can  be  solved  using  a 
tree-search  on  the  basis  of  an  operator-
difference  table.  Unfortunately,  this  very 
generality  makes  for  the  inefficiency  which 
attends  the  i n a b i l i ty  to  use  special  tricks 
developed  for  a  given  problem  domain.  Further, 
it  must  be  stressed  that  not  a ll  problems  are 
amenable  to  this  type  of  solution.  Even  for 
problems  which  are,  the  real  intelligence 
usually  comes  not  so  much  in  using  a  given 
operator-difference  table,  but  rather  in 
realizing  what  differences  are  salient  features 
of  the  given  problem  and  generating  by  experi­
ence  a  table  of  the  operators  likely  to  reduce 
them.  Perhaps  techniques  akin  to  those  Uhr 
and  Vossler  have  used  in  programming  a  machine 

144 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive  Models 

When  a  shot  is  fired  from  a  gun  two  forces 

involve 

are  involved  -  the  explosion  that  propels  the 
projectile  towards  the  target,  and  the  braking 
force  that  results  when  the  projectile  hits  the 
target  ( if  the  target  were  to  step  aside,  the 
projectile  would  not  stop  in  the  position  at 
which  it  was  originally  aimed).  B a l l i s t ic  move­
ments  in  animals  also 
this  "bang-bang" 
control.  There  is  an  i n i t i al  burst  of  accelera­
tion  as  the  agonist  contracts  and  the  antagonist 
muscle  relaxes;  an  intervening  quiet  period;  and 
then  the  f i n al  deceleration  as  the  antagonist 
contracts.  Experiments  on  rapid  flexion  and 
extension  of  joints  have  shown  that  muscle 
activation  occupies  only  a  small  portion  of  the 
movement,  that  the  duration  of  this  activation 
does  not  seem  to  be  related  to  the  extent  of  the 
movement.  Thus  the  duration  of  the  movement 
seems  to  be  determined  mainly  by  the  timing, 
relative  to  the  "go"  signal,  of  the  "stop" 
signal  (which  has  to  be  determined  by  the  brain, 
rather  than  being  imposed  by  the  environment,  as 
it  was  in  our  projectile  example).  Braltenberg 
and  Onesto  thus  proposed  a  network  for  convert­
ing  space  into  time  (a  subtle  alchemy!)  by  pro­
viding  that  the  position  of  an  input  (encoding 
the  desired  target  position)  would  determine 
the  time  of  the  output  (which  would  trigger  the 
"slamming  on  of  the  brakes").  The  scheme  (see 
Figure  3)  has  a  linear  array  of  output  cells 
whose  output  circuitry  is  so  arranged  that  the 
f i r i ng  of  any  one  of  them  w i ll  yield  the  antag­
onist  burst  that  w i ll  brake  the  b a l l i s t ic  move­
ment.  There  are  two  systems  of  input  fibres 
each  arranged  in  the  same  linear  order,  with 
position  along  the  line  corresponding  to  angle 
of  flexion  of  the  j o i n t.  The  f i r st  class,  which 
we  shall  c a ll  the  C-fibres,  connect  to  a  single 
output  c e l l.  The  second  class,  which  we  shall 
c a ll  the  M-fibres,  bifurcate  into  fibres  which 
contact  each  cell  in  the  array.  The  speed  of 
propagation  along  these  parallel  fibres  is  such 
that  the  time  required  to  go  from  one  point  in 
the  array  to  another  corresponds  to  the  time 
the  j o i nt  requires  to  move  between  the  cor­
responding  angles. 

its  own  set  of  feature  detectors 

to  generate 
for  pattern  recognition  may  eventually  be 
developed  to  provide  an  operator-difference 
table  generating  routine  to  complement  the 
supervisory  package  of  GPS. 
3.  DISTRIBUTED  MOTOR  CONTROL 

It  should  be  noted  that  even 

if 

the  mathe­

In  fact,  human 

In  man,  various 

to  fixate  another  point 

matical  equations  formalizing  the  P i t t s-
McCulloch  scheme  of  Figure  3  for  centering  of 
gaze  were  to  contain  a  damping  term  to  prevent 
the  eyeball  from  undergoing  continual  o s c i l­
lations, 
it  s t i ll  has  the  defect  of  being 
essentially  a  tracking  model,  whereas  the 
reflex  "snapping"  of  gaze  toward  a  flash  of 
light  is  essentially  b a l l i s t i c. 
eye  movements  can  be  either  b a l l i s t ic  or 
tracking.  Typically,  a  human  examining  a  scene 
w i ll  fixate  on  one  point  of  the  visual  f i e ld 
then  make  a  saccadic  movement  (the  term  for  a 
b a l l i s t ic  eye  movement) 
of  the  visual  scene,  u n t il  satisfied  that  he 
has  scanned  enough  of  the  scene  to  perceive  his 
current  environment.  However  in  other 
situations  -  such  as  watching  a  car  go  by  before 
crossing  the  street  -  he  w i ll  fixate  upon  an 
object  and  then  track  i t. 
cortical  areas  can  modulate  activity  in 
superior  colliculus,  and  Bizzi  has  found  in  one 
of  them  -  the  so-called  frontal  eye  f i e l d, 
which  is  in  frontal  cortex  -  that  there  are 
three  types  of  cells,  type  I  which  are  active 
in  b a l l i s t ic  eye  movements,  type  II  which  are 
active  in  tracking  eye  movements,  and  other 
cells  more  concerned  with  head  movements  than 
with  eye  movements.  Perhaps  a  similar 
situation  w i ll  be  found  on  closer  examination 
of  superior  colliculus. 
In  any  case,  it  does 
seem  that  the  Pitts-McCulloch  scheme  is  more 
suited  to  the  tracking  mode  than  to  the  bal­
l i s t ic  mode.  To  rectify  t h i s,  let  us  then 
present  another  model,  due  to  Braltenberg  and 
Onesto  (10) 
for  a  distributed  computer  control­
ling  b a l l i s t ic  movement. 
( It  should  be  men­
tioned  that  they  conceived  their  model  as  a 
model  of  the  cerebellum,  but  subsequent  investi 
gations  have  revealed  so  much  new  data  about 
the  cerebellum  that  their  model  cannot  stand  as 
a  model  of  the  cerebellar  cortex  without 
drastic  modification.  The  reader  may  find  a 
thorough  critique  of  cerebellar  modelling  in 
Boylle  and  Arbib  (11),  but  it  would  not  seem 
f r u i t f ul  to  present  the  details  here,  for  our 
aim  in  this  paper  is  not  to  say  "Here  is  the 
correct  model  for  the  function  of  a  certain  sub­
system  of  the  brain",  but  rather  to  say  "Here 
is  a  f r u i t f ul  way  to  go  about  modelling  brain 
function". 
In  this  s p i r i t,  we  present  models 
which  give  one  new  principles  of  organization, 
hoping  in  this  way  to  spur  much  further  work  to 
find  the  biological  implementation  of  these 
principles  in  neural  c i r c u i t r y;  or  to  see  their 
refinement  in  the  design  of  control  circuitry 
for  robots.) 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

145 

control  a  single  j o i n t,  but  would  control  a  whole 
hierarchy  of  subcontrollers,  whose  behavior 
would  of  course  be  modified  by  the  low-level 
postural  controllers  in  the  brainstem  and  spinal 
cord.  We  should  also  add  that  the  scheme  must 
be  elaborated  to  provide  for  generating  particu­
lar  velocities,  etc.  To  caricature  it  crudely, 
one  may  conjecture  that  such  an  option  has 
evolved  through  the  development  of  circuitry 
which  can  control  tracking  movements  internally, 
rather  than  driving  them  through  sensory 
channels. 

The  controller  then  e l i c i ts  a  b a l l i s t ic 

movement  by  f i r i ng  3  signals  -  one  to  trigger  the 
agonist  burst  which  w i ll  i n i t i a te  movement,  one 
on  the  C-fibre  corresponding  to  the  i n i t i al  j o i nt 
position,  and  one  on  the  M-fibre  corresponding  to 
the  target  position. 
If  we  assume  that  an  output 
cell  can  only  respond  to  parallel  fibre  input  if 
it  has  received  C-fibre  input,  we  see  that  only 
the  output  cell  corresponding  to  the  activated 
C-fibre  w i ll  f i r e,  and  it  is  clear  that  i ts  time 
of  f i r i ng  w i ll  correspond  to  i ts  distance  from 
the  activated  M-fibre.  Thus  it  w i ll  e l i c it  the 
braking  effect  of  the  antagonist  burst  at  pre­
cisely  the  right  time. 

Note  that  in  the  above  scheme,  we  could 

relieve  the  controller  of  having  to  "know"  where 
the  Joint  i s,  by  having  a  feedback  circuit  con­
tinually  monitor  j o i nt  position  and  keep  the 
appropriate  C-fibre  activated. 

While  we  do  not  claim  to  have  modelled  the 
way  the  nervous  system  controls  movement,  what 
we  have  shown  is  that  a  plausible  subsystem  for 
vertebrate  nervous  systems  may  be  of  the  type 
shown  in  Figure  4  in  which  position  of  the  input 
on  the  control  surface  encodes  the  target  to 
which  the  musculature  w i ll  be  sent.  Further,  we 
might  expect  that  -  akin  to  the  result  of  merg­
ing  the  Pitts-McCulloch  scheme  with  the  Braiten-
berg-Onesto  scheme  -  if  an  array  of  points  is 
activated  on  the  input  surface,  the  system  w i ll 
move  to  the  position  which  is  the  "centre  of 
gravity"  of  the  positions  encoded  by  that  array. 
It  should  be  noted  that  a  f u ll  elaboration 

of  this  scheme  would  involve  hierarchical 
arrangements.  For  example,  in  fixating  a  new 
point  in  space,  increasing  angles  of  deviation 
might  require  movement  of  eyes  alone,  then  of 
eyes  and  head,  and  then  of  eyes,  head  and  trunk. 
Thus  the  output  of  the  motor-computer  would  not 

4.  TWO  EXAMPLES 

To  round  out  our  discussion,  let  us  present 

a  model  of  frog  visumotor  behaviour  which 
involves  layered  distributed  computation,  and 
then  close  by  relating  it  to  a  model  of  the  r e ti 
cular  formation.  F i r s t,  we  need  to  comment  on 
the  idea  of  "Redundancy  of  Potential  Command". 
If  we  take  the  position  that  perception  of  an 
object  generally  involves  the  gaining  of  access 
to  "programs"  for  controlling  interaction  with 
the  object,  rather  than  simply  generating  a 
"label"  for  the  object,  we  must  emphasise  gain­
ing  of  access  to  a  program  rather  than  the  • 
execution  of  a  program  -  one  may  perceive  some­
thing  and  yet  s t i ll  leave  it  alone.  Thus  in 
gaining  access  to  the  program,  the  system  only 
gives  it  potential  command, 
further  processing 
being  required  to  determine  whether  or  not  to 
act.  A  key  question  w i ll  thus  be  "How  is  the 
central  nervous  system  structured  to  allow 

146 

Session No.  4  Associative and Adaptive  Models 

coordinated  action  of  the  whole  animal  when  d i f­
ferent  regions  receive  contradictory  local  Infor­
mation?"  McCulloch  suggested  that  the  answer  lay 
In  the  Principle  of  Redundancy  of  Potential 
Command  which  states,  essentially,  that  command 
should  pass  to  the  region  with  the  most  important 
information.  He  cited  the  example  of  the  be­
havior  of  a  World  War  1  naval  fleet  controlled  -
at  least  temporarily  -  by  the  signals  from  which­
ever  ship  f i r st  sighted  the  enemy,  the  point 
being  that  this  ship  need  not  be  the  flagship, 
in  which  command  normally  resided. 

McCulloch  further  suggested  that  this  redun­
dancy  of  potential  command  in  vertebrates  would 
find  i ts  clearest  expression  in  the  reticular 
formation  of  the  brain  stem  (RF).  Kilmer  and 
McCulloch  then  made  the  following  observations 
towards  building  a  model  of  RF: 

(i)  They  noted  that  at  any  one  time  an  animal 

is  in  only  one  of  some  20  or  so  gross  modes 
of  behavior  -  sleeping,  eating,  grooming, 
mating,  urinating,  for  example  -  and  posit­
ed  that  the  main  role  of  the  core  of  the 
RF  (or  at  least  the  role  they  sought  to 
model)  was  to  commit  the  organism  to  one  of 
these  modes, 

( i i)  They  noted  that  anatomical  data  of  the 

Scheibels  (12)  suggested  that  RF  need  not 
be  modelled  neuron  by  neuron,  but  could 
instead  be  considered  as  a  stack  of  "poker 
chips,"  each  containing  tens  of  thousands 
of  neurons,  and  each  with  i ts  own  nexus  of 
sensory  information, 

( i l l)  They  posited  that  each  module  ("poker 

chip")  could  decide  which  mode  was  most 
appropriate  to  i ts  own  nexus  of  information, 
and  then  asked,  "How  can  the  modules  be 
coupled  so  that,  in  real-time,  a  consensus 
can  be  reached  as  to  the  mode  appropriate 
to  the  overall  sensory  input,  despite  con­
f l i c t i ng  mode  indications  from  local  inputs 
to  different  modules?" 
This  was  the  framework  within  which  Kilmer, 

McCulloch  and  Blum  (13)  designed  and  simulated 
the  compartment  model,  called  S-RET1C,  which  we 
have  discussed  above  of  a  system  to  compute  mode 
changes,  comprising  a  column  of  modules  which 
differed  only  in  their  input  array,  and  which 
were  interconnected  in  a  way  suggested  by  RF 
anatomy. 

Pitts  and  McCulloch's  model  (our  Section  2) 

of  the  superior  colliculus  (which  is  the  cat's 
"equivalent"  of  the  frog's  tectum)  was  offered  as 
a  plausible  explanation  of  how  an  animal  might 
fixate  i ts  gaze  at  the  "average"  or  "centre  of 
gravity"  of  a  f i e ld  of  illumination.  For  us, 
their  scheme  has  the  added  significance  that  it 
showed  how  to  design  a  eomatotopically  organized 
network  in  which  there  is  no  "executive  neuron" 
which  decrees  which  way  the  overall  system 
behaves  -  rather  the  dynamics  of  the  effectors, 
with  assistance  from  neuronal  interactions, 
extracts  the  output  trajectory  from  a  population 
of  neurons,  none  of  which  has  more  than  local 

information  as  to  which  way  the  system  should 
behave. 

If  we  paraphrase  our  interpretation  of  the 
significance  of  the  Pitts  and  McCulloch  model  of 
the  superior  colliculus  to  say  that  it  showed 
how  "the  organism  can  be  committed  to  an  overall 
action  by  a  population  of  motoneurons  none  of 
which  had  global  information  as  to  which  action 
is  appropriate",  we  are  struck  by  the  similarity 
of  the  situation  to  that  in  our  statement  of  the 
RF problem. 

We  may  build  on  this  to  illuminate  another 
system  for  the  study  of  redundancy  of  potential 
command.  The  frog,  which  is  normally  immobile, 
w i ll  snap  at  any  f ly  that  comes  into  suitable 
range  -  "snapping"  comprising  a  movement  of  the 
head  (and,  when  necessary,  the  body)  to  aim  at 
the  f ly  and  the  rapid  extension  of  the  tongue  to 
"zap"  the  f l y.  The  situation  seems  very  simple 
in  that  the  frog  does  not  seem  to  recognize  f l i es 
as  such  -  rather  it  w i ll  snap  at  any  wiggling 
object,  but  w i ll  not  snap  at  a  stationary  ( i . e. 
dead)  f l y.  A  frog  confronted  with  two  f l i es 
then  presents  us  with  a  beautifully  simple 
redundant  command  situation  -  normally  the 
animal  snaps  at  one  of  the  f l i e s,  and  so  we  have 
sought  to  model  the  brain  mechanism  that  deter­
mines  which  of  the  f l i es  w i ll  "take  command"  of 
the  frog.  This  could  be  explained  in  terms  of  a 
serial  scan  made  of  the  tectum  u n t il  a  region  is 
f i r st  found  in  which  the  activity  in  the  four 
layers  of  ganglion  cell  termination  in  the  tect­
um  signals  the  presence  of  a  f ly  -  at  which  stage 
the  scanner  would  issue  a  command  to  snap  in  the 
direction  indicated  by  the  current  address  of 
the  scan.  However,  we  argued  that  such  serial 
processing  is  not  a  candidate  for  the  frog's 
neural  machinery  because  of  the  fact  (among 
others)  that  the  frog  w i ll  sometimes  snap  midway 
between  two  f l i es  -  precisely  the  "center  of 
gravity"  effect  one  expects  from  an  output 
system  of  the  distributed  computation  type 
suggested  by  Pitts  and  McCulloch  for  centering 
of  gaze. 
between  serial  and  distributed  processing  could 
not  be  made  by  asking  only  the  usual  question  of 
sensory  physiology,  "What  information  is  relayed 
to  the  brain?"  but  by  also  asking,  "How  does  the 
animal  make  use  of  such  Information  to  act?"] 

[Note  that  the  above  distinction 

However,  we  must  note  that  while  the  P i t t s-
McCulloch  model  does  yield  integrated  behavior, 
it  does  not  explain  the  "usually-one-fly-effect." 
Didday  (14,15)  has  offered  a  mechanism  for  this 
which,  in  retrospect,  could  be  seen  to  bear  a 
great  resemblance  to  the  Kilmer-McCulloch  RF 
model.  The  observations  on  frog  behavior  suggest 
three  layers  of  processing,  each  involving  dis­
tributed  computation.  The  f i r st  layer  operates 
upon  the  four  layers  of  retinal  information  to 
provide  for  each  region  a  measure  of  "foodness." 
The  third  layer  does  a  modified  Pltts-McCulloch 
type  computation  to  direct  motion  of  the  frog  to 
the  position  corresponding  to  the  "canter  of 
gravity"  of  activity  in  the  second  layer.  The 

Session No.  4 Associative and Adaptive Models 

147 

"Organizational  Principles  in  Cerebellar 
Modelling,"  Progress 
(to 
appear). 

in  Biophysics, 

(12)  A.  B.  Scheibel  and  M.  E.  Scheibel  (1958) 

"Structural  Substrates  for 
Patterns  in  the  Brain  Stem  Reticular  Co 
in  Reticular  Formation  of  the  Brain 
(H.  H. 
Jasper  et  a l .,  Eds.),  Boston:  L i t t l e,  Brown, 
31-55. 

Integrative 

(13)  W.  L.  Kilmer,  W.  S.  McCulloch  and  J.  Blum 
(1968) :  "Some  Mechanisms  for  a  Theory  of 
the  Reticular  Formation,"  in  Systems  Theory 
and  Biology  (M.  Mesarovic,  Ed.),  New  York: 
Springer-Verlag,  286-375. 

(14)  R.  L.  Didday  (1971  a)  "An  Easy  Method  for 

Simulating  Distributed  Computation  in 
Nervous  Systems,"  Int'l  J.  of  Man  Machine 
Studies, 

(in  press) 

(15)  R.  L.  Didday  (1971  b)  "A  Possible  Decision-

Making  Role  for  the  'Sameness'  and  'Newness' 
Cells  in  the  Frog,"  submitted  to  Brain 
Behav,  and  Evol, 

(16)  P.  H.  Greene  (1964)  "New  Problems  in  Adapt­

ive  Control,"  in  Computer  and  Information 
Sciences  (J.T.  Tou  and  R.H.  Wilcox,  Eds.), 
Washington:  Spartan. 

(17)  P.  H.  Greene  (1967)  "Models  for  Perception 

(19)  P.H.  Greene  (1970)  "The  Theory  of  Tasks: 

Cybernetic  Problems  of  Sensorimotor 
Structure,"  book  in  preparation  (Prelimin­
ary  material  may  be  found  in  Greene  [1967, 
1968]). 

and  Action",  Proceedings  of  the  First 
Annual  Princeton  Conference  on 
Information 
Sciences  &  Systems,  Dept.  of  EE,  Princeton 
University,  245-253. 
In  relation  to  which, 
see  numerous  articles  by  Russian  workers 
in  Biophysics, 
the  English  translation  of 
the  Russian  Biofizika, 
entitled  "Biophysics  of  Complex  Systems. 
Mathematical  Models." 

the  Section 

in 

(18)  P.  H.  Greene  (1968)  "A.  Essential  Features 

of  Purposive  Movements;  B.  Cybernetic 
Problems  of  Sensorimotor  Structure:  Intro­
ductory  Remarks  and  Survey  of  a  Study;  C. 
Seeking  Mathematical  Models  of  Skilled 
Actions;  D.  An  Aspect  of  Robot  Control  and 
Nervous  Control  of  Skilled  Movements;  Co­
ordination  of  Two  Effectors  and  Transfer 
of  Adaptation,"  Institute  for  Computer 
Research,  Quarterly  Progress  Report  No.  16, 
Sections  I II  A-D. 

task  of  the  second  layer  is  then  very  much  akin 
to  the  task  of  the  Kilmer-McCulloch  RF.  Where 
that  model  (13)  has  an  array  of  modules  which 
must  interact  to  get  a  majority  favoring  the 
same  mode,  the  task  of  the  second  layer  of  our 
hypothetical  tectum  (15)  is  to  turn  down  the 
activity  of  a ll  but  one  region  of  (or  from) 
the 
f i r st  layer.  The  essential  mechanisms  turn  out 
to  be  very  similar,  and  provide  a  plausible 
analogue  for  the  "sameness"  and  "newness"  neurons 
observed  by  Lettvin  et  a l.  (1).  The  models 
differ  in  having  a ll  modes  evaluated  in  each 
module,  versus  having  a  module  identified  with  a 
mode. 
sheds  new  insight  on  RF  modelling,  and  suggests 
alternate  hypotheses.  Our  model  is  s t i ll  a  crude 
oversimplification  of  the  complexities  of  a  real 
frog  brain,  but  we  believe  that  our  partial 
successes  show  that  our  organizational  principles, 
a ll  too  often  neglected  in  the  cybernetics 
l i t e r a t u r e,  must  play  a  crucial  role  in  future 
brain  theory.  This  thesis  is  elaborated  at  book 
length  in  (5),  and  extended  in  (4)  and  (11). 
See  also  the  related  studies  of  Greene  (16-19) . 

In  any  case,  the  study  of  frog  behavior 

REFERENCES 

(1)  J.  Y.  Lettvin,  H.  R.  Maturana,  W.  S.  McCul-

loch  and  W.  H.  Pitts  (1959):  "What  the 
Frog's  Eye  Tells  the  Frog's  Brain,"  Proc. 
IRE,  47,  1950-1959. 

(2)  R.  W.  Sperry  (1951)  "Mechanisms  of  Neural 

Maturation,"  in  Handbook  of  Experimental 
Psychology,  New  York:  John  Wiley,  236-280. 

(3)  W.  H.  Pitts  and  W.  S.  McCulloch  (1947): 

"How  We  Know  Universals:  The  Perception  of 
Auditory  and  Visual  Forms,"  Bull,  Math. 
Biophys.,  9_,  127-147. 

(4)  M.  A.  Arbib  and  R.  L.  Didday  (1971):  "The 
Organization  of  Action-Oriented  Memory  for 
a  Perceiving  System.  Part  I.  The  Basic 
Model,"  Journal  of  Cybernetics  1,,  No.  1. 
(Part  I I,  "The  Hologram  Metaphor,"  by  M.  A. 
Arbib  and  P.  Dev,  w i ll  appear  in  a  later 
issue.) 

(5)  M.  A.  Arbib  (1972):  The  Metaphorical  Brain, 

New  York:  Wiley-Interscience. 

(6)  M.  A.  Arbib  (1971)  "How  We  Know  Universals: 

Retrospect  and  Prospect,"  Mathematical 
Bioscienoes,  Warren  McCulloch  Memorial 
Issue. 

(7)  J.  Apter  (1945):  "The  Projection  of  the 

Retina  on  the  Superior  Colliculus  of  Cats," 
J.  Neurophysiol.,  8,  123-134. 

(8)  J.  Apter  (1946):  "Eye  Movements  Following 
Strychinization  of  the  Superior  Colliculus 
of  Cats,"  J.  Neurophysiol.,  9,  73-85. 

(9)  A.  Newell,  J.  C.  Shaw  and  H.  A.  Simon  (1959) 
"Report  on  a  General  Problem-Solving  Program" 
Proc. 
Paris:  UNESCO,  256-264. 

International  Conf.  Info.  P r o c, 

(10)  V.  Braitenberg  and  N.  Onesto  (1960):  "The 

Cerebellar  Cortex  as  a  Timing  Organ," 
Congress  Inst.  Medicina  Cibemetica,  First 
Naples  A t t i .,  239-255. 

(11)  C.  C.  Boylls  and  M.  A.  Arbib: 

