238 

CONJECTURES ON THE PERCEPTION OF ELONGATION 

by 

E.  S.  Deutsch 

Computer  Science  Center 
University  of  Maryland 
Colleqe  Park,  Maryland 

U.S.A. 

ABSTRACT 
The  papers  start  by  discussinq  some  of  the  back(cid:173)
ground  to  the  problem  of  the  perception  of  length 
together  with  some  known  illusions  in  this  f i e l d. 
The  difference  is  then  drawn  between  image  con(cid:173)
traction  and  image  thinning,  both  processes  of 
which  serve  to  introduce  the  proposed  conjecture. 
The  suggested  conjecture  is  that  lenqth  is  per(cid:173)
ceived  by  a  mechanism  which  f i r st  forms  a  minimal 
closed  path  (hull)  around  the  object  and  then 
performs  an  isotropic  image  reduction  operation 
It  is  conjectured  that 
on  the  hull  of  the  image. 
the  elongation  of  the  image  is  exemplified  in  the 
resulting  path  so  obtained;  no  path  should  result 
if  the  original  image  possesses  no  elongation. 
The  conjecture  is  used  to  explain  the  known 
illusions  discussed  and  a  few  new  ones  are 
suggested. 
An  isotropic  image  reduction  technique  is  de(cid:173)
scribed  and  experimental  results  testing  the  con(cid:173)
jecture,  obtained  using  a  variety  of  imaqes,  are 
presented. 

In 

INTRODUCTION 
In  this  paper  we  w i ll  address  ourselves  to  the 
phenomenon  of  length  perception  in  qeneral. 
the  f i r st  instance  an  attempt  will  be  made  at 
distinguishing  between  two  types  of  image  reduc(cid:173)
tion  operations,  namely  that  of  image  contraction 
and  that  of  image  thinning  or  skeletonization. 
While  both  of  these  operations  appear  to  be  simi(cid:173)
lar,  the  distinction  we  propose  to  make  between 
their  end  results  leads  to  the  possibility  of  a 
conjecture  upon  how  the  human  eye  perceives 
whether  a  given  image,  whatever  its  shape, 
possesses  the  property  of  elongation  or  not.  The 
author  is  mindful  of  the  fact  that  his  proposed 
conjecture  falls  short  of  explaininq  all 
different  types  of  experienced  phenomena  existinq 
in  the  field  of  lenqth  perception.  However,  some 
interesting  results  have  been  obtained  on  apply(cid:173)
ing  the  ideas  to  images  in  general  and  to  some  of 
the  optical  illusions  in  particular. 
It  seems  clear  that  for  an  image  reduction  pro(cid:173)
cess  to  be  meaninqful  it  must  exhibit  isotropic 
properties. 
In  other  words  unless  one  is  speci(cid:173)
fically  interested  in  the  reduction  operations 
exercising  a  certain  bias  in  a  particular  direc(cid:173)
tion  (1)  (see  Fiqure  4,  it  will  be  explained  in 
more  detail  later  on),  the  reduction  must  take 
place  uniformly  throughout  the  entire  imaqe.  We 
shall  indeed  describe  such  an  isotropic  process 
in  terms  of  a  computer  algorithm;  it  is  the  Very 
existence  of  such  a  process  that  gives  substance 

the 

indicates 

that  there 

to  our  conjecture. 
Previous  work  of  the  author 
are  considerable  advantages  in  working  with 
images  displayed  on  hexaqonal  arrays  (2). 
Accordinqly,  all  processes  to  be  described  here 
w i ll  utilize  such  arrays.  This  apparent  restric(cid:173)
tion  does  not  limit  the  generality  of  the  main 
discussion  in  any  way;  it  may  well  emerge  that 
what  follows  lends  additional  weiqht  to  the  arqu-
ment  that  hexaqonal  arrays  are  the  most  suitable 
for  imaqe  processing  in  qeneral. 
The  layout  of  the  remainder  of  this  paper  is  as 
follows.  We  shall  f i r st  arque  the  distinction 
between  the  two  types  of  image  reduction  opera(cid:173)
tions  mentioned  above.  A  further  related  dis(cid:173)
cussion  then  leads  to  the  introduction  of  the 
conjecture.  The  implementation  of  an  isotropic 
imaqe  reduction  technique,  the  use  of  which  has 
already  been  implied,  is  presented  next.  The 
compatibility  of  the  conjecture  with  some  of  the 
observed  optical  illusions  is  then  discussed. 
An  attempt  at  introducinq  new  optical  illusions 
in  light  of  the  conjecture  is  also  made. 

We  introduce  the  distinction  between  image  con(cid:173)
traction  and  imaae  thinning  by  means  of  an 
illustration.  Assume  that  the  imaqe  to  be  con(cid:173)
tracted  or  thinned  is  a  solid  disc  of  uniform 
qray  level  distribution.  For  the  present  arqu-
ment  we  shall  assume  that  the  center  of  the  disc 
coincides  with  a  point  on  the  display  matrix. 
It  w i ll  become  apparent  at  once  that  if  reduc(cid:173)
tion  takes  place  uniformly  throuqhout,  and,  that 
provided  continuity  is  maintained,  the  result  of 
this  imaqe  contraction  operation  should  reduce 
the  disc  to  a  single  dot.  An  imaqe  thinning 
operation  should  qive  the  same  result  under  simi(cid:173)
lar  conditions.  However,  it  is  quite  unnatural 
to  sugqest  that  a  thinned  disc  is  a  dot.  A  simi(cid:173)
lar  arqument  applies  to  the  case  when  we  consider 
the  imaqe  to  be  a  uniform  square. 
If  the  point 
of  intersection  of  the  diagonals  coincides  with 
a  point  on  the  matrix  then  the  result  of  both  a 
contraction  and  a  thinninq  or  skeletonizing 
operation  will  be  that  single  dot  on  the  matrix. 
Aqain,  it  is  quite  in  order  to  call  that  point, 
in  the  l i m i t,  the  contracted  form  of  the 
original  square,  but  that  point  is  not  the 
skeleton  of  the  square. 
It  is  in  fact  question(cid:173)
able  whether  the  term  thinninq  or  skeletonizing 
operation  is  applied  to  two  dimensional  imaqes 
similar  to  those  just  described  is  at  all  applic(cid:173)
able. 
Let  us  now  apply  a  deformation  to  the  disc  so 
that  for  a  qiven  set  of  perpendicular  diameters, 
one  diameter  is  very  sliqhtly  shorter  than  the 
other,  such  that  the  end  points  of  this  diameter 
are  equi-distant  from  the  center  of  the  disc. 
The  disc  deforms  into  an  ellipse.  Consider  the 
result  of  contraction  and  thinnina  ooerations  on 
the  deformed  disc,  as  the  ratio  of  the  lenqths 
of  the  lonqer  to  the  shorter  diameter  increases. 
When  the  ratio  of  these  principle  axes  is  near 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

239 

one  or  when  ø  (ø=  eccentric  angle)  1s  near  II/2 
both  these  operations  w i ll  yield  an  image  in  the 
form  of  a  single  point.  However,  as  ø  decreases 
a  continuity  of  points  emerges  i . e .,  a  skeleton. 
The  orientation  of  this  skeleton  w i ll  be  in  the 
direction  of  the  major  axis  of  the  particular 
ellipse.  The  number  of  points  emerging  w i ll  be 
inversely  proportional  to  the  value  of  p. 
these  circumstances  1t  becomes  possible  to  speak 
more  specifically  of  a  thinning  or  skeletonizing 
operation  rather  than  a  mere  contracting  operation, 
for  the  contraction  operation  may  or  may  not 
yield  a  skeleton  dependinq  upon  its  design. 
A  similar  argument  holds  with  reference  to  the 
square  being  deformed,  as  one  of  its  perpendicu(cid:173)
lar  axes  is  curtailed.  A  skeleton  w i ll  emerge  as 
the  ratio  of  the  longer  to  the  smaller  axis  i n(cid:173)
creases,  the  number  of  points  in  the  skeleton 
being  proportional  to  this  ratio.  Note  that  in 
both  of  the  examples  just  given,  the  skeleton 
emerged  along  the  longer  center  line  of  the 
objects,  that  i s,  it  coincided  with  a  geometric 
axis  of  the  object. 
In  both  the  cases  just  discussed,  the  deformation 
produced  a  degree  of  elongation  -  if  only  in  the 
intuitive  sense  -  such  elongation  being  register(cid:173)
ed  with  the  emergence  of  a  skeleton.  Our  inten(cid:173)
tion,  in  part,  is  to  generalize  this  notion  to(cid:173)
gether  with  its  converse  and  suggest  that  the  ex(cid:173)
istence  of  elongation  within  an  image  implies  the 
emergence  of  a  skeleton  and  vice  versa. 
In  other 
words,  given  that  an  image  reduction  operation  is 
applied  to  an  image;  should  a  skeleton  emerge 
then  it  can  be  said  that  the  original  image  ex(cid:173)
hibited  elongation  ( i . e .,  image  thinninq  has 
occured).  Should,  however,  only  a  sinqle  point 
or  a  clustering  collection  thereof  be  obtained 
then  no  such  property  is  attributable  to  the 
original  image  ( i . e .,  image  contraction  has 
occurred).  This  would  then  lead  to  a  qualitative 
rather  than  an  intuitive  definition  of  elongation. 
The  distinction  we  have  just  proposed  is  not 
merely  one  of  semantics.  The  distinction  is 
between  kinds  of  end  results  obtained  from  an 
image  reduction  operation;  a  mere  contracted 
image  for  some  types  of  images  and  a  skeleton  for 
others. 
An  additional  factor  involved  in  the  above  specu(cid:173)
lation  would  be  the  information  borne  by  the 
actual  skeleton  i t s e l f. 
the  degree  of  elongation  exhibited  by  an  ellipse 
of  a  given  eccentric  angle  ø2  would  exceed  that 
of  another  ellipse  of  eccentric  angle  0, 
ø1>  ø2 
equal  length.)  Application  of  a  reduction 
operation  to  two  such  ellipses  should,  provided 
our  previous  discussion  is  valid,  yield  two 
skeletons  (or  a  point  and  a  skeleton),  one  of 
which, 
being  longer  in  dot  count  than  the  other. 
Figure  1  are  shown  two  such  ellipses  their 
skeletons,  superimposed,  having  been  obtained 

.  (Assume  that  their  major  axes  are  of 

from  the"  ellipse  of  ø=ø2 

Intuitively  speaking, 

that  derived 

In 

if 

In 

In  summary,  the  production  of  a  skeleton 

usinq  the  image  reduction  mechanism  which  is  de(cid:173)
scribed  later. 
We  are  thus  proposinq  both  a  qualitative  and  a 
quantitative  measure  of  elongation  within  an 
image. 
by  a  uniform  reduction  operation,  siqnifies  the 
existence  of  the  elonqation  property  within  the 
imaqe,  the  actual  number  of  points  forminq  the 
said  skeleton  being  an  estimate  of  its  degree  of 
elonqation. 
The  discussion  so  far  has  been  restricted  to 
images  of  regular  shape.  What  about  the  e l i c i-
tation  of  the  elonqation  property  of  irreqular 
shapes?  Consider  the  images  shown  in  Figure  2. 
An  isotropic  imaqe  reduction  mechanism  applied  to 
the  riqht-hand  imaqe  would  yield  two  almost  per(cid:173)
pendicular  skeletons.  Yet  this  imaqe  clearly  ex(cid:173)
hibits  elongation  in  the  vertical  sense.  Further 
remarks  concerning  this  difficulty  are  deliber(cid:173)
ately  postponed  until  after  the  ensuing  dis(cid:173)
cussion,  whence  its  solution  will  become 
apparent.  We  now  return  to  our  proposition  re-
qarding  the  qualitative  measurement  of  lenqth. 
It  would  be  interesting  to  see  how  compatible  our 
proposition  regarding  the  attainment  of  a  quali(cid:173)
tative  estimate  of  length,  is  with  some  of  the 
observed  visual  phenomena.  We  have  seen  Its 
application  in  Fiqure  I  in  determining  the 
elongation  of  two  ellipses,  and  the  same  argument 
is  applicable  to  rectanqles  of  differing  dimen(cid:173)
sions.  Yet  would  the  proposition  apply  to  line 
drawinqs?  Consider  the  Mueller  Lyer  illusion, 
Figure  3(a),  in  which  the  top  vertical  line  looks 
lonqer,  although  the  vertical  members  of  each  of 
the  drawinqs  are  of  the  same  length.  Further(cid:173)
more,  consider  the  two  rectanqles  and  the  two 
sections  in  Figure  3(b)  and  3(c)  respectively. 
They  are  of  the  same  lenqth  in  each  case,  yet 
the  upper  member  appears  slightly  longer. 
considerations  such  as  these  which  led  one  to 
speculate  on  how  elonqation,  in  qeneral,  is 
perceived.  To  assume  that  there  are  a  number  of 
lenqth  perceivinq  f a c i l i t i es  within  the  human 
mind  each  of  which  appertains  to  a  different  kind 
of  image,  say,  regular  shaped  ones,  stroke  com(cid:173)
prising  images,  etc.,  is  not  impossible;  it  can 
be  neither  substantiated  nor  denied  in  view  of 
our  scanty  knowledqe  about  human  perception. 
would  be  exceedingly  useful  to  arrive  at  a 
qeneralized  mechanism  by  means  of  which  the 
elonqation  of  any  image  is  perceived. 
Accordingly,  we  propose  the  following  conjecture 
on  the  overall  perception  of  lenqth.  That  the 
elonqation  property  of  an  image  is  perceived  by 
the  eye  (?)  f i r st  forminq  the  (convex)  hull 
around  the  image  and  then,  treating  the  hull  as 
an  imaqe  with  uniform  qray-level  distribution, 
applyinq  isotropic  imaqe  reduction  to  this  image. 
By  the  arguments  above  the  resulting  skeleton 
exemplifies  the  elonqation  both  in  size  and 
direction. 
The  conjecture  states  that  the  residual  skeleton 
obtained  from  an  isotropic  image  reduction 
operation  yields  a  meausre  of  elonqation.  The 

It 

It  was 

240 

Session No.  6 Analysis  of Human Behaviour 

(One  can  introduce  many  small 

In  the  next  few  paragraphs  we  review  the  re(cid:173)

skeleton  i t s e lf  is  derived  by  drawina  the  envelope 
around  the  object  whose  length  is  to  be  measured. 
It  is  the  length  of  the  resulting  skeleton  rather 
than  the  extent  of  the  envelope  which  indicates 
object  elongation. 
undulations  in  the  contour  of  the  envelope  thus 
increasing  its  extent,  without  altering  the  final 
result.)  Once  the  envelope  is  formed  and  the  en(cid:173)
closure  is 
' f i l l e d - i n ',  the  skeleton  should  lie 
along,  or  very  close  to  the  longest  center  line 
of  the  ' f i l l e d - i n'  object.  This,  provided  that 
the  reduction  takes  place  isotropically. 
The  solution  to  the  problem  relating  to  the 
images  in  Figure  2  should  now  be  evident.  For 
the  formation  of  the  envelope  around  each  of 
these  images  yields  objects  whose  longest  axis  is 
near  vertical.  The  resulting  skeleton  accordinq 
to  the  conjecture  closely  approximate  this  axis. 
For  the  conjecture  to  be  meaningful  it  must,  not 
only  comply  with  ordinarily  observed  phenomena  but 
also,  cope  with,  and  possibly  give  rise  to  the 
creation  of  examples  of  such  phenomena.  We  w i ll 
devote  our  attention  to  both  these  aspects  later. 
For  the  moment  we  digress  in  order  to  discuss  the 
concepts  of  an  isotropic  image  reduction  mechan(cid:173)
ism.  We  w i ll  return  to  the  main  problem  later 
on. 
levant  literature. 
It  is  pointed  out  that  in  no  way  does  our  previous 
discussion  imply  that  because  all  regular  objects 
are  contractable  to  a  dot,  that  they  w i ll  be  re(cid:173)
cognized  as  being  identical.  The  individual 
shapes  of  such  objects  could  be  identified  as 
being  different  by  means  of  an  edge-detection 
mechanism,  a  visual  f a c i l i ty  for  whose  existence 
there  1s  considerable  evidence. 
It  would  Indeed 
be  interesting  to  evaluate  experimentally  the 
scope  of  an  image  reduction  mechanism  together 
with  an  edge-detection  process. 
A  very  interesting  explanation  has  been  proposed 
by  Blum  (4)  who  has  used  his  Medial  Axis  Trans(cid:173)
formation  to  explain  some  of  the  optical  illusions. 
The  skeletons,  termed  Medial  Axis  Functions,  pro(cid:173)
duced  by  this  transformation  differ  from  those 
obtained  using  the  algorithm  presented  in  the 
next  section.  His  argument,  however,  is  also 
based  upon  the  determination  of  the  properties  of 
the  skeleton,  i . e .,  the  Medial  Axis  Functions. 
He  suggests  that  the  visual  process  tries  to  line 
up  these  Medial  Axis  Functions  rather  than  the 
outline  of  the  objects  themselves;  it  is  the 
speed  of  formation  of  these  Functions  which  gives 
vise  to  the  observed  illusions.  Figure  3(d)  de(cid:173)
picts  the  formation  of  the  Functions  for  Figure 
3(a),  the  velocity  of  their  generation  is  repre(cid:173)
sented  by,  and  is  proportional  to  the  thickness 
of  the  dots.  The  Functions  associated  with  the 
converging  arrows  figure  coalesce  faster  thus 
producing  the  illusion  that  this  vertical 
shorter. 

line  is 

TOWARDS AN  ISOTROPIC  IMAGE  REDUCTION PROCESS 
We  have  already  mentioned  that  we  w i ll  concern 
ourselves  with  hexagonal  display  structures  only. 

Below  we  Dresent  an  isotroDic  image  reduction  a l(cid:173)
gorithm  appertainlnq  to  such  arrays.  For  a 
fuller  treatment  the  reader  is  referred  to  (1). 
Consider  the  six  peripheral  neiqhbors  of  any 
element  x  on  the  hexaqonal  arrav,  labelled  x(l) 
throuqh  x(6)  as  shown.  Since  we  are  deallng  with 
images  of  uniform  gray-level  distribution,  the 

value  of  any  element  in  the  array  can  be  either 
I (qray  image)  or  zero  (background).  We  shall 
also  refer  to  the  value  of  an  element  by  its  name 
and  say  that  x ( l ),  i . e .,  element  x(1)  has  the 
value  of  either  x(l)  =  1  or  0,  x(1)  =  0.  This 
w i ll  not  lead  to  a  confusion  between  the  name  and 
the  value  of  an  element  since  the  meaning  w i ll  be 
clear  from  the  context. 
Given  below  are  the  conditions,  all  of  which  must 
be  f u l f i l l e d,  under  which  the  element  x  is  delet-
able  from  the  original  image  durinq  the  image  re(cid:173)
duction  process. 

The  subscript  to  the  right  vertical  bar  1n  con(cid:173)
ditions  4  and  5  signifies  the  name  of  the  x  ele(cid:173)
ment  the  peripheral  elements  of  which  are  in(cid:173)
volved  in  the  summation. 
Each  element  is  scrutinized  independently  of  all 
the  others;  the  process  takes  place  in  parallel. 
This  process,  which  maintains  connectivity,  is 
carried  out  until  no  further  erasure  occurs. 
Condition  1  preserves  end  points  of  the  skeleton, 
conditions  2  and  3  cause  the  deletion  of  certain 
points  whose  neighbors  observe  certain  connecti(cid:173)
vity  situations,  condition  4  preserves  the  points 
in  on  an  already  derived  skeleton  and  condition  5 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

241 

preserves  intersection  points. 
The  six-way  symmetry  of  the  hexagonal  array  lends 
generality  to  the  above  conditions  and  renders 
the  latter  independent  of  position  within  the 
array  of  peripheral  elements,  in  the  sense  that 
the  conditions  "look  the  same"  whatever  fixed 
value  is  assigned  to  p. 
Consider  the  skeleton  of  the  letter  A  shown  in 
Figure  4(a). 
It  was  derived  using  one  value  of 
p,  p  =  1,  throughout  each  cycle.  The  bias  of  the 
skeleton  towards  the  lower  left  portions  of  the 
original  image  is  evident.  The  skeleton  w i ll 
occupy  different  positions  with  respect  to  the 
original  image  for  different  values  of  p  chosen, 
and  it  1s  this  facet  which  facilitates  isotropic 
reduction.  For  if  the  value  of  p  is  continually 
changed  during  the  reduction  process  so  as  to 
compensate  for  a  bias  in  a  particular  direction, 
then  hopefully,  a  uniform  reduction  will  result. 
Whereas  the  skeleton  in  Figure  4(a),  obtained 
with  p  s  1,  is  confined  to  the  lower  left  por(cid:173)
tions  of  the  image,  the  skeleton  obtained  using 
the  value  p  *  4  was  found  to  occupy  the  upper 
In(cid:173)
right  portion  of  the  image  (approximately). 
deed,  experimental  evidence  seems  to  indicate 
that  the  bias  produced  as  a  result  of  using  the 
value  p  =  p.  during  one  pass  over  the  image 
would  be  neutralized,  during  a  followinq  pass, 
usinq  the  value  p  =  p1+3.  Thus,  in  order  to 
attain  isotropic  reduction,  one  would  simply  per(cid:173)
form  each  pass  over  the  image  with  a  different 
value  of  p  thus  making  sure  that  any  inbalance 
caused  during  one  pass  is  taken  care  of  in  the 
next.  More,  or  less,  than  six  passes  may  be 
necessary  but  the  sequences  of  the  values  of  p 
would  consist  of  a  repetitive  group  of  six 
differing  p  values:  -  P1P2P3P4P5P6. 
A  factor  influencing  the  final  position  and 
shape  of  the  skeleton  within  the  image  is  the 
i n i t i al  value  of  p  and  the  remaining  values  of  p 
in  the  sequence.  We  have  found  that  smoother  and 
more  centrally  disposed  skeletons  were  obtained 
if  the  contraction  operations  were  actually  per(cid:173)
formed  six  times  with  p.  as  the  i n i t i al  value 
of  p  at  the  beginning  of  the  ith  pass  followed  by 
the  remaining  p  values  in  order.  Thus  using  the 
basic  sequence  P1P2p3P4P5P6.  P1  would  be  the 
f i r st  value  of  p  followed  by  p1...p6  1n  the 
f i r st  pass;  p2  would  be  the  f i r st  value  of  p  at 
the  beginning  of  the  second  round  followed  by 
P3...p6p, 
in  that  round.  The  third  time  round 
the  sequence  would  be  p3...p6p1p2  and  so  on. 
The  resulting  skeleton  is  obtained  by  forming  the 
logical  OR  of  the  previous  six  skeletons  and  re(cid:173)
peating,  etc. 
sequence  yielded  best  results:  -  p1  =  1,  p2 = 
P1+3,  p3  =  2,  p4  =  P3+3,  etc.  Figure  4(b)  shows 
the  result  obtained  usinq  this  sequence;  the 
skeleton  is  centrally  disposed  alonq  the  limbs  of 
the  letter.  Note  that  where  there  is  no  true 

In  practice,  the  following 

center  line,  that  i s,  where  the  local  part  of  the 
limb  is  an  even-number  of  elements  thick,  two 
contiguous  skeleton  points  are  generated.  Here, 
the  true  qeometric  center  line  is  situated 
between  these  two  points.  We  return  now  to  the 
main  discussion. 

It  is  suqqested 

THE  CONJECTURE  -  DISCUSSION 
In  our  attempt  at  establishina  credence  in  our 
conjecture  we  shall  try  to  interpret  some  of  the 
optical  illusions  usinq  the  conjecture,  and  at 
the  same  time,  suqgest  how  some  new  ones  might  be 
constructed.  We  shall  be  investiqatinq  some  of 
the  better  known  illusions,  and  in  doing  so,  pre(cid:173)
sent  some  of  the  theories  suqqested  by  others. 
The  most  popular  illusion  1n  the  field  of  lenqth 
perception  is  the  Mueller-Lyer  lines,  or  the 
"arrow"  illusion,  shown  in  Fiqure  3(a).  Why  in(cid:173)
deed  should  the  vertical  line  flanked  by  the  out-
qoinq  arrow  heads  appear  lonqer  than  an  equally 
long  vertical  line  with  inqoinq  arrow  heads?  The 
most  recent  attempt  at  explaining  this  phenomenon 
has  been  made  by  Greqory  (3). 
that  the  illusion  is  produced  by  our  general  per(cid:173)
ception  of  depth  in  three  dimensions,  and  by 
virtue  of  the  fact  that  there  exists  an  interest(cid:173)
ing  inverse  relation  -  known  as  Emmert's  Law  -
between  the  size  of  an  object  and  its  distance 
from  the  viewer.  According  to  this  theory,  the 
line  with  the  outgoing  arrows  is  beinq  associated 
with  the  three  dimensional  representation  of  a 
far  corner,  whereas  the  line  with  the  ingoing 
arrows  is  reminiscent  of  the  representation  of  a 
nearer  corner.  Neglectinq  the  lengthy  discus(cid:173)
sion,  it  is  finally  arqued  that  the  inverse  re(cid:173)
lation  causes  the  image  which  "looks"  as  thouqh 
it  were  furthest  away,  (the  line  representing  the 
far  corner)  to  appear  laraer. 
The  same  argument  is  used  to  explain  why,  in  the 
"railway-line"  i l l u s i o n,  the  upper  horizontal 
rectanqle,  Fiqure  3(b),  looks  longer  than  the 
lower  one.  The  two  converqinq  lines  introduce 
perspective  effects  and  hence  the  top  rectanqle, 
which  appears  now  further  away,  is  magnified  by 
virtue  of  the  inverse  relation.  Support  for  this 
approach  is  provided  by  some  experimental 
evidence.  The  illusion  shown  in  Figure  3(c),  the 
Jastrow  illusion,  is  not  discussed. 
We  now  discuss  the  arrow  illusion  in  the  light  of 
our  conjecture.  The  two  lines  are  displayed  as 
thouqh  they  were  reproduced  on  an  hexagonal  array 
in  Figure  5(a).  By  our  conjecture,  the  lenqth  of 
an  object  1s  perceived  by  the  eye,  in  its  overall 
view,  forming  an  imaginary  closed  hull  around  the 
object  and  then  " f i l l i nq  in"  the  entire  enclosure, 
thus  treatinq  it  as  a  uniform  image,  Figure  5(b). 
For  the  proposed  conjecture  to  be  valid,  the 
application  of  isotropic  image  reduction  to  these 
images  should  yield  two  skeletons,  the  larger  one 
of  which  should  be  derived  from  the  imaqe  repre(cid:173)
senting  the  line  with  the  outgoinq  arrows.  The 
result  of  applying  the  alqorithm  discussed  in  the 
previous  section  is  shown  in  Figure  5(c). 
(The 
arms  of  the  ingoinq  arrows  are  sliqhtly  longer, 
this  is  because  the  difference  in  shape  between 

242 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

It  is  seen  that  this  is 

Isotropic  image  reduction  w i ll 

the  two  uniform  images  in  Figure  5(b)  would  hardly 
be  noticable  otherwise.) 
in  fact  the  case. 
Two  arguments  in  favor  of  the  way  our  conjecture 
treats  the  above  illusion  are  now  presented.  The 
f i r st  deals  with  the  possibility  of  accomplishing 
this  very  illusion  in  a  different  way.  Consider 
the  two  vertical  lines  shown  in  Fiqure  6.  Which 
one  appears  longer? 
If  these  two  lines  are  just 
another  way  of  representing  the  arrow  illusion 
then  it  must  also  be  explicable  in  terms  of  our 
conjecture.  Now,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the 
hulls  of  both  the  images  of  Figure  6  are  rect(cid:173)
angles  in  which  the  two  shorter  sides  have  been 
made  circular. 
yield  two  skeletons  of  different  lengths  and 
hence  the  illusion. 
It  would  be  interesting  to 
see  how  the  above  notions  of  three  dimensional 
depth  perception  and  the  inverse  size  relation 
would  cope  with  this  representation. 
The  second  argument  runs  as  follows.  Assuming 
our  conjecture  to  be  valid,  is  it  possible  to 
find  an  "arrow"  whose  hull  would  yield  an  image 
which,  in  turn,  would  be  reducible  to  a  skeleton 
whose  size  ranked  between  those  of  the  other  two? 
Should  such  an  "arrow"  be  found,  then  it  too  must 
form  part  of  the  illusion  in  that  it  must  appear 
to  be  shorter  than  the  line  with  the  outqoing 
arrows  and  longer  than  the  line  with  the  ingoing 
arrows.  We  suggest  that  the  third  "arrow"  shown 
in  Figure  7(a)  is  such  a  possibility.  The  author 
has  not  as  yet  performed  extensive  tests  with 
these  drawings,  but  tentatively,  of  the  numerous 
persons  questioned  almost  all  without  exception 
ranked  the  arrows  1n  the  predicted  order.  The 
result  of  applying  the  reduction  operation  to 
these  arrows  is  shown  in  Figure  7(b). 
We  now  draw  our  attention  to  the  two  vertical 
lines  shown  in  Figure  8(a).  The  upper  line,  with 
the  smaller  horizontal 
line  throuqh  i t,  appears 
slightly  longer.  This  too  can  be  explained  by 
means  of  our  conjecture,  as  Figure  8(b)  indicates. 
Figure  8(b)  also  explains  why  generally,  a  narrow 
rectangle  of  a  given  length  qives  the  impression 
of  looking  slightly  longer  than  a  rectangle  of 
( c . f ., 
the  same  length  but  of  increased  width, 
our  early  discussion  regarding  the  skeletons 
obtained  from  rectangles  of  varying  side  ratios.) 
Our  conjecture  does  not  explain  the  "railway  line" 
illusion  of  Figure  3(b)  and  the  Jastrow  illusion 
of  Figure  3(c)  f u l l y.  We  feel  however,  that  it 
has  a  bearing  on  the  phenomenon.  Treatinq  the 
"railway"  illusion  f i r s t;  the  reason  the  upper 
rectangle  appears  longer  is  because  there  is  a 
confusion  between  the  actual  boundary  of  this 
rectangle  and  the  exceedingly  close  local  boundary 
dictated  by  the  converging  lines.  The  eye  in 
forming  the  enclosure,  includes  the  outer  lines 
too,  which  by  our  conjecture,  results  in  the  upper 
rectangle  looking  longer.  No  such  confusion 
arises  in  the  case  of  the  lower  rectangle  since 
the  distance  between  the  railway  lines  and  the 
actual  rectangle  is  fairly  large. 
It  is  also 
noteworthy  that  the  illusion  only  takes  place 

provided  one  of  the  objects  is  very  near  the 
converging  lines;  the  illusion  w i ll  not  occur  if 
both  objects  are  drawn  far  away  from  them. 
A  convenient  way  of  testinq  this  idea  would  be  to 
ascertain  whether  an  increase  1n  the  width  of  the 
upper  rectanqle  (or  a  decrease  in  the  width  of 
the  lower  rectanqle)  causes  the  illusion  either 
to  be  less  pronounced  or  to  disappear  entirely. 
By  a  previous  arqument,  the  apparent  decrease  1n 
length  caused  by  increasinq  the  width  of  the 
upper  rectangle  (or  the  apparent  increase  in 
lenqth  caused  by  decreasing  the  width  of  the 
lower  rectanqle)  should  comoensate  for  the  elonqa 
tion  influence  produced  by  the  two  bounding 
lines.  Preliminary  tests  have  certainly  shown 
that  alterinq  the  width  of  one  of  the  rectangles 
reduces  the  degree  of  lenqth  discrepancy  observed 
between  the  rectanqles. 
We  now  discuss  the  bearing  our  conjecture  has 
upon  the  Jastrow  illusion.  This  illusion  is  re(cid:173)
produced  in  Figure  9  with  the  two  sections 
" f i l l ed  i n ".  The  two  vertical  lines  complete  the 
hull  of  the  entire  image,  the  remainder  of  the 
hull  beinq  formed  by  the  edqes  of  the  sections 
themselves.  The  bottom  section  apoears  as  if  1t 
were  diverqing  from  the  boundary  and  at  the  same 
time  converging  into  the  space  between  the  two 
lines.  Note  that  this  effect  does  not  arise  in 
the  case  of  the  top  section  because  the  corres(cid:173)
ponding  Dortion  which  gives  rise  to  this  impres(cid:173)
sion  actually  forms  part  of  the  enclosure. 
It 
is  this  diverqing  effect,  interacting  between 
section  and  boundary  which  gives  rise  to  the 
section  lookinq  smaller,  locally. 
This  arqument  does  not  refute  our  comments  con(cid:173)
cerning  the  "railway"  i l l u s i o n,  since  in  the 
case  of  the  Jastrow  i l l u s i o n,  the  divergent 
effect  is  overwhelming.  We  have  tried  the  r a i l(cid:173)
way  illusion  using  inverted  triangles  instead  of 
the  rectanqles.  The  trianales  were  drawn  so  that 
their  apex  pointed  away  from  the  point  of  inter(cid:173)
section  of  the  converqinq  lines.  This  was  done 
in  order  to  obtain  the  diverginq  effect  of  the 
Jastrow  illusion.  The  illusion  seems  to  dis(cid:173)
appear  under  these  circumstances  (see  Fiqure  10). 
Compare  the  impression  obtained  from  Fiqure  3(b) 
with  that  obtained  from  Fiqure  10. 
Finally  we  present  an  instance  which  seems  to 
contradict  the  conjecture.  Consider  the  two 
images  with  their  unequal  vertical  lines  shown 
in  Fiqure  11.  The  extremities  of  the  squares 
flankinq  both  of  these  lines  are  the  same.  The 
envelope  of  each  of  the  images  1s  therefore  the 
same;  a  rectangle  whose  shorter  sides  corresponds 
to  the  outer  side  of  the  small  squares  and  whose 
larqer  sides  are  equal  to  the  distance  between 
these  squares'  outer  side.  The  con lecture 
implies  that  since  the  resultinq  skeletons  for 
each  of  the  hull  is  of  the  same  length,  the 
elonqation,  or  rather  the  extent  of  the  vertical 
lines  should  appear  similar.  Yet  this  is  not 
what  is  observed. 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

243 

CONCLUSION 
As  usual,  the  kind  of  material  described  in  this 
paper  is  particularly  vulnerable  to  criticism  and 
counter  arguments.  The  author  is  fully  aware  of 
this  and  particularly  so  on  the  following  two 
counts.  First,  because  most  of  the  material 
discussed  i s,  to  the  author's  knowledge,  new,  and 
second,  because  the  author  1s  knowingly  encroach(cid:173)
ing  upon  a  domain  which  is  a  l i t t le  alien  to  his 
own. 
Chronologically,  an  isotropic  image  reduction 
technique  was  all  that  we  were  after  originally. 
This  then  gave  rise  to  the  speculations  we  de(cid:173)
scribed  above.  The  fact  that  we  could  actually 
simulate  some  of  the  ideas  on  a  computer  seemed 
particularly  attractive. 
It  is  of  course  realiz(cid:173)
ed  that  the  investigations  have  been  limited  in 
their  scope  -  for  example,  we  have  not  mentioned 
the  Herring  illusion  at  all  -  but  they  seem  in(cid:173)
teresting  enough  to  warrant  further  attention. 
REFERENCES 

(1)  Deutsch,  E.  S.,  Towards  Isotropic  Image  Re(cid:173)
duction,  University  of  Maryland,  Technical 
Report,  No.  TR-70-139,  October  1970. 

(2)  Deutsch,  E.  S.,  Thinning  Algorithms  for 

Rectangular,  Hexagonal  and  Triangular 
Arrays,  University  of  Maryland,  Technical 
Report,  No.  TR-70-115,  June  1970. 

(3)  Gregory,  R.  L.,  Eye  and  Brain,  World  Univer(cid:173)

sity  Library,  McGraw  Hill  Book  Co.:  New 
York  1966. 

(4)  Blum,  H.,  A  Transformation  for  Extracting 

New  Descriptors  of  Shape  in  Models  for  the 
Perception  of  Speech  and  Visual  Form, 
Proceedings  of  a  Symposium,  Weiant  Wathen-
Dunn,  Editor,  M.I.T.  Press,  Cambridge,  1967. 

244 

Session No.  6 Analysis  of Human Behaviour 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

245 

246 

Analysis  of Human Behaviour 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

247 

i 

Figure  9. 

Figure  10. 

