258 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

A  STUDY IN DESCRIPTIVE REPRESENTATION OF 

PICTORIAL  DATA* 

O.  Firschein and  M.  A.  Fischler 

Information Sciences 

Lockheed  Palo Alto Research  Laboratory 

Palo Alto,  California  94304,  U.S.A. 

ABSTRACT 

Although  much effort has been expended on automatic 
scene description,  especially  in the various  robot and 
"hand-eye" projects,  these  efforts have usually been 
directed toward description for  immediate  use,  i.e., 
description of a  scene for the purpose of stacking 
blocks  using a manipulator arm,  or for allowing a 
robot to move through an environment.  This paper 
concerns a somewhat different type  of description  in 
which a scene is described  in general terms to be 
stored for an unspecified future use.  This type of 
description has application in  (1)  advanced robot 
systems,  where the robot,  similar to the human,  will 
build up an  "encyclopedia" of descriptions  for possible 
use,  and  (2)  in question-answering systems for  image 
data bases in which the descriptions  are to represent 
an "encyclopedic" knowledge of the image.  Experi(cid:173)
ments  in non-goal-directed description using human 
subjects are described,  experiments which  seek to 
determine how  general descriptions are  generated and 
the nature of such descriptions. 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

Much work has been done in describing a scene for 
specific use,  such as description of an image data 
base for definite retrieval  goals,  or  description  of a 
scene  for predetermined use by a manipulator arm  or 
for  specified  robot tasks. 
In  contrast to these  efforts, 
the  main theme of the present  investigation is that of 
non-goal  specific description of imagery,  i.e.,  prep(cid:173)
aration of a scene description for a broad range of 
possible use.  This is the type of description a human 
stores as he moves through an environment,  when he 
has no specific goal in mind.  He is later able to re(cid:173)
call the  stored  image  and to use  it for various pur(cid:173)
poses.  Our investigation is  concerned with how such 
descriptions  can be generated  (the prior knowledge, 
"set," and deductive capability required),  and the 
nature  of such descriptions  (the vocabulary,  relation(cid:173)
ships used,  and structural forms). 

To clarify what we mean by goal-specific description, 
consider the types  of pictorial  description  described 
below. 

•  Descriptions  for Reconstruction.  These  can 

be used to reconstruct a picture and  can 
employ  relatively  simple vocabulary.  They 
are  concerned largely with  providing detailed 
information on location,  size,  shape,  color, 
texture,  etc.,  and  even for a simple picture 
can be quite extensive. 

*Work  sponsored by The  Lockheed Independent Re(cid:173)
search  Program and by Office of Naval Research 
Contract  N00014-70-C-0239. 

•  Descriptions for  Classification.  These are 

used in distinguishing one scene from 
another,  or to place a scene in one or  more 
sets of distinct categories. 
In this case,  the 
person preparing the description  must have 
considerable knowledge  of what is typical and 
what  is atypical  for the  subject matter of the 
picture.  He  must also know the possible 
classification  categories. 

•  Descriptions  for  Retrieval  of  Pictures. 

These  must take  into account possible  user 
queries and  must  capture the  content or 
meaning of the picture using some labeling 
scheme which indicates these aspects of the 
picture to the  user. 

•  Descriptions  for  Picture  Comprehension. 

These are used to aid the observer  in under(cid:173)
standing a picture. 

In contrast to the above descriptive types,  we are 
interested in more general descriptions such as those 
defined in the next paragraphs. 

•  Descriptions  That  "Paint  Mental  Images." 

These  are  descriptions  in  literature  that are 
used to "paint a  mental  image" of the scene 
in the  reader's  mind. 

•  Descriptions  for Answering Queries.  These 

are  descriptions of an image for  use in 
answering general questions about the  image 
directly,  without the user's having to see to 
the actual  imagery. 

Some  relevant questions  concering the preparation  of 
general  image  descriptions  are: 

•  What strategies do human subjects use  in 

preparing such descriptions ? 

•  How do instructions and constraints on the 

subject affect  these  strategies? 

•  What is the relation  of training and back(cid:173)

ground to  such  strategies? 

As far as the deductive aspects used in  description 
are concerned: 

•  How deep is the reasoning required ?  In 

other words,  what are the logical  structures 
employed ? 

•  What information  included and not included 

in the photo is required ? 

•  How relevant are the  deductions to the  over(cid:173)

all impression of the photo ? 

•  What  is the validity of the  reasoning and how 

were the  conclusions drawn ? 

And,  finally,  as far as normalization is concerned: 
•  How can an unconstrained description be 

formalized  without  losing important 
information ? 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

259 

•  What transformations are necessary  in  going 
from the free natural  language description to 
the canonical form ? 

•  What mechanisms are  required to combine 

individual canonical descriptions  so as to 
form an overall  "complete" description? 

1.1  QUESTION ANSWERING BASED ON SYMBOLIC 

DESCRIPTION OF  PICTORIAL DATA:  THE 
ENCYCLOPEDIA  CONCEPT 

At first glance,  an attempt to create informal descrip(cid:173)
tions of imagery for a future unspecified use  seems 
overly ambitious.  There seem to be too many diverse 
questions that could be asked concerning the picture, 
and too many different requirements  in terms of the 
level of response required.  Consider,  however,  an 
analogous situation that arose  in the attempt to  sum(cid:173)
marize all human knowledge in such a way that ques(cid:173)
tions could be answered using this summary.  Although 
this task also seemed to be  insurmountable,  the 
resultant collections  of knowledge,  called encyclo(cid:173)
pedias,  have been used for many years,  and they have 
proved to be a useful tool for answering a diversity of 
questions. 

Our  work  has  similarities to that  of Schwarzlander  (1), 
who is  concerned with "repackaging" knowledge,  as 
represented in written form,  into an encyclopedic 
storage arranged in such a way that users can have 
convenient access to the  information.  The investiga(cid:173)
tion that he describes  is  concerned with the extraction 
of "information  items," basic  concepts  which  capture 
the  important units  of knowledge  from the written 
material.  A data base consisting of these  information 
items  is then used to answer user queries. 

Similarly,  it should be possible to develop an image 
data base using the concept of an encyclopedia for the 
body of knowledge  residing in either a  single  scene or 
a set of scenes.  The  same problems of level of detail 
and use of technical terminology arise  in the prepara(cid:173)
tion of both an encyclopedia based on knowledge 
expressed in natural language and one for which  knowl(cid:173)
In both cases, 
edge is expressed in pictorial form. 
one has to consider how the  material is to be organ(cid:173)
ized,  the nature of the potential user,  and the amount 
of material to be gathered. 

1.2  THE  STRUCTURE  OF AN ENCYCLOPEDIC 

ENTRY  FOR  PICTORIAL DATA 

Because the user cannot adequately evaluate a des(cid:173)
cription without knowing the context in which  it was 
generated,  i.e.,  the emotional set,  background,  and 
deduction procedures  of the person or process pro(cid:173)
ducing the description,  we have considered an encylo-
pedic entry as consisting of two parts,  the context of 
the description and the  description itself. 

Emotional.  "The picture  is  rather beautiful. " 
Doubts.  "I guess,"  "perhaps, "appear to be" 
Alternatives. 
Deductions.  "This area  is  developing fast,  because 
at the  opposite end of the runway that the subdivision 
is on,  there are building sites on both sides. " 

"Water or gas  storage tank" 

1.2.2  The  Description 

The descriptive portion of an encyclopedic entry 
could consist of one or  more  of the following content-
indicating elements: 

Descriptor  Data.  Words or phrases  concerning the 
acquisition of the photograph Itself,  such as the  sen(cid:173)
sor used,  date,  sensor parameters,  and altitude, 
as well as the subject matter in the photograph. 
Firschein and  Fischler  (2) have reviewed such des(cid:173)
criptor  systems  in  applications  ranging from  art 
libraries  to  indexing of psychiatric videotape. 

Informal descrip(cid:173)
Natural  Language  Descriptions. 
tions which capture the theme,  general layout and 
arrangement of the photograph,  the objects pictured, 
and their relationships with other objects.  Descrip(cid:173)
tions from different points  of view  (e.g.,  for the  case 
of question-answering systems,  geology,  hydrology, 
military intelligence)  are  often necessary  for ade(cid:173)
quate description of a picture  for encyclopedic 
purposes. 

Semantic  Maps.  The  contents  of a picture indicated 
by a two-dimensional structure which shows objects 
as nodes and the relationships between  objects as 
links.  The  semantic  map is discussed  in  more detail 
in section  3.2. 

Line Drawing Extracts.  Line  drawings extracted 
from a photograph for expressing specialized rela(cid:173)
tionships such as transportation networks,  geologic 
boundaries,  and water courses.  Figure  1 indicates 
three line drawings that were extracted from  a single 
Gemini 5 space photograph  (3),  one showing geologic 
features,  one showing sand dunes and ridges,  and the 
third showing stream channels and vegetation.  The 
structure of such line drawings can be expressed in 
one  of the formal notations  using grammar-based 
techniques. 

1.3  RELATION TO  PREVIOUS WORK IN  PICTURE 

DESCRIPTION 

Descriptions can be either "formal, " i . e .,  use nota(cid:173)
tion,  procedures,  or  rules to express the  content or 
meaning of a picture,  or be "informal, " i . e .,  use 
natural language in an unconstrained  manner  for the 
same purpose.  Work using these two approaches to 
description  is  reviewed briefly below. 

1.2.1  The  Context of the  Description 

1.3.1  Formal  Descriptive  Techniques 

The  contextual portion of the description indicates the 
emotional  impact of the  scenes on the observer,  his 
doubts  or expressions of alternatives,  and  indications 
of how he made his deductions.  Typical entries are: 

Tne  general  field of formal pictorial  description that 
relates to the present work is reviewed in Ref.  1. 
We  considered three classes of formal descriptive 
technique:  (1)  the  grammar-based approach,  which 

260 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

uses  symbolic notation to describe relationships 
among primitive pictorial units  (in practice,  these 
units were  invariably points  are line segments); (2) the 
descriptor-based approach,  which attempts to capture 
the  content of the picture by using a number of terms 
or phrases; and  (3) the procedure-based approach,  in 
which a high-level  control mechanism causes one des(cid:173)
cription to be generated from  many possible descrip(cid:173)
tions. 

It would  seem also that,  because  such 

It was  noted that the grammar-based approaches  (4, 
5,6,7)  can be used to answer questions  concerning 
certain types of line drawings but that these  methods 
had not yet been extended to true photographic mate(cid:173)
rial. 
approaches are  currently dependent on parsing an 
expression consisting of basic picture elements,  they 
would tend to be overwhelmed by gray-level imagery, 
in which the picture elements are difficult to  detect, 
and by extremely complicated  expressions which 
become  impractical to parse,  ft  is also not clear 
whether these  methods  could provide useful  "hlgh 
level'' descriptions  in the  more complicated environ(cid:173)
ment  of gray-level  photography. 

The descriptor-based approaches  (8,9,10) are used to 
locate pictures  that  might satisfy a query; the  set of 
index terms cannot,  in general,  be used to answer 
questions  directly.  Such descriptor approaches  are 
attractive today because  of the availability of com(cid:173)
puters  which  can efficiently perform  searches based 
on required combinations of descriptors. 

Finally,  there are the procedure-based approaches to 
description (11,12,13).  These are systems,  possibly 
grammar-based,  capable of preparing a large number 
of descriptions of a given picture,  coupled to a control 
mechanism which  selects procedures and the order of 
procedures to be used,  so as to produce only a single 
desired description.  As in the case  of the grammar-
based approach,  the procedure-based methods have 
not yet been extended to photographic  material. 

1.3.2 

Informal  Descriptions 

Two investigations  concerned with informal descrip(cid:173)
tion  of pictures  by human subjects are  of direct  inter(cid:173)
est to the present study. 
In both  cases,  the descrip(cid:173)
tions were used for pattern  recognition purposes. 

Fischler  (13) used a set of four samples of each of  14 
handwritten Sanskrit  characters on four human sub(cid:173)
jects  totally  unfamiliar with the  Sanskrit alphabet. 
The nature of the experiment was described to one of 
the  subjects,  who was asked to prepare a written des(cid:173)
cription for each  character  in one of the character 
sets  (14 distinct items).  These written descriptions 
were then used by the other three subjects to identify 
the  characters  in the three  remaining  (but  randomly 
intermixed)  character sets. 
It was  found that sur(cid:173)
prisingly high classification performance could be 
achieved with very simple and  seemingly crude des(cid:173)
criptions.  However,  this efficiency  of communication 
can be accomplished only when the communicants 
share a common model of the universe of discourse 
and have similar visual and perceptual abilities. 

C.  Vegetation and Intermittent 

Streams 

Fig.  1  Three Different Line Drawings De 

rived From the Same Space 
Photograph 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

261 

A  similar result was obtained by Krauss  (14),  who 
used children as subjects in an experiment concerning 
communication about patterns.  The subjects,  sepa(cid:173)
rated by a screen so that they could not see each 
other,  were provided with identical sets of six blocks, 
each block imprinted with a different design.  One 
child removed a block from a  special dispenser and 
stacked it on a peg.  He described the pattern on the 
block to the other child who had to find the corre(cid:173)
sponding block from the blocks  spread out in front of 
him and stack it on his peg.  For the subjects,  the 
object of the  game was to build identical stacks of 
blocks.  For them to perform their task  successfully, 
the first  subject had to describe the  figures well 
enough  so that his partner could select the correspond 
ing figure,  a task that was not simple because the 
figures imprinted on the blocks were complex and 
were not easy to relate to known pictures. 
It was 
found that children 4-1/2 years old had  difficulty in 
performing the description task because they used a 
"private  encoding"-a description that was not 
socially shared.  The children performed the task 
successfully when their own encodings were used as 
the description.  Thus,  while the aware adult formu(cid:173)
lates his description with regard to the  result that  it 
will produce  in the listener or  reader,  the young child 
(and the unsophisticated  machine) lacks this talent. 

2.  EXPERIMENTAL SETTING 

AND INITIAL OBSERVATIONS 

With the idea in mind of an image data base for 
unspecified future  use,  experiments were performed 
to determine: 

•  The  extent of utility of a general  symbolic 

description of a photographic scene 

•  The  extent to which contextual factors 

influence  description 

•  A  set of primitive vocabulary terms,  lin(cid:173)
guistic forms,  and pictorial relationships 
that can be chosen as the basis for semi-
formal  language  for describing  scenes - in 
particular,  aerial  terrain photographs 

As noted  in the  Fischler experiments in human com(cid:173)
munication about pictorial objects (13),  an observer 
is often guided in his description by the expected use 
of the description.  This predisposition to interpret, 
i.e.,  to concentrate on different aspects of a picture, 
is what the psychologist thinks of as  "set" or  "expec(cid:173)
tation."  We attempted,  therefore,  to give instruc(cid:173)
tions that would motivate the subjects to tell as  much 
as they could about a picture without providing any 
information that might result  in a limiting  "set." 

A preliminary  set of experiments was conducted using 
13 subjects who had a variety of backgrounds.  We 
were interested in observing the deductive and meta-
descriptive aspects of description,  as well as the 
scope,  format,  and forms of descriptions produced. 

Aerial photographs in both  color and black and white 
were  selected for use in these  experiments because of 
the many practical applications employing such data, 

e.g.,  earth resources studies.  The following photo(cid:173)
graphs were used: 

(1)  Black and white,  10,000-ft view of a subur(cid:173)

ban area having much open space 

(2)  Color,  10,000-ftview of a highly urbanized 

area 

(3)  Black and white,  150-mile-altitude view of 

the San  Francisco Bay area 

(4)  Color,  10,000-ft view of river and 

industrial area  (see Fig.  2) 

(5)  View of the  moon from  40-mile  altitude, 

black and white 

Fig.  2  Aerial  Photograph of Industrial Area 

The  instructions used were of three types: 

(1)  Please write a description of the attached 
photo.  The description will be used in an 
information  retrieval  experiment. 

(2)  Please write a description of the attached 

photo.  The description will be part of a 
data base dealing with  city planning. 

(3)  Please answer the following questions  con(cid:173)

cerning the picture.... 

The type of photograph used-i.e.,  simple or com(cid:173)
plex,  uniform or varied— had a strong effect on the 
subjects. 
In the preliminary experiments,  the sub(cid:173)
jects had the following general responses: 

•  Subjects find highly detailed scenes having 
little  or no centralizing theme  or focus very 
difficult to describe.  For example,  subjects 
asked to describe an aerial photograph of a 
suburban sprawl,  or a photograph of the 
moon showing uniform small cratering,  are 
not  merely unenthusiastic but  even hostile 
toward the task. 

•  Subjects  respond to pictures that have a 

centralizing theme and do relate other por(cid:173)
tions of the picture to the theme.  For 

262 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

• 

example,  for an aerial photograph of a harbor 
area,  the  subjects  will describe the river 
shape and then the various refinery,  port 
areas,  etc.,  surrounding the river. 
If the picture has no centralizing theme but is 
not totally unfocused,  subjects will  partition 
the picture into regions and describe each 
region  separately,  or  may partition the pic(cid:173)
ture according to whether the sub region 8 con(cid:173)
tain items that can be focused upon. 

•  Untrained  subjects  will  come to conclusions 
that are unwarranted by the pictoral  material 
that they are viewing.  Thus,  conclusions 
concerning the depth of a crater or the height 
of a mountain may be made even though there 
is no  scale that would enable reliable 
estimates. 

•  Subjects are uncertain about how to respond 
when they have a large amount of information 
about an area.  For example,  a subject who 
recognizes a photograph as being of an area 
with which he is intimately acquainted does 
not know which  of the  many  items to include 
in his description.  He is not sure which of 
his  conclusions are really warranted by the 
imagery and which are purely a product of 
prior  knowledge. 

Since the  first two  sets of instructions did not indicate 
how to organize the descriptions,  the approaches that 
were used by the subjects  (approaches that were often 
determined by the nature of the photographs) were  of 
interest.  The approaches noted were as follows: 

•  Central  focusing subject.  The subject first 

gave the central focus of the picture and 
then  related  all  other  objects to it. 

•  Descriptor  approach.  The  subject pro(cid:173)
vided a list of descriptor terms that he 
felt  captured the  salient points. 

•  Partition approach.  The subject partitioned 
the picture,  often into quadrants  (e.g.,  upper 
right,  upper left) and described the objects 
and their  relationships  within the quadrants. 
Sometimes the nature of the photo was  such 
that the partitioning was upper third,  middle 
third,  lower third,  or some  other top-to-
bottom divisional  scheme. 

•  Classification approach.  The  subject estab(cid:173)

lished  categories  (e.g.,  lakes,  shopping 
centers,  docking areas) and then described 
the  characteristics and positions of the 
items within the  categories. 

•  Unorganized listing.  The subject scanned 

the picture in  some  manner,  listing the 
objects and their attributes as he scanned. 

3.  ANALYSIS OF  EXPERIMENTAL DESCRIPTIONS 

As indicated previously,  we are  interested in both the 
factors that influence the approach to generating a 
pictorial description and the nature of the descrip(cid:173)
tions. 

It  is therefore pertinent to determine the 

emotional or  mental  set,  the background of the 
observer,  and the kinds of deductions made,  as 
opposed to the observations made when one views 
scenes directly.  For this reason,  each description 
was analyzed in terms  of two aspects:  context and 
content. 

3.1  CONTEXTUAL ITEMS 

The contextual analysis  included the objective impres(cid:173)
sion,  the emotional impression,  the  metadescriptions, 
and the deductions made,  as defined below. 

Objective impression.  Statements related to the sub(cid:173)
ject or title,  e. g.,  "a color aerial photograph of a 
land area invaded by a trlton-shaped waterway," that 
the  subject feels are objective  evaluations. 
(In fact, 
however,  these  statements  may be quite  subjective.) 

Emotional impression.  Statements  concerning emo(cid:173)
tions aroused in the  observer,  e.g.,  "Picture  is 
rather  beautiful." 
Metadescriptions.  Statements  concerning the  indexer, 
the descriptive process  itself,  or the picture as a phys(cid:173)
ical  entity,  that reveal aspects of the emotional or  men 
tal set,  the contextual knowledge,  and the certainty of 
the subject; e.g.,  respectively,  "I am not sure about 
...  "  "It is  probably  not of interest to detail  the  loca(cid:173)
tions  of buildings. "  "The  picture  is  6  inches  wide and 
4 inches high. " For human-gene rated description, 
metadescriptive  Information is  of consequence because 
it provides an indication  of the validity  of the  descrip(cid:173)
tion - an  important  consideration  if the  description  is 
to be included in a data base. 

Deductions.  Conclusions drawn by combining several 
elements  of the picture with the  subjects  prior  knowl(cid:173)
edge; e.g.,  "expensive house" is a deduction,  while 
"house with  swimming pool and tennis court"  is an 
observation. 
It is not always possible to determine 
whether a deduction has been made; e.g.,  the des(cid:173)
cription "auto bridge" could be based either on the 
shape of the bridge or on the presence of a highway 
leading up to the bridge and the absence of railroad 
tracks. 

Figure 3 presents a typical description and an analy(cid:173)
sis of the  contextual  aspects. 

3.1.1  Deductions 

Subjects describing pictures  often perform  rather 
subtle  deductions,  frequently without being aware of 
the  elements that they employed. 
It  is  of interest to 
examine the  deductive process  for three reasons: 
(1)  to determine whether higher level  deductions are 
crucial to the descriptive process,  (2)  to determine 
whether better deductive procedures can be formally 
instituted,  and  (3)  to determine what the require(cid:173)
ments  are  for automatic  deduction using computers. 

Some of the deductions made by the subject can be con(cid:173)
sidered as  "lower  level," involving direct pattern 
recognition of objects in the photo;  other deductions 
are  "higher  level,"  requiring relating various  clues 
in the photo to information known to the observer. 

Session No.  6  Analysis  of Human  Behaviour 

263 

picture,  can be  presented to a  panel.  The panel  is 
asked  whether  the  assertions  are  true  or  false,  and 
the  reasons  for  their  answers. 
possible  to  determine  whether  the  deductions  were 
valid,  at  least  by a  consensus  of other  observers,  and 
it  is  possible  to  investigate  more  precisely  the  deduc(cid:173)
tive  mechanisms  used by  subjects. 

In  this  way,  it  is 

It  should  be noted that  consensus  is  an  operation that 
can be  used by a  robot  in  observing a  scene  at a  later 
time.  Winston's  thesis  (15)  shows  how an  automated 
system  can  improve  its  original  description  after  see(cid:173)
ing  several  examples  of a  class  of objects,  which 
obviously  relates  to the  idea  of a  consensus. 

3.2  CONTENT  OF  THE  DESCRIPTION 

Each description  was  transformed  to  a  canonical  form 
to  allow  comparison  of descriptions  to  be  made,  and 
also to  allow  descriptions  of the  same  picture  to  be  com 
bined  to obtain a  composite  description.  To be  useful 
in  computer  data bases,  such  canonical  forms  should 
utilize  a  small  number  of primitives  and  relationships. 
We  therefore  analyzed  the  relationships  contained  in 
the  descriptions  to  determine  the  relationship  cate(cid:173)
gories  used.  Examination  of the  categories  not  only 
aids  in  the  selection  of basic  relationships  to  be  used 
in  the  canonical  forms  but  also  provides  insight  into" 
the  analysis  required  for  an  automated  system  to 
provide  general  image  descriptions. 

3.2.1  Canonical  Forms 

It  should be  noted that  in  transforming 

To  use  informal  descriptions  in a  mechanized  data 
base,  the  representation  must  be  normalized because 
of the  wide  variation  in  narrative  style  used by the 
subjects.  A  variety  of  canonical  forms  could  be  used; 
we  have  chosen a tabular form  and  a network  repre(cid:173)
sentation. 
from  the  informal  description  to  the  canonical  forms, 
at  times  we  have had  to  make  "creative" alterations. 
In  so  doing,  there  is  always  some  danger  that the 
investigator  will  warp the  original  data  presented  by 
the  subjects.  We  have not,  as yet,  investigated the 
consistency  of analysts  in transforming  a  given  de(cid:173)
scription  to  canonical  form;  this  warrants  study. 

Tabular  form.  The  descriptions  were  reduced  to  the 
general  form:  (modifier,  object,  location),  (relation(cid:173)
ship,  location),  (modifier,  object,  location),  namely, 
a  relationship between two  objects,  each  having a 
location and  descriptive  modifiers.  The  relationship 
often has  a  location,  e. g .,  "crosses  a t ."  Using this 
form,  such  a description as  "waterway,  possibly an 
estuary  or  part  of  a harbor,  with  many  ship  docks" 
becomes  "(possibly  estuary  or  part  of  harbor,  water(cid:173)
way, 
where 
indicates  that no  information  was  given. 
Note  that  location  can be  given  with  respect  either  to 
other  objects  or  to  the  photograph  itself.  A  complete 
tabular  canonical  form  for  the  description  given  in 
Fig.  3a  is  shown  in  Table  1. 

)  (many  ship docks, 

)  (with 

),  " 

b.  Contextual  Aspects 

Fig.  3  A  Typical Description  and  an Analysis  of the 

Contextual  Items  It  Contains 

Some  of the  mechanisms  used  to  make  deductions  are: 

•  Observation  of use  of object,  e . g .,  "auto 

bridge,"  "runway  for  airplanes" 

•  Observation  of adjacent  object,  e.g.,  "build(cid:173)

ings  near  sports  area  probably  gyms" 

•  Analysis  of texture,  e . g .,  "sandy  ground" 
•  Analysis  of  shadows,  e.g.,  "River  is  flowing 
from  the  top  of the  picture  to  bottom  of the  pic 
ture  judging  by  the  shadow  cast by  the  dam." 

•  Analysis  of  color  change,  e . g .,  "Channel 

must have been  dredged. " 

•  Distance  and  height estimation,  based  on 

comparison  with  known  objects  shown 

3.1.2  Validity  Checking and  Consensus 

To  verify  conjectures  concerning deductions  made  and 
the  mechanisms  used  in  obtaining them,  the  deductive 
statements  made  concerning a  picture,  along with  the 

264 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

Table 1 

TABULAR FORM OF CANONICAL DESCRIPTION 

(Capitals  indicate that item is part of overall 
theme of picture.) 

Network representation.  A network representation, 
sometimes called a "relational graph," is shown in 
Fig.  4,  using the same informal description as for the 
tabular analysis.  Objects are circled,  and the modi(cid:173)
fiers and the relationships to the objects are indicated 
by links.  This representation is related both to the 
list structures used in computer graphics systems 
such as Sketchpad (16) and to the semantic networks 
as used by Quillian (17).  Portions of the informal 
description that are higher level are closely related 
to the semantic network concept; lower level portions 
of the description are closer to the computer graphics 
area.  As noted by Winograd (18),  what is important 
is not the network representation but rather what the 
representation is made to depict.  For example,  it is 
possible to link concepts on the basis of their close(cid:173)
ness in the sense of meaning,  or by the roles played 
by the concepts (actor,  action,  object,  modifier) with(cid:173)
in the description.  In our recent work using rela(cid:173)
tional nets,  it appears that the simple linked struc(cid:173)
ture presented in this paper does not always capture 
the conceptual structure appropriately.  Recent work 
on conceptual nets by Schank et al.  (19) describes a 
labeled link structure in which the link symbol de(cid:173)
notes the role played by the concepts.  This auxiliary 
information adds an additional dimension of seman(cid:173)
tic content to the network representation. 
3.2.2  Description  Completeness 
For a data base consisting of picture descriptions to 
be useful,  it is necessary that the descriptions be 
"complete1' in some sense.  This problem of complete(cid:173)
ness of an "information item file (IF)" is faced by 
Bottle and Schwartz lander (20) in their encyclopedia 
information system,  and in the field of information 
science in the preparation of information abstracts 
for information retrieval.  In the present case of a 
description to be used in an encyclopedic data base, 
we have approached the problem of completeness 

as follows.  Several different descriptions of a given 
picture are combined to obtain a composite.  The com(cid:173)
posite description is then used as a standard of com(cid:173)
pleteness. 
An example of a composite description is depicted in 
Fig.  5,  which was formed as follows.  An additional 
informal description obtained from a subject was con(cid:173)
verted into the network form.  TMs network was com(cid:173)
pared with the original network of Fig.  4,  and addi(cid:173)
tional links and nodes were then added.  The phrases 
used for these additional links and nodes are under(cid:173)
lined in the description of Fig.  6. 
For a set of subjects having no special technical 
qualifications and no highly specialized set,  it was 
found that convergence was obtained quite rapidly -
after two or three descriptions were combined.  On 
the other hand,  an individual with a speciality can 
introduce a whole new set of links and nodes into the 
semantic net,  and therefore convergence to a certain 
representation does not guarantee completeness; it 
merely indicates completeness for a particular set 
of subjects. 
3.2.3  Deriving the  Composite Representation 
It is difficult to formulate rules for obtaining the net(cid:173)
work representation or for forming the composite 
network,  since these transformations depend on the 
analysts understanding of the meaning of portions of 
the description.  However,  some general guidelines 
are possible:  First,  identify the theme sentence of 
the description; then draw a network using the objects 
and relationships found in the theme sentence.  This 
provides the nucleus for the rest of the network. 
The composite network is formed by selecting the 
most complete network for a given picture and then 
examining the other network representations of de(cid:173)
scriptions of that picture,  noting whether any new 
aspects arise.  Even though other terminology has 
been used,  e.g.,  "waterway" for "canal," it is not 
difficult to identify such paraphrasing,  even without 
recourse to the picture. 
For composite descriptions to be useful in practice, 
automatic conversion from natural language to con(cid:173)
ceptual structure must be available,  and composite 
descriptions must be obtained automatically using 
structure-matching techniques.  For matching of 
queries to the data base,  a true normal form must be 
derived in which paraphrases of the same concepts 
are structured identically. 
One problem that arises in a practical system based 
on composite descriptions is conflict between the 
descriptions of a given image that are provided by 
different observers.  When this problem occurs,  the 
system must be able to detect the conflict so that a 
review mechanism can determine which description 
was inappropriate. 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

265 

266 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

in Table 3.  A partitioning has been made to indicate 
the general  category that the  relationship belongs to, 
such as the "joining,  intrusion,  division" category. 
Relationships  in this particular  category  were  found 
to be numerous in the descriptions,  partly because of 
several of the photos used but also,  we feel,  because 
the human observer tends to use global relationships 
quite readily. 
Interestingly enough,  such global rela(cid:173)
tionships  are  probably the  most  difficult  for automated 
analysis. 

Table 3 

RELATIONSHIPS USED IN THE  DESCRIPTIONS 

It is an aerial photograph,  whose most arresting fea(cid:173)
ture  is a waterway,  possibly an estuary or part of a 
harbor,  with  many  ship docks.  The  waterway 
stretches across the upper part of the photograph, 
with a single stream on the left breaking into 3 arms 
at not quite  mid-photo.  The upper arm divides again 
into inlets  cut off from view; at the top,  the  middle 
arm is a small,  straight-sided,  closed inlet or dock(cid:173)
ing area in a peninsula or island; the lower arm passes 
out of the picture on the right,  possibly dividing again 
at the right edge.  Across the waterway just to the 
left of the division is a bridge.  The land areas are 
flat and  apparently developed for  industrial use,  with 
a network  of roadways.  There are  many  storage tanks 
and warehouse-like buildings.  Except on the upper 
left,  the land  is not very densely covered with  build(cid:173)
ings;  rather they appear  in clusters next to the water(cid:173)
way or a roadway. 

Fig.  6  Additional Description Used To Make  Com(cid:173)
posite  Description.  Underlining indicates 
additions  to original  representation. 

4.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

This  section presents  summary  tables  of the  results 
obtained in the experiments to date  with respect to the 
metadescriptive terms,  the relationships used,  and the 
deductions  made. 

4.1  METADESCRIPTIVE  TERMS 

Typical  metadescriptive terms  concerning the 
observer and  comments  concerning the description 
itself are  given  in  Table  2.  Most  subjects were  frank 
to admit uncertainty and inability to analyze a picture, 
using terms  such  as  "I don't have the  experience to," 
as indicated in Column  (a).  Moreover,  they often 
included a rough estimate  of the accuracy  of their 
observations,  using terms such as those shown in  (b), 
ranging from low-probability terms  such as  "may" 
to high-probability terms  such  as  "probably." 

Table 2 

TYPICAL  METADESCRIPTIVE  TERMS  FOUND 

IN  DESCRIPTIONS 

The relationships used  in the descriptions are  shown 

The deductions  made are  given in Table 4.  Again,  a 
partitioning has been used to  indicate the  mechanisms 

4.3  DEDUCTIONS  MADE 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

267 

used in the deduction.  (When more than one mecha(cid:173)
nism  is probably  involved,  the number of additional 
categories  is indicated in parentheses.)  In addition, 
we have partitioned the table so as to indicate whether 
the reasoning used was stated in the description or 
whether we made assumptions regarding the nature of 
the reasoning. 

Table 4 

DEDUCTIONS MADE 

Most of the deductions were found to be based on 
the use of objects or the presence of adjacent objects, 
e.g.,  "parking facility" and  "Building near  sports 
area is probably a gym."  Analyses of texture, 
shadow,  and color/gray level,  although extremely 
important in specialized description,  such as 
analysis of space photography  (3),  were not used 
frequently by the lay observers who constituted 
the  majority of our subjects. 
Only a representative set of distance,  area,  and height 
deductions has been entered in Table 4.  The subjects 
were fairly free with such estimates,  and often their 
estimates appeared  without any probabilistic 
modifiers. 

The final category,  "combination of many factors," 
was  most evident in responses to the  instruction 
"Provide a title for this picture."  The titles  supplied, 
such as "Early Morning Affluence," and  "High-
Density Suburban Sprawl," represented an extremely 
high level of deduction,  based on many factors. 

5.  ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 

The number of sentences,  and of sentences  containing 
statements  concerning the observer,  expressing 
uncertainty of observation,  and  containing significant 
deductive  content are  given for  each description in 
Table 5. 

SUMMARY OF METADESCRIPTIVE  TERMS USED 

Table 5 

268 

Session No.  6 Analysis of Human Behaviour 

It will be noted in Table 4 that there is quite a varia(cid:173)
tion in the  items from description to description,  and 
we have used averages just to obtain a rough indica(cid:173)
tion of the importance of some  of the factors. 
It was 
found that sentences  containing expressions  concern(cid:173)
ing the observer were not used by most observers; 
that all observers  expressed  some  form  of uncertainty; 
and that almost all observers used deductive 
expressions. 

Other  results  of  interest  are: 

• 

• 

In the  few composite descriptions prepared, 
convergence was obtained  within two or 
three  descriptions. 
In the descriptions,  we identified five 
different global approaches,  as  indicated  in 
Section 2:  central focusing subject,  descrip(cid:173)
tor,  partition approach,  classification 
approach,  and unorganized listing. 

•  Eleven  categories of relationships and the 

roles they play were identified,  as indicated 
in  Table 3. 

•  The  metadescriptive  elements provide  clues 
to the validity  of the descriptions.  Since the 
number of terms used by  observers to 
indicate  doubt and uncertainty was  fairly 
limited,  there iB a reasonable potential for 
formalizing or mechanizing the  process  of 
using such information to aid in assessment 
of  validity. 

6.  DISCUSSION 

The question  of whether a  symbolic  representation 
can be used to capture the "meaning'' or  content of a 
picture has been raised. *  In particular,  the  concept 
of whether such representations could be  complete 
enough to act as an "encyclopedia," a data base for 
answering questions about the picture,  has been the 
focus of this  study. 
It  is  felt that this question  is of 
increasing importance  for  machine perception as  well 
as for information  retrieval using pictorial  material. 

Due to the  generality of the questions posed,  we feel 
that  it is  not practical  to  conduct an  investigation 
using large-scale experimentation.  That is,  the 
large number  of viewpoints  (i.e.,  different  sets)  that 
the subject can bring to an aerial photograph makes it 
difficult to obtain general results. 
that completeness and validity should be examined by 
the use of a number of different observers,  and an 
attempt should be made to obtain consensus on the 
various aspects of the description. 

Instead,  we feel 

The utility of such  representations will depend on the 
completeness of the representation and the accessi(cid:173)
bility of the data.  This paper has dealt with the  first 
topic;  currently,  we are studying the question of 
accessibility. 

A  basic  requirement that arises  in dealing with  in(cid:173)
formal  description  is  that of transformation of de(cid:173)
scriptions to a canonical form  so as to decrease the 
variation in nomenclature,  structure,  and length of 
the  descriptions.  A  tabular  form and a  network form 
for  use as  canonical representations were  indicated, 
and a  method of forming composite descriptions from 
the canonical  forms was  given.  Our  initial evaluation 
of the  innovation of forming a  composite  semantic  net(cid:173)
work from  individual networks  Looks  very promising. 
The  composites  formed in this manner were  found to 
give a  clear  representation of the original pictorial 
objects. 

7.  REFERENCES 

(1)  H.  Schwarzlander,  "Encyclopedic Storage of 
Scientific and Technical  Knowledge,"  IEEE  Trans. 
Eng. Writing & Speech, Vol.  EWS-13, No. 2, Sep 1970 
(2)  O.  Firschein and M.  A.  Fischler,  'Describing 
and Abstracting  Pictorial  Structures,"  Pattern 
Recognition J.  (in press) 
(3)  Ecological Surveys  From Space,  NASA SP-230, 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
Washington,  D.C.,  1970 
(4)  W.  F.  Miller and A.  C.  Shaw,  "Linguistic 
Methods  in  Picture  Processing - A  Survey, "  Fall 
Joint  Computer Conference,  1968,  pp.  279-290 
(5)  A.  C.  Shaw,  The  Formal  Description and  Pars(cid:173)
ing of Pictures,  Ph.D.  Thesis,  Computer Science 
Department,  Stanford University,  1967 
(6)  T.  G.  Evans,  "A Grammar-Controlled  Pattern 
Analyzer," Info.  Proc.,  Vol.  68,  Amsterdam, 
North-Holland  Publishing Co.,  1969 
(7)  R.  Narasimhan,  "On the Description,  Genera(cid:173)
tion,  and Recognition of Classes of Pictures," 
Automatic  Interpretation and  Classification of Images, 
A.  Grasselli,  ed.,  Academic  Press,  1969 
(8)  M.  Ogi,  "Pattern-Matching Techniques Applied 
to Indexing and Retrieving  Films for Television Use," 
Proc.  ASIS Annual Meeting,  1968 
(9)  B.  L.  Kenney et a l .,  "An Automated Index and 
Search  System  for  Psychiatric  Videotapes,"  Proc. 
ASIS.  1970 
(10)  S.  Rice,  "Picture Retrieval by Concept Coordi(cid:173)
nation, " Special  Libraries,  Dec  1969 
(11)  M.  B.  Clowes,  "Transformational Grammars 
and the  Organization Pictures," Automatic  Interpre(cid:173)
tation and  Classification of Images  [seeRef.  (7)] 
(12)  J.  F.  O'Callaghan and P.  C.  Maxwell,  "On 
Describing  Line  Drawings,"  Seminar  Paper No.  18, 
C. S. I. R. O.,  Division of Computer Research, 
Jan 1970 
(13)  M.  A.  Fischler,  "Machine  Perception and 
Description of Pictorial  Data,"  Proc.  Intemat.  Joint 
Conf.  on Artificial  Intelligence,  Washington,  D.C., 
May  1969 
(14)  R.  M.  Krauss,  "Language as a Symbolic 
Process in Communication," Am.  Scientist,  Vol.  56, 
No.  3,  1968,  pp.  265-278 

Session No.  6 Analysis  of Human Behaviour 

269 

(15)  P.  H.  Winston,  "Learning Structural Descrip(cid:173)
tions  From  Examples," MAC  TR-76,  Project MAC, 
Massachusetts  Institute of Technology,  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  Sep 1970 
(16)  I.  E.  Sutherland,  Sketchpad - A  Man-Machine 
Graphical Communication System,  Tech.  Report 
No.  296,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Lincoln,  Lab.,  1963 
(17)  M.  Ross Quillian,  "The Teachable  Language 
Comprehender," Comm.  ACM.  Vol.  12,  No.  8, 
Aug 1969 
(18)  T.  Winograd,  "Procedures as a Representation 
for  Data  in a  Computer  Program for Understanding 
Natural  Language," MAC  TR-84,  Project MAC, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  Feb  1971 
(19)  R.  C.  Schank,  L.  Tesler,  and S.  Weber, 
"Spinoza II:  Conceptual Case-Based Natural  Language 
Analysis,"  Stanford  Artificial  Intelligence  Project, 
Memo AIM-109,  Computer Science Department, 
Stanford University,  Jan 1970 
(20)  R.  T.  Bottle  and  H.  Schwarz  lander,  "Variations 
in the Assessment of the Information  Content of 
Documents," Proc.  ASIS Annual Meeting,  1970 

