Session No.  7  Pattern Recognition I General  Papers 

333 

VISUAL DETECTION OF NOISY PATTERNS 

integration  within  the  summation  areas. 

R.  M.  Hodgson,  G.  A.  Gelade  and  R.  L.  Beurle 

Department  of  Electrical  and  Electronic 
Engineering,  University  of  Nottingham, 

England. 

Abstract 

Experiments  are  reported  in which  the 

quantum  noise  limitation  of  visual  thresholds  is 
explored  further  by  the  addition  of  noise  to 
test  patterns  presented  to  the  observers.  The 
results  show  the  characteristics  predicted  by  a 
statistical  theory  of  vision  developed  to  account 
for  the  influence  of  the  added  noise,  which  was 
reported  earlier. 

In  particular,  these  measurements  make  it 

possible  to  calculate  independent  values  for 
quantum  efficiency  and  for  Rose's  factor  of 
certainty. 

List  of  Symbols 

the  area  of  summation  of  the  eye 
the  effective  area  of  the  stimulus  (see 

Beurle  et  al(2)) 

the  area  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye 
a  factor  dependent  on  the  mechanism of 

noise  integration within  a  summation  area 

threshold  contrast  (^1/I) 
the  luminance  of  a  display 
the  factor  of  certainty 
the  number  of  scintillations  per  unit  area 

per  second 

the  number  of  events  in  a  sample 
the  mean number  of  events  in a  sample 
the  number  of  quanta  per  photopic  lumen 
the  energy  of  a  scintillation  at  the  minimum 
- S α P 
OP 
the  quantum efficiency 
the  integration  time  of  the  eye 
the  distance  of  an  observer  from a  display 

(1) 

In  a  previous  paper(1)  a  statistical  theory 
of  visual  thresholds  was  reported  which  accounts 
for  the  influence  both  of  quantum  noise  and  of 
visual  noise  added  to  the  test  patterns.  This 
theory  finds  particular  application  in  the  pre­
diction  of  thresholds  of  vision  through  image 
intensifying  systems  which  superimpose  system 
noise  on  the  observed  scenes. 
In  a  subsequent 
paper(2)  an  additional  factor  was  introduced  to 
allow  for  alternative  mechanisms  of  noise 

In  particular,  an  unequivocal  experi­

Here  we  report  the  results  of  continued 
experimental  work  designed  to  validate  and  to 
extend  these  theories  of  vision  w i th  noisy 
displays. 
mental  demonstration  of  the  predicted  double-
threshold  response  is  reported.  An  experimental 
measurement  of  the  background  luminance,  for 
which  the  stimulus-threshold  contrast  has  a  mini­
mum  value,  allows  the  calculation  of  two 
important  parameters  of  vision.  These  factors 
are :-

(i)  The  quantum  efficiency  (So)  of  the  eye, 

defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  number  of 
quanta  effectively  absorbed  at  the 
retina  to  the  number  of  quanta  entering 
the  eye. 
cal  factor  representative  of  sensi­
t i v i t y. 

Thus,  SO  is  a  purely  physi­

( i i)  The  factor  of  certainty  (k).  A 

detection  threshold  in  the  theory  is 
considered  to  be  the  result  of  a 
decision  with  a  predetermined  prob­
ability  of  freedom  from  error,  k  is  a 
measure  of  this  probability; 
it  is  a 
subjective  factor  which  can  be  varied 
by  changing  the  instructions  given  to 
observers. 

In  normal  visual  threshold  determinations, 
these  factors  are  not  readily  separable; 
it  is 
the  addition  of  the  extra  quantum-like  noise  to 
the  test  patterns  that  permits  their  separation. 
In  our  experiments,  these  factors  were  determined 
for  a  range  of  observers. 

2.  The  experimental  system 

The  added  visual  noise  used  in  the  experi­
ment  was  quantum  noise  of  the  type  obtained  in 
the  output  from  an  image  intensifier.  The  noise 
arises  in  intensifying  systems  as  a  result  of 
the  detection  of  individual  photons  at  the 
input  photocathode.  The  form  of  the  added  noise 
is  similar  to  that  of  retinal  quantum  noise, 
except  that  the  'quantum'  presented  to  the 
retina  by  the  intensifier  is  much  larger.  To 
avoid  confusion,  the  added  noise  w i ll  be 
referred  to  as  ' s c i n t i l l a t i on  noise1. 

The  experimental  realisation  of  such  a 

noisy  display  consisted  of  cinematographically 
projected  loops  of  film  of  electronically 
produced  random  dot  patterns.  The  presence  of 
a  stimulus  was  signalled  by  an  increase  in  the 
mean  s c i n t i l l a t i on  density  over  the  area  of  the 
stimulus.  The  individual  scintillations  were 
small  (~  3  min.  of  arc  in  diameter),  circular, 
of  uniform  energy,  and  of  very  high  contrast 
relative  to  the  background. 

Psycho-physical  measurements  of  detection 

thresholds  were  made  on  the  display  using  a 
modified  method  of  limits.  The  subjects 

334 

Session No.  7  Pattern Recognition I General  Papers 

controlled  the  luminance  of  the  display.  The 
contrast  was  maintained  constant  for  an  i n d i(cid:173)
vidual  threshold  measurement. 

3.  The  predicted  effect  on  thresholds  of  the 

added  noise 

In  a  paper  by  Beurle  et  al 

a  general 

(2) 

expression  is  derived  for  the  threshold  contrast 
of  a  stimulus  in  a  noisy  display.  A  summary  of 
the  derivation  of  the  theory  is  given  below; 
for  the  detail  the  original  paper  should  be 
consulted. 

(i)  The  suggestion  that  s t a t i s t i c al 
fluctuations  in  the  arrival  of  photons  may 
present  a  fundamental  limit  to  the  performance 
of  the  eye  at  low  light  levels  was  f i r st  fully 
(3,4)  The  basis  of  Rose's 
developed  by  Rose. 
theory  is  an  ideal  detector  continually  sampling 
a  s t a t i s t i c a l ly  stationary  random  display  of 
equal  energy  events  resulting  in  a  mean  count 
of  rf  events.  An  incremental  increase  An  in  the 
number  of  events  in  a  sample  w i ll  be  required 
for  the  presence  of  the  increment  to  be  detected 
against  the  presence  of  the  s t a t i s t i c al  fluc(cid:173)
tuations  around  the  mean 
.  The  magnitude  of 
the  increment  required  for  a  predetermined 
certainty  of  detection  is  given  by 

[1] 

A Poisson  distribution  for  the  detected  photons 
is  assumed  in  representing  the  magnitude  of  the 
noise  present  in a sa.mple by  /N.  k  is  a  con(cid:173)
stant  named  by  Rose  "the  limiting  signal  to  noise 
ratio  of  the  device"  but  is  referred  to  in  this 
paper  as  the  factor  of  certainty.  The  notions 
of  signal  detection  theory  are  considered  in 
depth  in  papers  by  Tanner  and  Swets'^)  and 
G r e e n .^ 

This  equation  represents  the  effect  on 
detection  of  quantum  noise  in  the  background 
arising  in  the  process  of  detection  of  light 
at  the  retina. 

( i i) 

In  the  theory  discussed  by  Beurle  et 

al(2)  a  primary  detection  unit  is  postulated 
which  samples  within  an  area  of  radial  symmetry 
the  dimensions  of  which  are  a  function  of  the 
mean  background  luminance  and  are  stimulus 
invariant. 
Integration  of  the  light  f a l l i ng 
within  two  summation  areas  strategically  placed 
with  respect  to  the  retinal  image  of  the  stimulus 
enables  the  signal  and  background  contributions 

to  be  determined.  The  difference between 
these  outputs  is  taken  as  an  indicator  of  the 
presence  of  a  signal.  A  spatial  weighting 
function  for  the  summation  unit  has  been 
determined  that  gives  a  reasonable  f it  to 
experimental  data  on  the  detection  thresholds 
of  a  range  of  disc  sizes  and  contrasts. 

( i i i)  Rose's  equation  is  combined  with 
the  empirical  spatial  weighting  function  and 
data  from  the  literature  on  summation  time  and 
pupil  area as  a  function  of  background  luminance. 
These  together  enable  threshold  predictions  to 
be  made  of  the  detection  thresholds  of  relatively 
complex  patterns  on  uniform backgrounds  at  low 
light  levels. 
In  the  higher  scotopic  and  in 
the  mesopic  range  of  luminances  for  patterns 
with  extended  borders, a  linear  or  edge  detector 
replaces  the  primary  or  area  detector. 

(iv)  The  theory  is  extended  to  deal  with 

scintillation  noise  in  visual  displays  by 
determining  the  additional  statistical  fluc(cid:173)
tuation  in  the  light  detected  at  the  retina. 
The  total  noise  in  the  output  of  a  summation 
unit  is  calculated  as  the  sum of  the  quantum 
noise  generated  at  the  retina  and  the  scin(cid:173)
tillation  noise  derived  from  the  display.  The 
general  expression  for  the  threshold  contrast 
of  a  stimulus  in  a  noisy  display  is  shown(2) 

The  terms  within  the  square  root  sign  can 

be  identified  with  the  two  sources  of  noise. 
The  f i r st  term  is  representative  of  retinal 
quantum  noise,  and  decreases  with  increasing 
display  luminance.  The  second  term  is  repre(cid:173)
sentative  of  the  s c i n t i l l a t i on  noise,  and 
increases  with  increasing  display  luminance. 
The  threshold  contrast  has  a  minimum  when  the 
terms  within  the  root  sign  have  a  minimum.  At 
this  minimum,  when  the  stimulus  is  large  com-
pared  with  the  summation  area,  it  is  further(2)  ' 
shown  that: 

The  theory  thus  predicts  that,  for  a  given 
stimulus,  a  graph  of  threshold  contrast  against 
display  luminance  w i ll  the  "U"-shaped. 
display  without  added  noise,  within  the  luminance 
range  of  our  experiments,  the  threshold  contrast 
is  known  to  decrease  monotonically  with 
increasing  background  luminance. 
Brodhum^7?). 

(Kdnig  and 

In  a 

4.  Experimental  results 

A ll  of  the  subjects  investigated  to  date 
have  shown  the  "U"-shaped  threshold  contrast 
curves  predicted  by  the  theory. 
In  addition  to 
a  general  investigation  for  a  range  of  stimuli, 

Session No.  7  Pattern Recognition I General  Papers 

335 

a  large number of measurements were made using 
four  subjects,  the  same  stimulus  and  identical 
noise  films.  The mean  curves  calculated  from 
these  results  are  plotted  in Fig.l.  The 
expected error in a threshold plotted on  the 
mean curve  for any  subject was  less  than 0*05 
log.  units; 
this  figure  includes  the  effect  of 
within-session and  day-to-day  variations.  Exam­
ination  of  the  four  curves  reveals  a  range 
between  subjects  of  0.8  log.  units  in  the  value 
of  the  background  luminance  at  the  contrast 
minima.  C.A.,  R.H.  and A.G.  show a change from 
peripheral  to  foveal  vision  at  the  high-contrast, 
high-luminance  end  of  the  visibility  curve. 
With  subject  P.K.,  it  was  found  that  peripheral 
vision  gave  increased  visibility within  the 
luminance  range  of  the  system. 

Substitution  of  the  observed  values  for 
Qmin  into  equation  [5]  enabled  the  quantum 
efficiencies  of  the  observers  to  be  calculated. 
The  calculated values  of  S  ,  and  the values of 
the  various  parameters  of  the  display  and  the 
visual  system,  appropriate  to  the  contrast 
threshold  at  the  lowest  background  level  investi­
gated,  were  inserted  into  equation  [4],  and k 
was  evaluated  for each observer.  The values  of 
αp(8) and  T(9,10)  were  obtained  from  the  l i t­
erature.  The  results  are  tabulated  below. 

stimulus  over  the  smallest  range  of  background 
luminances. 

The  calculated  quantum efficiencies  fall 

within  the  range of 0.5% - 52  calculated by 
Rose  (3)  on  the  assumption  that  k = 5.  These 
efficiencies are  less  than the 62 derived by 
Barlow,(11)  but  considering  the  large  number  of 
parameters  involved  in  the  determination,  the 
agreement  is  reasonable. 

5.  Conclusions 

The experiments  reported here were per­
formed at  low background  luminances with an 
upper  limit  of  about-2  log.  ml..  Experiments 
now  in  progress  are  not  subject  to  this  limit, 
and thresholds can be determined by varying 
the  contrast  instead  of  the  overall  luminances 
of  the  display.  Several  phenomena  are  being 
investigated,  including  the  peripheral/foveal 
changeover.  It  is  thought  that  this  work  will 
lead  to an extension of  the  empirical  model  of 
the  visual  detection  process  for  patterns 
immersed  in noise. 

6.  Acknowledgements 

The work  presented  in  this  paper  has 

been  carried out within  the Department  of 
Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineering  at  the 
University  of  Nottingham,  under  a  contract 
sponsored by the Signals Research and Develop­
ment Establishment,  Christchurch,  Hants. 

7.  References 

1.  Beurle,  R.  L.,  Daniels,  M.  V.,  Hills,  B.  L. 

"Image  intensifier  design  and  visual 
performance  at  low  light  levels". 
Proceedings of  the Fourth  Symposium on 
Photo-Electronic  Image Devices. 
Advances  in  Electronics  and  Electron 
Physics, Vol.  28B, Academic Press,  1969. 

(These  results  are  calculated  attributing  to β a 
value  of  0.1,  see  Beurle  et  al( 2 )). 

Observer C.A.  was  able  to  see  the  stimulus 
over  the  greatest  luminance  range;  examination 
of  the  table of  results  shows  that  he has  a 
relatively high quantum efficiency  and  a  low 
factor  of  certainty.  P.K.  has  a  similar  quantum 
efficiency  to  C.A.,  but  his  higher  factor  of 
certainty  resulted  in his  reduced  range  of  back­
grounds  for which  the  stimulus was  visible. 
Observer R.H.  had a low quantum efficiency 
relative  to  P.K.,  but  his  lower  factor  of 
certainty  allowed him to  detect  the  stimulus 
over  a  larger  range.  Subject  C.A.,  having both 
a  low So and a high k, was  able  to detect  the 

2.  Beurle, R.  L., Daniels, M.  V., Hills,  B.  L. 

"Visual  perception  and  the  influence  of 
visual  noise". 
Conference  on Artificial  Intelligence, 
Washington,  1969.  (In  the  press) 

International  Joint 

3.  Rose,  A.  "The  relative  sensitivities  of 
television  pick-up  tubes,  photographic 
film,  and the human eye".  Proc.  Inst. 
Radio Engrs.,  30,  393-400,  (19A2). 

A.  Rose,  A.  "The  sensitivity performance  of 

the human eye on an absolute scale" 
J.O.S.A.,  38,  196-208,  (19A8). 

5.  Swets, A.  and Tanner,  W.  P.  "A decision­

making  theory  of  visual  detection". 
Psy. Rev., 61, A01-A09,  (195A) . 

336 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

Green,  D.  M. 

"Psychoacoustics  and 

detection  theory". 
Am  32,  1189-1203,  (1960). 

J.  Acoust.  Soc, 

Konig,  A.  and  Brodhun,  E.  Sitzungsber, 

Preuss  Akad.  Wiss.,  Berlin,  27,  641-644, 
(1889). 

De  Groot  and  Gebhard,  "Pupil  size  as 
determined  by  adapting  luminance". 
J.O.S.A.,  42,  7,  492-495,  (1952). 

Barlow,  H.  B. 

"Temporal  and  spatial 

summation  in  human  vision  at  different 
background  intensities".  J.  Physiol., 
141,  337-350,  (1958). 

Graham,  C.  H.  and  Kemp,  E.  H. 

"Brightness 

discrimination  as  a  function  of  the 
duration  of  the  increment  in  intensity". 
J.  Gen.  Physiol.,  21,  635-650,  (1938). 

Barlow,  H.  B. 

"Measurements  of  the 

quantum  efficiency  of  discrimination  in 
human  scotopic  vision".  J.  Physiol., 
160,  169-188,  (1962). 

Session No.  7  Pattern Recognition I General  Papers 

337 

