Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

365 

VISUAL-TACTILE  SYMBIOTIC  SYSTEM FOR STEREOMETRIC 

PATTERN RECOGNITION 

S.  Aida,  L.  Cordelia  and  N.  Ivacevic 

Laboratorio  di  Cibernetica  del  CNR 

Arco  Felice,  Napoli,  Ttaly 

Abstract 

This  paper  describes  a  preliminary  compo(cid:173)

nent  for  a  symbotic  system  of  visual  and  tactile 
senses.  The  concept  of  symbiotic  system  w i ll 
play  an  important  role  in  the  realization  of 
a r t i f i c i al  intelligence.  That  i s,  visual  and 
tactile  sensors  are  the  essential  ones  for  both 
recognizing  and  handling  any  kind  of  object. 

For  correct  manipulation  of  objects  it  is 

necessary  to  know  their  spacial  characteristics, 
as,  for  example,  shape  and  position. 

Information  on  these  characteristics  of 

objects  is  picked  up  by  human  beings  through 
visual  and  tactile  senses.  Before  direct 
contact  with  the  object,  when  the  visual  sense 
plays  an  exclusive  role,decision  (depending  on 
the  principal  task)  is  based  only  on  optical 
information.  From  the  moment  of  touch,  both 
optical  and  tactile  information  begin  to  be 
coordinated.  At  this  moment  the  visual  sense 
can  be  partly  released  for  other  tasks  and  the 
tactile  sense  may  become  dominant  In  picking  up 
object 
It 

information. 
is  clear  that  visual  control  usually 

has  the  dominant,  but  not  absolute,  role  in  the 
recognition  and  manipulation  of  objects. 

The  system  proposed  here  is  a  new  kind  of 
system  wherein  an  obscure  visual  image  can  be 
identified  as  a  clear  Image  by  the  coordination 
of  visual  and  tactile  senses. 

This  system  is  quite  effective  when  the 

object  is  cubic  and  inseparable  from  its  circum(cid:173)
stances,  as  in  the  case  of  the  recognition  and 
handling  of  objects  in  industrial  use,  under(cid:173)
water  application,  and  so  on. 

Introduction 

Solving  problem  of  stereometric  pattern 

intelligence  systems. 

recognition  is  important  for  realizing  practical 
a r t i f i c i al 
likely  that  dynamic  visual-tactile  information 
processing  w i ll  be  used  in  several  such  man-
machine  systems. 
mainly  the  tactile  information  processing 
techniques  for  designing  a  symbiotic  system. 

In  this  paper  we  w i ll  describe 

It  appears 

Some  studies  of  tactile  displays  have  been 

made;  for  example,  a  conference  on  tactile  dis(cid:173)
plays  was  held  at  Stanford  Research  Institute, 
Menlo  Park,  California,  on  April  3  and  4,1969. 
A  major  objective  of  this  conference  was  to 
examine  current  neurophysiological  and  psycho(cid:173)
logical  theories  to  determine  the  extent  that 
a  rational  basis  for  the  design  of  dynamic  tac(cid:173)
t i le  displays  could  be  developed,  (1) 

In  general,  the  tactile  model  includes  a 
pressure-electric  transformation  element,  and 
this  system  is  modeled  after  its  physiological 
counterpart. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  sensory  nerve 
it.  ending  which  controls  the  tactile  sense 
and 
exist  in  skin.  The  particular  model  eliminates 
the  function  of  the  temperature,  pain  and  touch 
sensation  of  the  tactile  sense  and  arranges  a 
piezo-electric  element  of  strain  sensor  corre(cid:173)
sponding  to  pressure  sense. 

The  tactile  sensor  to  be  described  here 
consists  of  normal  on-off  elements.  The  fea(cid:173)
ture  of  this  tactile  system  is  to  provide  the 
finger  with  tactile  sensors  to  move  along  the 
surface  of  a  object  when  one  of  the  sensors 
touches 

i t. 

Stereometric  pattern  recognition  is  made 
use  of  in  the  system  for  manipulating  objects. 
The  particular  device  for  manipulation  is 
called  a  manipulator;  it  is  an  a r t i f i c i al  hand 
with  a  tactile  sense.  We  consider  these  sys(cid:173)
tems  to  correspond  to  human  sense  organs  and 
call  them  visual  and  tactile  systems,  respec(cid:173)
tively.  The  visual  system  is  responsible  for 
spatial  information  and  the  tactile  system  for 
detailed  shape  information  of  objects.  The 
purpose  of  this  symbiotic  system  is  to  provide 
a  kind  of  a r t i f i c i al  intelligence  by  using  both 
visual  and  tactile  information. 

System  design  is  an  Important  part  of  this 
In  order  to  provide  a  framework 

kind  of  study. 
for  this  symbiotic  system,  a  general  approach 
to  its  system  design  has  proposed  by  Aida  and 
Kinoshita  (2),  the  experimental  structure  is 
illustrated  there. 

System  Design 

An  important  feature  of  this  symbiotic 
system  Is  that  the  information  processing  is 
carried  out  by  coordinating  visual  and  tactile 
information.  The  system  described  here  can  be 
actualized  in  two  forms:  one  is  an  open-loop 
structure  and  the  other  a  closed-loop  one  which 
includes  learning  techniques. 

In  the  open-loop  symbiotic  system,  the 

output  of  the  visual  sensor  serves  as  an  input 
to  the  tactile  sensor,  and  this  system  can  rep(cid:173)
resent  a  time  sequence  of  events  from  visual  to 
tactile  sensor.  A  simple  block  diagram  is  i l(cid:173)
lustrated  in  Fig.  1  (a). 

Although  in  Fig.  1  (b)  the  visual  sensor 

and  the  tactile  sensor  are  in  chronological 

366 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

sequence,  the results from the  tactile sensor 
are  fed  back  to  influence what  will  later occur 
at  the visual sensor,  for example,  a grey level 
or scanning method control.  The resultant  out(cid:173)
put  of  the combination appears as  the image of ft 
visual  display,  and  the effects of  changes in the 
individual  blocks on the resultant output are 
different  for  the open-loop and  closed-loop  con(cid:173)
figurations  . 

In  the  open-loop  symbiotic  system,  visual 
processing  is only  used  to  decide  the position 
of  the object, whose  image  is obscure,  then  the 
tactile sense moves towards the object and 
touches  its predetermined  part  to get  a detec(cid:173)
tion matrix  for  the  object.  After  matrix pro(cid:173)
cessing,  tactile  information  is  converted  into 
a visual  signal to present a clear  image of  the 
visual desplay, but  this process has only been 
for  the  edges of  the object. 

Therefore, pattern recognition by the open 

loop symbiotic systems  is  carried out  step by 
step as follows: 

1)  Range finding and locating of  the di(cid:173)
rection of  gaze with respect  to visual 
sensor.  Visual  image  of  the  object  is 
partly  or  completely  obsucre. 

2) Positioning of ohscure part by  the di(cid:173)

vided area on the image screen. 

3) Tactile sensor moves  to  the object and 

touches  the  obscure  part  of  the object 
on the images screen. 

4)  Detection matrix is made on the basis 

of 3) . 

5) Convert  tactile  information  to  visual 

display  signal. 

6) Loop 3)  to 5)  until  the obscure part 

on the image screen is cleared. 

A block diagram for the open-loop and the 
closed-loop  symbiotic  system  is  shown  in Fig.2, 
it  shows  conceptually  a block diagram of  the 
symbiotic  system with visual  and tactile senses. 
This system consists of  four parts;  a part which 
processes  information from the visual  sense,  for 
example, a vidicon camera, a part which processes 
those from the tactile sense,  a part which inte(cid:173)
grates the information, and a display device 
which indicates  the process. 

The initial scene of objects obtained by the 

vidicon camera and  its displayed  image  is  ob(cid:173)
scure.  It  has been  impossible  to recognize ob(cid:173)
jects with  this  primary  image- only.  However  this 
initial  information  establishes  the  existence  and 
the  position of  the  objects.  Variations  in 
brightness are extracted by using the procedure 
of  lateral  inhibition,  and  then the digitalized 
image  is cut off  by an appropriate threshold val(cid:173)
ue.  The process provides  the beginnings of fea(cid:173)
ture extraction and  the recognition of objects, 
but  for  indestinct  features.  The  finger with 
the  tactile  sensor  is  stretched out,  and  the 

features of  the  parts  of  objects  are  extracted 
by being touched with the finger. 

The tactile system searches out and recog(cid:173)
nizes  states  of  the  object  surface  for  obscure 
parts  of  the  picture.  The  feature  is  taken 
by using a contact distribution which takes 
account  both of  tactile  information and of  the 
finger's movement.  The feature on  the  image is 
transformed to a line drawing picture which  is 
processed with the detection matrix,  elements 
of which are abstracted by the contact distri(cid:173)
bution generated by the tactile sensor.  The 
function D 
A  (u.v)  as  shown in Fig.3 is defined as 
mn 

(u,v)  of  two iunctions p(u,v)  and 

It  is  considered  that  the  output  D 
indicates 
the same features pattern in the window A  as 
the  pattern of  the  detection matarix.  If  the 
output  equals  zero,  the  feature  of  object  is 
not  extracted  in  the window. 

Then,  the system adjusts  its  parameters, 

which  are gradually varied with  the observation 
of Dmn in the window established from the  result 
of  recognition.  Three  kinds of modified  parame(cid:173)
ters are considered,  they are processed acording 
to  the following order:  1)  focus of vidicon 
camera,  2)  contrast,  3)  elements of  detection 
martrix.  First,  it  is  necessary  to  adjust  the 
locus  so  that  the  clearest  feature of  the pat(cid:173)
tern  can be obtained.  If  the  focus  is  off  the 
point,  the image becomes obscure.  In the sym(cid:173)
biotic system,  the focus is adjusted by a visu(cid:173)
al  sensor driving signal  as shown in Fig.2,  and 
the  distance  from  the  position  of  finger  is 
calculated. 

in  the 

Second,  the  constrast  is  gradually  adjust(cid:173)
If  the  contrast  is  highly  intensive,  the 

ed. 
feature  of  pattern  is  lost.  The A 
picture  is  established as  the unknown part  for 
the recognition of  the picture and  stored pat(cid:173)
tern.  As  the part of  the object  corresponding 
to A 
parameters  of visual  system  like  contrast  or 
brightness are adjusted BO that the recognition 
will  coincide with  that  from  tactile  sense. 
Moreover,  a shadow pattern of  the object  is 
varied with  chages  in  the derection of  the  light 
thrown on  it  and  the  feature of  the  pattern  is 
extracted more easily. 

is recognized by the  tactile sense, 

Third,  the  element  of  detection matrix  is 
changed correspoding  to  the  sensitivity value 
of D  .  As described above, the image obtained 
from the visual  scene  is  transformed automati(cid:173)
cally  into  a scene with  clear edges.  With  this 
image,  the whole scene is recognised. 
Thus,  in  the closed-loop symbiotic system, 

whenever  the 'object  is  touched by  the  tactile 
sensor,  the  tactile  information controls param(cid:173)
eters of visual aensor,  such as the threshold 
level of the visual-processing system, and a 
clearer  image results. 

Session No. 8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

367 

Artificial  Tactile  Perceptions 

The assumption underlying tactile explora(cid:173)
tion  is  that  if  a device  is  able  to  feel  a  con(cid:173)
tact  situation with  the object  and  to  identify 
automatically  the  surfaces  which  limit  i t,  then 
it  is  possible  to  get  a  quantity  of  Information 
sufficient  to  enble  a  computer  to  characterize 
the object  from a  geometrical  point  of view. 

Using sensors of  a particular kind,  it may 
be possible to characterize an object  also from 
other points of view,  thermal,  chemical, and so 
on. 

The computer can make some elementary deci(cid:173)
sions about  the shape and  the kind of  the exam(cid:173)
ined object and subsequently can give some 
simple orders to an actuator. 

Computer  Simulations  of  Stereometric  Forms 

A lot of methods have been proposed for 

It  is 

visual  processing  (3).  This  section,  therefore, 
describes  some  computer  simulations of  the  tac(cid:173)
tile-processing system which  is under  develop(cid:173)
ment  to  realize  this  kind  of  system. 
difficult  to  say  how  large  a part  the  tactile 
sense  plays  in  the  field  of  pattern  recognitions. 
As  the first  step in this determination, we con(cid:173)
sider  the  exploration oi  space  patterns by  di(cid:173)
rect  contact  only,  that  is,  by  the  sense of 
touch.  Then, we are trying to optimize the 
prehension  of  objects  at  a  lower  level  in  the 
hierarchy of manipulation control,  dependent  on 
their  stereometric  forms.. 

In order  to accomplish  a classification of 
stereometic forms we used the prepositional cal(cid:173)
culus with operations already known from Boolean 
algebra.  Each proposition is an affirmation or 
negation of  the presence of  a certaion feature 
which an object could possess.  A certain com(cid:173)
bination of  propositions gives a mathematical 
model  of  a  spacial  form.  This  procedure make  it 
possible  to  use  the  computer  in  the  pracess  of 
the  classification and  recognition of  spacial 
patterns. 
If  the  concept  of  the  object  corre(cid:173)
sponds  to  that  of  the  abstract  model.  The 
answer should be satisfactory. 

Obviously,  it  is  not  necessary  to  take  into 

account  all  established  propositions,  bux  only 
characteristic ones,  because complete classifi(cid:173)
cation  hopeless  if  all  possible  inputs  are 
considered.  However.,  classification  carried 
out  in phases.— A,  B are  classified  in  phase  I, 
and  C,  D in phase  II — and manifests a large 
economy as regards the complete classificatory 
system. 

As an example, a choice tree is given, as 

shown  in  Fig.  4;  it  consists  of  a  series  of 
phases by means of which one gradually arrives 
at more precise  identification. 

In the decision process, we start with the 
assembly of  initial  propositions,  which  form  the 
basis of  the  calculus, marked with: 

From  n element s  ot  the  base  L,  we  can  theoreti(cid:173)
cally  form  2  members  of  all  possible  combina-
t ions  as  follows: 

(The sign over  the  letter means negation) 

In  this  case,  the  number  of  conjunc(cid:173)

If  some  basic  propositions  are  joined  by 
logical  connections,  the  disjunction  s(L)  will 
have some empty members  (the values of which 
are  zero). 
tions  is  reduced  to  2  -  k,  where  k is  the 
number of  eliminated conjunctions.  As  k 
becomes bigger,  the  logical  connection between 
basic propositions  becomes  stronger.  The  re(cid:173)
maining  conjunctions  form the  reduced disjunc(cid:173)
tion  r(L)  which  characterizes  one  determined 
object,  i.e.,  a mathematical  model  which  can 
easily be represented by a string of  numbers. 
Logical  connections between the proposi(cid:173)
tions  Li  could  be  carried  out  in  different  ways. 
Here we have used the form of equality, which, 
within certain limits, can be treated as an 
equation and processed numerically on the com(cid:173)
puter. 

As an example, here is a group of characer-

istic  propositions with  the marked phases  of 
classification mentioned before: 

A  There  is  contact  with  the  object. 

I 
II  B  Surface  is  curved. 
C  Surface  is  plane. 

III  D  "Vertical" edges are parallel. 

E  "Vertical"  edges connect  at one 

JV  F  Three pairs of  parallel  surfaces 

point. 

exist. 

V  G  Distances between neighbouring 

vertices  are  equal. 

etc . 

This  group  is  not  definite,  it  can  be 

changed and enlarged, depending on the principal 
task  of  classification. 

Combinations  of  propositions  existing  in 

the  description  of  the  object  do  not  exhaust  all 
theoretical  possibilities.  Besides  conclusions 
of  logical  connections  between propositions 
which allow us  to  distinguish between objects, 
it  is  also  possible  to  find  common  conditions 
for the variants  in  one  class  of  objects. 

Considering  the  disjunction  chracteristics 

described above,  the  logical  connection for a 
cube, using the equality form, would be: 

r(L)  -  A.  B.  C.  D.  E.  F. G 

giving, as a result, a new proposition: 

L  :  Body is a cube 

or 

L = A. B. C. D. E. F. G 

368 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

Because  the  density  of  the  sensors  is  low, 
the  model  obtained  is  more  or  less  approximate. 
In  the  beginning,  we  limited  our  exploration  to 
simple  objects  with  plane  surfaces. 

Input  date  have  to  be  obtained  by  scanning 

the  object.  Any  touch  of  the  object  by  the 
sensors  corresponds  to  one  plane; 
the  equation 
of  this  is  easy  to  find  using  analytic  geometry. 
In  this  way,  the  touched  body  w i ll  be  repre(cid:173)
sented  by  one  polyhedron  which  envelops  the 
body  and  wkich  is  composed  of  the  group  of 
planes'  whose  equations  are  known.  Co-ordinates 
of  the  vertices  and  equations  of  the  edges  are 
easy  to  calculate. 
plane  is  the  same  as  the  equation  of  the  sup(cid:173)
ported  surface  of  the  polyhedron). 

(The  equation  of  the  support 

If  we  suppose  that  an  object  is  touched  at 

point  p  (determined  by  the  vector  r1)  by_the 
sensor  s  (determined  by  the  unit  vector  r  ) , 
then  the  equation  of  the  tangential  plane  i s: 

Then,  if  the  object  is  scanned  by  touching  in 
more  points,  we  can  have  the  assembly  of  all 
equations  of  the  surfaces  of  the  enveloped 
polyhedron,  which  gives  us  the  mathematical  model 
of  the  object. 

A  flow  chart  of  stereometric  forms  using 

tactile  information  Is  shown  in  Fig.  5. 
In  the 
flow  chart  an  input  matrix  is  obtained  by  tac(cid:173)
t i le  exploration  of  the  object,  measuring  the 
co-ordinates  of  the  touch  points  and  the  two 
angles  which  determine  the  tangential  plane  in 
each  point,  using  a  convenient  reference  system. 
The  f i r st  three  numbers  in  one  row  are  Cartesian 
co-ordinates:  x,  y,  and  z  respectively,  and  the 
following  two  are  values  of  the  azimuth  and 
inclination  angles. 
five  columns  and  as  many  rows  as  there  are  touch 
points  with  different  tangential  planes. 

In  this  way  the  matrix  has 

In  the  present  stage  of  the  work  the  number 

and  equations  of  tangential  planes  which  deter(cid:173)
mine  enveloping  polyhedron  are  computed,  then 
the  angles  between  planes  and  the  locations  of 
the  polyhedron's  vertices  as  intersection  points 
of  three  or  more  planes.  The  results  from  these 
computations  could  be  considered  a  mathematical 
model  of  the  object.  Then  the  program  identi(cid:173)
fies  perpendicularity  and  parallelism  between 
planes,  if  any  exist.  Having  a ll  these  results, 
the  program  confronts  them  with  basic  proposi(cid:173)
tions,  which  could  be  assumed  as  the  logical 
model  of  the  object. 

The  second  part  of  the  program,  which  is 
realized  only  in  principle  but  so  far  not  yet 
written  in  computer  language.,  provides,  on  the 
basis  of  confronting  real  and  theoretical  dis(cid:173)
junctions,  and  by  the  use  of  baaic  propositional 
calculus,  to  obtain  logical  connections  between 
basic  propositions,  with  regard-to  the  created 
object  and  to  make  decisions  about  the  geometry 
of  the  object. 

Experimental  Model 

In  the  f i r st  step  of  an  experimental  study, 
tactile  information  is  taken  by  one  finger  with 
four  sensors  which  are  perpendicular  t6  each 
other,  as  shown  in  Fig.6.  The  finger  is  able  to 
keep  in  contact  with  the  surface  of  an  object, 
moving  along  i t. 

The  finger  consists  of  a  rigid  support  ter(cid:173)

minated  with  a  semisphere.  On  the  surface  of 
the  semisphere,  a  number  of  small-pressure  sen(cid:173)
sitive  on-off  sensors  w i ll  be  distributed, 
according  to  geometrical  c r i t e r i a;  however,  this 
experimental  finger  is  only  distributed  with 
four  sensors,  s t i ll  according  to  geometrical 
criteria.  A  set  of  motors  driven  by  electronic 
logic  moves  the  finger  in  the  space.  The  orien(cid:173)
tation  of  the  finger  remains  unchanged  with 
respect  to  the  three  chosen  axes:  x,y,and  z. 

The  surface  equation  is  determined  by  the 
position  of  the  finger,  when  the  sensor  is  in 
contact  with  the  surface  which  delimits  the 
object  and  by  the  identification  of  the  sensor 
concerned. 

If  the  finger  is  able  to  move,  keeping  in 

contact  with  the  surface  which  delimits  the 
object,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  the  group  of 
equations  of  the  surfaces  whose  envelope  ap(cid:173)
proximates  the  shape  of  the  object. 

The  block  scheme  of  the  electronic  logic, 

which  commands  the  control  system  of  the  finger, 
is  shown  in  Fig.7.  The  scheme  shows  the  elec(cid:173)
tronic  concerning  only  one  sensor  for  movements 
of  the  finger  on  the  x  and  y  surface.  The  elec(cid:173)
tronic  circuit  is  similar  for  a ll  the  sensors. 
In  Fig.7,  a  generoc  sensor  is  symbolized 
by  the  switch  S  .  S 
is  closed,  when  the  i-th 
sensor  is  in  contact  with  the  object,  and  the 
finger  moves  along  the  object  according  to  the 
predetermined  direction  of  the  switch  S  .  That 
i s,  a  signal  proceeds  to  block  A,  the  essential 
element  of  which  is  an  SCR.  The  voltage  V  ,  at 
the  output  of  A,  goes  to  the  block  B  which  con(cid:173)
trols  the  motors Mx and  M 
in  order  to  move  the 
y 
finger  in  the  direction  dj  associated  with  the 
sensor  S  .  Let  us  suppose  that  the  sensor  loses 
its  contact  owing  to  the  S  being  opened.  The 
block  is  such  that  V  is  s t i ll  present,  to  try  to 
make  new  contact.  We  permit  the  finger  to  move 
the  same  direction  di  up  to  the  maximum  constant 
length: 
direction  perpendicular  to  d  ,  up  to  the  maximum 
contant  length  if  there  is  no  contact; 
following  movement  is  imposed  towards  the  direc(cid:173)
tion,  perpendicular  to  the  last  one,  until  the 
switch  makes  contact  with  the  object. 

then  we  impose  a  movement  towards  the 

The  movements  of  the  4-sensored  finger  are 

the 

x 

illustrated  in  Fig.8,  and  the  following  w i ll 
happen: 

1)  contact  is  restored  during  dr. 

2)  contact  is  restored  at  any  moment 

during  the  cycle. 

3) 

contact  is  not  restored  after  the  cycle 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

369 

switches  is  an  important  for  recognizing ob­
jects,  in order  to  determine  the  directions  of 
the  finger's movements  as  shown  in  Fig.  8. 
If 
and  only  if  in  z-plane,  the  sequence  of  the 
switches should be ordered counter-clockwise as 
S  ,  S  ,  then  continuously  S1-,  S2-, 
, S—n/2 
n/2 
where,  n  is  numbers  of  switches  in  the  same 
plane,  and each switch provides the same angle 
on the surface of  a finger. 

From  this  introductory  research,  it  is 
possible  to  point  out  that  the  visual-tactile 
symbiotic  system  is  more  practical  and  efficient 
for  stereometric  pattern  recognitions  than  the 
use of  conventional  methods. 

Acknowlegements 

The  authors would  like  to  express  their 
appreciations  to professor  E.  Caicniello  and 
Ing.  S.  Levialdi  for  their  stimulative  descuss-
ions. 

References 

1)  Special  Issue on Tactile Display Conference, 

IEEE Trans, on Man-Machine System, Vol.MMS-11 
No. 1, March, 1970. 

2)  S. Aida and G. Kinoshita 

Pattern Recognition by  the  Symbiosis of 
Visual  and Tactile Senses. 
Proceedings of  1FAC Kyoto Symposium on System 
Engineering Approach  to  Computer Control, 
Kyoto, Japan, August, 1970. 

3)  For example, A. Guzman 

Computer  Recognition  of  Three-Dimentional 
Objects  in Visual  Scene. 
Project MAC, MIT, December, 1968. 

has been completed. 

Fig.  9 shows the contour made by the 4-
sensored  finger  exploring  the  object.  Thick 
lines  represent  the  contour  of  the  object  when 
the  switch  is  closed,  and  the  fine  lines  the 
cycle as shown in Fig.8.  The points indicated 
by x are the contact-points on the surface of 
the object.  We can draw one contour  line  (thick 
line),  if  we provide  an appropriate  angled 
sensor on the finger.  We are also considering 
using  a  ball  with  tactile  sensors  instead  of  the 
finger  to  recognize  a  surface  in  the  same  plane 
of  the  object. 

Concluding Remarks 

In this paper, we have discussed conceptu*-
ally  the  principles  of  a  visual-tactile  symbiot­
ic  system  combining  stereometric  pattern  recog­
nition  with  tactile  perception  involving  one 
finger  with  4  sensors-  However,  in  computer 
simulation, we  considered only  the  tactile per­
ception of  grasping with  two  fingers  and  provid­
ed  that  the  two  tangential  planes  at  the  point 
of  contact  of  the  fingers  with  the  object  are 
almost  parallel.  For  this  purpose  a  terminal 
device  with  two  fingers  articulated  in  the  pro­
portions of  the  human  hand  has  been partly  real­
ized. 

In  realizations  of  the  symbiotic  system,  in 
order  to  incorporate  the  results  of  tactile  per­
ception discussed here, we can start by arrang­
ing  the explored  area  in  a more  convenient way, 
particularly  adapted  to  the  optical  part  of  the 
system.  We can divided this area with horizon­
tal  planes  distant  one  from  the  other  for  incre­
ment Δ z = 1. In our reference system equations 
of  these  planes  will  be: 

z  =  i, 

(i = 0,  1,  2,  . ..  ,  L) 

If  we  remember  that  the general  equation  for 
tangential  planes determining  the  envelope  of  a 
polyhedron  is: 
Fk(x,y,z)  - 0, 
then  the  common  solution  for  both  equations  will 
be: 

(k = 1,  2,  . ..  ,  n) 

Fk(x,y,i) = 0 
i.e.,  in  explicit  form: 

yk  -  yk(x,i) 
which  will  adjust  the  analytical  expression  for 
intersecting  lines  between  tangential  planes  and 
sets  of  parallel  z-planes. 
If  we  form  quadratic 
martices  in these z-planes,  and  put L  along  in­
tersection lines and 0 on rest, we will have 
some  kind of  binary  digitalized  contour  represen­
tation.  Now we can uniformly consider optical 
and tactile  information. 

In the  tactile model,  the  sequence of 

370 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

371 

372 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

373 

novement  of  direction  d1  whiie  switch  S1  is  closed. 

the  maximum  constant  length  of  direction  d1  while 
switch  S1  is  opened. 
the  maximum  constant  length  of  direction  d2-  while 
switch  S2  is  opened. 

: 

movement  of  direction d1- while  switch  Sr  is  opened; 
such  movement  should  be  continued  until  switch  S1  is 
closed  or  the  system  is  stopped-

Fig.  8  Movements  of  4-sensored  finger. 

374 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

375 

Fig.  9  Contour  line  by  4-sensored  finger. 

