376 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

PATTERN RECOGNITION  BY AN ARTIFICIAL TACTILE  SENSE 

Department  of  Electrical  Engineering,  Chuo  University 

Gen-ichiro  Kinoshita 

Bunkyo-ku,  Tokyo,  Japan 

Shuhei  Aida 

University  of  Electro-Communications 

Chofu-shi,  Tokyo,  Japan 

Masahiro  Mori 

Tokyo  Institute  of  Technology 
Meguroku,  Tokyo,  Japan 

Abstruct 

This  paper  proposes  an  a r t i f i c i al  tactile  pat(cid:173)
tern  recognition  system,  which  combines  recogni(cid:173)
tion  by  touching  the  object  surface  with  an 
a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense  and  recognition  by  grasp(cid:173)
ing  the  object  with  an  a r t i f i c i al  hand. 

The  inspiration  for  this  proposition  was  found 

in  the  function  of  the  tactile  sense  of  a  human 
hand. 

The  fundermental  principle  of  a r t i f i c i al  tac(cid:173)
t i le  pattern  recognition  is  to  process  a  stress 
distribution  that  the  unknown  object  produces  in 
the  a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense  elements. 

In  the  proposed  method,  the  3-dimensional 

stress  distribution  is  partitioned  into  a  2-dimen-
sional  peripheral  pattern  and  a  threshold  dec(cid:173)
rement  by  analogy  with  threshold  phenomena  in  the 
living  body.  The  object  surface  is  recognized  as 
a  sequence  of  the  peripheral  processings  at  each 
threshold  decrement. 

A  simple  experiment  classifying  cylinders  and 

square  pillars  was  performed  by  the  a r t i f i c i al 
hand  with  on-off  switches  instead  of  the  pressure 
sense  elements.  As  the  result,  a  high  r e l i a b i l i ty 
of  recognition  is  obtained. 

1.  Introduction 

A  manipulator  system  extending  the  function  of 

the  human  hand  has  been  carried  out  mainly  for 
In  this  sys(cid:173)
controlling  nuclear  "  hot  cells  ". 
tem,  the  perception  of  the  handled  objects  is 
performed  by  the  visual  and  tactile  senses  of  an 
oparator.  He  can  see  the  object,  but  the  system 
requires  a  closed  loop  to  feed  back  tactile  sen(cid:173)
sory  information  to  the  oparator's  hand.  The  op(cid:173)
erator  senses  only  pressure  which  is  given  by  the 
bilateral  servo  in  the  manipulator  system.  Howev(cid:173)
er,  in  this  system  an  a r t i f i c i al  hand  is  not  being 
operated  by  machine,  but  by  the  operator.  In 
contrast,  the  authors  intend  to  develop  a  system 
for  an  a r t i f i c i al  hand  which  is  operated  automat(cid:173)
ically  by  the  machine. 

In  considering  a  system  for  an  a r t i f i c i al  hand 

or  a  manipulator  system  with  a r t i f i c i al  i n t e l(cid:173)
ligence  for  handling  the  cubic  objects, 
it  is  nec(cid:173)
essary  that  the  system  should  have  the  functions 
to  carry  out  the  various  mechanical  operations 
automatically  with  respect  to  the  results  of 
recognition  of  the  objects.  Therefore,  the  device 

for  operating  an  a r t i f i c i al  hand  should  be  consid 
ered  as  a  single  unit  instead  of  as  an  operator 
plus  the  a r t i f i c i al  senses. 

Studies  of  the  visual  sense  have  been  done  not 

only  in  the  field  of  physiology,  but  also  in  the 
field  of  the  biological  engineering.  Consequently 
it  seems  reasonable  the  tactile  sense  also  should 
be  discussed  from  the  standpoint  of  biological 
engineering  and  technological  applications. 
This  paper  proposes  a  scheme  for  pattern 
recognition  using  an  a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense 
and  presents  the  experimental  results  of  the  pat(cid:173)
tern  recognition  of  objects  being  gripped  by  an 
a r t i f i c i al  hand. 

2.  Tactile  Pattern  Recognition  using  the 
VARISHOLD Method. 

VAR1SH0LD  Method  is  shortened  form  for  a  var-
iable  threshold  method(1).  The  threshold  is  appli 
ed  in  a  discrete  time;its  level  is  variable  in 
each  sampling  time. 

This  section  shows  the  method  of  pattern  reco(cid:173)
gnition  using  VARISHOLD  Method  which  is  consider(cid:173)
ed  as  the  modified  IMICTRON(l).  Several  applicat(cid:173)
ions  of  the  IM1CTR0N  have  already  been  discussed. 
The  most  distinguishing  property  of  the  IMICTRON 
is  its  time-varying  threshold  level  with  a  funct(cid:173)
ion  of  reintegration,  which  makes  it  possible  to 
realize  a  fuzzy  logic,  such  as  required  for  the 
dynamic  visual-pattern-recognition  network. 

It  is  a  matter  of  scientific  knowledge  that 

the  physiological 
levels  vary  and  that  the  living 
body  has  the  properties  of  adaptation.  The  thres(cid:173)
hold  is  a  reference  level  relative  to  external 
stimuli;  its  value  changes  due  to  circumstance. 
The  VARISHOLD  involves  varying  the  threshold  acc(cid:173)
ording  to  the  parameters  of  the  system  as  well  as 
the  input  of  the  system.  So  to  speak,  this  method 
constitutes  the  authors  application  of  the  varia(cid:173)
ble  threshold  of  living  body  to  a  technological 
context. 

2.1  A r t i f i c i al  Tactile  Pattern  Recognition 

In  general,  objects  are  recognized  as  a  visual 

pattern. 
If  pattern  recognition  with  aid  of  the 
visual  sense  is  s k i l l f u ly  constructed,  an  a r t i f i(cid:173)
cial  hand  can  be  easily  used  as  a  manipulator  for 
a  general  purpose  machine  or  as  the  hand  of  a 
robot. 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

377 

face  against  a  surface  of  tactile  sense,  the  str(cid:173)
ess  distribution  rasing  in  the  receptive  field 
corresponding  to  receptive  group  is  shown  in  Fig. 
3.  Its  distribution  is  a  3-dimensional  one.  The 
stress  distribution  is  processed  by  the  informa(cid:173)
tion  for  the  each  threshold.  The  authors  consid(cid:173)
er  the  recognition  of  the  surface  shape  of  an 
object  by  the  following  method. 

2.4  Recognition  of  the  Pressure  Distribution 

From  the  result  of  the  preceeding  section,  the 

pressure  distribution  due  to  the  object  is  rec(cid:173)
ognized  by  the  VARISHOLD  Method. 

Let  R  be  a  region  of  the  receptive  field  and 

let  V(  x,y,z  )  be  the  distribution  of  pressure  in 
R,  and  R  V(  x,y,z  )  are  a  subset  of  3-dimen(cid:173)
sional  huelidean  space  E. 

The  following  steps  are  considered  to  be  the 
process  of  pattern  recognition  of  an  a r t i f i c i al 
hand  with  an  a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense. 
1)  Detecting  quantitatively  the  size  or  form  of 
the  object  from  the  sensing  of  the  hand  which  is 
gripping  the  object. 
2)  Judging  the  state  of  the  object  surface  by  the 
a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense. 
3)  Judging  the  state  of  the  other  surface  by  cha(cid:173)
nging  the  grip  state  of  hand. 
4)  Perceiving  the  object  from  the  information  of 
step  1)  -  step  3).  The  main  discussion  here  is  of 
the  perception  of  the  object  surface  state  of  st(cid:173)
ep  2) . 

2.2  A  Model  of  Tactile  Receptor. 

As  shown  in  F i g . l,  a  simple  model  of  tactile 
sense  is  derived  from  the  physiological  one.  A 
rectangular  box  in  the  figure  indicates  the  rece(cid:173)
ptor  of  Fig.2. 
It  is  well  known  that  the  sensory 
nerve  and  its  ending  which  governs  the  tactile 
sense  exist  in  skin.  The  model  ignores  the  funct(cid:173)
ions  of  temperature,  pain  and  touch  and  arranges 
a  piezo-electric  element  or  strain  sensor  corres(cid:173)
ponding  to  the  pressure  sense. 

Until  the  collagen  fibers  become  aligned  in  the 

direction  of  applied  stress,  the  microscopic  arc(cid:173)
hitecture  of  the  collagen  fibers  in  the  dermis  of 
skin  is  such  as  to  allow  a  large  deformation  at 
very  low  stress. 

Therefore,  the  authors  consider  the  model  in 
which  the  area  surrounding  a  piezo-electric  elem(cid:173)
ent  is  f i l l ed  by  semi-elastic  material.  When  any 
object  comes  in  contact  with  the  surface  of  model, 
a  strain  resulting  in  elastic  deformation  of  mate(cid:173)
r i al  induces  and  is  converted  to  an  electrical 
signal  by  a  piezo-electric  clement.  Also,  the  Ma-
ch  phenomenon  which  has  the  action  of  extracting 
the  object  edge  feature  occurs  in  skin  similar  to 
visual  sense.  The  Mach  phenomenon  may  be  used  in 
the  processing  of  pattern. 

2.3  A  Realization  of  Receptor 

It  is  well  known  that  the  physiological  recept(cid:173)
or  corresponding  to  pressure  sense  is  the  Pacini(cid:173)
an  corpuscle  emits  impulses  according  to  corpuscle 
deformation  which  results  from  the  strain  of  skin 
tissue.  The  sensory  nerve  ending  in  a  Pacinian 
corpuscle  is  surrounded  by  a  lamellated  f l u i d - f i(cid:173)
lled  capsule  which  is  dependent  on  the  viscous 
element.  Then,  an  object  pattern  is  able  to  be 
discriminated  through  the  pressure  pattern  or  str(cid:173)
ess  distribution  of  a  group  of  Pacinian  corpuscl(cid:173)
es.  Therefore,  the  receptor  unit  corresponds  to 
Pacinian  corpuscle  described  above  and  its  unit 
input  given  as  shown  in  Fig.2  can  be  considered 
as  the  surface  of  Pacinian  corpuscle.  As  shown  in 
Fig.2,  the  inner  potential  I  of  the  receptor  is 
compared  with  a  given  threshold  G.  If  the  inner 
potential  Ip  is  greater  than  a  threshold  0,  the 
receptor  output  is  given  by  a  function  generator. 
The  inner  potential  Ip  is  an  unknown  factor,  but 
it  is  able  to  determine  a  level  on  the  basis  of 
the  threshold.  In  case  of  pressing  globular  sur(cid:173)

378 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

Then,  a  parallel  projection  may  be  defined  as 

By  thenarallel  projection  in  the  direction  of 

the  line  1,  the  elements  in  the  pattern  Xi  are 
projected  on  the  p.  Xi'  may  be  defined  as 

A  subscript  i  corresponds to  the  threshold  θi 

and  in  the  case  of  the  subscript  i  =  1,  the  plane 
P(  θi=1  )  is  a  supporting  hyperplane  of  V(x,y,z). 
Therefore,  the  parallel  projection  for  each 
threshold  θi  satisfies  the  following  relation, 
which  shows  the  relationship  between  a  mapped  Xi' 
and  X  for  the  form  of  V(  x,y,z  ). 

1)  Pillared  form 

3.  Pattern  Recognition  of  the  Grasped 

Object  by  the  A r t i f i c i al  Hand". 

Pattern  recognition  of  the  grasped  object  is 
carried  out  by  the  a r t i f i c i al  hand  with  the  tac­
t i le  sense 
in  an  important  factor  for  recogniz­
ing  the  surface  shape  of  grasped  object  by  the 
a r t i f i c i al  hand.  There  are  two  distinct  types  of 
recognition  for  the  grasped  object  by  the  a r t i fi 
cial  hand  with  the  tactile  sense. 
It  is  divided 
into  two  important  properties  of  a  method  of 
recognition  in  which  one  type  is  to  detect  a 
point  of  contact  with  the  surface  of  the  object, 
another  is  to  recognize  the  surface  shape  of  the 
object  as  the  information  for  recognizing  the 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

It 

pattern  of  the  grasped  object  surface  by  the 
a r t i f i c i al  hand.  In  the  each  case,  a  possibility 
of  detecting  a  coordinate  of  the  a r t i f i c i al  hand 
or  finger  must  be  included  and  the  function  of 
the  a r t i f i c i al  hand  with  the  tactile  sense  is 
classified  into  4  groups. 

is  d i f f i c u lt  that  piezoelectric  elements 

are  closely  arranged  on  the  hand or the  fingers  as 
mentioned  in  the  previous  section.  This  section 
describes  that  the  a r t i f i c i al  hand  as  shown  in 
Fig.4  grips  the  object  and  recognizes  the  object 
shape  by  means  of  the  data,  that  i s,  the  points 
of  contact  which  are  given  by  the  a r t i f i c i al  hand 
and  the  object. 

A  group  of  r-on-off  switches,  x  ,x,, 
i  2 

x 

r 

379 

[24] 

[25] 

A sign table is made into table 2.  From the 
sign table,  the hyperplane is eliminated by the 
method which lists up the representative point 
in the same subspace. Table 2 can be rewritten 
as table 3 (2). 

It  is  clear from table  3 that row v„  can be 

eliminate from table 4 regardless of pattern 
classification,  if  v 
that  is,  s  for  the  hyper(cid:173)
plane  I of pattern 2 and v  ,  s.  for the hyperpla(cid:173)
ne 111 of pattern 2 have the value 1 or 0. Then, 
table 4  is given, and a block diagram of pattern 
classification  is  shown  in Fig.S. 

Experimental Results 

The classification of the grasped object by 

the  artificial  hand  is  carried  out  automatically 
on the basis of a sequence consisting of search 
action,  grasping action and action of classifi(cid:173)
cation. 

Grasping  action  is  carried out  with  the  fol(cid:173)

lowing steps as shown in Fig.d for processing the 
grasp uniformly. 

Step 1.  The object is grasped by the thumb 

and the index finger. 

Step 2.  The object is  lifted by a wrist 

rotation. 

in addition. 

the object. 

and fingers. 

Step  3  The  little  finger grasps  the object 

Step 4.  The  index  finger is  removed from 

Step 5.  The object  is grasped by the thumb 

The experiment  of the  classification  is  car(cid:173)

ried out by using the objects of the cylinder and 
the  square pillar including the one which  is used 
for deciding  the  coefficient  of the  hyperplane. 
Table 5 shows the object type which is used 

for the experiment.  The number of times,  and the 
square pillar is grasped by the state which  is 
slightly rotated on its axis. As the experimental 
results, a percentage  of correct  answers  for  the 
classification  is  tabulated  in  table  5. 

It  is  evident  that  the  percentage  of  correct 

answer is  over 90 percent  for a neighbourhood of 
the object, C3 and S3 which is used for deciding 
the  coefficient  of hyperplane.  The  result  of the 
experiment may be applied to the recognition of 
the objec'  by adjusting the finger length  in case 
of  limited objects. 

4. Conclusion 

A method of pattern recognition has been dis(cid:173)

cussed which uses an artificial tactile model 
which has been compared to a physiological model 
of skin. 

It  is  shown  that  recognition  of  its  shape  over 

where  A  .  B  represents  the  inner  product  of  A  and 
B,  |A |=  A • A. 

Therefore,  the  set  belonging  to  the  each  cat(cid:173)
egory  is  classified  by  the  same  hyperplanes  and 
the  object  is  classified  by  the  category  which 
corresponds  to  the  object. 

3.1  An  Lxperiment  of  Pattern  Recognition  by  the 

A r t i f i c i al  Hand  with  the  Tactile  Sense. 

The  tactile  sense  as  shown  in  Fig.  4  consists 
of  22  on-off  switches  arranged  in  order.  A  coef(cid:173)
ficient  of  the  hyperplane  equation  is  decided  by 
grasping  separately  two  kinds  of  object,  a  cyl(cid:173)
inder  (  90  mm  in  diameter  )  and  a  square  p i l l ar 
(  70  mm  in  a  side  ). 

A position sign s.  of v.( x1,,x2, . . .. ,x22, ) 

for each hyperplane may bedefmed as 

380 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

the  surface  of  the  solid  object  can  be  easily 
carried  out  by  the  a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense,rath-
er  than  by  the  a r t i f i c i al  visual  sense  and  also 
that  the  a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense  can  be  used  as 
an  supplementary  method  for  processing  of  the  ar(cid:173)
t i f i c i al  visual  sense.  The  relationship  of  the 
area  of  patterns  for  each  threshold  is  given. 

Moreover,  the  method  and  some  experiments  for 
recognizing  the  grasped  object  are  given.  A  sim(cid:173)
ple  experiment  classifying  the  cylinders  and  the 
square  pillars  is  performed  by  the  a r t i f i c i al 
hand  with  on-off  switches  instead  of  the  elements 
of  the  a r t i f i c i al  tactile  sense. 

Experimental  results  show  a  high  probability 

of  recognition. 

5.  Acknowledgement 

The  authors  wish  to  acknowledge  the  co-opera(cid:173)

tion  of  Mr.K.Takase  in  constructing  the  a r t i f i(cid:173)
cial  hand  and  its  logic  circuit  from  the  model 
studied  on  a  digital  computer.  The  authors  thank 
also  to  Dr.  Y.Umetam  for  helpful  discussions. 

References 

1)  S.Aida  and  G.Kinoshita  :  A  Pattern  Classifica(cid:173)

tion  by  the  Time  Varying  Threshold  Method. 
International  Joint  Conference  on  A r t i f i c i al 
Intel ligence,  Washigton.P.C. (1969.). 

2)  A.G.Arkadev  and  E,M.Braverman  :  Teaching 
Computers  to  recognize  Patterns,  Academic 
Press(1967) . 

3)  S.Aida  and  G.Kinoshita  :  Pattern  Recognition 

by  the  Symbiosis  of  Visual  and  Tactile  Senses, 
Proc.  of  the  Third  Hawaii  Conference  on System 
Sciences(1970j. 

4)  S.Aida  and  G.Kinoshita  :  Pattern  Recognition 

by  the  Symbiosis  of  Visual  and  Tactile  Senses, 
IFAC  Kyoto  Symposium  on  Systems  Engineering 
Approach  to  Computer  Control(1970). 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

381 

382 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

383 

384 

Session No.  8 Robots and Integrated Systems 

