[ding 

463 

A  LANGUAGE  BASED  PROBLEM-SOLVER 

S.  Ramani 

Computer  Group 

Tata  Institute  of  Fundamental  Research, 

Bombay  5,  India 

Abstract 

Language  learning  and  language  use 
It  is 

play  central  roles  in  problem-solving. 
argued  here  that  a  rigidly  built-in  language will 
not  serve  the  needs  of  problem-solving.  To  use 
language  as  significantly  as  in  human  problem-
solving  it  is  necessary  to  design  language  pro(cid:173)
cessors  specially  suited  to  the  task.  The  pro-
cesBoi  should use  language  as  a  medium  for 
describing  situations  so  that  their  similarities 
are  recognized.  Recognition  of  such  similarity 
would  enable  the  system  to  respond  to  new  situ(cid:173)
ations  with  forms  of  response  known  to  be  ap(cid:173)
propriate  in  similar,  familiar  situations. 

The  design  and  implementation  of a 

problem-solving  system  based  on  this  principle 
are  described.  This  system  exhibits  some  cap(cid:173)
ability  to  learn  and  use  a  language,  and  to  solve 
problems. 

1•  Introduction 

The  state  of  the  art  in  problem-

solving,  constituting  the  background  to  the  work 
reported  here,  is  based  on  a  number  of  con(cid:173)
cepts  and  techniques,  including  the  following: 

use  of heuristics,  in  addition  to 
algorithms,  in  programs  (1,2); 
provision  for  pursuing  a  hierar(cid:173)
chically  organized  set  of  goals 
and  subgoals,  by  the  use  of  rec(cid:173)
ursive  routines  and  push-down 
stacks  (3); 
use  of  a  scheme  of  representation 
for  mapping  problem-situations 
into  data  structures  (4); 
uBe  of an  input  language  resembling 
a  natural  language  (5); 

use  of  sets  of  strings  in  a  language 
as  representations,  to  provide  for 
generality  (6). 

The  use  of  an  adequate  language  for 

input  and  output,  and  for  the  internal  represen(cid:173)
tation  of  relevant  information  as  well,  is  very 

attractive  as  a  possible  solution  to  the  problem 
of  generality.  Similarly,  one  is  also  attracted 
by  the  possibility  of  realizing  a  system  which 
w i ll  accept  directions  (complete  or  partial)  for 
solving  problems  in  some  language  resembling 
a  natural  language  (7).  Obviously,  such  a  sys(cid:173)
tem  will  be  open-ended  in  a  very  significant 
sense  of  the  t e r m, 

We  start  with  these  concepts  and  argue 

further  that  a  general  problem-solver  should 
possess  a  general  language-using  capability. 
This  capability  should  uniformly  provide  for 
input /output  communication,  for  the  internal 
representation  of  the  totality  of  problem  situa(cid:173)
tions  constituting  the  problem  world,  and  for 
the  communication  and  representation  of 
problem-solving  techniques,  including  algori(cid:173)
thms  and  heuristics. 

The  approach  reported  here  is  further 

characterized  by  three  features: 

(a)  the  requirement  that  the  system  be 
open-ended,  in  regard  to  the  language  used; 
it  should  be  possible,  at  any  stage,  to  add 
incrementally  to  the  repertoire  of  the  system, 

(b)  the  requirement  that  the  system  be 

similarly  open-ended  in  regard  to  the  class  of 
questions  answered,  or  the  class  of  problems 
solved,  and 

(c)  the  requirement  that  the  capability  of 
the  system  be  enhanced  in  a  simple  and  natural 
manner.  Specifically,  it  is  required  that  the 
system  should  enhance  its  capabilities  automat(cid:173)
ically  when  a  worked-out  example  is  supplied. 

The  first  two  requirements  raise 

major  questions  regarding  the  nature  of  the 
language  processor  to  be  used.  The  following 
sections  describe  these  questions  and  provide 
an  answer  for  them,  based  on  the  concept  of 
analogy  directed  behaviour.  This  concept  is 
then  extended  to  provide  a  basis  for  meeting 
the  third  requirement  cited  above  -  that  the 
problem-solving  should  itself  be  example 
It  is  argued  that  such  a  problem -
driven. 
solver  will  cope  with  an  open-ended  problem 
world,  in  a  sense,  creatively. 

2.  The  Basic  Issues 

One  needs  a  theory  of  language  to 
design any  language-using  system,  a  theory 
which  covers  syntax,  semantics  and  pragmatics. 

464 

Session No.  10 Computer  Understanding I (Communication) 

Designers  have  been  quick  to  borrow  from  l i n(cid:173)
guistics  whatever  has  been  available  in  the  way 
of  syntax  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  a  for(cid:173)
mal  grammar  of  a  language,  such  as  a  transfor(cid:173)
mational  generative  grammar,  could  be  used 
in  conjunction  with  a  syntax-directed  parser  to 
perform  an  analysis  of  natural  language 
sentences  (8, 9). 

Another  frequently  suggested  possibi(cid:173)

lity  is  the  use  of  a  semantic  processor  which 
w i ll  map  sentences  of  a  natural  language  into 
strings  in  a  formal  language  (say,  a  first  order 
predicate  calculus)  using  information  obtained 
from  syntax  analysis,  whenever  necessary (10). 

There  are  difficulties  in  adopting  syn(cid:173)

tax  directed  parsing  methods  for  use  in  a 
problem-solver  of  the  type  visualized  in  the 
previous  section.  For  example,  it  is  algorith-
mically  impossible  to  produce  a  generative  gra(cid:173)
mmar  for  every  given  set  of  sentences  (see(ll) 
for  a  formal  analysis).  Making  incremental 
additions  to  a  generative  grammar  to  extend  the 
language  is  an  equally  demanding  task,  sharing 
many  features  with  the  task  of  program  derelo-
pment  and  debugging. 

These  limitations  on  automatic  acqui(cid:173)

sition  are  severe  in view  of  the  enormous 
effort  required  to  create  grammars  manually. 
Machine-usable  grammars  for  chunks  of  nat(cid:173)
ural  language  large  enough  to  be  useful  are  not 
yet  available. 

A  similar,  if  not  worse,  situation 
prevails  in  the  area  of  semantics  of  useful 
chunks  of  natural  language.  The  mapping  of  an 
input  sentence  into  a  formula  in  some  logical 
calculus  requires  an  algorithm.  There  is  no 
uniform  procedure  for  arriving  at  such  an  algo(cid:173)
rithm  which  maps  sentences  in  a  given  language 
into  formulas  in  a  chosen  logical  calculus.  Any 
such  algorithm  w i ll  require  considerable  modi(cid:173)
fication  and  debugging  when the  set  of  sentences 
it  has  to  handle  is  enlarged  in  any  significant 
manner. 

3.  The  Case  for  Analogy 

Is  there  any  alternative,  then,  to  the 
Is  it  possible 
design  of  a  language  processor? 
to  avoid  syntax-directed  analysis,  followed  by 
a  mapping  of  the  input  sentences  into  strings  in 
a  logical  calculus ? 

The  alternative  explored  in  the  work 

reported  here  is  based  on  the  notion that  human 
language  behaviour  is  analogy  directed.  One's 
response  to  a  verbal  stimulus  is  generally  de(cid:173)
termined  by  the  similarity  it  has  to  a  familiar 
stimulus.  The  response  to  the  new  stimulus 
resembles  the  response  to  the  familiar  one  in 
certain ways.  One  is  often taught  the  answer 
to  a  new  kind  of  stimulus  by  being  given  an 
example. 

To  model  this  type  of  behaviour,  one 
has  to  look  for  a  programmable  process  which 
w i ll  carry  out  this  analogizing  and  answer  new 
questions  on  the  basis  of  a  set  of question-
answer  pairs  used  as  examples.  Each  question-
answer  pair  that  is  supplied  as  an  example 
would  be  accompanied  by  a  set  of  sentences 
(the  context).  The  processor  would  obviously 
use  a  store  for  factual  information  (say,  in  the 
form  of  sentences)  which  describes  the  class 
of  situations  about  which  it  can  be  questioned. 
This  store  forms  a  kind  of  data-base.  When 
presented  with  a  new  question,  the  processor 
creates  a  reply  to  it  by  recognizing  its  simila(cid:173)
rity  to  a  question  given  earlier  as  an  example. 
From  the  example,  the  processor  would  identi(cid:173)
fy  the  form  of the  informative  sentences  rele(cid:173)
vant  to  the  question.  Then  the  processor  would 
identify  such  sentences  in  the  data-base  and 
create  a  reply. 

Proceeding  further,  one  could  add  to 

the  system  being  visualized  to  enable  it  to 
handle  inputs  other  than  simple  questions.  Some 
inputs  may  be  informative  sentences  which  have 
to  be  analyzed  in  order  to  extract  the  informat(cid:173)
ion  they  bring  to  the  system.  The  extracted 
information  is  then  incorporated  into  the  data 
base. 

Finally,  one  could  imbed  a  language 
processor  of  this  sort  into  a  problem-solver. 

The  following  sections  show  how  these 

tasks  are  tackled.  But,  it  is  useful  here  to 
summarize  the  motivations  for  investigating 
analogy  as  a  principle  directing  natural  language 
behaviour: 

(a)  Analogy  appears  attractive  as  one 

technique  by which  a  language  may  be  acquired. 
An  analogy  directed  processor  can  be  made  to 
tackle  a  new  class  of  questions  or  statements 
by  supplying  it  with  an  example.  The  process 
is  incremental. 

Session No. 10 Computer Understanding I (Communication) 

465 

(b)  An analogy directed processor is  not 

limited to any specific language.  Depending 
upon the  examples  supplied,  it tackles  different 
languages. 

(c)  Recognizing a familiar structure under(cid:173)
lying a new situation,  and  responding to it acc(cid:173)
ordingly,  appears to be an essential component 
of all intelligent behaviour.  A language proce(cid:173)
ssor used by a problem-solver will provide for 
such recognition at each step of problem-
solving.  For instance,  a simple question that 
arises at some  step of problem-solving will be 
recognized by its  familiar  structure,  even if it 
is  new in certain respects,  and be answered 
appropriately.  In other words,  a language 
processor which can handle new sentences by 
analogy provides the basis for a problem-
solver which can handle new problems by 
analogy. 

A detailed treatment of the  role of 

language  learning  in intelligent behavior may 
be found in (12).  In this paper,  Narasimhan 
argues that the use of a  rigidly determined 
language denies a problem-solver the ability 
to cope with new classes  of situations,  (in 
McCarthy's words  (7) a problem-solver using 
such a limited language cannot be 'told' about 
the new classes of situations,  and therefore, 
it  cannot also  learn their  relevant  features  by 
itself). 

(d)  The approach prescribes a simpler 

structure  for a language processor.  Seemingly 
arbitrary  compartmentalization  of the  process 
is avoided.  Consider,  for example,  the  syntax 
directed processors which fail to use  semantic 
or contextual  clues  in syntactic  disambiguation. 
Analogy directed processors  are  not divided 
into such non-communicating  sub-systems. 

A detailed critique of language behavior 
models  incorporating generative grammars has 
been written by Hockett  (13).  He also presents 
arguments  for  recognizing the important  role 
of analogy in human language behavior. 

4.  The Proposed Model for a Language 

Processor 

The considerations  described in the 

previous sections lead to a model for a language 
processor having the following features: 

(a)  The processor deals with situations, 

a situation being a stimulus  (or input) in its 

context. 

The stimulus is a string of symbols 
(e.g.,  a question in a natural language,  the 
words being treated as symbols here).  The 
context is a set of strings  of symbols  (e.g.,  a 
set of sentences  describing some aspect of the 
world that is being questioned). 

(b)  The  response of the processor to any 
situation is based on pattern setting examples 
(or paradigms)  given to it  earlier. 

A paradigm consists of a context ( a 
set ol strings of symbols),  an input ( a string 
of symbols) and a  response (or output).  The 
response is a sequence of strings  of symbols 
(e.g.,  a sequence of sentences in a natural 
language). 

(c)  Paradigms are stored in a form that 
highlights  their  structure,  de-emphasizing the 
particulars  of the situation involved.  A para(cid:173)
digm stored in this form,  called a schema, can 
be used by the processor to create responses 
to new situations by a process of extrapolation. 

(d)  The processor has access to a store 
for sentential strings,  constituting a data-base 
(see Fig. l). 

Inputs  to  the  processor  are  of two 

kinds.  The  first  kind  of  inputs  are  paradigms 
labelled  as  such.  The  other  kind  of  inputs  are 

466 

Session No.  10 Computer  Understanding I (Communication) 

sentential  strings  ( e . g .,  questions,  commands 
or  informational  sentences  in  a  natural  language 
The  processor  schematizes  and  stores  the  para(cid:173)
digms  for  later  use.  The  processor  responds 
to  sentential  stimuli  by  extrapolating  from  an 
appropriate  schematized  paradigm,  if  such  a 
paradigm  is  available. 
In  any  case,  the  sent(cid:173)
ential  input  is  added  to  the  data-base,  for  poss(cid:173)
ible  functioning  as  a  contextual  string  for  later 
inputs. 

(e)  The  suitability  of  a  (schematized)  para(cid:173)
digm  for  determining  the  creation  of  a  response 
to  a  given  stimulus  is  based  on  two  factors: 

ii) 

i)  structural  similarity  between  the 
current  stimulus  and  the  stimulus 
component  (or  input  component)  of 
the  paradigm, 
the  presence  or  absence  in  the 
data-base  of  a  set  of  strings  having 
specified  structures  (the  processor 
obtains  the  specification  for  these 
structures  by  extrapolating  from 
the  schematized  paradigm  being 
tested  for  suitability). 

(f)  Assume  a  suitable  schema  is  found  for 

determining  the  response  in  a  given  situation. 
The  processor  computes  a  response  having  a 
structure  determined  by  the  schema.  Elements 
of the  response  ( e . g ..  words,  numbers  and 
phrases)  may  be  obtained  by  the  processor  from 
the  sentential  store  and  incorporated  into  the 
structure  as  specified  by  the  schema. 

Obviously,  the  processes  referred  to 
in  paragraphs  (c),  (d),  (e)  and  (f)  above  have  to 
be  described  in  detail.  This  is  done  in  the 
following  sections.  Before  proceeding  further, 
it  is,  however,  necessary  to  describe  an  impo(cid:173)
rtant  feature  of  the  processor  which  provides 
for  a  problem-solving  capability.  The  same 
facility  enables  the  processor  to  respond  to  a 
stimulus  which  has  a  complex  structure,  with 
phrases  nested  inside  other  phrases  at  several 
levels, 

(g)  The  extrapolation  procedure  referred 
to  in  paragraph  (f)  determines  a  series  of  str(cid:173)
ings  called  !the  response'. 
In the  case  of  cert(cid:173)
ain  classes  of  situations,  the  response  may 
simply  be  printed  out  (e. g. ,  a  simple  question 
is  given  a  factual  answer,  without  involving 
nested  computation). 

In the  general  case,  however,  the  ext(cid:173)

rapolated  'response'  may  function  as  a  sequence 

In  other  words,  in  response 

of  internal  stimuli. 
to  a  given  stimulus,  the  processor  presents 
itself with  a  sequence  of  internal  stimuli.  The 
processor  has  appropriate  provision  to  halt  the 
main  sequence  of  computation  at  one  level  to 
perform  necessary  subcomputations  at  a  lower 
level,  as  necessitated  by the  internal  stimuli. 
The  processor  can,  in  this  manner,  respond  to 
internal  stimuli  precisely  as  it  rerponds  to  an 
external  one,  choosing  suitable  schema  to  det(cid:173)
ermine  the  response.  Generally,  the  nesting 
extends  only  a  finite  number  of  levels  and  the 
process  ultimately  terminates. 

The  processor  prints  out  each  string 

in  'the  response'  at  each  level  when  it  arises  as 
an  internal  stimulus.  Many  such  strings  do  not 
require  any  further  processing,  as  the  available 
schemata  do  not  provide  for  it.  Any  such  str(cid:173)
ing  just  gets  printed  out  and  the  processor 
moves  on  to  the  next  internal  stimulus.  The 
complete  print-out  is  the  true  record  of  respon(cid:173)
ses  at  all  the  levels. 

The  machinery  for  nested  computation 

of  responses  to  a  hierarchically  organized  set 
of  stimuli  is  basically  the  GPS  (3)  machinery, 
involving  push-down  stacks,  etc. 

5.  The  Nature  of  the  Paradigms  Used 

A  simple  paradigm  is: 

Context:  The  weight  of  the  ship  is 

2000  tons 

:  What  is  the  weight  of the 

Input 

Output 

ship? 
:  2000  tons 

Given  the  new  situation, 

Context :  The  height  of  the  boy  is 

Input 

:  What  is  the  height  of the 

four  feet 

boy? 

Extrapolation  at  one  level  yields  the  answer: 

"Four  feet". 

On the  other  hand,  a  more  complex 

paradigm  would  be  something  like  this: 

Context:  The  density  of  lead  is  8  gm 

per  cc 

The  volume  of  a  sphere  is 
0.75  x  PI  x  radius  **3 
The  radius  of a  sphere  is 

0. 5  x the  diameter 

Input 

:  Find  the  weight  of a  lead 

sphere  6  cm  in  diameter 

Output  :  1. Find  the  volume  of the 

sphere 

Session No.  10 Computer Understanding I (Communication) 

467 

2.  Multiply  the  volume  by  the 

density 

3.  That  is  the  weight  of  the  sphere 

Obviously,  the  three  strings  in  the 

'output'  are  internal  stimuli  which  trigger  off 
internal  activity  to  create  the  final  output. 

The  choice  of  these  forms  for  paradi(cid:173)
gms  reflects  certain  beliefs  regarding  human 
verbal  behavior.  One  belief  is  that  the  prese(cid:173)
nting  of  a  paradigmatic  example  of  the  desired 
behavior  is  most  valuable  when  it  is  clearly 
separated  from  the  preceding  and  succeeding 
activity.  The  paradigm  should  be  well  segmen(cid:173)
ted  from  the  background  activity  and  be  labelled 
as  such,  Secondly,  when question-answering 
or  problem-solving  is  taught,  it  is  very  useful, 
if  not  imperative,  to  draw  attention  to  the  re(cid:173)
levant  facts  -  the  context. 

6.  The  Paradigmatic  Processor 

6. 1  Schematization  of  Paradigms 

Consider  a  paradigm  consisting  of 
strings  of words  and  symbols,  these  strings 
being  statements,  questions  or  commands  occ(cid:173)
urring  in the  paradigm.  The  paradigm  is  divi(cid:173)
ded  into  a  contextual  component,  consisting  of 
the  strings  C 1 ,  C2,  C3,  . . .,  Cn,  an  'input' 
component  consisting  of  one  string  Q  and  an 
'output'  component  consisting  of  the  strings 
A1,  A2,  A3,  ........,An. 

does  one  extrapolate  from  them  to  compute  the 
appropriate  response  to  a  new  stimulus? 

As  mentioned  earlier,  paradigms  sup(cid:173)

plied  to  the  processor  are  'schematized'  and 
stored.  The  schematization  serves  essentially 
to  assign  a  structure  to  the  paradigm,  facilit-

ating  extrapolation.  Any  input  stimulus  S,  a 
string  of words  and  symbols,  triggers  off  a 
search  activity  in  the  processor.  The  search 
is  for  the  'schema'  of  a  paradigm  p  [ C,Q,A  ] 
which  has  an  input  component,  Q,  maximally 
resembling  S.  By  a  linear  mapping  of  symbols 
of S  onto  matching  symbols  in  Q,  substrings  of 
S  are  placed  in  one-to-one  correspondence  with 
substrings  of Q  (illustrated  below). 

Substrings  such  as  'the  weight  of the 

ship1,  che  radius  of the  sphere',  etc.,  are 
treated  as  integral  units  whenever  necessary. 
This  follows  the  conception  of  a  sentence  as  a 
string  of  units  in  specified  order,  some  units 
being  words  or  single  symbols,  while  others 
are  phrases  defined  by  sets  of  recursively  app(cid:173)
licable  rules  (Bobrow(5)  and  Weizenbaum  (14) 
describe  approaches  which  suggested  this  dev(cid:173)
elopment.  Leavenworth  (15)  and  Woods  (16) are 
also  relevant  papers). 

Consider  a  paradigm  p 

[  C,Q,A  ]  . 

To  assign  a  structure  to  this  paradigm,  we 
look  for  maximal  substrings  which  occur  in  one 
or  more  places  in  one  Bet  of  Btrings  as  well  as 
in  one  or  more  places  in  another  set  of  strings. 
For  example,  the  maximal  substrings  common 
to  C  and  Q  below  are  (the  cost  of,  is,  4, 
pencils) 

C  :  The  cost  of  one  pen  is  4  rupees 

The  cost  of two  pencils  is  1  rupee 

Q  :  What  is  the  cost  of 4  pens  and  3 

pencils 

Let  S  cq  be  the  set  of  maximal  substrings  com(cid:173)
mon to Q  on  one  hand  and  to  C  on the  other. 
Saq  is  the  set  similarly  defined  with  respect 
to  "K  and Q.  The  set  of maximal  substrings, 
each  one  of which  occurs  somewhere  in  A  as 
well  as  somewhere  in  C,  is  called  Sca •  We 
define  two  new  sets 

The  schematization  of  the  paradigm 

p  [ C,  Q.  A  ]  is  performed  by  substituting 
uniformly  for  each  substring  in  the  set  S 
a 
corresponding  formal  variable,  at  each  of  its 
occurrences  in  p.  This  requires  the  generation 
of  a  set  of  distinct  formal  variables  Sf  ,  such 
that 

•  The  schematization  gives 

|Sf|  = 

|Sv| 

468 

Session No.  10 Computer  Understanding I (Communication) 

[Sq,_Scf 

,C  ,  Q,  A'  ]where 

us  the  schema  K 
C'  is  obtained  from  C  and  A'  from  A  by the 
substitution  process  described  above.  Scf 
is 
a  new  set  of  variables  obtained  by  substituting 
in  Sca  every  occurrence  of  a  variable  in Sv  by 
the  corresponding  formal  variable  from  Sf  . 
This  process  is  illustrated  by  the  following 
example: 

Paradigm 

71 

Q 
A 

:  G  is  31. 5 feet  per  second  squared 
The  ball  is  thrown  vertically  upward  at 

31  feet  per  second 

:  Find  how  high  the  ball w i ll  go 
:  V =  31 

G=  31.5 
Find  (  V  **  2)  /  (2  *  G) 
That  gives  the  height  reached  by  the 

ball 

Sq  =  {  the  ball  } 
Sc a=  {  31,  G,  31.5,  the  ball  } 
Sv  =  {  31.  G,  31.5 } 
Sf  =  {  00001,  00002,  00003  } 
Scf =  "  00001,  00002,  00003,  the  ball  } 

Schema 

Q 

00002  is  00003  feet  per  second 

squared 

The  ball  is  thrown  vertically  upward 

at  00001  feet  per  second 
Find  how  high  the  ball  w i ll  go 

V=  00001 
00002  =  00003 
Find 
That  gives  the  height  reached  by  the 

(V  **  2)  /  (2  *  00002) 

ball 

6. 2  Extrapolation  from  Schemata 

,  C1  ,  Q,  A'] 

Given  a  stimulus,  S,  one  may  compare 
it  with  the  input  component  of a  schema  K  [Sq  , 
Scf 
.  The  comparison  perform(cid:173)
ed  by  the  processor  consists  of two  steps:  (a) 
linear  mapping  of S  onto  Q,  and  (b)  evaluation 
of  the  match.  Consider  two  strings  of words 
and  symbols 

The  linear  mapping  of  Y1  Y2  Y3  . .. 
Z1Z2  Z3 

is  performed  as  follows: 

...Zm 

Yn  onto 

1.  The  mapping  should  proceed  from 

Y1t o Yn. 

2.  If  it  is  otherwise  permissible  to  map 
Yj  onto  either  Zj  or  Zk,  j <  k, 
Yi  should  be  mapped  onto  Zj  . 

3.  If  Yj  is  mapped  onto  Z ;,  no  mapping  of 

the  form  Yk  -  Z1  is  permitted  if 
k> i while  1  <  j. 

4.  Pursuant  to  the  conditions  stated  above, 
if  Yj  and 

Yj  may  be  mapped  onto  Z: 
Z J are  identical. 

5.  Pursuant  to  the  first  three  conditions, 

Y^  may be  mapped  onto  Z:  irrespe(cid:173)
ctive  of  their  being  identical,  if  they 
are  both  numbers,  neither  being  a 
formal  variable. 

The  mapping  w i ll  not  be  complete  after 
the  exhaustive  application  of  the  five  rules  list(cid:173)
ed  above.  Considering  the  example  referred  to 
in Section  6. 1,  the  part  of  the  mapping  perfor(cid:173)
med  according  to  these  rules  is  shown  here: 

However,  it  is  possible  at  this  stage  to 

estimate  the  degree  to  which  Q  resembles  S. 
A  useful  index  of  the  match  is  found  as  follows: 

1.  Assign  to  every  element  in  Q,  but  not  in 

SQ ,  the weight  1. 

2.  Assign  to  every  element  in Sq the  weight 

0.25. 

3.  Make  a  weighted  count  of  all  elements  of 

S  successfully  mapped  onto  some 
elements  of  Q  at  this  stage.  Let  this 
be R1 . 

4.  Let  a  weighted  count  of  all  elements  in Q 

be  R2. 

5.  R 1 / R2 is  the  match  index. 

By  using  this  match  criterion,  the 

schemata  most  suitable  to  the  task  at  hand  are 
selected  and  tried  one  by  one  for  applicability. 
For  instance,  if the  task  is  to  create  a  response 
to 

'Find  how  high  the  stone  w i ll  go' 
the  paradigm  listed  in Section  6.1  could  be 
selected. 

How  does  one  use  the  paradigm  in  the 
new  situation?  The  linear  mapping  of S  onto  Q 
creates  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between 
elements  which  occur  in S  with  their  substitute 

Session No.  10 Computer Understanding I (Communication) 

469 

store  for  later  use. 

If  the  command 

•Find  (  V  **  2)  /  (2  *  G)1 

becomes  an  internal  stimulus,  the  processor 
could  find  a  suitable  schema  to  guide  it  in  per(cid:173)
forming  this  sub-task. 

7.  Design  and  Implementation  of the  Problem-

solver 

The  simple  examples  presented  in 

Section  6  show  how  the  paradigmatic  creation 
of a  direct,  simple  response  is  possible  at  a 
very  lew  level  of  operation.  A  stimulus  of  any 
complexity  results  in  internal  stimuli,  and  a 
whole  hierarchy  of  schemata  is  brought  into 
play.  This  is  true  not  only  in  numerical  prob(cid:173)
lem-solving,  but  also  in  the  interpretation  of 
complex  sentences,  which  is  a  kind  of  'problem-
solving'  in  itself. 

Fig.  2  shows  the  problem-solver  which 
consists  of  the  rudimentary  processor  shown  in 
Fig.  1  along  with  push-down  stores  necessary 

elements  in  Q.  The  mapping  can  now  be  comp(cid:173)
leted  by  an  interpolation  process  (see  (17)  for 
a  flow-chart  of this  process,  as  well  as  for 
details  in  general. 
(17)  differs  in  formulation). 

In  certain  places,  however, 

On  completion  of the  mapping,  a  one-
to-one  correspondence  can  be  set  up  between 
strings  in  Sq  which  occur  in  Q  and  their  substi(cid:173)
tutes,  S' 
,  which  occur  in  S.  For  instance,  in 
the  above  example,  the  single  member  of Sq , 
'the  ball1,  can  be  put  in  correspondence  with 
'the  stone'  in  S.  Uniformly  substituting  mem(cid:173)
bers  of  Sq  occurring  in  C  of  the  schema  by 
corresponding  members  of Sq' ,  a  modified 
context  C" 
T"  consists  of  two  strings: 

In  the  above  example, 

is  created. 

00002  is  00003  feet  per  second  squared 
The  stone  is  thrown  vertically  upward  at 

00001  feet  per  second  squared 

The  modified  context  C"  shows  the 
structure  of  sentences  to  be  identified  in  the 
sentential  store,  if the  chosen  schema  is  to  be 
useful  in  creating  a  response.  The  processor 
searches  this  store  to  locate  sentences  which 
match  the  strings  of  C "  ,  using  the  linear  mapp(cid:173)
ing  technique  described  above. 
sentences  are  not  found,  the  processor  attempts 
to  use  another  paradigm. 
If  matching  sentences 
are  found,  the  mapping  technique  described 
identifies  substrings  which  occur  in  the  place 
of  the  formal  variables  S f.  A  one-to-one  cor(cid:173)
respondence  is  created  between  elements  of Sf 
and  their  substitutes,  which  constitute  the  set 

If  matching 

At  this  stage,  the  processor  creates 

th-e  response  by  uniformly  substituting  elements 
of  Sf  occurring  in  X'  by  the  corresponding 
elements  of the  set  Su. 

If  no  suitable  schema  is  found  for  a 
given  stimulus  S,  it  is  treated  as  informative 
input  to  be  directly  sent  to  the  sentential  store. 
On the  other  hand,  if a  schema  is  found,  the 
computed  response  is  output  string  by  string. 
After  each  string  is  output  in  this  manner,  it 
is  re-presented  to  the  processor,  as  an  inter(cid:173)
nal  stimulus.  For  instance,  if  the  computed 
response  has  the  string  'V*41 '  in  it,  it  will  be 
re-presented  as  an  internal  stimulus.  Failing 
to  find  a  suitable  schematized  paradigm  to  gui(cid:173)
de  the  response  to  this  new  stimulus,  the  pro(cid:173)
cessor  w i ll  file  away  ,V * 4 1'  in  the  sentential 

470 

Session No.  10 Computer  Understanding I (Communication) 

for  the  recursive  application  of  schemata.  The 
interpreter  is  a  simple  speedup  device  which 
responds  to  frequent  forms  of  internal  stimuli. 
Though  whatever  it  does  can,  in  principle,  be 
performed  in  the  paradigmatic  mode,  it  increa(cid:173)
ses  efficiency  and  reduces  storage  requiremerts 
by  interpreting  a  set  of  simple  stimuli  very 
economically.  Some  of  the  forms  it  handles, 
using  a  finite  state  grammar,  are* 

found  in  (17).  For  instance,  the  terms  in  the 
interpreted  statements  could  be  numbers  such 
as  3.61  or  4,  or  a  string  of words  such  as  'the 
weight  of the  stone'. 
In  the  last  case,  the  num(cid:173)
erical  value  associated  with  the  string  would  be 
searched  for  in  the  sentential  store.  Units  may 
follow  terms. 

The  sentential  store  and  the  store  for 

schemata  along  with  necessary  indexes  are 
accommodated  in  nearly  500,000  words  of  a 
disc-file  memory.  A  description  of  indexing 
and  retrieval  techniques  specially  developed  for 
this  work  may  be  found  in  (18). 

A  number  of  problems  solved  by  this 
system,  along  with  the  guiding  paradigms  may 
be  found  in  (17).  An  example  is  listed  here, 
(deletions,  employed  to  save  space  here,  are 
marked  by  ' .. .  '). 

PROBLEM  SOLVED 

C  -  5  GRAM S  OF  SAND  ARE  AT  80  DEGREE S 

CENTIGRADE 

60  GRAM S  OF  KEROSENE  ARE  AT  10 

DEGREE  S  CENTIGRADE 

THE  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  SAND  IS  0. 2 
THE  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  KEROSENE  IS 

0.4 

THE  SAND  AND  THE  KEROSENE  ARE 

BROUGHT  TOGETHER 

Q  -  WHAT  IS  THE  FINAL  TEMPERATURE 

ATTAINED 

Step  numbers  may  be  incorporated  in 

the  strings  constituting  a  paradigmatic  response. 
The  'goto'  statements  of  the  interpreter's  lan(cid:173)
guage  essentially  allow  jumping  and  looping 
within  a  sequence  of  internal  stimuli  essentially 
constituting  a  program. 

The  stimulus 

!what  is  A'  would  be 
responded  to  by  locating  a  'Sentence'  of  the 
form  'A  =  --  '  in  the  sentential  store  and  keep(cid:173)
ing  the  value  ready  for  further  use.  The  inter(cid:173)
preter  provides  for  the  use  of  'that',  'the 
result', 
quantity  arising  from  the  preceding  operation. 
The  interpreter  used  incorporates  many  sophi(cid:173)
stications,  and  descriptions  of  these  may  be 

'it'  and  'result1  to  refer  to  any  such 

*Following  standard  linguistic  convention,  alt(cid:173)
ernatives  appear  within  braces,  while  optional 
fragments  appear  within  brackets. 

Final 
Output  - 

FIND  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  KEROSENE  , 
MULTIPLY  60  BY  0.4 
MULTIPLY  THE  RESULT  BY  10 
THAT  IS  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  KEROSENE 
THE  HEAT  IN  THE  KEROSENE=  240. 000 
FIND  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  SAND 

. .. 

• • • 

THE  HEAT  IN  THE  SAND  =  80. 000 
ADD  IT  TO  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  KEROSENE 
THAT  IS  THE  TOTAL  HEAT 
THE  TOTAL  HEAT  =  320.000 
FIND  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF  THE 

MULTIPLY  60  BY  0.4 
THAT  IS  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF 

THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF  KEROSE(cid:173)

IGNORE  THE  TEMPERATURE  -  10  DEG(cid:173)

REE  S  CENTIGRADE 

FIND  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF  THE 

KEROSENE 

KEROSENE 

NE  =  24.000 

Session No.  10 Computer Understanding I (Communication) 

471 

SAND 

IGNORE  THE  TEMPERATURE  -  80  DEGRE-

ADD  IT  TO  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF 

E  S  CENTIGRADE 

THE  KEROSENE 

THAT  IS  THE  TOTAL  THERMAL  CAPAC(cid:173)

ITY 

25.000 

THE  TOTAL  THERMAL  CAPACITY  * 

DIVIDE  THE  TOTAL  HEAT  BY  THE  TOT(cid:173)

AL  THERMAL  CAPACITY 

THE  RESULT  IS  THE  ANSWER,  IN  DEG(cid:173)

REE  S  CENTIGRADE 

THE  ANSWER,  IN  DEGREE  S  CENTIGRA(cid:173)

DE  =  12,800 

PARADIGMS  USED 

C  -  75  GRAM  S  OF  CLAY  ARE  AT  20  DEGREE 

S  CENTIGRADE 

THE SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  CLAY  IS  0. 5 

Q  -  FIND  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  CLAY 

A  -  1.  MULTIPLY  75  BY  0.5 

2.  MULTIPLY  THE  RESULT  BY  20 
3.  THAT  IS  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  CLAY 

C -  75  GRAM  S  OF  METAL ARE  AT  20  DEG(cid:173)

REE  S  CENTIGRADE 

THE  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  M E T AL IS  0. 5 

Q  -  FIND  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF  THE 

M E T AL 

A  -  1.  MULTIPLY  75  BY  0.5 

2.  THAT  IS  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY 

OF  THE  M E T AL 

3.  IGNORE  THE  TEMPERATURE  -  20 

DEGREE  S  CENTIGRADE 

C  -  THE  IRON  FILING  S  AND  WATER  ARE 

BROUGHT  TOGETHER 

Q  -  WHAT  IS  THE  FINAL  TEMPERATURE 

ATTAINED 

A  -  1.  FIND  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  WATER 

2.  FIND  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  IRON  FILINGS 
3.  ADD  IT  TO  THE  HEAT  IN  THE  WATER 
4.  THAT  IS  THE  TOTAL  HEAT 
5.  FIND  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF 

THE  WATER 

6.  FIND  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY  OF 

THE  IRON  FILING  S 

7.  ADD  IT  TO  THE  THERMAL  CAPACITY 

OF  THE  WATER 

8.  THAT  IS  THE  TOTAL  THERMAL 

CAPACITY 

9.  DIVIDE  THE  TOTAL  HEAT  BY  THE 

TOTAL  THERMAL  CAPACITY 

10.  THAT  IS  THE  ANSWER,  IN  DEGREE  S 

CENTIGRADE 

8.  Discussion 

A  number  of  questions  can  be  raised 
about  this  approach.  Some  of  these  questions 
are  answered  here  and  certain  lines  for  possi(cid:173)
ble  developments  in  consonance  with  this  appro(cid:173)
ach  are  discussed. 

8. 1  Nature  of the  Language  Provided  for 

Does  the  system  at  least  provide  for 

the  use  of  phrase  structure  languages? 

It  will  be  apparent  that  we  are  not  wor(cid:173)

king  with  a  slot-and-filler  model,  where  the 
fillers  are  single  words.  Since  a  variable 
could  be  any  string  of words  and  symbols, 
there  exists  the  possibility  that  such  fillers 
themselves  will  have  a  complex  structure. 
Fillers  usually  get  transferred  from  the  stim(cid:173)
ulus  to  the  internal  responses. 
Incorporation 
of  a  filler  with  a  complex  structure  modifies 
the  internal  response  and  increases  the  proce(cid:173)
ssing  it  w i ll  go  through.  But  eventually,  any 
necessary  breaking  up  of  phrases  does  get 
carried  out. 

Further,  it  can  be  seen  that  there  is 

provision  for  handling  surface  transformations. 
If  the  system  can  handle  a  question  of  the  form 
'Does  N  divide  M?'  ,  we  can  provide  a  new 
paradigm  that  will  transform  an  equivalent 
question  to  this  form: 

C 
Q 
A 

-
Is  M  divisible  by  N? 

: 
: 
:  Does  N  divide  M? 

8. 2.  Completeness  and  Contradictions 

It  is  reasonable  to  ask  of  a  problem-
solving  system  if  it  guarantees  the  solution  of 
any  given  problem  belonging  to  some  class  of 
problems.  Can  it  give  answers  which  contra(cid:173)
dict  each  other?  Can  the  problem-solver  go 
into  an  endless  loop  in  response  to  any  given 
problem? 

The  system  described  here  can  exec(cid:173)
ute  an  algorithmic  process  and  in  that  t r i v i al 

472 

Session No.  10 Computer  Understanding I (Communication) 

sense,  it  can  guarantee  solutions  to  any  problem 
in  a  class  which  is  algorithmically  solvable. 
Operating  in  areas  which  cannot  be  wrapped  up 
in  formal  systems,  it  can  give  contradictory 
solutions. 
the  paradigms  provided  indicate  methods  of 
avoiding  such  a  possibility. 

It  can  go  into  an  endless  loop  unless 

8. 3  Possible  Developments 

Useful  minor  additions  would  include 
a  random  number  generator  accessible  in  the 
interpreter's  language  and  a  name  generator 
for  creating  arbitrary  names  for  local  variables. 
'Let  that  be  X1,  'Let  that  be  Y'  etc.  are  suffici(cid:173)
ent  for  handling  small  problems,  but  one  needs 
a  name  generator  for  larger  problems. 

The  system  presently  handles  words 

as  units  and  cannot  separate  a  word  into  its 
root  and  word-ending.  A  provision  to  handle 
this  would  be  useful. 
It  would  also  be  useful 
to  have  a  good  evaluator  for  arithmetic  expre(cid:173)
ssions,  instead  of  depending  on  the  crude  prog(cid:173)
ramming  language  of  the  interpreter.  A  very 
sophisticated  addition  would  be  a  provision 
which w i ll  enable  the  system  to  write  a  few 
lines  in  a  programming  language  such  as 
FORTRAN  and have  them  executed. 

It  would  be  very  useful  to  provide  for 
on-line  interaction  between  the  system  and  a 
communicant.  This  ought  to  be  implemented 
easily  by  incorporating  two  new  primitives  in 
the  interpreter's  repertoire,  for  on-line  input 
and  output. 

Typical  symbol  manipulation  by  a  stud(cid:173)

ent  (for  example,  that  involved  in  symbolic 
integration  or  algebraic  factorization)  is  often 
performed using  an  external  aid  such  as  a 
blackboard,  or  pencil  and  paper. 
It  would  be 
useful  to  provide  a  two  dimensional  array  on 
which  the  system  could  write,  sense,  and  mani(cid:173)
pulate  alphanumeric  expressions.  With  a  num(cid:173)
ber  of  manipulation  primitives  built  into  the 
interpreter's  repertoire,  this  array  could  be 
used  as  an  internal  blackboard. 

Such  a  'blackboard'  w i ll  also  enable 
the  writing,  examination  and  'editorial'  mani(cid:173)
pulation  oi  long  sentences.  This  might,  to  some 
extent,  bridge  the  difference  in  complexity 
between  the  sentences  used  by  the  system  and 
those  found  in  written  human  communication. 

Many  of  the  facilities  mentioned  here 

are  available  in  standard  programming  langu(cid:173)
ages,  but  it  would  be  interesting  to  see  them 
used  by  a  paradigmatic  problem-solver. 

A  more  basic  advance  would  be  the 

development  of  paradigms  which  would  lead  the 
system  to  use  t r i al  and  error  as  a  learning 
device  in  solving  a  variety  of  problems.  T r i al 
episodes  which  end  in  success  should  be  auto(cid:173)
matically  culled  out  as  useful  paradigms  for 
schematization  and  storing.  This  w i ll  involve 
considerable  addition  to  the  system  described. 

Acknowledgment 

This  work  owes  much  by  way  of  guid(cid:173)
ance  to  Professor  R.  Narasimhan,  and  without 
his  collaboration  it  would  not  have  been  possibles 

Professor  J. R.  Isaac  provided  const(cid:173)
ant  encouragement  and  his  critical  interest  put 
many  ideas  into  perspective. 

Comments  of  the  referees  on  the  orig(cid:173)

inal  draft  are  gratefully  acknowledged. 

References 

1.  Newell,  A ,,  Shaw,  J. C. ,  and  Simon,  H. A ., 
Empirical  Explorations  of  the  Logic  Theory 
Machine  Proc.  WJCC,  1957 

2.  Minsky,  M ., 

A  Selected  Descriptor-Indexed  Bibliography 
to  the  Literature  on Artificial  Intelligence, 
IRE  Transactions  on  Human  Factors  in 
Electronics,  March  61 

3.  GPS,  A  Program  that  Simulates  Human 

Thought,  in  'Computers  and  Thought', 
Feigenbaum,  E.  and  Feldman,  J .,  Eds., 
McGraw-Hill,  1963 

4.  Newell,  A .,  Shaw,  J . C .,  and  Simon,  H. A ., 
A  Variety  of  Intelligent  Learning  in  a  Gener(cid:173)
al  Problem  Solver,  Self-Organizing  Systems 
(Yovitts,  M .,  and  Cameron,  S.  Eds.) 
Pergamon,  1960 

5.  Bobrow,  D. G., 

'Natural  Language  Input  for  a  Computer 
Problem-Solving  Syst  e m 't  Ph.  D.  Thesis. 
M . I . T .,  1964 

6.  Newell,  A ., 

The  Search  for  Generality,  Proceedings  of 
the  IFIP  Congress  65,  Spartan  Books,  1965 

7.  McCarthy,  J ., 

Programs  with  Common  Sense, 
Proceedings  of the  Symposium  on  the  Mech(cid:173)
anization  of  Thought  Processes  (Blake,  D. V., 

Session No.  10 Computer Understanding I (Communication) 

473 

and  Uttley,  A . M .,  Eds.),  H. M. Stationary 
Office,  1959 

8.  Thompson,  F. B .,  English  for  the  Computer, 

Proc.  FJCC,  1966 

9.  Zwicky,  A . M .,  Friedman,  J .,  Hall,  B . C ., 

and  Walker,  D. E .,  The  Mitre  Syntactic 
Analysis  Procedure  for  Transformational 
Grammars,  AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings, 
Vol.  27,  Part  1,  1965 

10.Coles,  L.S. , 

An  On-line  Question  Answering  System  with 
Natural  Language  and  Pictorial  Input,  Proc(cid:173)
eedings  of ACM,  Spartan  Press,  1968 

11.See  the  Chapters  by  Chomsky,  N. in  Hand(cid:173)
book  of  Mathematical  Psychology,  Luce, 
R . D .,  et  al,  Eds.,  John  Wiley,  1963 

1 2. Narasimhan,  R., 

Intelligence  and  Artificial  Intelligence, 
Computer  Studies  in  the  Humanities  and 
Verbal  Behavior,  Vol.11,  Nr. 1,  March  1969 

13.Hockett,  C . F .,  The  State  of  the  A r t, 

Mouton,  1968. 

1^  Weizenbaum  J. , 

Eliza  -  A  Computer  Program  for  the  Study 
of  Natural  Language  Communication  Between 
Man  and  Machine, 
CACM,  Vol.  9,  No. 1,  Jan.  1966. 

1 5.Leavenworth,  B. M .,  Syntax  Macros  and 

Extended  Translation,  CACM,  Vol.  9,  No. 11, 
Nov.  1966 

16. Woods,  W . A .,  Transition  Network  Grammare 

for  Natural  Language  Analysis,  CACM, Vol. 
13,  No. 10,  Oct.  70 

17. Ramani,  S. , 

Language  Based  Problem-Solving,  Ph.D. 
Thesis,  Computer  Group,  Tata  Institute  of 
Fundamental  Research,  1969 

1 8.Ramani,  S. ,  Indexing  and  Retrieval  of Sent(cid:173)

ences  in  a  Natural  Language  Data-Base, 
Tech.  Report  No. 89,  Computer  Group, Tata 
Institute  of  Fundamental  Research,  Jan. 1970. 

