Session No.  11 Theoretical Foundations 

497 

IMPROVEMENT OF MARKO'S MODEL 

TOWARD THE INTER-LOCUTIONAL COMMUNICATION THEORY 

Hideo Seki 

University  of  Electro-Communications 

Tokyo,Japan 

Abstract 

A new model of a communication system was 

proposed which  takes  advantage  of  both  Shannon's 
as well as Marko's models.  Such a model was re(cid:173)
alized  by  turning  our  attention  to  the  point 
that  a two-way communication channel  may be un(cid:173)
derstood as a unidirectional channel  changing 
its  direction  alternatively  so  long  as  short 
time  duration  is  concerned. 
In  contradiction  to 
Marko's view  that  the  Shannon's  theory  is  a  spe(cid:173)
cial  case  of  Marko's  theory,  the  author  takes  a 
view  that  both  theories  must  be  included  in  his 
new single model. 

Communication between  three  information 

nodes was also discussed as  an example of multi(cid:173)
ple  inter-locutional  communications.  The  full 
paper  will  be  divided  into  following  parts. 

1.  Introduction 
2.  Shannon's Model 
3.  Marko's Model 
4. 
Improved Model 
5.  Multiple  Inter-Locutional  Communications 
6.  Conclusion 

1.  Introduction 

Shannon's model of  a communication channel 
is  useful  for  the  efficient  and  reliable  trans(cid:173)
mission  of  information,  while  that  of  Marko 
may  be more appropriate  for  treating  the  case of 
actual  communication between  two  living  creatures 
or  between one  creature  and his  surroundings,  as 
Marko  insisted.  The  author  also  agrees with  the 
latter  in  the  point  that  such  a new model  should 
be  promising for  developing an  inter-locutional 
communication  theory  in  the  future.  However  I 
have  a  different  opinion  in  some  minor  points, 
those which  are  the main  parts  of  this  paper. 
In  short,  the  information  flow  between  two  nodes 
should  be unidirectional  during  a  small  interval 
of  time  and  it  may  be  considered  bidirectional 
only  when  the  time  intervals  are  sufficiently 
long.  From  this  standpoint,  I  would  like  to 
Insist  that  the  Shannon's  model  is  not  a  special 
case of Marko's model  and  the new model  should 
include both. 

Before  considering  the  new model,  it  will 

be  helpful  to  review briefly  both models. 

2.  Shannon1 Model 

IS,T,CH,R,D and N,  shown  in Fig.l,  respec(cid:173)
tively  express  information  source,  transmitter, 
communication channel,  receiver,  destination and 

noise source. 

Let x1 , x2,... , xk. ,...x  be  representation 
elements(e.g.  letters)  at  the  transmitter  side 
and  the set  of  these  elements be written  as  X. 
Similarly,  Y  is  the  set  on  the  receiver  side, 
including y  ,  y  , . . .,  y,,...  y  .  Then  the  self 
entropies may be expressed as follows. 

where  P(x, )  or  P(y.)  is  the  probability  of  oc(cid:173)
currence.  P(xk  ,  yi)  and P(xkI y  )  are  joint  and 
conditional  probabilities  respectively. 
As  is well  known,  the mutual  entropy  is  used  for 
the  estimation  of  channel  capacity  and  is  relat(cid:173)
ed  to other entropies  as  follows. 
I( X; Y ) -- H(X) - H( XY ) - H( Y ) - H( Y|X ) 

The  conditional  entropy H(  X|Y  )  is  called 
equivocation,  while  H(  Y|X  )  is  channel  noise 
entropy.  According  to  the  notation  of  Marko, 
the  latter  is  written  as D12or D21 and  called  by 
him as  discrepancy.  The net  information  at  the 
receiver  side  is,  of  course,  the  difference  be(cid:173)
tween the  tranmitted  information and  equivoca(cid:173)
tion.  This  difference  is  I(  X;Y  )  itself. 

3. Marko's model 

The'notations  in  Fig.2  are  slightly  modified 
from  those  shown  in Marko's model  in  the  origi(cid:173)
nal  paper  so as  to  facilitate  the  reader's  com(cid:173)
parison with Shannon's model,  i.e.  H( X  )  and 

498 

Session No.  11 Theoretical Foundations 

H( X|Y ) are used here instead of H1 and D21 re­
spectively.  However,  1( X;Y )  cannot  be used 
for T21 ,  because  of  the  unsymmetric  character of 
T  and  T  .  In  this  case,  I( X->Y )  was  used  for 
T21  while  I(  X<-Y  )  for  T12. 
Note  that  represents  the  set  of  transmitting 
elements in I( X->Y ), while the same letter X 
denotes  the  set  of  received  elements  in  I( X<-Y ) 
As will be shown later,  symbol  I( X;Y ) may be 
used for the sum equation  (15). 

In this model, X is an information source 
as well as a destination and Y has also two 
meanings. For this reason, X and Y(3) can conven­
iently be called  Information nodes 

Then,  according to Marko's  theory,  the message 
element  x  following αn not only depends  on  the 
elements  α1  α2  .  .  .  out also on β1 β2 . . .. βn . . 
Let  us  represent  this  conditional  probability on 
the side of node X by P( x1xn, yn) .  Similarly, 
the  conditional  probability on  the  side  of  node 
Y can be defined by P( y 
x  ).  Consider 
also  the  joint  conditional  probability  P(  x, 
yx  ,y  )  which  is  the  probability  of  joint 
occurrence x and y due to the preceding n events 
on the side of nodes X and Y respectively. 

n  n 

Then the total subjective entropy on X side 

can be defined by 

In  contrast  to  the  Shannon's model, where 

the equivocation was simply expressed by 

1I( X ) - 1( X;Y  ) 

and the channel noise was 

H( Y  )  -  l( X;Y  ), 

as  in equation  (3),  the  corresponding quantities 
should  take  the  following  forms  in Marko's mod­
el. 
Equiv. 
CM -  N 

= II ( X ) - 1  ( X->Y ) 
:  H ( Y|X ) = H ( Y ) - 1 ( X<-Y ) 

H  (  X|Y  )  -

: 

(13) 

Note  that  the  free  subjective  entropies  seem 
similar  as  above  but  have  basic  differences  as 
follows 
on X side 
on Y s i d e 

:  H ( X|XY ) = 11 ( X ) - T  ( X-Y ) 
:  H  ( Y|YX ) = H ( Y ) - J  ( X-Y ) 

The  directive  subjective mutual  entropies 

defined by equations  (11)  and  (12)  are,  of 
course,  non-symmetric. But their sum becomes 
symmetric as follows 

(14) 

T  ( X;Y  ) = I  ( X-Y  ) + 1  ( X-Y  ) 

(15) 

Thus this sum may be understood as the total mu 
tual  entropy  and be written  as  I  ( X;Y  ),  using 
the same  notation as  in the case of  Shannon's 
model.  Then the definition of  total mutual  en­
tropy may be written down as follows. 

On the other hand,  the free subjective entropies 
on X and Y sides can respectively be defined by 
the  follosing  two equations. 

The  following  relations  also are deducible  from 
equation  (14). 

H(  X|XY  )  : lim { -  Y P( xn, yn, x  ) log P( x |x

n , y

n )} 

n 

XY 

!!( Y|YX  )  Jim {- }  ]'( yn, x",  y )  lop. I'(y|yn, xM  ) } 

n ^  YX 

(9),(10) 

The  directive  subjective mutual  entropy  through 
the left-going communication channel should be 
expressed  as 

C\A\ 

and,  therefore,  the  similar  quantity  through  the 
right-going communication channel  can analogously 

Such condition was denominated by Marko as 
"suggestion", where the information received by 
node X from node Y shall be returned without any 
transformation.  However,  in  the general  case  of 

Session No.  11 Theoretical Foundations 

499 

H ( X ) ≠1 ( X .Y )  , 

"stochastic  degree  of  synchronization"  or  "de 
gree of  perception" was defined by him as  fol 
lows. 

In  this  case,  if  the  condition 

H ( X|XY ) = 1  ( X>Y ) 
11 ( Y|YX ) = 1  ( X-Y ) 

(18) 

(19) 

is  sat isfied,  the  coupling between two nodes be­
come maximum and the relation 

results,  as  can be seen easily.  But,  in general, 

(20) 

results  from equations  (14)  and  (15). 

Fig.  3  shows  the possible values of  the 

stochastic  degree  of  synchronization  under  dif­
ferent  conditions. 

(21) 

4.  Improved Model 

Marko's model seems perfectly general so as 
to  be  applied  to  the  inter-]ocutional  communica­
tions between the  animals  and machines.  However, 
it  seems  to me  that  a  fine-structural  refinement 
should  be  necessary  for  further  development  of 
the  bidirectional  information  theory.  The  reason 
is  that  the  telephone  communication  between  two 
persons,  data communication between two computers 
and many other  communications  are unidirectional 
as  far  as  a  short  interval  of  time  is  concerned. 
TASI  system  is an example  that  such  substantial 
characteristics  in  speech were  properly  used. 
This means the model should be Shannon's, at 
least,  within  a  short  interval.  Reversing of  the 
direction  of  information  flow occurs  only when 
the  storage and processing of  the received mes­
sages  are  completed.  This  idea  necessarily  re­
quires the model  to be modified to a new model as 
Fig.  4 where  the  situation of  information  source 
and  destination  alternatively  reverses  from  time 
to  time.  In Fig.  4,  IN means  information node 
which becomes  information source or  destination 
depending on  the  instant  of  situation. 

Now,  the model of Fig.  3 is a uni-direction-
al  communication  channel  and  the  equations  from 
(1)  to  (6)  hold exactly,  so  far  as  the  change­
over switch is  set on the  fixed  side.  As  a con­
sequence, H  ( X|XY )  in Marko's model becomes 
simply as H ( X )  .or 

Thus,  a ll  relations  which  were  deduced  in  the 
unidirectional  communication  model  may  be  apl-
lied  to  the  new  model. 
cal  sense,  the  notation 
not  be  true,  because  of  the  f i n i te  duration  of 
time  of  the  change-over  switch  position.  But, 
it  is  not  a  serious  problem  in  practice. 

In  a  rigorous  mathemati­
(22)  and  (23)  may 

Let  us  consider  next  the  case  of  two  commu-
cation  channels  of  opposite  flows  of  information 
between  two  communication  nodes. 
In  such  cases, 
the  continuous  flows  of  signals  may  occur  in 
both  directions,  and  the  model  cannot  be  consid­
ered  to  be  unidirectional  if  even  a  very  short 
interval  Is  taken  so  long  as  we  pay  an  at Lent, ion 
to  the  middle  point  of  communication  route. 
Even  this  model  also  may  be  regarded  as  a  unidi­
rectional  flow,  at  least,  at  both  terminals  of 
communication  route  where  two  change-over 
switches  are  inserted  as  shown  in  Fig.  5,  which 
is  the  result  of  fine-structural  consideration. 
Thus,  considering  the  network  inside  the  dotted 
square  as  a  communication  channel,  you  can  see 
that  the  Fig.  5  exactly  coincides  with  Fig.  4. 

Now,  anyway,  the  changing  over  of  switches 
should  occur  always  when,  at  least,  a  whole  sen­
tence  is  completed. 
In  other  words,  the  revers­
ing  of  direction  of  an  information  flow  w i ll  a l­
ways  occur  when  a  sentence  α1  α2  ....αn  or  sen-
tences  composed  from  representation  elements  x 
x2 
or  sentences  originated  from  node  X  be 
.  Then, 
node  Y  w i ll  send  back  another  sentence  or  series 
of  sentences  choosing  from  his  repertoire,  con­
sidering  it  as  a  most  suitable  one  for  a  special 

. ..  is  over.  Let  this  sentence  or  series 

(27) 

Thus you can see that  the Marko s entropy equa­
tions  become  necessary  at  this  level  of  sen­
tences.  Similarly,  the  equations  from  (11)  to 
(17) may be rewritten in the same manner as 
above, but may be  omitted here for  the simpli­
fication. 

In  short,  the  improved model  coincides with 

Shannon's model  at  letter  (  representation  ele­
ment  )  level  and with Marko's model  at  sentence 

500 

Session No.  11 Theoretical  Foundations 

(  message  )  level.  Representation  elements  have 
no  meanings,  while  the  messages  have. 

Communications  having  a  fixed  purpose  among 

nodes  might  have  considerable  effects  on  their 
forthcoming  behavior. 
If  the  relation  between 
the  messages  and  bahavior  could  be  estimated 
quantitatively,  a  value  anylysis  of  information 
may  also  be  possible. 

5.  Multiple  Inter-Locutional  Communications 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  stochastic  degree 
of  synchronization  (18)  proposed  by  Marko  is  a 
measure  of  persuasion.  But  the  purpose  of  com(cid:173)
munication  among  multiple  nodes  may  be  flexible. 
For  example,  it  may  be  consultaion,  discussion, 
quarrel  or  any  other  type. 
In  such  cases,  value 
of  information  or  measure  of  learning  may  become 
necessary  instead  of  the  stochastic  degree  of 
synchronization. 

The  old  proverb  says,  "  two  heads  are  better 

than  one  ".  The  similar  proverb  in  Japan  says, 
"  three  heads  constitute  Manjusuri  ".  This  sug(cid:173)
gests  that  the  value  of  information  can  be  raised 
up  by  communications  among  multiple  nodes.  Al(cid:173)
though  the  quantitative  analyses  of  such  informa(cid:173)
tion  processing  are  extremely  d i f f i c u lt  at  this 
stage,  s t i ll  we  can  roughly  analyses,  in  princi(cid:173)
ple,  according  to  the  model  of  Fig.  6.  Fig.  6 
(a)  is  an  abbreviated  diagram  of  Fig.  4,  at  the 
same  time  inserting  third  node  Z. 
(b),  (c)  or 
(d)  of  Fig.  6  show  states,  respectively,  when  X, 
Y  or  Z  is  the  information  source  and  the  remain(cid:173)
ing  two  are  destination. 

rising  up  after  repeating  inter-locution  and 
finally  approaches  unity. 

In  Snannon's  mathemetical  theory  of  commu-
cation,  the  average  amount  of  information  mes(cid:173)
sages  instead  of  special  messages  was  a  most  im(cid:173)
portant  quantity.  But,  in  our  case,  probabili(cid:173)
ties  of  same  messages  are  rather  important  and 
this  very  quantity  may  be  considered  a  measure  of 
the  value  of  information. 

Another  suitable.measure  for  the  group  as 

a  whole  is  learning 

,  i.e. 

The  number  of  nodes  also  can  be  extended  to 

more  than  three.  Christie  and  others  have  dis(cid:173)
cussed  the  case  of  nodes  5  and  got  some  experi(cid:173)
mental  results  under  proper  constraints. 

A  brain  also  can  be  taken  as  a  system  con-

sistinfg  of  many  localized  information  proces(cid:173)
sors  or  nodes  and  communication  channels  between 
nodes.  Thus  even  a  brain  ordinarily  considered 
as  one  node  in  the  case  of  inter-locution 
should  be  taken  as  an  ensemble  of  nodes. 
the  above  mentioned  new  model  probably  become 
one  of  the  important  suggestions  for  treating 
thinking  processes  of  the  brain. 

If  so, 

6.  Conclusion 

In  concluding  my  discussion  about  the  new 

model  for  inter-locutional  communication,  It 
seems  better  to  summarize  some  important  points 
for  further  studies  as  follows: 
a.  Though  the  node  In  an  inter-locutional  com(cid:173)
munication  net  is  able  to  be  an  information 
source  or  a  destination,  it  must  remain  to  be 
either  of  them  within  a  short  interval  of  time, 
i.e.  the  model  must  be  uni-directional. 
b.  Statistical  relations  between  representation 
elements  follow  the  mathematics  of  Shannon's 
model  at  the  level  of  uni-directional  communi(cid:173)
cations . 
c.  Statistical  relations  between  messages, 
should  follow  the  mathematics  of  Marko's  model 
at  the  level  of  inter-locutional  communications. 
d.  Though  continuous  information  flows  to  both 
directions  may  occur  in  a  4  wire  communication 
channel,  it  s t i ll  may  be  regarded  as  a  revised 
model,  because  two  change-over  switches  are 
necessary  just  in  front  of  the  information  pro(cid:173)
cessing  units. 
e.  The  new  model  can  be  extended  to  the  inter-
locutional  communications  between  more  than  two 
nodes  by  considering  conditional  probabilities 
of  choosing  particular  messages.  Thus  the  def(cid:173)
inition  of  the  value  of  information  and  the 
learning  of  the  group  may  become  possible. 
Finally,  the  author  would  like  to  offer 

(28) 
Fig.  7  shows  this  tendency.  Before  starting 
inter-locution,  the  figure  showa  that  the  proba(cid:173)
b i l i t i es  P  of  choosing  any  message  are  uniformly 
distributed.  Assuming  the  abscissa  is  the  order 
number  of  probabilities  arranged  from  higher  to 
lower  ones,  the  peak  of  the  curve  gradually 

Session No.  11 Theoretical Foundations 

501 

many  thanks  to  the  members  of  I.E.C.E.J 
their  suggestive  discussions. 

for 

References 

(2)  H.  Marko  :  I.E.E.E.  Spectrum,  4  ,  pp.76-83 

(  1976  ) 

(1)  C.E.Shannon  :  B.S.T.J.,  27.pp.379-423; 

pp.  623-653  (  1948  ) 

(3)  Lee  S.  Christie,  R.  Duncan  Luce  and  Josiah 
Macy,  Jr.  :  Communication  and  Learning  in 
Task-Oriented  Groups,  MIT,  RLE  Technical 
Rrport  No.231  (  May  13,  1952  ) 

502 

Session No.  11 Theoretical Foundations 

Session No.  11 Theoretical Foundations 

503 

