Session No.  15 Heuristic Problem Solving 

651 

CHANGES  IN  REPRESENTATION WHICH 

PRESERVE  STRATEGIES  IN  GAMES 

by 

Ranan  B.  Banerji  &  George  W.  Ernst 

Professors,  Engineer!ng  &  Information  Sciences 

Case  Western  Reserve  University 

Cleveland,  Ohio 
United  States 

ABSTRACT 

One  reason  for  changing  the  representation 
of  a  game  is  to  make  it  similar  to  a  previously 
solved  one.  As  a  definition  of  similarity, 
people  have  previously  often  proposed  homomor-
phism-like  structures.  One  such  structure,  the 
"s 
paper. 

is  defined  and  studied  in  this 

-homomorphism", 

It  is  indicated  that  a  useful  winning  stra(cid:173)

tegy  exists  for  any  game  in  a  general  class 
called,  "positional  games".  A  set  of  sufficient 
conditions  is  derived  which  a  game  has  to  f u l f i ll 
to  have  an  s0-homomorphism  with  a  positional 
game.  The  conditions  are  exemplified  by  applying 
it to  a  class  of  games  shown  by  Newell  to  be 
representable  as  tic-tac-toe. 

KEY WORDS 

Game-playing,  problem-solving,  strategies, 
homomorphisms,  representation,  a r t i f i c i al  i n t e l(cid:173)
ligence. 

1. 

the 

Introduction 
It-  has  been  known  for  some  time  that 
ease  with  which  a  problem  can  be  solved  is 
heavily  dependent  on  the  manner  in  which  the 
problem  is  stated.  To  enable  a  serious  study  of 
this  phenomenon,  (which  we  shall  call  represen(cid:173)
tation  dependence),  it  is  necessary  to  have  a 
well-defined  model  of  what  a  problem  i s.  Three 
such  models  are  available  in  the  literature, 
Green[6],  Amare]  [1]  and  Ernst  and  Newell  [ 5 ], 
The  latter  two  have  been  used  to  study  repre(cid:173)
sentation  dependence. 
problem  is  considered  to  be  that  of  proving  a 
statement  in  a  f i r st  order  predicate  calculus. 
It  is  our  belief  that  the  study  of  representation 
dependence  is  possible  in  this  model  also  in 
terms  of  what  is  known  as  the  extension  of 
theories  by  definition  [10]. 

In  the  third  one  any 

Any  of  these  existing  models  can  thus  be 

used  for  the  study  of  representation  dependence. 
Indeed,  some  day  we  may  be  able  to  consider  the 
relationship  between  the  three  models  in  terms 
of  such  a  study.  Meanwhile,  studies  on  repre(cid:173)
sentation  dependence  w i ll  have  to  continue 
separately  along  these  three  different  avenues. 
This  paper  w i ll  use  a  formal  variant-  of  the 
"state  space"  model  of  GPS  [5]  and  study  certain 
issues  of  representation  dependence. 

The  reason  for  changing  the  representation 
of  a  problem  is  not  always  to  make  the  problem 

In  many  cases 

[9]  argues  as  follows:  When 

"simpler"  (although  in  the  examples  of  Amarel 
[1 ]  the  problem  space  is  shrunk). 
changing  the  representation  of  a  problem  i n(cid:173)
creases  i ts  search  space,  and  yet  makes  the 
problem  easier  by  allowing  previously  learned 
problem  solving  methods  to  be  used  in  the 
problem.  Polya 
a  person  is  given  a  problem  if  he  notices 
sufficient  similarities  between  the  given  pro(cid:173)
blem  and  a  problem  which  he  knows  how  to  solve, 
then  he  can  solve  the  given  problem  in  the  same 
way  that  he  solved  the  known  problem. 
eral,  the  two  problems  w i ll  have  different, 
abstract-  structures  (in  our  case  different 
state  spaces),  but  they  are  sufficiently  similar 
that  the  same  strategies,  heuristics,  etc.,  can 
be  used  on  both. 

In  gen(cid:173)

As  a  definition  of  this  similarity  we  pro(cid:173)

pose  different  kinds  of  homomorphism-like 
relationships  between  two  problems  which  pre(cid:173)
serves  certain  strategies,  heuristics,  etc.,  for 
solving  the  problems.  Por  instance,  Amarel  [1 ] 
has  suggested  that  what  is  a  single  transfor(cid:173)
mation  in  one  problem  may  correspond  to  a 
sequence  of  transformations  in  another  problem. 
Other  kinds  of  homomorphisms  have  also  been 
described  in  the  literature.  For  example,  there 
is  a  well  known  similarity  between  the  strategies 
for  playing  the  games  of  staircase  nim  and  nim. 
This  similarity  is  a  rather  unusual  homomor(cid:173)
phism  between  the  two  gomes.  This  led  some  to 
develop  general  methods  to  determine  if  a  given 
game  is  homomorphic  to  nim.  The  resulting 
methods  led  to  the  discovery  of  a  homomorphism 
between  the  eight  pawns  game  and  nim  (and 
several  other  homomorphisms  [2,3]). 

Encouraged  by  these  results,  we  decided  to 

study  the  conditions  under  which  a  game  could 
have  a  tic-tac-toe-like  game  as  a  homomorphic 
image.  Previous  to  this  investigation,  a  gen(cid:173)
eralized  class  of  games,  called  positional 
games,  had  been  studied  by  Koffman  [71.  This 
class  included  such  games  as  Go-Moku,  Hex, 
Bridgit  and  two  and  three  dimensional  tic-tac-
toe.  Koffman  developed  a  game-independent 
learning  technique  which  was  effective  for  any 
positional  game.  The  development  of  methods  for 
recognizing  homomorphisms  with  positional  games 
would  enable  wider  application  of  Koffman's 
method  for  playing  these  games. 

Another  reason  for  studying  homomorphisms 
with  positional  games  is  to  try  to  answer  some 
of  the  questions  raised  by  Simon  [11]  and  by 
Newell  [8],  They  claimed  that  the  four  games  in 
Fig.  1  (one  of  which  is  tic-tac-toe)  are 
"isomorphic"  to  one  another  in  some  very  non-
obvious  ways.  We  found  that  a  few  of  these 
games  were  not  even  obviously  positional, 
although  most-  of  them  were.  Therefore,  we  felt-
that  a  deeper  analysis  of  game  structures  was 
needed  before  homomorphisms  with  positional  games 
could  be  studied. 

During  our  investigation,  it  also  became 
evident,  that  the  homomorphisms  one  should  be 
looking  for  are  certainly  not  one-one  maps  or 

652 

Session No.  15 Heuristic Problem Solving 

Session No. 15 Heuristic Problem Solving 

653 

654 

Session No.  15 Heuristic Problem Solving 

PO  gives  the  set  of  game  situations.  P1  and 

P2  relate  the  wins  and  losses  to  A  and  B.  P3 
indicates  that  the  f i r st  player  is  on  move  when 
m~1 .  According  to  P4,  the  f i r st  player's  move 
consists  of  moving  an  element  of  #  to  X,  while 
the  second  player's  move  consists  of  moving  an 
element  of  #  to  Y.  F4  also  forbids  moves  from 
a  win  or  a  loss. 

Tic-tac-toe  can  be  represented  as  a  posi(cid:173)

tional  game.  N  is  the  set  of  nine  squares  on  a 
tic-tac-toe  board.  A  is  the  set  of  horizontal, 
vertical  and  diagonal  lines,  and  B  -  A;  i . e .,  the 
set  of  winning  paths  are  the  same  for  both 
players. 
3.2  Definition  of  Reducible  Games 

(Often  a  game  can  be  described,  conveniently, 

in  terms  of  a  set  of  properties.  A  chess  posi(cid:173)
tion,  for  example,  can  be  described  by  consider(cid:173)
ing  each  square  to  be  a  property  whose  value  is 
the  piece  on  the  square  (or  empty).  A  property 
then  is  a  function  which  maps  game  situations 
into  some  set,  e.g.,  chess  pieces.  Reducible 
games  are  described  in  terms  of  such  properties. 
A  reducible  game  (S,  R,  P,  W,  L)  is  des(cid:173)
cribed  in  terms  of  n  such  properties,  f,. ,  f2,, 
. . .,  f  ,  and  two  classes,  A  and  B,  of  subsets  of 
these  properties.  For  any  position  in  S  each 
of the  n  properties  has  a  value  of  0,  1 ,  ?  or  3. 
The  postulates  of  a  reducible  game  involve  the 
set  T  of  positions  that  are  reachable  from  some 
starting  position  s0eS.  Space  does  not  allow 
us  to  give  a  complete  formal  definition  of  the 
Instead,  we 
postulates  of  a  reducible  game. 
give  a  brief  informal  description  of  a  reducible 
game  and  a  detail  description  of  race,  a  typical 
reducible  game. 

The  A  and  B  of  a  reducible  game  are  analo(cid:173)
gous  to  the  A  and  [3  of  a  positional  game.  Each 
element  acA  is  a  winning  set  of  properties  in 
the  sense  that  a  reachable  position  s  is  a  win 
if  f(s)-1 
i'or  each  f  ga.  Similarly,  a  reachable 
position,  s  is  a  loss  if  f(s)-?  for  each  febeB. 
Each  legal  move  from  a  reachable  position, 

In  addition,  once  a  property  acquires 

s,  to  a  new  position  t ( i . e .,  sRt)  changes  the 
value  of  some  properly  f  from  0  to  non-zero. 
That  i s,  there  is  an  f  such  that.  f(s)-0  and 
f(t)^0. 
a  non-zero  value  i f  wil 1  remain  non-zero  for  the 
remainder  of  the  game.  Due  to  these  rules  (and 
other  rules  described  below)  about 
the  way  that 
moves  change  the  values  of  properties,  a  property 
can  become  inessential  to  the  play  of  the  game. 
An  inessential  property  is  one  that  can  never 
contribute  to  a  win  (or  a  loss-)  because  every 
winning  (losing) 
least,  one  property  whose  value  cannot  be  changed 
to  a  1  (2),  Moves  affect 
the  values  of  inessen(cid:173)
t i al  properties  in  a  different  way  than  essential 
properties. 

set  containing  it,  contains  at-

If  a  reachable  position  s  is  not  a  win  nor a 

loss,  and  if  f(s)-0  for  some  property, 
then 
there  is  a  legal  move  from  s  to  a  new  position 
t  ( i . e .,  sRt). 
In  t  all  of  the  essential  pro(cid:173)
perties  have  the  same  values  as  they  had  in  s 

f, 

f 

except  for  f  whose,  value  changes,  i . e .,  f(t)=0. 
If  f  is  an  inessential  property  of  t,  f(t)=3. 
is  an  essential  property  of  t,  f(t)=1  if 
If 
the  player  made  the  move  ( i . e .,  sgP). 
If  the 
opponent,  made  the  move  and  f  is  essential  for  t, 
then  f ( t ) - 2. 
t i al  properties  of  t  acquire  a  value  of  3.  Thus, 
we  see  that  a  single  move  may  change  the  values 
of  several  properties. 

In  addition,  all  of  the  inessen(cid:173)

An  example,  race,  w i ll  help  to  clarify  the 
above  description  of  reducible  games.  One  way 
to  describe  a  race  position  is  to  t e ll  the 
players  who  is  on  move,  what  tickets  are  s t i ll 
available  for  purchase,  and  how  the  horses  stand, 
i . e .,  to  whom,  if  any,  each  horse  belongs  and 
where  it,  stands  on  the  track,  which  horses  are 
disqualified  and  which  horses  are  unowned.  Each 
situation,  then,  has  three  components,  and  we 
shall  designate  a  situation  by  a  triple  ( t,  b, m) 
where  m  is  the  usual  move  indicator,  0  or  1. 
The  f i r st  component,, 
tickets.  The  second  component,,  b,  is  the  board, 
i . e .,  an  assignment  to  each  horse  of  P1 ,  P.?,  P3, 
E1 ,  E2,  E.3,  U0  or  DQ.  These  values  stand  for 
"owned  by  the  f i r st  player  and  in  position  1,  71 
or  3",  "owned  by  the  second  player  and  in  posi(cid:173)
tion  1,  ?,  or  3n,  "unowned"  and  "disqualified", 
respectively. 

t,  is  the  set  of  unbought 

We  may,  at  this  point,  make  various  con(cid:173)

In  any  case,  it  makes  no 

ventions  about  whether  any  combination  of  these 
three  components  would  be  allowed.  Should  we, 
for  instance,  accept  a  situation  where  no 
tickets  are  bought,  two  horses  (one  owned  by 
each  player)  have  already  won,  while  three 
others  are  disqualified?  The  answer,  we  believe, 
is  a  matter  of  taste. 
difference  in  the  final  analysis,  because  as 
long  as  we  take  the  proper  i n i t i al  situation 
as  the  one  where  all  the  tickets  are  unbought 
and  all  the  horses  are  unowned,  then  the  move 
rules  restrict  T  to  exclude  all  such  nonsense 
states,  since  such  states  cannot  be  reached  by 
any  sequence  of  legal  moves.  This  exemplifies 
the  strong  influence  of  the  set  T  on  a ll  our 
discussions  and  explains  why  it  plays  such  an 
import,ant  role  in  our  definitions. 
Continuing  with  the  example, 
let  position 
(t.,b0,m0)  be  a  legal  move  from  position 
(t'1  ,b1,m1
2  ).  Then  t2  contains  a ll  the  tickets  in 
t1  except  some  specific  ticket  Mi.  Also  m1=0  if 
m4-1  and  vice  versa,  b,,  is  obtained  from  b1  as 
the  ownership  and  the  position  of  all 
follows: 
the  horses  are  the  same  in  b1  and  b,,  except  for 
those  whose  columns  contains  an  X  in  the  Mi  row 
of  the  move  table  in  Fig.  1.  For  these  horses, 
their  values  are  advanced  one  step  if  they  are 
unowned  or  belong  to  the  player  on  move.  That 
i s,  if  m2=0,  then  a  value  of  P1  becomes  P2,  P2 
If  m2=1  then 
becomes  2P3  and UO becomes  P1. 
E1  becomes  E2  etc,  and  U0  becomes  E12.  If  the 
horse  belongs  to  the  opponent  of  the  player  on 
move, 
if  m2=0  then 
values  of  E1  and  E2  become  DQ  and  if  m2=1  then 
P1  and  V?  become  DQ.  Disqualified  horses  on 
the  Mi  list,  remain  disqualified. 

it  is  disqualified, 

i . e ., 

Session No.  15 Heuristic Problem Solving 

655 

A  situation  (t,b,m)  is  winning  if  and  only 

To  see  that  this  game  is  reducible,  one  sets 

if  there  is  some  horse  h  with  a  value  P'3  in  b  and 
m=1 .  Similarly  (t,b,m)L  if  and  only  if  m-0  and 
there  is  a  horse  whose  value  is  E3. 
up  one  function  fif or  each  ticket,  Mi  as  follows. 
fi  (1<i<?)  for  a  situation  is  0  if 
The  value  of 
and  only  if  Mi  is  unbought,  i . e .,  if  Mi  et. 
If 
Mi  is  not  in  t,  the  value  of  f  has  to  be  sur(cid:173)
mised  from  the  values  of  the  horse  as  given  in 
If  at  least  one  horse  appearing  in  the  row 
b. 
of  the  ticket  Mi  has  a  value  P1,  P2  or  P3,  the 
value  of  fi.  is  1 . 
If  at  least  one  horse  on  the 
row  o  f  Mi  ft  as  a  value  E1  ,  E2  or  E3,  the  value 
of  f. 
a  starting  state  where  a ll  the  tickets  arc  on 
the  table  and  all  the  horses  are  unowned,  then 
these  two  rules  wilI  never  contradict  one 
another). 
qualified,  then  f.  has  the  value  3  for  the  state. 

( If  the  game  is  played  legally  from 

If  all  horses  in  the  row  Mi  are  dis-

is  2. 

It  is  clear 

that  if  any  winning  situation 

is  reached  from  the  usual  starting  situation, 
then  the  table  shows  that  there  should  be  exactly 
three  tickets  be!onging  to  the  winning  player 
which  has  the  winning  horse's  name  on  i t.  So 
there  is  a  set  of  f 's  such  that  a ll  their  values 
are  1  at  that  situation.  Thus  one  can  isolate  a 
class  of  sets  of  the  f 's  such  that  a  situation 
is  a  win  if  and  only  if  all 
the  members  of  some 
set  in  this  class  has  the  value  1.  This  shows 
that  the  wins  and  losses  of  a  race  are  specified 
in  the  same  way  as  the  wins  and  losses  of  a 
reducible  game. 

To  see  how  the  move  rules  of  race  f it  the 

to  the  opponent,  then  after 

above  description  of  reducible  games,  let  the 
value  of  f  be  0  for  some  situation.  From  what 
has  gone  above  it  is  clear  that  in  this  case  Mi 
w i ll  be  an  unbought  ticket. 
If  this  is  a  reach-
able  situation  which  is  neither  a  win  nor  a  loss, 
then  the  player  on  move  can  buy  this  ticket. 
If 
the  horses  on  this  ticket  are  either  dis(cid:173)
alI 
qualified  or  belong 
buying  this  ticket  a ll  the  horses  on  it  w i ll  be 
disqualified  and  the  value  of  the  ticket  for  the 
new  state  w i ll  be  3.  Otherwise  the  value  of  f 
will  be  determined  by  the  identity  of  the  player, 
which  in  turn,  will  be  reflected  by  the  owner(cid:173)
ships  of  the  horses  in  the  next  position.  As  far 
as  a ll  the  other  tickets  are  concerned,  the  un(cid:173)
bought  ones  will  remain  unbought,  and  the  others 
w i ll  either  retain  their  values  (since  horses  do 
not  change  hands,  nor  do  'the 
bearing  the  horses  names)  or  some  tickets  take 
on  the  value  3  if  their  horses  get  disqualified 
by  the  purchase. 
3.3  A  Homomorphism 

tickets 

In  this  section  we  define  a  relation  h 

between  positional  and  reducible  games.  Theorem 
2  proves  that  this  relation  is  an  s0-morphism. 
Our  reason  for  doing  this  is  that  we  have  power(cid:173)
ful  methods  for  playing  positional  games.  Since 
s  -morphisms  preserve  winning  strategies,  we  can 
now  apply  these  same  methods  to  reducible  games. 

666 

Session No.  15 Heuristic Problem Solving 

as  the  tickets.  Also,  if  the'image  of  a  race 
position  in  tic-tac-toe  is  to  be  determined,  it-
has  to  be  done,  not  in  terms  of  the  history  of 
the  game,  but  only  in  terras  of  the  position  it-
self.  As  we  have  remarked  before,  the  position 
is  adequately  described  in  terms  of  the  board  and 
just  the  unbought  tickets.  An  onlooker  walking 
in  at  the  middle  of  the  game  is  at  no  disadvan(cid:173)
tage  if  he  does  not  know  who  bought  which  ticket 
in  the  past.  Our  method  of  formulation  reflects 
this  fact. 
is  capable  of  exhibiting  the  homomorphism  even 
in  this  formulation.  Our  surmise  is  that theorem 
2  would  be  able  to  recognize  a  positional  game 
no  matter  how  it  is  formulated.  The  examples 
in  this  paper  have  used  only  the  games  in  Fig.  1, 
However,  more  complicated  games  of  race  ( i . e ., 
more  horses  and  tickets)  would  have  throe 
dimensional  tic-tac-toe,  Bridgit  or  other  posi(cid:173)
tional  games  as  their  images.  We  have  used  the 
race  in  Fig.  1  to  keep  the  examples  simple. 
4.  Concluding  Remarks 

It  also  points  out  how  theorem  2 

Of  the  various  ways  in  which  one  can  change 
the  representation  of  games,  we  have  considered 
the  case  where  the  change  takes  the  game  to  a 
homomorphic  image.  Of  course,  the  kind  of 
homomorphism  considered  in  this  paper  (to  wit, 
the  s  -homomorphism),  is  not  the  only  kind  of 
homomorphism  that  can  be  studied.  The  various 
examples  studied  by  Amarel  [1]  and  the  graph 
homomorphism  studied  by  Banerji  [ ],  are  examples 
of  other  kinds  of  homomorphisms.  Whether  all 
these  can  ultimately  be  unified  to  a  general 
class  of  relations  between  representations  or 
whether  we  will  have  to  remain  satisfied  with  a 
number  of  special  cases,  remains  to  be  seen. 

If  is  our  belief  that  some  of  the 

results 

in  this  paper,  together  with  other  work  on 
homomorphisms,  is  a  f i r st  step  towards  the 
automatic  change  of  representation.  Theorem  1, 
for  instance,  <-ould  lead  to  the  automatic  veri(cid:173)
fication  of  a  "hunch"  that  a  given  game  may  have 
e  strategy  similar  to  that  of  a  previously 
known  game.  Given  a  repertoire  of  previously 
understood  games,  the  theorem  may  lead  to  on 
exhaustive  search  for  possible  changes  of 
representation. 

Although  much  less  general,  theorem  2  lends 

this  search  since  jt  allows 
greater  strength  to 
one  to  establish  the  fact  that  a  given  game  is 
homomorphic  to  one  of  a  wide  class  of  games  (in 
this  case  the  positional  games),  thus  reducing 
the  search  space. 
If  the  search  produces  an 
affirmative  answer,  it,  also  allows  one  to  con(cid:173)
struct  a  specific  homomorphic  image  as  opposed 
to  searching  for  one. 

Needless  to  say,  such  theorems  do  not 

obviate  the  need  for  heuristics.  They  merely  add 
to  our  stock  of  applicable  heuristics  or  render 
previously  known  heuristics  more  widely  applic-
able. 
In  the  absence  of  a  generally  efficient 
problem  solving  technique  ( it  is  not  hard  to  see 
that  given  any  such  technique,  a  problem  can  be 
devised  which  renders  it  i n e f f i c i e n t ),  one  can 

Session No.  16 Heuristic Problem Solving 

657 

658 

Session No.  15 Heuristic Problem Solving 

Figure  2.  A  race  position  and  two  of  i ts  t i o-
tac-toe  images. 
In  the  rare  position  the  shaded 
areas  are  disqualified  horses;  an  X  indicates  the 
position  of  a  horse  belonging  to  player  X;  an  0 
indicates  the  position  of  a  horse  belonging  to 
player  0. 

