Integrating Multiple Internet Directories by Instance-based Learning 

Ryutaro Ichise, Hiedeaki Takeda, Shinichi Honiden 

National Institute of Informatics 

2-1-2 Hitotsubashi Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430 Japan 

{ichise,takeda,honiden}@nii.ac.jp 

Abstract 

Finding desired information on the Internet is be(cid:173)
coming increasingly  difficult.  Internet directories 
such as Yahoo!, which organize web pages into hi(cid:173)
erarchical categories, provide one solution to this 
problem;  however, such directories are of limited 
use because some bias is applied both in the col(cid:173)
lection and categorization of pages.  We propose 
a method for integrating multiple Internet directo(cid:173)
ries by instance-based learning.  Our method pro(cid:173)
vides the mapping of categories in order to trans(cid:173)
fer documents  from one directory to another,  in(cid:173)
stead of simply merging two directories into one. 
We present herein an effective algorithm  for de(cid:173)
termining similar categories between two directo(cid:173)
ries via a statistical method called the k-statistic. 
In order to evaluate the proposed method, we con(cid:173)
ducted experiments using two actual Internet direc(cid:173)
tories, Yahoo!  and Google.  The results show that 
the proposed method achieves extensive improve(cid:173)
ments  relative to both  the Naive  Bayes  and En(cid:173)
hanced Naive Bayes approaches, without any text 
analysis on documents. 

Introduction 

1 
The World-Wide Web (WWW) is now used not only by com(cid:173)
puter specialists,  but by  all  sorts  of people,  from children 
to businessmen and businesswomen,  which has resulted in 
an enormous quantity of web pages available on the Inter(cid:173)
net.  This makes finding pages containing the desired infor(cid:173)
mation rather difficult.  Search engines are requisite for find(cid:173)
ing the desired information.  In general, current search en(cid:173)
gines perform their functions via one of two methods: a key(cid:173)
word search and a directory search.  A keyword search en(cid:173)
gine performs searches by means of user-specified keywords. 
Keyword-based search engines like Google can reliably find 
pages  containing the  specified  keywords.  However,  if the 
user does not have a thorough knowledge of his/her search 
domain  and  cannot  choose  the  appropriate  keywords,  the 
search engine is useless. In such a situation, directory-based 
search engines do a good job.  In a directory-based search 
engine, pages are evaluated and organized by humans before 

being registered in the search engine's archive.  Directory-
based search engines provide knowledge of WWW naviga(cid:173)
tion.  Users reach the desired information by going up and 
down the directories. 

Although pages are carefully selected and well-organized, 
a single Internet directory  is not sufficient because the  In(cid:173)
ternet directory tends to have some bias in both collecting 
and categorizing pages.  In order to solve these problems, 
we herein propose a method that coordinates multiple  In(cid:173)
ternet directories by  estimating  directory  similarities.  The 
proposed method does not simply merge multiple directories 
into a larger directory, but instead determines the relationship 
between directories.  Many public Internet directories exist. 
Some are designed to cover wide domains, while others fo(cid:173)
cus on special domains.  Such Internet directories are diffi(cid:173)
cult to merge. Moreover, these directories should not be inte(cid:173)
grated, because the existing differences in concept hierarchies 
among the directories is important when selecting and using 
directory-based search engines.  In this paper, we propose a 
method to solve this problem by determining the rules for 
mapping categories in a directory to those in another direc(cid:173)
tory.  Our solution can be applicable not only to the Internet 
directory problem, but also to the integration of web market(cid:173)
place catalogs [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001]1 and ontology in(cid:173)
tegration in general. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as  follows.  In 
Section 2, we define the problem of coordinating multiple In(cid:173)
ternet directories. In Section 3, we discuss related studies. In 
Section 4, we propose a new machine learning method for the 
above-mentioned problem.  Next, in Section 5, we compare 
the performance of the proposed method to that of the En(cid:173)
hanced Naive Bayes approach [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001] 
for an integration problem using real Internet directories. Fi(cid:173)
nally, in Section 6, we present our conclusions. 

Integration of Multiple Internet Directories 

2 
In order to state the problem, we introduce a model for the 
Internet directories we intend to integrate.  We assume there 
are two Internet directories: a source directory and a target 
directory. The documents in the source Internet directory are 

'For example, the integration of a distributor's catalog and a web 

marketplace. 

22 

Al AND DATA INTEGRATION 

expected to be assigned to categories in the target Internet di(cid:173)
rectory. This produces a virtually integrated Internet directory 
in which the documents in the source directory are expected 
to be members of both the source and target directories. This 
integrated directory inherits the categorization hierarchy from 
the target Internet directory. 

The Internet directory model for the source and target is as 

follows: 

•  The source Internet directory, Sp contains a set of cate(cid:173)
gories, Cs1, CS2, • • •, Csn, that are organized into an "is-
a" hierarchy. Each category can also contain documents. 
•  The target Internet directory Tp contains a set of cate(cid:173)
gories, C11, C12, • • • , Ctm that are organized into an "is-
a" hierarchy. Each category can also contain documents. 
The proposed model permits documents to be assigned to 
intermediate categories.  This model is similar to the catalog 
model in lAgrawal and Srikant, 2001], except that the cate(cid:173)
gories are organized into a conceptual hierarchy.  Since the 
catalog model ignores hierarchy structure and therefore can(cid:173)
not assign documents to an intermediate category, our Inter(cid:173)
net directory model is more general than the catalog model. 
The problem addressed in this paper is finding an appro(cid:173)
priate category Ct  in the target directory Tp for each docu(cid:173)
ment Ds1 in the source directory Sp.  An example is shown 
as the mapping of a black box  Dx  in Figure  1,  where the 
black circles indicate categories and the hollow boxes indi(cid:173)
cate documents. What we need to do is determine an appro(cid:173)
priate category in Tp  for a document which appears in Sp 
but not in  TD,  because mapping is not necessary if the doc(cid:173)
ument is included in both the source and the target directo(cid:173)
ries. Documents D1 and D2 in Figure 1 are examples of such 
documents. This mapping can have several possibilities, e.g., 
Dx can be mapped to an upper left category or to a lower left 
category, etc. 

3  Related Work 
One  popular approach  to  this  kind  of problem  is  to  apply 
standard machine  learning methods [Langley,  1996].  This 
requires  a  flattened  class  space  having  one  class  for  ev(cid:173)
ery  leaf node.  The  problem  can  then  be  considered  to 
be  a normal  classification  problem  for documents.  Naive 
Bayes(NB) [Mitchell, 1997] is an established method used for 
this type of document classification framework.  A classifier 

is constructed using the words in the documents.  However, 
this classification scheme ignores the hierarchical structure of 
classes and, moreover, cannot use the categorization informa(cid:173)
tion in the source directory. Enhanced Naive Bayes [Agrawal 
and Srikant, 2001], hereafter referred to as E-NB, is a method 
which  does use this information.  E-NB  will be discussed 
in  the next section.  GLUE  [Doan ct  al.,  2002]  is another 
type of system employing NB. To improve accuracy, GLUE 
combines NB and a constraint optimization technique called 
relaxation  labeling.  However,  the  general  performance  of 
the system depends on that of NB. Unlike NB, the systems 
in  [Koller and  Sahami,  1997],  [Wang  et  al.,  1999] classify 
documents into hierarchical categories, and these systems use 
the words in the documents for classification rules. However, 
these systems cannot use the categorization information in the 
source directory. 

Another type of approach  is ontology merging/alignment 
systems.  These  systems  combine  two  ontologies,  which 
are  represented  in  a  hierarchal  categorization. 
Chi-
maera  [McGuinness et al., 2000]  and  PROMPT  [Noy and 
Musen, 2000] are examples of such systems and assist in the 
combination of different ontologies.  However, such systems 
require human interaction for merging or alignment.  In ad(cid:173)
dition to this requirement,  these systems are based on the 
similarity between words, which introduces instability.  The 
dictionaries used for such systems often have word similarity 
bias.  FCA-MERGE [Stumme and Madche, 2001] is another 
type of ontology merging method.  It uses the attributes of 
concepts to merge different ontologies.  As a result, it cre(cid:173)
ates a new concept without regarding the original concepts in 
both ontologies. Calvanese et al. [Calvanese et al, 2001] also 
discussed an ontology integration framework with respect to 
global ontology and local ontology. 

As mentioned before, we also tackled the similar problem 
of catalog integration. An approach, besides E-NB, is to con(cid:173)
struct  the  abstract-level  structure  of two  hierarchies  [Ome-
layenko and Fensel, 2001].  This approach does not direct 
the transformation of source and target information, but trans(cid:173)
forms via the abstract-level structure.  It is relatively easy to 
transfer information through many hierarchical structures, but 
it is hard to create a common structure for those hierarchies. 
The  bookmark-sharing  systems  of Siteseer  [Rucker  and 
Polanco,  1997]  and  Blink  [Blink,  2000]  also  deal  with  a 
similar problem.  These  systems attempt to share URL  in(cid:173)
formation which appears in the source bookmark but not in 
the target bookmark.  These systems flatten the categoriza(cid:173)
tion  of bookmarks  in  the  same  manner  as  NB  and  deter(cid:173)
mine the mapping of categories in each bookmark, based on 
the shared URL information.  Such systems are problematic 
when a given URL does not fit into an exact category. kMe-
dia [Takeda et al, 2000] is another bookmark-sharing system 
that uses hierarchical structures explicitly, but is dependent 
on the similarity of the words within pages. 

In 

information 

the  context  of 

retrieval,  Stucken-
schmidt [Stuckenschmidt, 2002] has coordinated the formal 
model of hierarchies with multiple classification hierarchies. 
In our paper, since the upper and lower boundaries of concept 
mapping can be determined by  subsumption relationships, 
we can infer the boundary of valid mapping and also check 

A! AND DATA INTEGRATION 

23 

as our measurement standard. If many documents in category 
Csi  also appear in category  Ctj  at the same time, we consider 
these two categories to be similar, because the ways of cate(cid:173)
gorization in Csi and  Ctj  are supposed to be similar, i.e., if 
another document D comes in  Csi,  it is likely that D will be 
also included in CtJ.  This method avoids both the keyword 
extraction process and the handling of word meaning.  The 
example shown in Figure 2 illustrates that documents in the 
bottom category in the source Internet directory can be trans(cid:173)
ferred to a similar category in the target Internet directory. 

whether  or  not  the  given  mapping  is  consistent. 
In  our 
problem, since we have only partial evidence of classes and 
do not know the definitions of classes, we can not apply this 
method directly. 

4  Learning the Relationship between 

Categories of Two Internet Directories 

In this section, we explain our method to determine the rela(cid:173)
tionship between categories in two Internet directories.  One 
characteristic of the proposed method is to use the hierarchi(cid:173)
cal structure "as is."  We use all categories including inter(cid:173)
mediate categories and leaf categories, because information 
for categorization can also be obtained from these categories. 
Another characteristic of the proposed method is the exclu(cid:173)
sive reliance on the categorization structure of both directo(cid:173)
ries, i.e., with no reliance on the semantic information of the 
documents.  We can determine the relationship between cat(cid:173)
egories of the two directories by statistically comparing the 
membership of the documents to the categories. 

4.1  Basic Concept 
Although E-NB was developed for a very similar problem, 
it is missing an important feature:  categorization hierarchy. 
According to [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001], the initial defini(cid:173)
tion of the problem is identical to that of this paper. However, 
the previous paper assumes that "any documents assigned to 
an interior node really belong to a conceptual leaf node that 
is a child of that node," and concludes from this assumption 
that "we can flatten the hierarchy to a single level and treat 
it as a set of categories." However, the conclusion overlooks 
the categorization hierarchies. The categorizations are not in(cid:173)
dependent of each other.  The categorization hierarchies are 
usually structured using an "is-a" or another relationship. If a 
document is categorized in a lower category in the categoriza(cid:173)
tion hierarchy, then the document should also be categorized 
in the upper categories 2. If we flatten the categories, such in(cid:173)
formation regarding the relationships between categories will 
be lost. 

Another problem associated with NB  is its sensitivity to 
the words in documents.  For example, if a document con(cid:173)
tains the word bank, the category for the document could be 
a financial category; however, the category could also be a 
construction category. The quality of categorization with NB 
is thus not stable according to the contents of documents, due 
to the natural language techniques of processing words.  It 
is critical to integrate Internet directories because mixing re(cid:173)
liable Internet directories maintained by human editors with 
less reliable and less stable machine-generated classifiers will 
confuse users and decrease their confidence.  In addition to 
the problem of sensitivity, analysis of a document to extract 
words is expensive. 

Our method focuses on the similarity of the way of catego(cid:173)
rization, not the similarity of documents.  Then, how do we 
measure the similarity of categorization?  We utilize shared 
documents in both the source and target Internet directories 

2Note that the reverse is not always true, because documents can 

be categorized into intermediate categories. 

Figure 2:  Document transfer from source Internet directory 
to target Internet directory. 

4.2  k-Statistic 
The remaining problem is how to determine the pairs of simi(cid:173)
lar categories. We adopt a statistical method to determine the 
degree of similarity between two categorization criteria. The 
K-statistic method [Fleiss, 1973] is an established method for 
evaluating the similarity between two criteria. Suppose there 
are two categorization criteria, Csi in SD and  Ctj  in TD. We 
can determine whether or not a particular document belongs 
to a particular category3.  Consequently, documents are di(cid:173)
vided into four classes, as shown in Table  1.  The symbols 
N11, N12, -N21 and N22 denote the numbers of documents for 
these classes.  For example,  N11  denotes the number of doc(cid:173)
uments which belong to both Csi and Ctj. We may logically 
assume that if categories Csi and Ctj have the same criterion 
of categorization, then  N12  and N21  are nearly zero, and if 
the two categories have a different criterion of categorization, 
then  N11  and N22 are nearly zero.  The  k-statistic  method 
uses this principle to determine the similarity of categoriza(cid:173)
tion criteria. 

In the  k-statistic  method, we calculate the probability P, 
3 Remember that categorization in a directory is determined using 

the nodal structure of the categorization hierarchy. 

24 

Al AND DATA INTEGRATION 

which  denotes  the percentage of coincidence of the concep(cid:173)
tual  criteria,  and  the probability  P'  which  denotes  the per(cid:173)
centage of coincidence of the conceptual criteria by chance. 

As  such,  the  value of the  K-statistic  is  represented  as  the 

following equation: 

Next,  we  examine  whether  we  can  assume  the  K  =  0, 
which  indicates  that  the  percentage  of  coincidence  for  the 
two  conceptual  criteria  is  zero.  We  therefore  calculate  the 
test statistic Z according to the following equation. 

The value Z follows a normal distribution.  A null hypothe(cid:173)
sis is considered to occur when the percentage of coincidence 
of the concept  criteria  is  zero.  When  we  assume  a  signifi(cid:173)
cance level of 5% and the following equation is satisfied, we 
can dismiss the null hypothesis. 

When the null hypothesis can be dismissed, the criteria are 

determined to be the same. 

4.3  Determination of Pairs of Similar Categories 
The relationship between the two categorization criteria is ex(cid:173)
amined from top to bottom.  This algorithm is shown in Fig(cid:173)
ure  3.  First,  the most general  categories  in  the  two catego(cid:173)
rization hierarchies are compared using the K-statistic.  If the 
comparison confirms that the two categories are similar, then 
the  algorithm  outputs  this  pair  of  categories.  At  the  same 
time,  the algorithm  generates all  possible pairs of their chil(cid:173)
dren  categories.  It  generates  two  lists  of categories  each  of 
which is a list of the confirmed category and its children cat(cid:173)
egories.  Then,  the algorithm  picks  one category  from  each 
list and makes a pair, except for the original  pair.  This  new 
pair is then evaluated recursively using the K-statistic method. 
When  a similar pair is  not generated,  the algorithm  outputs 
the pairs of similar concepts  between the two categorization 
hierarchies.  They are used as mapping rules from the source 
directory to the target directory4. 

This top-down comparison approach attempts to reduce the 
exploration space, using the structure of both directories as a 
guide.  Assuming that similar categories include similar sub(cid:173)
categories, we can skip the combination of categories which 
4The  rules do  not guarantee  the consistency of the mappings, 
because category hierarchies have the possibility of inconsistency 
with regard to similar relationships. 

Figure 3:  Algorithm to determine similar category pair. 

is likely unnecessary5. This is another benefit of using the ''as 
is" hierarchy, in contrast to the flattening approach. 

4.4  Application Policy of Rules 

Since the  proposed method  uses categorization  similarity,  if 
a  category  in  the  source  Internet  directory  does  not  have  a 
similar category in the target directory, then those documents 
cannot be categorized in the target Internet directory. In order 
to avoid this problem,  we once again  use the categorization 
hierarchy.  If the  system  cannot  find  a  similar category  pair 
for the category containing the document,  it applies the  rule 
generated for the parent category instead. 

5This assumption may sometimes be too strong, e.g., a child cat(cid:173)
egory of a category is not so relevant, whereas its child category (a 
grandchild category of the original category)  is relevant.  In such 
cases, we should relax this constraint when exploring future candi(cid:173)
dates. 

Al AND DATA INTEGRATION 

25 

4.5  Computational Complexity 

•  Yahoo!  :  Arts / Visual-Arts / Photography 

Google :  Arts /Photography 

•  Yahoo!  :  Computers_and_Internet / Software 

Google :  Computers / Software 

Table 2 shows the numbers of categories, the links in each 
Internet directory and the links included in both Internet di(cid:173)
rectories. Links are considered to be the same when the URLs 
in both directories are identical. 

We  conducted  ten-fold  cross  validations  for  the  shared 
links.  The shared links were divided into ten data sets; nine 
of these sets were used to construct rules, and the remaining 
set was used for testing. Ten experiments were conducted for 
each data set,  and the average accuracy  is shown  in the re(cid:173)
sults.  In order to compare our proposed method to the E-NB 
approach, the classifiers are assumed to correctly assign doc(cid:173)
uments when the document is categorized cither in the same 
category as the test data or in the parent categories of the test 
data.  E-NB  constructs classifiers  for only the  first-level  cat(cid:173)
egories  in  the  experimental  domain,  whereas  the  proposed 
method  uses  all  of the  categories  from  top  to  bottom.  The 
significance level for the K-statistic was set at 5%. 

5.2  Experimental  Results 
The experimental results are  shown in Tables 3  and 4.  Ta(cid:173)
ble 3 shows the results obtained using Yahoo!  as the source 
Internet directory and Google as the target Internet directory, 
and Table 4 shows the results obtained using Google as the 
source  Internet  directory  and  Yahoo!  as  the  target  Internet 
directory.  For comparison,  these tables also  include the re(cid:173)
sults  of 
[Agrawal  and  Srikant,  2001].  E-NB  denotes  the 
method of [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001] and SBI denotes the 
similarity-based  integration  method  that  is  proposed  in  this 
paper.  The data obtained for the proposed method and that 
presented in  [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001] are not truly com(cid:173)
parable because the collection date is different7. 

The proposed algorithm did well compared to E-NB, per(cid:173)
forming more than 10% better in accuracy on the averages. In 
the Movies domain,  the proposed algorithm performs much 
better in accuracy than E-NB. One reason for this is that the 
pages related  to  movies contain  various  words that  indicate 
numerous movie settings, making classification using word-
based systems difficult.  On the other hand,  in the Outdoors 
domain, performance is similar for both methods because the 
7In addition, differences may have occurred due to data selec(cid:173)
tion.  For example, Yahoo!  has links that use @(the at mark). The 
treatment of such links was not discussed in [Agrawal and Srikant, 
2001]. In the present study, we did not use such links. 

5  Experiments  Using Internet  Directories 
5.1  Experimental Settings 
In  order to  evaluate  the  proposed  algorithm,  we  conducted 
experiments  using data collected  from  the Yahoo!  [Yahoo!, 
2001] and Google [Google, 2001]6 Internet directories.  The 
data  was collected  in the  fall  of 2001.  In  order to compare 
the proposed method to that in [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001], 
we selected the same locations in Yahoo!  and Google for the 
experimental data. The locations are as follows: 

•  Yahoo!  :  Recreation / Automotive 

Google :  Recreation / Autos 

•  Yahoo!  :  Entertainment / Movies_and_Film 

Google :  Arts / Movies 

•  Yahoo!  : Recreation / Outdoors 
Google :  Recreation / Outdoors 

6Since  the  data  in  Google  is  constructed  by  the  data  in 

dmoz [dmoz, 2001], we collected data through dmoz. 

26 

Al AND DATA INTEGRATION 

6  Conclusions 
In this paper,  a statistical-based technique was proposed for 
integrating  multiple  Internet  directories  by  determining  the 
relationship between these directories.  The proposed method 
uses the K-statistics to  find  similar category pairs, and trans(cid:173)
fers  the  document  categorization  from  a  category  in  the 
source  Internet  directory  to  a  similar  category  in  the  target 
Internet  directory.  The  proposed method  has  an  advantage 
in  document treatment in that it relies on the category struc(cid:173)
ture  only,  and  not  on  words  or  word  similarity  in  a  docu(cid:173)
ment.  The performance  of the proposed method  was tested 
using actual Internet directories, and the results of these tests 
show that the performance of the proposed method was more 
than  10%  better  in  accuracy  than  that  of previous  methods, 
although the number of categories were by  far larger for our 
proposed method.  In addition, our problem modeling is more 
general  than  the  other models  in  terms  of assignment docu(cid:173)
ments on intermediate categories. From this, we can conclude 
our approach shows great promise in comparison to systems 
employing NB, such as E-NB  [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001], 
GLUE [Doan et ai. , 2002], and so on. 

Although  the  present  results  are  encouraging,  much  has 
yet  to  be  done.  The  limitation  of the  proposed  method  is 
that  this  method  is  based  on  the  existence  of shared  links. 
In  other words,  the proposed  method  is  less  reliable  if there 
are  fewer  shared  links.  To  improve  our  proposed  method, 
various  methods might be used to  obtain  semantic  informa(cid:173)
tion  in  order to  increase the number of shared  links,  e.g.,  to 
regard  similar pages  as  the  same  links.  Another option  for 
this  problem  might  be  to  combine  semantic  information  or 
other  information  about  the  documents. 
If we  could  a  es(cid:173)
tablish  good combination  of our proposed method and  such 
information,  it is possible that we could greatly improve our 
method.  Moreover, the present method can find only one-to-
one mapping rules.  If the system is able to find one-to-many 
or many-to-many mappings,  it would work more correctly in 
categorization.  For the  development  of these  mappings,  we 
might  invent  probabilistic  mapping  representations  and  also 
introduce a subsumption technique  [Stuckenschmidt,  2002]. 
Finally,  the proposed  method should be  expanded  so that it 
can  apply  to  more  than  three  concept  hierarchies. 
In  such 
a  case,  despite  the  conflict  between  several  concept  hierar(cid:173)
chies, we would expect more information to be obtained. The 
aforementioned tasks for improvement will be investigated in 
future studies. 

References 
[Agrawal and Srikant, 2001]  Rakesh  Agrawal  and  Ramakr-
ishnan  Srikant.  On  integrating catalogs.  In Proceedings 
of the  Tenth  International  World  Wide  Web  Conference 
(WWW-10), pages 603-612, 2001. 

[Blink, 2000]  Blink,  http://www.blink.com/, 2000. 
[Calvanese et  al,  2001]  Diego Calvanese,  Giuseppe De Gi-
acomo,  and Maurizio Lenzerini.  A  framework for ontol(cid:173)
ogy integration. In Proceedings of the First Semantic Web 
Working Symposium, pages 303- 316, 2001. 

[dmoz, 2001]  dmoz. http://dmoz.org/, 2001. 

Table  3:  Results of Yahoo!  as the  source  Internet directory 
and Google as the target Internet directory. 

Table 4:  Results  of Google  as  the  source  Internet  directory 
and Yahoo!  as the target Internet directory. 

Outdoors domain treats pages using special outdoors-related 
words, and no classification method for the Outdoors domain 
has been established for human readers. 

in 

As  mentioned  earlier, 

the  experiments  described 
in [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001], the classifiers induced by the 
system have the ability to classify the documents into only the 
first-level  categories  of the  test domain  in the target  Internet 
directory. The proposed classifiers can classify the documents 
into sub-categories as well.  For example, we used 4,623 cat(cid:173)
egories  for  document  assignment  in  the  Movies  domain  of 
Yahoo! as the source Internet directory and Google as the tar(cid:173)
get Internet directory, whereas their system used only 40 cat(cid:173)
egories.  Therefore,  the classifiers obtained  by the proposed 
method are more reliable and  useful than  those obtained by 
other methods. 

Next,  we  compare  our  method  with  GLUE  [Doan  et  al, 
2002]. The basic steps of GLUE are as follows. First, the user 
trains learners for each concept for target taxonomies.  Learn(cid:173)
ers can be a combination of different strategies like name- or 
contents-based learning. Then, they determine that the source 
concept  and  target  concept  are  similar,  if the  application  of 
learners for the source concept yields good enough.  Finally, 
the  system  applies  the  relaxation  labeling  method  for  simi(cid:173)
lar concept pairs.  The method does not use the hierarchical 
structures in learning very well, and relies mainly on the per(cid:173)
formance of the  learning method,  namely  NB.  On the other 
hand, our method does use hierarchical structures in learning 
very well.  So, we do not need a semantical analysis in learn(cid:173)
ing.  They report an accuracy of 65-95% which  is equivalent 
to our results, but they use only a few categories, i.e., 40-363, 
while  we  use  170-4623  categories.  We  can  say  from  both 
theoretical  and practical  viewpoints that our method is more 
appropriate in learning for large hierarchical structures. 

Al AND DATA INTEGRATION 

27 

[Doan et al, 2002]  AnHai  Doan,  Jayant  Madhavan,  Pedro 
Domingos, and Alon Halevy.  Learning to map between 
ontologies on the semantic web. In Proceedings of the 
11th International World Wide Web Conference, 2002. 
IFleiss, 1973] J. L. Fleiss. Statistical Methods for Rates and 

Proportions. John Wiley & Sons, 1973. 

Very Large Data Bases, pages 363-374, Los Altos, CA 
94022, USA, 1999. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
[Yahoo!, 2001]  Yahoo! http://www.yahoo.com/, 2001. 

g

l

e, h t t p : / / d i r e c t o r y . g o o g l e . c o m /, 2001. 

o

o

[Google, 2001] G
[Roller and Sahami, 1997]  Daphne Koller and Mehran Sa-
hami.  Hierarchically  classifying  documents  using  very 
few words.  In Douglas H. Fisher, editor, Proceedings of 
the Nth International Conference on Machine Learning, 
pages 170-178, Nashville, US, 1997. Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, San Francisco, US. 

[Langley, 1996] Pat Langley. Elements of Machine Learn-

ing. Morgan Kaufmann, 1996. 

[McGuinness et ai, 2000]  Deborah L. McGuinness, Richard 
Fikes, James Rice, and Steve Wilder. An environment for 
merging and testing large ontologies. In Anthony G. Cohn, 
Fausto Giunchiglia, and Bart Selman, editors, Proceedings 
of the Conference on Principiles of Knowledge Represen-
tation and Reasoning (KR-00), pages 483-493, S.F., April 
11-15 2000. Morgan Kaufman Publishers. 

[Mitchell, 1997]  Tom  M.  Mitchell.  Machine  Learning. 

McGraw-Hill, 1997. 

[Noy and Musen, 2000]  Natalya Fridman Noy and Mark A. 
Musen.  Prompt:  Algorithm and tool for automated on(cid:173)
tology merging and alignment. 
In Proceedings of the 
17th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-
2000), pages 450-455, Menlo Park, 2000. AAA1 Press. 

[Omelayenko and Fensel, 2001]  Borys Omelayenko and Di(cid:173)
eter Fensel. An analysis of b2b catalogue integration prob(cid:173)
lems. In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Enterprise Information Systems, pages 945-952, 2001 

[Rucker and Polanco, 1997]  James  Rucker  and  Marcos  J. 
Polanco.  Siteseer:  Personalized navigation for the web. 
Communications of the ACM, 40(3):73-75, 1997. 

[Stuckenschmidt, 2002]  Heiner  Stuckenschmidt.  Approxi(cid:173)
mate information filtering with multiple classication hier(cid:173)
archies. International Journal of Computational Intelli(cid:173)
gence and Applications, 2(3):295-302, 2002. 

[Stumme and Madche, 2001]  G.  Stumme  and  A.  Madche. 
Fca-merge: Bottom-up merging of ontologies. In Proceed(cid:173)
ings of the 17th International Joint Conference on Artifi(cid:173)
cial Intelligence, pages 225-230, 2001. 

[Takeda et ai, 2000]  Hideaki  Takeda,  Takeshi  Matsuzuka, 
and Yuichiro Taniguchi.  Discovery of shared topics net(cid:173)
works among people. In R. Mizoguchi and J. Slaney, edi(cid:173)
tors, Proceedings of the 7th Pacific Rim International Con(cid:173)
ference on Artificial Intelligence (PRICAI-2000), volume 
1886 of LNAI, pages 668-678, Berlin, 2000. Springer. 

[Wang et ai, 1999]  Ke  Wang,  Senqiang  Zhou,  and  Shi-
ang  Chen  Liew.  Building  hierarchical  classifiers  using 
class proximity. In Malcolm Atkinson, Maria E. Orlowska, 
Patrick Valduriez, Stan Zdonik, and Michael Brodie, edi(cid:173)
tors, Proceedings of the 25 th international Conference on 

28 

AI AND DATA INTEGRATION 

