A semantic framework for multimedia document adaptation 

Jerome Euzenat, Nabil Layaida, Victor Dias 

INRIA Rhone-Alpes 

655 avenue de I'Europe, 38330 Montbonnot Saint-Martin, France 

{Jerome.Euzenat,Nabil.Layaida}@inrialpes.fr 

Abstract 

With  the  proliferation  of  heterogeneous  devices 
(desktop  computers,  personal  digital  assistants, 
phones), multimedia documents must be played un(cid:173)
der various constraints (small screens,  low band-
width).  Taking these constraints into account with 
current document  models  is  impossible.  Hence, 
generic  source  documents  must  be  transformed 
into documents compatible with the target contexts. 
Currently, the design of transformations is  left to 
programmers. We propose here a semantic frame-
work,  which  accounts  for  multimedia  document 
adaptation in very general terms. A model of a mul(cid:173)
timedia document is a potential execution of this 
document and a context defines a particular class 
of models.  The adaptation should then retain the 
source document models that belong to the class 
defined by the context if such models exist.  Oth(cid:173)
erwise, the adaptation should produce a document 
whose models belong to this class and are "close" 
to those of the source documents. We focus on the 
temporal dimension of multimedia documents and 
show how adaptation can take advantage of tempo(cid:173)
ral reasoning techniques. Several metrics are given 
for assessing the proximity of models. 

Introduction 

1 
The multiplication of execution contexts for multimedia doc(cid:173)
uments requires the adaptation of document specifications to 
the particularities of the contexts. Adaptation is not very pre(cid:173)
cisely defined and it is currently specified through program(cid:173)
ming. We propose a semantic approach to multimedia docu(cid:173)
ments (§2). It does not deal with the semantics of document 
content,  but with that of their composition.  The approach 
allows the definition of adaptation in very general semantic 
terms independent from the multimedia objects (§3). We then 
investigate the temporal dimension of multimedia documents 
specified  qualitatively  (§4) and  propose metrics for finding 
the "best" adaptations.  We discuss then the limitations of 
current multimedia specifications that prohibit a better adap(cid:173)
tation (§5). 

We first introduce the characteristics of multimedia docu(cid:173)

ments (§1.1) and adaptation (§1.2). 

1.1  Multimedia documents 
A multimedia document is a digital document composed of 
objects of different nature:  text,  sound,  image,  animation, 
etc. These objects and their compositions are called multime(cid:173)
dia objects. Multimedia documents are traditionally analysed 
following four dimensions [Layaida, 1997]: 

•  logical (organisation into chapters, shots, etc.), 
•  spatial (graphic layout), 
•  hypermedia  (relations  between  documents  and  docu(cid:173)

ment fragments), 

•  temporal (temporal ordering of the multimedia objects). 
These dimensions are not totally independent and require a 

combined processing. 

This paper primarily focuses on the adaptation of multime(cid:173)
dia documents along their temporal dimension. In a temporal 
multimedia document, the presentation of the multimedia ob(cid:173)
jects is scheduled over time.  Such a document is presented 
in Figure 1.  Time is displayed on the horizontal axis.  The 
example presented is the introduction of a slideshow made 
of different panels composed of graphic objects that can be 
presented simultaneously.  The first panel displays the title, 
authors and outline of the speech; each of these objects are 
represented by a segment whose begin and end points corre(cid:173)
spond to the beginning and ending of their presentation on 
screen. 

Title 

Outline 

Authors 
2 

5 

0 

B 
8 

D 
10 

12  t(s) 

Figure 1: Temporal dimension of a multimedia document. 

The Title object starts at second 0 and ends at second 5, 
while the Author object starts at second 2 and ends at sec(cid:173)
ond 5.  Between seconds 5 and 8 the Outline object is pre(cid:173)
sented, etc. Such a description is exact and quantitative since 
it defines exactly the beginning and ending instants of each 
multimedia object.  This information is sufficient for playing 
the document: to one exact quantitative representation corre(cid:173)
sponds only one possible execution of the document (within 
a fixed temporal reference). 

Al AND THE INTERNET 

31 

Specifying  a multimedia document  in  an  exact  manner is 
like  writing  a  paper  directly  in  PostScript  instead  of  using 
LATEX. Multimedia documents are not often specified in an 
exact  way  because  it  is  more  convenient  for  the  author  to 
leave the interpretation of the specification to the machine as 
soon as the will of the author is clearly expressed. The author 
can concentrate on the creative part of is or her work instead 
of characterising the exact position of each object. 

Non-exact specifications can be achieved by expressing the 
qualitative relations  between  multimedia objects.  There  are 
several  languages for specifying multimedia documents with 
different ways  of expressing the temporal  dimension:  SMIL 
[W3C,  1998]  expresses  the  positioning  of  multimedia  ob(cid:173)
jects with parallel and sequence operators on intervals; Magic 
I Dalai et al, 1996] and Madeus [Layaida, 1997] use a restric(cid:173)
tion of the Allen algebra of temporal intervals. 

The document of Figure  1  can  be expressed qualitatively. 
For instance, the Authors object starts after and finishes with 
the Title object; the Authors object meets the Outline object. 
From such a specification,  the multimedia presentation sys(cid:173)
tem  (or the Player) computes a plan  (called "scenario") that 
can be executed. This function is called temporal formatting. 

2  A  semantic  approach  to  multimedia 

documents 

2.1  Specifications 

1.2  Adapting multimedia documents 
A  server delivers a  multimedia document to  be played  by  a 
client.  Clients  and  servers  can  be  different  machines  with 
different capabilities.  Different  contexts  of multimedia  pre(cid:173)
sentations  introduce different constraints on  the presentation 
itself.  For instance, bandwidth limitations between the client 
and the server can result in preventing the client from playing 
two bandwidth-demanding videos at the same time.  Display 
limitations can produce similar constraints.  Other constraints 
may also  be  introduced by user preferences, content protec(cid:173)
tion  or terminal  capabilities.  The  constraints  imposed  by  a 
client are called a profile. 

Profiles  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of a  restriction  of the 
language used for specifying target documents or in terms of 
additional constraints imposed on the objects.  For instance, 
if the device features only a screen with  limited capabilities, 
it can be impossible to display two images simultaneously on 
the same screen. 

For  satisfying  these  constraints,  multimedia  documents 
must be  adapted before being played.  From the profile  and 
the source document, the adaptation must provide a document 
satisfying the constraints expressed in the profile. Qualitative 
specifications arc central to this process as they enable more 
efficient adaptation by providing more  flexibility.  This adap(cid:173)
tation  is  usually  performed  by  a  program  transforming  the 
document IVillard, 2001; Lemlouma and Layaida, 2001]. 

For the  purpose  of characterising  the  adaptation  process, 
we introduce a semantics of multimedia documents and illus(cid:173)
trate  it on  the  temporal dimension  (§2).  The  semantic defi(cid:173)
nition of adaptation (§3) leads to distinguish refining adapta(cid:173)
tion (in which the models of the adapted document are mod(cid:173)
els  of the  source  documents)  from  transgressive  adaptation 
(in which the models are as close as possible to those of the 
source document).  Section 4  illustrates  the notion  of close(cid:173)
ness for the temporal dimension.  The  limits of our approach 
are then presented (§5). 

Table  1: The  13 relationships between temporal intervals. 

Definition 1 (Specification).  A specification s —  (O, C) of a 
document is made of a set of objects O and a set of constraints 
C between these objects (i.e., a relation between several ob(cid:173)
jects).  The set of all specifications will be noted S. 

In the remainder, the constraints will be considered as bi(cid:173)
nary. The temporal specification can then be represented as a 
relation graph [van Beek,  1992].  This representation will be 
used for describing models. 

Definition 3 (Resolved relation graph).  A relation graph is 
resolved iff all the labels are singletons. 

32 

Al AND THE INTERNET 

2.2  Semantics  of a specification 
The specification of a multimedia document is interpreted as 
the  set of its  potential  executions.  A  model  of a  multimedia 
document (in  the  sense  of model  theory)  is  an  execution  of 
the document satisfying the specification. 

3.1  Adaptation constraints 
Definition  7  (Adaptation  constraint).  An  adaptation  con(cid:173)
straint a determines a set of possible executions Ma-  The set 
of adaptation  constraints  will  be noted A 

The  example  above  introduced  a  constraint  prohibiting 
more than  one  image  to  be  displayed  at  once on  a  screen. 
This can be expressed by a MSO constraint. 

A profile p is a set of such constraints. It determines a class 
of qualitative models (those who satisfy the constraints).  The 
role of adaptation is thus to determine if there exist models of 
the initial specification belonging to that class.  Otherwise, it 
is convenient to alter the specification by  finding,  among the 
set of models  satisfying the  profile,  those  that are  "semanti-
cally closer" to the source specification. 

Example 3 (Temporal model).  The interpretation presented 
in Example 2 is a model of s1 but not of s2. 

In the following, we will  always consider that there exists 
at  least one model  of the source  specification  (which  is thus 
consistent). 

These models correspond faithfully to the execution of the 
multimedia documents.  However, the formatter will consider 
executions as equal  if they only differ by a translation factor 
and  the  adaptation  will  consider two  executions  as  equal  if 
they  only  differ  in  duration,  preserving  topology  and  order(cid:173)
ing.  We  introduce  qualitative  representations  of models  as 
abstractions of models. 

Since  the  Allen  relations  are  exclusive  and  exhaustive, 
qualitative representations of a model correspond to resolved 
relation graphs. 

3.2  Problems 
One of the benefits of the approach is to be able to clearly pro(cid:173)
vide criteria that an  adaptation  function r  must meet.  These 
criteria are expressed here as a set of problems. 

The  first  one is that the adapted specification must satisfy 

the adaptation constraints. 

3  Semantics of adaptation 
The adaptation  of a  multimedia document is  constrained by 
the profile.  The profile defines constraints that must be satis(cid:173)
fied by the document to be played. 

Moreover,  if there  exists  a  possible  execution  of the  doc(cid:173)
ument  satisfying  the  adaptation  constraints,  this  execution 
must be preserved in the adapted specification. 

Al AND THE INTERNET 

33 

In such a case, the adaptation should not authorise models 

that were not models of the source specification. 

•  Unfortunately,  no  guarantee  is  given  that  the  languages 
used for expressing the specifications and the adaptation con(cid:173)
straints allow the expression of a specification satisfying these 
requirements. 

Moreover, one constraint that should be achieved by a se(cid:173)
mantic approach is that the result of adaptation must not de(cid:173)
pend on the syntactic form of the specification. 

Definition 9 (Distance between sets of models). 

Taking  the  semantic  approach  to  multimedia  document 
adaptation allows the characterisation of adaptation in a very 
general  way  depending  only  on  model  theoretic  considera(cid:173)
tions.  In  particular, these definitions are totally  independent 
from the language used for expressing documents and profiles 
as well as the multimedia object and constraint types. 

This  characterisation  clearly  emphasises  the  constraints 
that  a  refining  adaptation  must  meet  and  that  can  be  over(cid:173)
looked when programming the transformation. 

Transgressive  adaptation  is  more  difficult  to  characterise 

and this is considered in the next section. 

4  Transgressive adaptation in the temporal 

dimension 

The goal of transgressive adaptation is to find a specification 
T(S) as close as possible to the source specification s. Seman-
tically,  this amounts to  find  the  specifications whose models 
are  the  closest  possible  to  those  of the  source  specification. 
Figure 3  shows the set of models satisfying MSO(l).  A dis-

Applying a semantic approach to transgressive adaptation 
can  be  compared  to  the  use  of  the  semantic  approach  for 
knowledge base revision [Dalai,  1988].  This will be the first 
step  taken  here.  But we  will  show  that the  simple distance 
used for comparing models is not sufficient for adapting mul(cid:173)
timedia documents. Measures depending on the kind of mul(cid:173)
timedia objects are required. 

The  usual  way  to  compute  the  distance  between  sets  of 
models  is  function of a distance d between  two  models and 
a method of aggregation F. 

The  second  element  is  the  distance  d  that  is  considered 

hereafter1. 

4.1  Distance on  the qualitative  models 
The  first  distance  that  comes  to  mind  consists  of counting 
the relations between two objects that differ between models. 
It  is comparable to the Hamming distance (i.e.,  the  cardinal 
of the  symmetric  difference  between  two  sets)  counting  the 
propositional atoms that do not have the same truth-value in 
propositional logic [Dalai, 1988]. Because qualitative models 
correspond to resolved relation graphs, the distance is easily 
computed by counting  the  labels  which  differ between  each 
pair of objects.  The distance is defined on graphs (and more 
precisely on their labelling functions). 
Definition 10 (Distance between resolved relation graphs). 

Example  7.  Concerning  s1,  the  four  models  are  all  at  the 
same distance from the model of the source specification be(cid:173)
cause they all differ by two relations (the one between A and 
B and its converse). 

In  order to  find  more  precise results  that  discriminate be(cid:173)
tween the four models of the example, the relations between 
intervals can be transcribed into relations between their begin 
and end points and the same sort of distance can be used. 

34 

Al AND THE INTERNET 

Definition  11  (Distance  between  interval  relations  based 
on endpoints). 

The  distance  between  models  is  the  sum  of the  distance 

between each interval relation. 
Definition  12  (Distance  between  models  based  on  end-
points). 

Table 2:  Relations preserved by the linearization of an over(cid:173)
lap 

adapting  situation  s\.  Two  models  (before  and  meets)  arc 
clearly  preferred over the others (met by  and after).  But in(cid:173)
tuitively,  it  seems  that  meet  is  a  belter  solution  because  it 
reduces  the  distance  between  the  two  objects  which  where 
previously overlapping.  We show that it is possible to find a 
distance conforming to this intuition. 

4.3  Conceptual  distance  in  the  interval  algebra 
The problem with the former distance is that it does not take 
into  account  the  topological  structure  of temporal  relations 
(i.e.,  it only  counts differing relations on endpoints or  inter(cid:173)
vals  without  consideration for a  proximity  between  the  dis(cid:173)
agreeing relations).  To  take  this  proximity into account,  we 
take  advantage  of  the  notion  of  conceptual  neighbourhood 
[Freksa,  1996] and the shortest path distance in its graph (see 
Figure 4). 

Conceptual neighbourhood attempts at capturing the prox(cid:173)
imity between qualitative relations by observing the effects of 
transforming the related objects. 

The conceptual neighbourhood relation for the transforma(cid:173)
tion  that  moves one endpoint without affecting the others  is 
given in Figure 4. 

A  distance  between  relations  can  be  directly  computed 

from the graph. 

Then  the  distance  between  models  can  be  expressed  by 
summing up  the conceptual  distances  between  the  relation(cid:173)
ships used in both models. 
Definition 15 (Conceptual distance between models). 

Example 9.  Concerning s1, the models satisfying the adapta(cid:173)
tion  constraint MSO(l)  are  at different conceptual distances 
from  the  source  specification:  before  is  at  a  distance  of 2, 
meet is at a distance of 1, met by is at a distance of 5 and after 
is at a distance of 6.  So the closest solution to serializing the 
overlap relation is meet. This corresponds to the intuition. 

5  Limitations 
Extending the presented work to  the spatial  dimension does 
not  look  very  difficult.  The  logical  dimension  is  even  eas(cid:173)
ier because  it  provides  a  very  structured  organisation  of the 
document that, we conjecture, can yield direct adaptation. So 
the proposed approach is able to cope with adaptation in each 
dimension of the document. 

Real difficulties arise when hypermedia and temporal and 
spatial  dimensions  are  considered  together.  As  a  matter of 
fact, the presence of hypermedia links which, when triggered 
by the users, jump to other parts of the presentation, introduce 
non-determinism in the interpretation of documents [Dalai el 
al,  1996;  Fargier  el  al,  1998].  This  non  determinism  does 
not  easily  fit  with  the  conceptual  neighbourhood  approach 
which favours continuity. 

A  further  analysis  shows  that  the  temporal  information 
contained in specifications is not sufficient for a good adapta(cid:173)
tion.  For instance, considering two  panels composed of two 
pictures  each  (AB  and  then  CD,  like  in  Figure  1)  and  the 
MSO(l) constraint, the closest models linearizing the presen(cid:173)
tation  are  ABCD  and  ABDC  with  a  conceptual  distance  of 
18.  However,  if both  panels  aim  at  comparing two  objects 
01  (right) and 02  (left) on  the basis of two features (one by 
panel), preserving the parallelism (which  suggests the com(cid:173)
parison)  imposes  the  choice  of ABCD.  The  absence  of in(cid:173)
formation  about  the  comparison  is  missing  from  the  speci(cid:173)
fication resulting  in  lower quality  adaptation.  Some  authors 
[Rutledge el al, 2000]  have proposed to use rhetorical struc(cid:173)
tures [Mann and Thompson, 19871 in order to choose a better 
presentation at the formatting stage.  This could be useful for 
the adaptation stage as well. 

Al AND THE INTERNET 

35 

AAA1, Philadelphia (PA US), pages 475-479, Philadelphia 
(PA US), 1988. AAAI. 

[Fargier et al., 1998] Helfcne Fargier, Muriel Jourdan, Nabil 
Layaida, and Thierry Vidal.  Using temporal constraints 
networks to manage temporal scenario of multimedia doc(cid:173)
uments. In Proceedings of ECAl 98 Workshop on Spatial 
and Temporal Reasoning, Brighton (UK), 1998. 

[Freksa, 1996]  Christian Freksa.  Temporal reasoning based 
on  semi-intervals.  Artificial  Intelligence,  54(1-2):  199-
227, 1996. 

[Gardenfors, 1992] Peter Gardenfors, editor. Belief revision. 

Cambridge university press, Cambridge (GB), 1992. 

[Layaida, 1997] Nabil Layaida. Madeus: Systeme d'edition 
et de presentation de documents structures multimedia. 
These d'informatique, Universite Grenoble 1, 1997. 

[Lemlouma and Layaida, 2001]  Tayeb Lemlouma and Nabil 
Layaida.  The negotiation of multimedia content services 
in heterogeneous environments. In Proc. 8th International 
Conference on Multimedia Modeling (MMM01), pages 
187-206, Amsterdam (NL), 2001. 

[Mann and Thompson, 1987]  William  Mann  and  Sandra 
Thompson.  Rhetorical structure theory:  A theory of text 
organization.  Technical Report RS-87-190, International 
Computer Science Institute, Marina Del Rey, CA, 1987. 
[Monjardet, 1981]  Bernard  Monjardet.  Metrics  on  par(cid:173)
tially ordered sets — a survey.  Discrete mathematics, 
35(1):173-184,1981. 

[Rutledge et al., 2000] Lloyd Rutledge, Jim Davis, Jacco van 
Ossenbruggen, and Lynda Hardman.  Inter-dimensionnal 
hypermedia communicative devices  for rhetorical  struc(cid:173)
ture. In Proc. 7th International Conference on Multimedia 
Modeling (MMM00), pages 89-105, Nagoya (JP), 2000. 
[van Beek, 1992]  Peter van Beek.  Reasoning about quali(cid:173)
tative temporal information. Artificial Intelligence, 58(1-
2):297-326,1992. 

[Villard, 2001]  Lionel  Villard.  Authoring  transformations 
by direct manipulation for adaptable multimedia presenta(cid:173)
tions. In Proc. ACM Symposium on Document Engineer(cid:173)
ing (DocEng'OJ), pages 125-134, Atlanta (US), 2001. 

[W3C, 1998]  W3C. 

SMIL  1.0  Specification,  1998. 

http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-smil/. 

6  Related work 
The most related work is that of [Dalai et al,  1996], which 
describes the generation of multimedia presentations through 
the negotiation of the temporal constraints.  Like the work 
presented here, the temporal specifications are expressed by 
Allen relations. The approach differs because we consider an 
existing specification to be adapted where the authors gen(cid:173)
erate schedules and preferences among them on the  fly.  So 
there is no alteration of already existing constraints based on 
the semantic characterisation, but a satisfiability check and 
negotiation of constraints when inconsistency is detected. 

The transgressive adaptation can be compared with the re(cid:173)
vision in knowledge bases [Gardenfors, 1992]:  the addition 
of a new  (adaptation) constraint leads  to inconsistency.  It 
is necessary to find a new specification satisfying this con(cid:173)
straint and  not too different from the source specification. 
One difference is that adaptation constraints are not always 
formulas of the specification language.  Having several con(cid:173)
straints raises problems similar to incremental revision: since 
the constraints are not provided in a sequence but in a set, it is 
important that the adaptation does not depend on some order 
of presentation constraints.  Although transgressive adapta(cid:173)
tion is neither revision (it does not correspond to some change 
in our knowledge) nor update (it cannot be compared to the 
acquisition of a new information), more generic techniques 
developed for revision could be used in the context of multi(cid:173)
media adaptation. 

7  Conclusion 
This paper applied a semantic approach to multimedia docu(cid:173)
ments and their adaptation. This allows for a precise defini(cid:173)
tion of what is expected from the adaptation of these doc(cid:173)
uments  and  the  comparison  of the  results  given  by  hand-
made transformation with what was expected.  It proposes a 
model-based distinction between compliant documents, refin(cid:173)
ing adaptation and transgressive adaptation. This framework 
has been applied to the temporal dimension of the documents 
providing measures for sharply discriminating the possible 
transgressive adaptations. 

As discussed above, there remains more work to be carried 
out for covering all the aspects of multimedia documents and 
for deepening the specification of documents and adaptation 
constraint so that the adaptation produces quality results. 
References 
[Allen, 1983]  James Allen.  Maintaining knowledge about 
temporal  intervals.  Communications  of  the  ACM, 
26(11):832-843,1983. 

[Dalai et al., 1996]  Mukesh  Dalai,  Steven  Feiner,  Kath(cid:173)
leen McKeown,  Shimei Pan, Michelle X. Zhou, Tobias 
Hollerer, James Shaw, Yong Feng, and Jeanne Fromer. Ne(cid:173)
gotiation for automated generation of temporal multimedia 
presentations. In ACM Multimedia conference, pages 55-
64, Boston (MA US), 1996. 

[Dalai, 1988]  Mukesh Dalai.  Investigations into a theory of 
knowledge base revision: preliminary report. In Actes 7th 

36 

Al AND THE INTERNET 

