Getting Serious about the Development of Computational Humor 

Oliviero Stock  and  Carlo Strapparava 

ITC-irst, 1-38050 Povo Trento Italy 

{stock, strappa}@itc.it 

Abstract 

Society needs humor, not just for entertainment. In 
the Web age, presentations become more and more 
flexible and personalized and they will require hu­
mor contributions for electronic commerce devel­
opments (e.g. product promotion, getting selective 
attention, help in memorizing names, etc...) more 
or less as it happened in the world of broadcasted 
advertisement.  Even if deep modeling of humor in 
all of its facets is not something for the near future, 
there is something concrete that has been achieved 
and that can help in providing attention to the field. 
The paper refers to the results of HAHACRONYM, 
a project devoted to humorous acronym production, 
a circumscribed task that nonetheless requires vari­
ous generic components. The project opens the way 
to developments for creative language, with appli­
cations in the world of advertisement. 

Introduction 

interaction,  according 

1 
Future  human-machine 
to  a 
widespread  view,  will  emphasize  naturalness  and  effec­
tiveness and hence the incorporation of models of possibly 
all  human cognitive capabilities,  including the handling of 
humor.  There are many practical settings  where computa­
tional humor will add value.  Among them:  business world 
applications (e-commerce to name one), general computer-
mediated  communication  and  human-computer  interaction 
[Morkes et al, 1999], educational and edutainment systems. 
There are  important prospects for humor also in automatic 
information  presentation. 
In  the  Web  age  presentations 
become more and more  flexible  and personalized and they 
will  require  humor  contributions  for  electronic  commerce 
developments  (e.g.  product  promotion,  getting  selective 
attention, help in memorizing names, etc...) more or less as 
it happened in the world of broadcasted advertisement. 

Yet deep modeling of humor in all of its facets is not some­
thing for the near future;  the phenomena are too complex, 
humor is one of the most sophisticated forms of human in­
telligence.  It is Al-complete:  the problem of modeling it is 
as difficult to solve as the most difficult Artificial Intelligence 
problems. But some steps can be followed to achieve results. 
In the general case,  in order to be successfully humorous, 

a computational system should be able to:  recognize situa­
tions appropriate for humor; choose a suitable kind of humor 
for the situation; generate an appropriately humorous output; 
and, if there is some form of interaction or control, evaluate 
the feedback. 

We are concerned with systems that automatically produce 
humorous output (rather than systems that appreciate humor). 
Some of the fundamental competencies are within the range 
of the state of the art of natural language processing.  In one 
form or in another humor is most often based on some form 
of incongruity. For verbal humor this means that different in­
terpretations of utterances must be possible (and must not be 
detected before the culmination of the humorous process) or 
must cause perception of specific forms of opposition.  Nat­
ural language processing research has often dealt with ambi­
guity in language.  A common view is that ambiguity is an 
obstacle for deep comprehension. Most current text process­
ing systems attempt to reduce the number of possible inter­
pretations of the sentences, and a failure to do so is seen as 
a weakness of the system.  From a different point of view, 
the potential for ambiguity can be seen as a positive feature 
of natural language. Metaphors, idioms, poetic language and 
humor use all the multiple senses of texts to suggest connec­
tions between concepts that cannot, or should not, be stated 
explicitly. 

The work presented here is based on various resources for 
natural language processing, adapted for humor. It is a small 
step,  but aiming at  an  appreciable concrete result.  It has 
been developed within HAHACRONYM1, a project devoted 
to computational humor.  A visible and evaluable result was 
at the basis of the deal.  We proposed a situation that is of 
practical interest, where there is no domain restriction and 
many components are present, but simpler than in more ex­
tended scenarios. The goal is a system that makes fun of ex­
isting acronyms, or, starting from concepts provided by the 
user, produces a new acronym, constrained to be a word of 
the given language. And, of course, it has to be funny. 

The project was meant to convince about the potential of 
computational humor, through the demonstration of a work­
ing prototype and an assessment of the state of the art and 

1European Project IST-2000-30039. HAHACRONYM has been 
the first EU project devoted to computational humor.  The consor­
tium included ITC-irst, as coordinator, and the University of Twente. 
See h t t p : / / h a h a . i t c . i t. 

ART AND CREATIVITY 

59 

of scenarios where humor can add something to existing in­
formation technologies.  The results of the project put us in 
a better position to move forwards in introducing computa­
tional humor in more complex scenarios. 

2  AI and Computational Humor 
So far only very limited effort has been put on building com­
putational humor prototypes.  Indeed very few working pro­
totypes that  process  humorous text and/or simulate  humor 
mechanisms exist, and mostly they worked in very restricted 
domains. 

There has been a considerable amount of research on lin­
guistics  of humor and  on  theories  of semantics  and  prag­
matics of humor [Attardo, 1994; Attardo and Raskin, 1991; 
Giora and Fein, 1999; Attardo, 2002]; however, most of the 
work has not been formal enough to be used directly for com­
putational humor modeling.  An effort toward formalization 
of forced reinterpretation jokes has been presented by Ritchie 
[2002]. 

Within  the  artificial  intelligence  community,  most  writ­
ing on  humor has  been  speculative  [Minsky,  1980;  Hofs-
tadter el al., 1989]. Minsky made some preliminary remarks 
about how humor could be viewed from the artificial intelli­
gence/cognitive science perspective, refining Freud's notion 
that humor is a way of bypassing our mental "censors" which 
control inappropriate thoughts and feelings.  Utsumi  [1996] 
outlines a logical analysis of irony, but this work has not been 
implemented.  Among other works:  De Palma and Weiner 
[ 1992] have worked on knowledge representation of riddles, 
Ephratt [1990] has constructed a program that parses a lim­
ited range of ambiguous sentences and detects alternative hu­
morous readings.  A formalization, based on a cognitive ap­
proach (the belief-desire-intention model), distinguishing be­
tween real and fictional humor has been provided by Mele 
[2002]. 

Probably the most important attempt to create a computa­
tional  humor prototype is the  work of Binsted and Ritchie 
[1997].  They have devised a formal  model of the seman­
tic and syntactic regularities underlying some of the simplest 
types of punning riddles.  A  punning riddle is  a question-
answer riddle that uses phonological ambiguity.  The three 
main strategies used to create phonological ambiguity are syl­
lable substitution, word substitution and metathesis. 

Almost all the computational approaches try to deal with 
the incongruity theory at various level of refinement [Raskin, 
1985; Attardo, 1994]. The incongruity theory focuses on the 
element of surprise.  It states that humor is created out of a 
conflict between what is expected and what actually occurs 
in the joke. This accounts for the most obvious features of a 
large part of humor phenomena: ambiguity or double mean­
ing. 

Specific workshops concerned with Computational Humor 

have taken place in recent years and have drawn together most 
of the community active in the field. The proceedings of the 
most comprehensive events are [Hulstijn and Nijholt, 1996] 
and iStock et al, 2002].  Ritchie [2001] has published a sur­
vey of the state of the art in the field. 

3  HAHACRONYM 
3.1  Resources 
In order to realize the HAHACRONYM prototype, we have re­
fined existing resources and we have developed general tools 
useful for humorous systems. As we will see, a fundamental 
tool is an incongruity detector/generator, that makes the sys­
tem able to detect semantic mismatches between word mean­
ing and sentence meaning (i.e. in our case the acronym and 
its context).  For all  tools,  particular attention  was  put on 
reusability. 

The starting point for us consisted in making use of some 
"off-the-shelf  resources,  such  as  WORDNET  DOMAINS 
[Magnini et al., 2002] (an extension of the well-known En­
glish WORDNET) and standard parsing techniques. The tools 
resulting from the adaptation will be reusable for other appli­
cations, and are portable straightforwardly to other languages 
(e.g. WORDNET DOMAINS is multilingual). 
Wordnet and Wordnet Domains 
WORDNET is a thesaurus for the English language inspired 
by psycholinguistics principles and developed at the Prince­
ton  University  by George Miller  [Fellbaum,  1998].  It has 
been conceived as a computational resource, therefore im­
proving  some  of the  drawbacks  of traditional  dictionaries, 
such as circularity of definitions and ambiguity of sense ref­
erences.  Lemmata (about 130,000 for version 1.6) are orga­
nized in synonym classes (about 100,000 synsets).  WORD-
NET can be described as a "lexical matrix" with two di­
mensions:  a dimension  for lexical relations,  that  is  rela­
tions  holding  among  words,  and  therefore  language  spe­
cific, and a dimension for conceptual relations, which hold 
among senses (the synsets) and that, at least in part, we con­
sider independent from a particular language. A synset con­
tains all the words by means of which it  is possible to ex­
press the synset meaning:  for example the synset {horse, 
Equus-caballus}  describes the  sense  of "horse" as  an 
animal,  while  the  synset  { k n i g h t,  horse}  describes 
the  sense  of "horse"  as  a  chessman.  The  main  relations 
present in WORDNET are synonymy, antonymy, hyperonymy-
hypony my, meronymy-holonymy, entailment, troponymy. 
Augmenting WordNet with Domain information 
Domains have been used both in  linguistics (i.e. Semantic 
Fields) and in lexicography (i.e. Subject Field Codes) to mark 
technical usages of words.  Although this is useful informa­
tion for sense discrimination,  in  dictionaries  it  is  typically 
used for a small portion of the lexicon.  WORDNET  DO­
MAINS is an attempt to extend the coverage of domain labels 
within an already existing lexical database, WORDNET (ver­
sion 1.6). The synsets have been annotated with at least one 
domain label, selected from a set of about two hundred la­
bels hierarchically organized.  (Figure 1 shows a portion of 
the domain hierarchy.) 

We have organized about 250 domain labels in a hierar­
chy (exploiting Dewey Decimal Classification), where each 
level is made up of codes of the same degree of specificity: 
for example, the second level includes domain labels such as 
BOTANY,  LINGUISTICS,  HISTORY,  SPORT  and  RELIGION, 
while at the third  level we can find specialization such as 

60 

ART AND CREATIVITY 

Figure  1:  A portion of the domain hierarchy 

A M E R I C A N _ H I S T O R Y,  G R A M M A R,  PHONETICS  and  T E N(cid:173)
NIS. 

Information brought by domains is complementary to what 
is  already  present  in  W O R D N E T.  First  of  all  a  domain 
may  include  synsets  of  different  syntactic  categories: 
for 
instance  M E D I C I NE  groups  together  senses  from  Nouns, 
such  as  d o c t o r #l  and  h o s p i t a l # l,  and  from  Verbs 
such  as  o p e r a t e # 7.  Second,  a  domain  may  include 
senses  from  different  W O R D N ET  sub-hierarchies  For  ex(cid:173)
ample,  SPORT  contains  senses  such  as  a t h l e t e # l,  de(cid:173)
riving  from  l i f e _ f o r m # l,  game  equipment  #  l,  from 
p h y s i c a l _ o b j e c t # l,  s p o r t #l 
from  a c t # 2,  and 
p l a y i n g _f i e l d # l,  from  l o c a t i o n # l. 

Opposition  of semantic  fields 
On  the  basis  of  well  recognized  properties  of  humor  ac(cid:173)
counted for in many theories (e.g. incongruity, semantic field 
opposition, apparent contradiction, absurdity) we have mod(cid:173)
elled an independent structure of domain opposition, such as 
R E L I G I ON  VS.  T E C H N O L O G Y,  SEX  VS.  R E L I G I O N, etc... We 
exploit these  kind  of opposition  as  a  basic  resource  for the 
incongruity  generator. 

Adjectives and  Antonymy Relations 
Adjectives  play  an  important  role  in  modifying  and  gen(cid:173)
erating  funny  acronyms.  W O R D N ET  divides  adjectives 
Descriptive  adjectives  (e.g.  b i g, 
into  two  categories. 
b e a u t i f u l, 
i n t e r e s t i n g,  p o s s i b l e,  m a r r i e d) 
constitute  by  far the  largest category.  The  second category 
is called simply relational adjectives because they are related 
by derivation to nouns (i.e.  e l e c t r i c al  in  e l e c t r i c al 
e n g i n e e r i ng  is  related to noun e l e c t r i c i t y ).  To re(cid:173)
lational adjectives, strictly dependent on noun meanings, it is 
often  possible  to  apply  similar  strategies  as  those exploited 
for nouns.  Their semantic  organization,  though,  is  entirely 
different from the one of the other major categories.  In  fact 
it  is  not  clear what  it  would  mean  to  say  that  one  adjective 
"is a kind  of'  (ISA) some other adjective. The basic semantic 
relation  among descriptive adjectives  is antonymy.  W O R D-
N ET  proposes  also that this  kind  of adjectives  is  organized 
in  clusters  of synsets  associated  by  semantic  similarity  to  a 
focal adjective.  Figure 2 shows clusters of adjectives around 
the direct antonyms fast I slow. 

Figure  2:  An  example  of  adjective  clusters  linked  by 
antonymy  relation 

Exploiting the hierarchy 
It  is  possible  to  exploit  the  network  of  lexical  and  seman(cid:173)
tic relations built in W O R D N ET to make simple ontological 
reasoning.  For example, if a noun or an adjective has a ge(cid:173)
ographic location meaning, the pertaining country and conti(cid:173)
nent can be inferred. 

the 

rhythm  of 

takes 

rhymes  and 

To  cope  with 
CMU 

Rhymes 
into  account 
The  HAHACRONYM  prototype 
the  acronym  ex(cid:173)
word 
this  aspect  we  got  and 
pansion. 
reorganized 
pronouncing 
dictionary 
( h t t p:  //www.  speech.es.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict) 
with a suitable indexing.  The CMU Pronouncing Dictionary 
is  a  machine-readable  pronunciation  dictionary  for  North 
American English that contains over 125,000 words and their 
transcriptions. 

the 

Its format is particularly useful  for speech recognition and 
synthesis,  as  it has mappings  from words to their pronunci(cid:173)
ations  in  the  given  phoneme  set.  The  current  phoneme  set 
contains 39 phonemes; vowels may carry lexical stress. 

Parser, grammar and  morphological analyzer 
Word  sequences  that  are  at  the  basis  of acronyms  are  sub(cid:173)
ject to a well-defined grammar, simpler than a complete noun 
phrase grammar, but complex enough to require a nontrivial 
analyzer.  We  have decided to use a well established nonde-
terministic parsing technique. As far as the dictionary is con(cid:173)
cerned, we use the full  W O R D N ET lexicon, integrated with 
an ad-hoc morphological analyzer. 

Also for the generation part we exploit the grammar as the 

source for syntactic constraints. 

All the components are implemented in Common Lisp aug(cid:173)

mented with nondeterministic constructs. 

Other  resources 
An  "a-semantic"  dictionary 
is  a  collection  of  hyper-
bolic/epistemic/deontic adjective/adverbs.  This  is  a last  re(cid:173)
source,  that  some  time  can  be  useful  in  the  generation 
of  new  acronyms.  Some  examples  are:  abnormally,  ab-
strusely,  adorably,  exceptionally,  exorbitantly,  exponentially, 
extraordinarily,  voraciously,  weirdly,  wonderfully.  This  re(cid:173)
source is hand-made, using various dictionaries as  informa(cid:173)
tion sources. 

Other  lexical  resources  are:  a  euphemism  dictionary,  a 
proper noun  dictionary,  lists  of typical  foreign  words  com(cid:173)
monly used in the language with some strong connotation. 

ART AND CREATIVITY 

61 

3.2  Architecture and Implementation 
To  get  an  ironic  or  "profaning"  re-analysis  of  a  given 
acronym, the system follows various steps and strategies. The 
main  elements of the  algorithm can  be schematized  as  fol­
lows: 

•  acronym parsing and construction of a logical form 
•  choice  of what  to  keep  unchanged  (typically  the  head 
of the highest ranking NP) and what to modify (e.g. the 
adjectives) 

•  look up for possible substitutions 
•  exploitation of semantic field oppositions 
•  granting phonological analogy:  while keeping the con­
straint  on  the  initial  letters  of  the  words,  the  overall 
rhyme  and  rhythm  should  be  preserved  (the  modified 
acronym should  sound  similar to the  original  as  much 
as possible) 

•  exploitation of W O R D N ET antonymy clustering for ad­

jectives 

•  use of the a-semantic dictionary as a last resource 
Figures 3 and 4 show a sketch of the system architecture. 

where 

we can use in the acronym expansion a synonym of "CPU". 
The  same  happens  for "fast").  Once  we  have  an  acronym 
proposal, a syntactic skeleton has to be  filled  to get a correct 
noun phrase.  For example given in input "fast" and "CPU", 
the system selects TORPID with the possible syntactic skele­
ton: 

"fast"  and 

"rapid"  and 

"processor"  are  synonyms 

re­
spectively  of 
the  notation 
< P a r t _ of _Speech>Le^tr  means  a  word  of  that  par­
ticular part_of.speech with Letter as initial.  Then the system 
fills  this  syntactic  skeleton  with  strategies  similar  to  those 
described for re-analysis. 

"CPU"  and 

The system is fully implemented in Common Lisp, exploit­
ing  CLOS  and  the  Meta-Object  protocol  to  import  W O R D-
N ET DOMAINS  and to implement the navigation/reasoning 
algorithms. 

In our system, making fun of existing acronyms amounts to 
an ironical rewriting, desecrating them with some unexpect­
edly contrasting, but otherwise consistently sounding expan­
sion. 

As far as acronym generation is concerned, the problem is 
more complex.  To  make the task more attractive  -  and dif­
ficult -  we  constrain  resulting  acronyms  to  be  words  of the 
dictionary  (APPLE  would  be  good,  IBM  would  not).  The 
system takes in input concepts (actually synsets, possibly the 
result of some other process,  for instance sentence interpre­
tation) and  some minimal structural indication,  such as the 
semantic head.  The primary strategy of the system is to con­
sider as  potential acronyms words that are in  ironic relation 
with the input concepts.  By definition acronyms have to sat­
isfy constraints - to include the initial  letters of some lexical 
realization of the inputs words synsets, granting that the se­
quence of initials satisfy the overall acronym syntax.  In this 
primary  strategy,  the  ironic  reasoning  comes  mainly  at  the 
level of acronym choice in the lexicon and in the selection of 
the fillers of the open slots in the acronym. 

For  example,  giving  as  input  "fast"  and  "CPU",  we 
get  static, 
the  com­
plete  synset 
is  { p r o c e s s o r # 3,  CPU#1, 
c e n t r a l . . p r o c e s s i n g . u n i t # l,  mainframe#2}.  So 

torpid,  dormant. 
for  "CPU" 

(Note 

that 

3.3  Examples 
Here  below  some  examples  of acronym  re-analysis  are  re­
ported.  As far as semantic  field  opposition is concerned we 
have slightly tuned the system towards the domains FOOD, 
RELIGION and SEX. We report the original acronym, the re-
analysis and some comments about the strategies followed by 
the system. 
ACM - Association for Computing Machinery 
-->Association  f or  Confusing  Machinery 
FBI - Federal Bureau of Investigation 
—► Fantastic  Bureau  of  I n t i m i d a t i on 
The system keeps all the main heads and works on the adjec­
tives and the PP head, preserving the rhyme and/or using the 
a-semantic dictionary. 
CRT - Cathodic Ray Tube 
—► C a t h o l ic  Ray  Tube 
ESA - European Space Agency 
—> Epicurean  Space  Agency 
PDA - Personal Digital Assistant 
—►Penitential  Demoniacal  A s s i s t a nt 
—> P r e n u p t i al  Devotional  A s s i s t a nt 
MIT - Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
—► Mythical  I n s t i t u te  of  Theology 
Some re-analyses are RELIGION oriented. Note the rhymes. 

62 

ART AND CREATIVITY 

As far as generation from scratch is concerned, a main con­
cept and some attributes (in terms of synsets) are given as in­
put to the system.  Here below we report some examples of 
acronym generation. 
Main concept: processor (in the sense of CPU); 
Attribute: fast 
OPEN  - On-line Processor for Effervescent Net 
PIQUE  - Processor for Immobile Quick Uncertain Experi­

mentation 

TORPID  -  Traitorously  Outstandingly Rusty  Processor  for 

Inadvertent Data_proeessing 

UTMOST  - Unsettled Transcendental Mainframe for Off-line 

Secured Tcp/ip 

We note that the system tries to keep all the expansions 
of the  acronym coherent in  the  same  semantic  field of the 
main  concept  (COMPUTER  _SCIENCH).  At  the  same  time, 
whenever possible, it exploits some incongruity in the lexi­
cal choices. 

3.4  Evaluation 
Testing  the  humorous quality of texts  is  not an  easy  task. 
There  have  been  relevant  studies  though,  such  as  (Ruch, 
19961.  For HAHAc RONYM, a simpler case, an evaluation 
was conducted under the supervision of Salvatore Attardo at 
Youngstown University, Ohio.  Both reanalysis and genera­
tion have been tested according to criteria of success stated in 
advance and in agreement with the European Commission, at 
the beginning of the project. 

The  participants  in  the  evaluation  were  forty  students. 
They were all native speakers of English. The students were 
not told that the acronyms had been computer generated. No 
record  was  kept  of  which  student  had  given  which  set  of 
answers (the answers were strictly anonymous).  No demo­
graphic data were collected.  However, generally speaking, 
the group was homogeneous for age (traditional students, be­
tween the ages of 19 and 24) and mixed for gender and race. 
The students were divided in two groups. The first group of 
twenty was presented the reanalysis and generation data. We 
tested about 80 reanalyzed and 80 generated acronyms (over 
twice as many as required by the agreement with the Euro­
pean Commission). Both the reanalysis module and the gen­
eration module were found to be successful according to the 
criteria spelled out in the assessment protocol. The acronyms 
reanalysis  module  showed  roughly  70%  of acronyms hav­
ing a score of 55 or higher (out of a possible  100 points), 
while the acronym generation module showed roughly 53% 
of acronyms having a score of 55 or higher.  The thresholds 
for success established in the protocol were 60% and 45%, 
respectively. 

A set of randomly generated acronyms were presented to a 
different group of twenty students.  A special run of the sys­
tem was performed in which the semantic filters and heuris­
tics had been disabled, while only the syntactical constraints 
were operational.  (If the syntactical rules had been disabled 
as well the output would have been gibberish and it would be 
difficult to compare with the regular system production).  In 

Table 1: Evaluation Results 

A  curiosity  that  may  be  worth  mentioning:  HA­
HACRONYM participated to a contest about (human) produc­
tion of best acronyms, organized in December 2002 by RAI, 
the Italian National Broadcasting Service. The system won a 
jury's special prize. 
4  Prospects for advertisement 
Humor  is  the  healthy  way  of  creating  'distance*  between 
one's self and the problem, a way of standing back and look­
ing at the problem with perspective.  Humor reveals new as­
pects, disarms and relaxes.  It is also infectious and it is an 
important way to communicate ideas.  On the cognitive side 
humor has two very important properties: 

-  it  helps getting and  keeping people's attention.  Type 
and rhythm of humor may vary and the time involved 
in building the effect may be different in different cases: 
some times there is a context - like joke telling - that 
from the beginning let you expect for the humorous cli­
max, which may occur after a long while: other times the 
effect is obtained in almost no time, with one perceptive 
act - for instance in static visual humor, funny posters 
or in cases when some well established convention is re­
versed with an utterance; 

-  it helps remembering.  For instance it is a common ex­
perience to connect in our memory some knowledge we 
have acquired to a humorous remark or event. In a for­
eign language acquisition it may happen that an involun­
tary funny situation is created because of so called "false 
friends" - words that sound similar in two languages and 
may have the same origin but have a very different mean­
ing.  The humorous experience is conducive to remem­
bering the correct use of the word. 

No  wonder  that  humor  has  become  one  of the  favorite 
strategies used by creative people involved in the advertising 
business.  In fact among the various fields in which creative 
language is used, advertising is probably the area of activity 
in which creativity (and hence humor) is practiced with most 
precise objectives. 

From an applied AI point of view, we believe that an envi­
ronment for proposing solutions to advertising professionals 
can be a realistic practical development of computational hu­
mor and one of the first attempts in dealing creative language. 
Some examples of the huge array of opportunities that lan­
guage offers and that existent NLP techniques can cope with: 
rhymes, wordplays, popular sayings or proverbs, quotations, 
alliterations,  triplets,  chiasmus,  neologism,  non  sequitur, 

ART AND CREATIVITY 

63 

adaptation  of existing  expressions,  adaptation  of proverbs, 
personification, synaesthesia (two or more senses combined). 
An intelligent system devoted to advertisement, based on 
an apparatus that extends the one we have described, can play 
with these expressions, alter them, change the context, use 
them as a platform for completely new ideas (e.g. create the 
slogan: Thirst come, thirst served for a soft drink). 

In the longer run the aim is to go for individual-oriented 
advertisement.  Let us leave aside issues of privacy for the 
moment, though we know this is a critical theme. The avail-
ability of individual profiles, automatic inferencing of interest 
and behavior models, information about the location of the 
individual, combined with reasoning on the offer side (what 
is advisable to promote in a given context of business) will 
all provide the basic input for advertising things worth get­
ting the interest of a specific individual in a given context. 
Commercial advertisement will be just one case along this 
line - one can think of influencing the individual behaviour on 
the basis of the availability of any possible resources such as, 
for instance, cultural goods.  A prediction is that when such 
situation-oriented  advertisements  will  become  widespread, 
the same features that prevail now with broadcasted material 
will be sought after for the new case. So, forms of humorous 
advertisement for the individual (even playing on personal as­
pects) will become a plus. 

An important aspect to be taken into account is how humor 
is appreciated by different individuals. Personality studies re­
garding this specific theme give important indications [Ruch, 
20021. One option will also be to develop humor for conver­
sational systems, based on embodied agents. The work of Ni­
jholt [2002] Andre and Rist [2000] and Cassell [2001] could 
provide the starting point for introducing dynamic humor. 

For obtaining good results (there are not many things that 
are worse than bad humor!) for these longer term objectives, 
much work will be needed, especially further integration with 
ontologies, common sense reasoning and pragmatics. 
References 
[Andre and Rist, 2000]  E.  Andre  and  T.  Rist.  Presenting 
through performing: On the use of multiple lifelike char­
acters in knowledge-based presentation systems. In Proc. 
of the Second International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces (IUI 2000), pages 1-8,2000. 

[Ephratt, 1990]  M.  Ephratt.  What's  in  a  joke. 

In 
M. Golumbic, editor, Advances in AI: Natural Language 
and Knowledge Based Systems, pages 406-450. Springer 
Verlag, 1990. 

[Fellbaum, 1998] C. Fellbaum. WordNet. An Electronic Lex(cid:173)

ical Database. The MIT Press, 1998. 

[Hofstadter et al., 1989]  D.  Hofstadter, 

[Giora and Fein, 1999] R. Giora and O. Fein. Irony: Context 
and salience. Metaphor and Symbol, 14:241-257,1999. 
L.  Gabora, 
V.  Raskin,  and  S.  Attardo.  Synopsis  of  the  work­
shop on  humor and cognition.  Humor,  2(4):293-347, 
1989. 

[Hulstijn and Nijholt, 1996]  Joris  Hulstijn  and  Anton  Ni­
jholt, editors. Proc. of International Workshop on Com(cid:173)
putational Humour (TWLT 12), University of Twente, En-
schede, 1996. 

[Magnini et al., 2002]  B. Magnini, C. Strapparava, G. Pez-
zulo, and A. Gliozzo.  The role of domain information in 
word sense disambiguation. Journal of Natural Language 
Engineering, 8(4):359-373,2002. 

[Mele, 2002]  F. Mele.  Real and fictional ridicule.  In [Stock 

etal., 2002], 2002. 

[Minsky, 1980]  M. Minsky.  Jokes and the logic of the cog­
nitive unconscious. Technical report, MIT Artificial Intel­
ligence Laboratory, 1980. AI memo 603. 

[Morkes et al, 1999]  J.  Morkes,  H.  Kernal,  and  C.  Nass. 
Effects of humor in task-oriented human-computer inter­
action and computer-mediated communication. Human-
Computer Interaction, 14:395-435,1999. 

[Nijholt, 2002]  A. Nijholt. Embodied agents: A new impetus 

to humor research. In [Stock et al., 2002], 2002. 

[Palma and Weiner, 1992]  P.  De  Palma  and  E.  J.  Weiner. 
Riddles:  accessibility and knowledge representation.  In 
Proc. of the 15th International Conference on Computa(cid:173)
tional Linguistics (COLING-92), Nantes, 1992. 

[Raskin, 1985] V. Raskin. Semantic Mechanisms of Humor. 

Dordrecht/Boston/Lancaster, 1985. 

[Ritchie, 2001 ] G. Ritchie. Current directions in computa­
tional humour. Artificial Intelligence Review, 16(2): 119-
135,2001. 

[Attardo and Raskin, 1991 ] S. Attardo and V. Raskin. Script 
theory revis(it)ed: joke similarity and joke representation 
model. Humour, 4(3):293-347,1991. 

[Attardo, 1994]  S. Attardo.  Linguistic Theory of Humor. 

Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, 1994. 

[Attardo, 2002]  S. Attardo.  Formalizing humor theory.  In 

[Stock  et,  2002],  2002. 

[Binsted and Ritchie, 1997]  K.  Binsted  and  G.  Ritchie. 
Computational rules for punning riddles.  Humor, 10(1), 
1997. 

[Cassell, 2001] J. Cassell. Embodied conversational agents: 
Representation and intelligence in user interface. AI Mag(cid:173)
azine, 22(3):67'-83,2001. 

IRitchie, 2002]  G. Ritchie. The structure of forced interpre­

tation jokes. In [Stock et al., 2002], 2002. 

[Ruch, 1996]  W.  Ruch.  Special  issue:  Measurement ap­

proaches to the sense of humor. Humor, 9(3/4), 1996. 

[Ruch, 2002]  W.  Ruch.  Computers  with  a  personality? 
lessons to be learned from studies of the psychology of 
humor. In [Stock et al., 2002], 2002. 

[Stock et al., 2002] O. Stock, C. Strapparava, and A. Nijholt, 

editors. Proceedings of the The April Fools Day Workshop 
on Computational Humour (TWLT20), Trento, 2002. 

[Utsumi, 1996]  A. Utsumi.  Implicit display theory of verbal 
irony: Towards a computational theory of irony.  In  [Hul(cid:173)
stijn and Nijholt, 1996], 1996. 

64 

ART AND CREATIVITY 

