On the Revision of Probabilistic Beliefs using Uncertain Evidence 

Hei Chan and Adnan Darwiche 
Computer Science Department 

University of California, Los Angeles 

Los Angeles, CA 90095 

[hei, darwiche] @cs. ucla. edu 

Abstract 

We revisit the problem of revising probabilistic be(cid:173)
liefs using uncertain evidence, and report results on 
four major  issues  relating  to  this problem:  How 
to  specify  uncertain  evidence?  How  to  revise  a 
distribution?  Should, and do, iterated belief revi(cid:173)
sions commute? And how to provide guarantees on 
the amount of belief change induced by a revision? 
Our discussion is focused on two main methods for 
probabilistic revision:  Jeffrey's rule of probability 
kinematics and Pearl's method of virtual evidence, 
where we analyze and unify these methods from the 
perspective of the questions posed above. 

Introduction 

1 
We  consider  in  this  paper  the  problem  of revising  beliefs 
given uncertain evidence, where beliefs are represented using 
a probability distribution.  There are two main methods for 
revising probabilistic beliefs in this case. The first method is 
known as Jeffrey's rule and is based on the principle of proba(cid:173)
bility kinematics, which can be viewed as a principle for min(cid:173)
imizing belief change [Jeffrey, 1965]. The second method is 
called virtual evidence and is proposed by Pearl in the context 
of belief networks—even though it can be easily generalized 
to arbitrary probability distributions—and is based on reduc(cid:173)
ing uncertain evidence into certain evidence on some virtual 
event [Pearl, 1988]. We analyze both of these methods in this 
paper with respect to the following four questions: 
1. How should one specify uncertain evidence? 
2.  How should one revise a probability distribution? 
3.  Should, and do, iterated belief revisions commute? 
4.  What guarantees can be offered on the amount of belief 

change induced by a particular revision? 

Our main findings can be summarized as follows.  First, we 
show that Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method both revise be(cid:173)
liefs using the principle of probability kinematics.  Jeffrey's 
rule explicitly commits to this principle, while Pearl's method 
is based on a different principle.  Yet, we show that Pearl's 
method implies the principle of probability kinematics, lead(cid:173)
ing to the same revision method as that of Jeffrey's. The dif(cid:173)
ference between Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method is in the 

way uncertain evidence is specified.  Jeffrey requires uncer(cid:173)
tain evidence to be specified in terms of the effect it has on 
beliefs once accepted, which is a function of both evidence 
strength  and  beliefs  held  before  the  evidence  is  obtained. 
Pearl, on the other hand, requires uncertain evidence to be 
specified  in  terms of its strength only.  Despite this differ(cid:173)
ence, we show that one can easily translate between the two 
methods of specifying evidence and provide the method for 
carrying out this translation. 

The multiplicity  of methods  for specifying evidence also 
raises an important question: how should informal statements 
about evidence be captured formally using available meth(cid:173)
ods? For example, what should the following statement trans(cid:173)
late to: "Seeing these clouds, I believe there is an 80% chance 
that it will rain?" We will discuss this problem of interpreting 
informal evidential statements later, where we emphasize its 
subtlety. 

As  to  the  question  of iterated  belief revision:  It  is  well 
known that Jeffrey's rule does not commute; hence, the or(cid:173)
der in which evidence  is  incorporated  matters  [Diaconis & 
Zabell,  1982].  This has long been perceived as a problem, 
until clarified recently by the work of Wagner who observed 
that Jeffrey's method of specifying evidence is dependent on 
what is believed before the evidence is obtained and, hence, 
should  not  be  commutative  to  start  with  [Wagner,  2002]. 
Wagner proposed a method for specifying evidence, based 
on the notion of Bayes factor, and argued that this method 
specifies only the strength of evidence, and is independent of 
the beliefs held when attaining evidence. Wagner argued that 
when evidence is specified in that particular way, iterated re(cid:173)
visions should commute. He even showed that combining this 
method for specifying evidence with the principle of proba(cid:173)
bility kinematics leads to a revision rule that commutes. We 
actually show that Pearl's method of virtual evidence is speci(cid:173)
fying evidence according to Bayes factor, exactly as proposed 
by Wagner and, hence, corresponds exactly to the proposal he 
calls for. Therefore, the results we discuss in this paper unify 
the two main methods for probabilistic belief revision pro(cid:173)
posed by Jeffrey and Pearl, and show that differences between 
them amount to a difference in the protocol for specifying un(cid:173)
certain evidence. 

Our last  set of results relate to the problem of providing 
guarantees on the amount of belief change induced by a re(cid:173)
vision.  We have recently proposed a distance measure for 

BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 

99 

bounding  belief changes,  and  showed  how  one  can  use  it 
to provide  such guarantees  [Chan  &  Darwiche,  2002].  We 
show  in  this  paper  how  this  distance  measure  can  be  com(cid:173)
puted  when  one  distribution  is  obtained  from  another using 
the  principle  of probability  kinematics.  We  then  show  how 
the guarantees provided by this measure can be realized when 
applying  either  Jeffrey's  rule  or  Pearl's  method,  since  they 
both are performing revision based on the principle of proba(cid:173)
bility  kinematics. 

Probability Kinematics and Jeffrey's Rule 

Therefore, for any event a, its probability under the new dis(cid:173)
tribution  Pr'  is: 

Consider now the problem of revising a probability distri(cid:173)
bution Pr given uncertain evidence relating to a set of mutu-

of specifying  uncertain  evidence  is through  the  effect that  it 
would have on beliefs once accepted. That is, we can say that 

which is the closed form for Jeffrey's rule.  We now show an 
example of using Jeffrey's rule. 

Example 1  (Due to Jeffrey)  Assume  that  we  are  given  a 
piece of cloth, where its color can be one of: green (cg), blue 
(cb), or violet (cv).  We want to know whether, in the next day, 
the  cloth  will be sold  (s),  or not sold  (s).  Our original state 
of belief is given by the distribution Pr: 

3  Virtual Evidence and Pearl's Method 

the logical entailment relationship.  This is exactly the distri(cid:173)
bution  that  Jeffrey  suggests  and,  hence,  this  method  of re(cid:173)
vision  is  known  as  Jeffrey's  rule.  We  stress  here  that  we 
are  drawing  a distinction  between the principle  of probabil(cid:173)
ity kinematics and Jeffrey's rule, which are often considered 
synonymous.  Specifically, Jeffrey's rule arises from a com(cid:173)
bination  of two  proposals:  (1)  the  principle  of probability 
kinematics, and (2) the specification of uncertain evidence us(cid:173)
ing a posterior distribution.  It is possible for one to combine 
the principle of probability kinematics with other methods for 
specifying evidence as we discuss later. 

100 

BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 

One day,  Mr.  Holmes' receives a  call from  his  neighbor, 
Mrs.  Gibbons,  saying she may have heard the alarm  of his 
house going off. Since Mrs. Gibbons suffers from a hearing 
problem, Mr.  Holmes concludes that there is an 80% chance 
that Mrs.  Gibbons  did hear  the  alarm  going  off.  According 
to the method of virtual evidence, this uncertain evidence can 

4  Comparing the Revision Methods 
From the illustrations of the two belief revision methods, Jef-
frey's rule and Pearl's method of virtual evidence, we can see 
that a belief revision method can be broken into two parts:  a 
formal method of specifying uncertain evidence, and a prin(cid:173)
ciple of belief revision that commits to  a unique  distribution 
among many which satisfy the uncertain evidence. 

4.1  Pearl's  method  and  Probability  Kinematics 
We  now  show  that  Pearl's  method,  like  Jeffrey's  rule,  also 
obeys the principle of probability kinematics; what they differ 
in is how uncertain evidence is specified. 

which is the closed form for Pearl 's method. 

The  above  revision  method  is  a  generalization  of  the 
method  of virtual  evidence  proposed  by  Pearl  [1988]  in  the 
context  of belief networks.  A  belief network  is  a  graphi(cid:173)
cal  probabilistic  model,  composed  of two  parts:  a directed 
acyclic  graph where  nodes represent variables,  and a set  of 
conditional  probability  tables  (CPTs),  one  for each  variable 
[Pearl,  1988;  Jensen,  2001].  The  CPT  for  variable  X  with 
parents  U  defines  a  set  of  conditional  probabilities  of the 
form  Pr(x  |  u),  where  x  is  a  value  of variable  X',  and  u 
is  an  instantiation of parents  U.  Suppose now that we  have 
some virtual evidence bearing on variable Y, which has val-

BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 

101 

From  Jeffrey's  Rule  to  Pearl's  Method 

4.3 
We  can  also  easily  translate  from  Jeffrey's  rule  to  Pearl's 
method. 
the  new  probabilities  of  events 

Specifically, 

Therefore,  both  Jeffrey's  rule  and  Pearl's  method  obey  the 
principle  of probability  kinematics  for belief revision. 

From  Pearl's  Method  to Jeffrey's  Rule 

4.2 
With  the  previous  result,  we  now  show  how  we  can  easily 
translate  between  the  two  methods  of specifying  uncertain 
evidence.  For example,  to translate  from  Pearl's method  to 
Jeffrey's  rule,  we  note  that  the  new  probabilities  of events 

Suppose  instead  that  we  want  to  evisc  the  distribution  Pr 
using Jeffrey's  rule,  assuming that  after accepting uncertain 

Substituting the above probability qt  in Jeffrey's rule (Equa(cid:173)
tion 2), we get: 

which  is  exactly  the  distribution  obtained  by  the  method  of 
virtual evidence (Equation 4).  We now illustrate this transla(cid:173)
tion by revisiting Example 2. 

Interpreting Evidential Statements 

5 
The evidence specification protocols adopted by Jeffrey's rule 
and Pearl's method have been discussed by Pearl  [2001],  in 
relation  to  the  problem  of  formally  interpreting  evidential 
statements. Consider the following statement as an example: 

Looking  at this  evidence,  I  am  willing  to bet  2:1 
that David is not the killer. 

This statement can be formally  interpreted  using either pro(cid:173)
tocol.  For example,  if a  denotes the  event "David  is not the 
killer," this statement can be interpreted in two ways: 

102 

BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 

gardless  of  how  this  is  accomplished  though,  we  need  to 
stress  that  the  process  of  mapping  an  informal  evidential 
statement into a revised probability distribution involves three 
distinct elements: 

1.  One  must  adopt  a  formal  method  for  specifying  evi(cid:173)

dence. 

2.  One must interpret the informal evidential statement, by 

translating it into a formal piece of evidence. 

3.  One  must  apply  a  revision,  by  mapping  the  original 
probability  distribution  and  formal  piece  of  evidence 
into a new distribution. 

Our main point here is that Jeffrey's rule and  Pearl's method 
employs  the  same  belief revision  principle,  i.e.  probability 
kinematics.  Moreover,  although they adopt different,  formal 
methods  for specifying  evidence,  one  can  translate between 
the  two  methods  of specification.  Finally,  one  may  take the 
view  that  Jeffrey's  rule  and  Pearl's  method  constitute  com(cid:173)
mitments to how informal evidential statements should be in(cid:173)
terpreted, making the first and second elements the same, but 
wc do not take this view here.  Instead, we regard the issue of 
interpretation as a third, orthogonal dimension which is best 
addressed independently. 

6  Commutativity of Iterated Revisions 
We now discuss the problem of commutativity of iterated re(cid:173)
visions,  that  is,  whether  the  order  in  which  we  incorporate 
uncertain evidence matters.2 

It is well known that iterated revisions by Jeffrey's rule are 
not commutative [Diaconis & Zabell,  1982].  As a simple ex(cid:173)
ample, assume that we are given a piece of uncertain evidence 
which suggests that the probability of event o  is  .7,  followed 
by  another  piece  of uncertain  evidence  which  suggests  that 
the  probability  of r*  is  .8.  After  incorporating  both  pieces 
in  that order,  we  will  believe  that  the  probability  of a  is  .8. 
However,  if the  reversed  order  of revision  is  employed,  we 
will believe that the probability of a is  .7.  In general, even if 
we are given pieces of uncertain evidence on different events, 
iterated revisions by Jeffrey's rule are not commutative. 

This  was  viewed  as a  problematic  aspect of Jeffrey's  rule 
for  a  long  time,  until  clarified  recently  by  Wagner  [2002]. 
First,  Wagner observed and  stressed  that the evidence spec(cid:173)
ification  method  adopted  by  Jeffrey  is  suitable  for  the  "All 
things  considered"  interpretation  of  evidential  statements. 
Moreover, he argued convincingly that when evidential state(cid:173)
ments carry this interpretation, they must not be commutative 
to start with.  So the lack of commutativity  is not a problem 
of the revision method, but a property of the method used to 
specify  evidence.  In fact,  Wagner suggested a third method 
for specifying evidence based on Bayes factors [Good,  1950; 
1983; Jeffrey,  1992],  which leads to commutativity.  Specif(cid:173)
ically,  if  Pr  and  Pr'  are  two  probability  distributions,  and 

2There is a key distinction between iterated revisions using cer(cid:173)
tain evidence versus uncertain evidence.  In the former case, pieces 
of evidence may be logically inconsistent, which adds another di(cid:173)
mension of complexity to the problem [Darwiche & Pearl,  1997], 
leading to different properties and treatments. 

The first interpretation translates directly into a formal piece 
of evidence,  Jeffrey's  style,  and  can  be  characterized  as  an 
"All  things considered"  interpretation since  it  is  a statement 
about the  agent's  final  beliefs,  which  are  a  function  of both 
his prior beliefs and the evidence [Pearl, 2001].  On the other 
hand, the second interpretation translates directly  into a for(cid:173)
mal  piece  of evidence,  Pearl's  style,  and  can  be  character(cid:173)
ized as a "Nothing else considered" interpretation since it is 
a statement about the evidence only [Pearl, 2001]. 

The  two  interpretations  can  lead  to  contradictory  conclu(cid:173)
sions about the evidence. For example, if we use the "Nothing 
else considered" approach to interpret our statement, we will 
conclude that the  evidence  is  against David being the  killer. 
However, if we use the "All things considered" interpretation, 
it  is  not  clear whether the  evidence  is  for or  against,  unless 
we know the  original probability that David  is the killer.  If, 
for example,  David  is  one  of four  suspects  who  are  equally 
likely  to be the killer,  we will  originally  have:  Pr(a)  =  3/4. 
Therefore, this evidence has actually increased the probabil(cid:173)
ity that David  is the killer!  Because of this,  Pearl argues for 
the  "Nothing  else  considered"  interpretation,  as  it provides 
a summary of the evidence and the evidence alone, and dis(cid:173)
cusses how people tend  to use betting odds to quantify their 
beliefs even when they are based on the evidence only [Pearl, 
2001]. 

Example  2  provides  another  opportunity  to  illustrate  the 
subtlety  involved  in  interpreting  evidential  statements.  The 
evidential  statement  in  this  case  is  "Mr.  Holmes  concludes 
that  there  is  an  80%  chance  that  Mrs.  Gibbons  did  hear 
the  alarm  going  off." 
Interpreting  this  statement  using  the 
"All things considered" approach gives us the conclusion that 
Pr\a) 
:  Pr'  (a)  =  4 : 1,  where  a  denotes  the  event  that 
the alarm has gone off.  This interpretation assumes that the 
4  :  1 ratio applies to the posterior beliefs in a and a, after Mr. 
Holmes  has  accommodated  the  evidence  provided  by  Mrs. 
Gibson.  However,  in Example 2, this statement was given a 
"Nothing else considered" interpretation, as by Pearl [1988, 
Page 44-47], where the 4 : 1 ratio is taken as a quantification 
of the evidence strength.  That is, the statement is interpreted 
as  Pr(n  |  a)  :  Pr(n  |  a)  =  4  :  1,  where n stands  for the 
evidence.  In fact, the two interpretations will lead to two dif(cid:173)
ferent probability distributions  and,  hence,  give  us different 
answers  to  further probabilistic  queries.  For example,  if we 
use the "All  things considered" approach in  interpreting this 
evidential statement, the probability of having a burglary will 
be Pr'{b)  =  7.53 x 1 0- 3, which is much larger than the prob(cid:173)
ability we get using the "Nothing else considered" approach 
in Example 2, which is 3.85  x  10- 4. 

From  the  discussions  above,  the  formal  interpretation  of 
evidential statements appears to be a non-trivial task, which 
can be sensitive to context and communication protocols. Re(cid:173)

BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 

103 

beliefs.  We have recently proposed a distance measure de(cid:173)
fined between two probability distributions which can be used 
to  bound the  amount of belief change  induced  by  a revision 
[Chan & Darwiche, 2002].  We review this measure next and 
then use it to provide some guarantees on any revision which 
is based on probability kinematics.5 

Interestingly  enough,  Wagner  [2002]  showed  that  when 
evidence  is  specified  using  Bayes  factors  and  revisions  are 
accomplished  by  probability  kinematics,  belief revision  be(cid:173)
comes commutative.4  This was an illustration that Jeffrey's 
rule is indeed composed of two independent elements: an ev(cid:173)
idence specification method, and a revision method. 

In  fact,  we  now  show  that  the  evidence  specification 
method adopted by Pearl's method corresponds to the method 
of specifying evidence by  Bayes factors.  This has a number 
of implications.  First,  it  shows  that revisions  by  the  virtual 
evidence  method  are  commutative.  Second,  it  provides  an 
alternate,  more  classical,  semantics  for the  virtual  evidence 
method. Finally, it shows again that Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's 
method  both  revise  distributions  using probability  kinemat(cid:173)
ics. 

This distance measure can also be expressed using the Bayes 
factor: 

This measure satisfies the three properties of distance:  posi-
tiveness, symmetry, and the triangle inequality.  It is useful to 
compute this distance measure between two probability dis(cid:173)
tributions  as  it  allows  us  to  bound  the  difference  in  beliefs 
captured by them. 

7  Bounding Belief Change Induced by 

Probability  Kinematics 

One  important  question  relating  to  belief revision  is  that  of 
measuring  the  extent  to  which  a  revision  disturbs  existing 

According to Theorem  1,  if we are able to compute the dis(cid:173)
tance measure between the original and revised distributions, 
we can get a tight bound on the new belief in any conditional 
event  given  our original  belief in  that  event.  The  following 
theorem  computes  this  distance  measure  for  belief revision 
methods based on probability kinematics. 

5The results in this section are reformulations of previous results 
[Chan & Darwiche, 2002], and are inspired by a new understand(cid:173)
ing of Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method as two specific instances of 
revision based on probability kinematics, and the understanding of 
Pearl's method in terms of Bayes factors. 

104 

BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 

00-10065.  We  also wish to thank Carl  Wagner, Judea Pearl, 
and the late Richard Jeffrey, for their valuable comments and 
discussions. 

References 
[Chan & Darwiche, 2002]  Hei  Chan  and  Adnan  Darwiche. 
A  distance  measure  for  bounding  probabilistic  belief 
change. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth National Confer(cid:173)
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pages  539-545,  Edmonton, 
Canada, July 2002. 

[Darwiche & Pearl,  1997]  Adnan Darwiche and Judea Pearl. 
On  the  logic  of  iterated  belief revision.  Artificial  Intelli(cid:173)
gence 87(1-2):]  29, January  1997. 

[Diaconis & Zabell,  1982]  Persi  Diaconis  and  Sandy  L. 
Zabell.  Updating  subjective  probability.  Journal  of the 
American  Statistical Association  77:822-830,  1982. 

[Good,  1950]  Irving J.  Good.  Probability and the  Weighing 

of Evidence. Charles Griffin, London, 1950. 

[Good,  1983]  Irving J.  Good.  Good Thinking:  the Founda(cid:173)
tions  of Probability  and  Its  Applications.  University  of 
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis,  1983. 

[Jeffrey,  1965]  Richard  C.  Jeffrey.  The  Logic  of Decision. 
McGraw-Hill,  New York,  1965.  (2nd edition)  University 
of Chicago  Press,  Chicago,  1983.  (Paperback  correction) 
1990. 

[Jeffrey,  1992]  Richard  C.  Jeffrey.  Probability  and  the Art 
of Judgement.  Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge, 
1992. 

[Jensen, 2001]  Finn V. Jensen.  Bayesian Networks and De(cid:173)

cision Graphs.  Springer-Verglag, New York, 2001. 

[Pearl,  1988]  Judea  Pearl.  Probabilistic Reasoning in  Intel(cid:173)
ligent  Systems:  Networks  of  Plausible  Inference.  Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1988. 

[Pearl, 2001]  Judea  Pearl.  On  two  pseudo-paradoxes  in 
Bayesian  analysis.  Annals  of Mathematics  and Artificial 
Intelligence 32:171-177, 2001. 

[Wagner, 2002]  Carl  Wagner.  Probability  kinematics  and 
commutativity. Philosophy of Science 69:266-278, 2002. 

Theorem 2 allows us to compute the distance measure for 

revisions based on Jeffrey's rule and virtual evidence. 

The significance of Corollaries l and 2 is that we can com(cid:173)
pute the distance measure easily  in both cases.  For Jeffrey's 
rule, we can compute the distance measure by knowing only 

We close this section by showing that the principle of prob(cid:173)
ability kinematics is optimal  in a very precise sense:  it com(cid:173)
mits to a probability distribution that minimizes our distance 
measure. 

8  Conclusion 
In  this  paper,  we  analyzed  two  main  methods  for  revising 
probability  distributions  given  uncertain  evidence:  Jeffrey's 
rule and Pearl's method of virtual evidence.  We showed that 
the  two  methods  use  the  same  belief revision principle,  i.e. 
probability kinematics, with their difference being only in the 
manner in which they specify uncertain evidence, and showed 
how to translate between the two methods for specifying evi(cid:173)
dence.  We also discussed the much debated problem of inter(cid:173)
preting evidential statements.  Moreover, we showed that the 
method  of virtual  evidence  can  be  reformulated  in  terms  of 
Bayes  factors,  which  implies a  number of results,  including 
the commutativity of revisions based on this method.  Finally, 
we showed that revisions based on probability kinematics are 
optimal in a very specific way, and pointed to a distance mea(cid:173)
sure  for  bounding  belief change  triggered  by  any  revision 
based  on  probability  kinematics.  Our bounds  included  Jef(cid:173)
frey's rule and Pearl's method as special cases. 

Acknowledgments 
This  work  has  been  partially  supported  by  NSF  grant  IIS-
9988543,  MURI  grant  N00014-00-1-0617,  and  DiMl  grant 

BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 

105 

