A Logic For Causal Reasoning 

Alexander Bochman 

Computer Science Department, 

Holon Academic Institute of Technology, Israel 

e-mail: bochmana@hait.ac.il 

Abstract 

We  introduce  a  logical  formalism  of  irreflexivc 
causal  production relations that possesses both a 
standard monotonic semantics, and a natural non(cid:173)
monotonic semantics.  The formalism is shown to 
provide a complete characterization for the causal 
reasoning behind causal theories from [McCain and 
Turner, 1997].  It is shown also that any causal re(cid:173)
lation is reducible to its Horn sub-relation with re(cid:173)
spect to the nonmonotonic semantics. We describe 
also a general correspondence between causal re(cid:173)
lations and abductive systems, which shows, in ef(cid:173)
fect, that causal relations allow to express abductive 
reasoning.  The results of the study seem to sug(cid:173)
gest causal production relations as a viable general 
framework for nonmonotonic reasoning. 

Introduction 

1 
Causal theories have been introduced in [McCain and Turner, 
1997] as a nonmonotonic formalism that provides a natural 
solution for both the frame and ramification problem in rea(cid:173)
soning about actions (see [Giunchiglia el al, 2001] for a de(cid:173)
tailed exposition).  A causal  theory is a set of causal rules 
A->B that express a kind of a causal relation among proposi(cid:173)
tions. The nonmonotonic semantics of such theories is deter(cid:173)
mined by causally explained interpretations, namely the in(cid:173)
terpretations that arc both closed with respect to the causal 
rules and such that every fact holding in them is caused. 

The above fonnalism has been defined semantically, and 
the main aim of our study consists in laying down  its log(cid:173)
ical  foundations.  As  we  will  show,  such  foundations  can 
be built in the framework of an inference system for causal 
rules that we will call causal production relations. The log(cid:173)
ical origins of the latter are in input/output logics [Makinson 
and der Torre, 2000], but we will supply them with a nat(cid:173)
ural  nonmonotonic semantics allowing to represent  signifi(cid:173)
cant parts of nonmonotonic reasoning. Thus, the main result 
of the present study is that causal production relations com(cid:173)
pletely characterize the inference rules for causal condition(cid:173)
als that preserve the nonmonotonic semantics of causal theo(cid:173)
ries. It will be shown also that any causal theory is reducible 
with respect to this semantics to a determinate causal the(cid:173)
ory that contain only Horn causal rules with literals in heads. 

The importance of determinate theories lies in the  fact that 
(modulo some mild finiteness restrictions) the explained in(cid:173)
terpretations of such a theory are precisely the interpretations 
of its classical completion (see [McCain and Turner, 1997]). 
Consequently, the nonmonotonic consequences of such the(cid:173)
ories are  obtainable by the  use  of classical  inference tools 
(such as the Causal Calculator, described in [Giunchiglia et 
al.,2001]). 

Finally, we will describe a relationship between causal re(cid:173)
lations and abductive reasoning.  As we will see, the latter 
will be representable via a special  kind of causal  relations 
called abductive causal relations. This will serve as yet an(cid:173)
other justification  for our general  claim that causal  produc-
tion relations could be used as a general-purpose formalism 
for nonmonotonic reasoning, a viable alternative to other non(cid:173)
monotonic formalisms (such as default logic). 
2  Causal production relations 
We will assume that our language  is an ordinary proposi-
tional language with the classical connectives and constants 
{A, V, ->, ->, t, f}. In addition, t= and Th will denote, respec(cid:173)
tively, the classical entailment and the associated logical clo(cid:173)
sure operator. 

A causal rule is a rule of the form A => B, where A and 
B  arc classical  propositions.  Informally,  such a rule  says 
that, whenever A holds, B is caused.  The following defini(cid:173)
tion describes an inference system for causal rules that will be 
shown to be adequate (and complete) for causal theories. Ac(cid:173)
tually, many of the postulates below (e.g., And and Or) have 
already been suggested in the literature (see, Lifschitz, 1997; 
Schwind, 1999]). 
Definition 2.1.  A causal production relation (or simply a 
causal relation) is a relation => on the set of propositions sat(cid:173)
isfying the following conditions: 
(Strengthening)  If A I= B and B => C, then A => C; 
(Weakening) If A => B and B I= (7, then A => C; 
(And) 
If A => B and A =» C, then A=>B/\C\ 
(Or) 
If A => C and  B => C, then AvB=>C; 
(Cut) If A => B and A A B => C, then A => C; 
(Truth) 
(Falsity) 

t => t; 
f=>f. 

CAUSALITY 

141 

Though causal relations satisfy most of the rules for clas(cid:173)
sical  entailment,  their distinctive  feature  is that they  are  ir-
reflexive, that is, they do not satisfy the postulate A=>A. Ac(cid:173)
tually, such relations correspond to a strongest kind of input-
output logics from  [Makinson and der Torre,  2000],  basic 
input-output  logics with reusable  output,  with  the only dis(cid:173)
tinction  that causal  relations  satisfy also Falsity.  The  latter 
restricts the universe of discourse to consistent theories1. 

As a consequence of Cut, any causal relation will already 

be transitive, that is, it will satisfy 

If A=>  D  and  C/\(A-+B)  =>  D,  then  C => D. 

However, transitivity is a weaker property than Cut, since 
it  does  not  imply  the  latter  (see  [Makinson  and  der Torre, 
2000]).  In addition, the material implications corresponding 
to the causal  rules can be used as auxiliary assumptions in 
making derivations.  This is a consequence of the following 
property that holds for causal relations: 
(AS) 
Remark.  The  notion  of a  causal  production  sanctioned  by 
the  above  postulates  is  atemporal.  For  example,  the  rule 
cannot be understood as saying that P and q jointly 
cause  -q  (afterwards)  in a temporal  sense;  instead,  by Cut 
and Falsity it implies 
, which means, in effect, that 
p Aq cannot hold.  Speaking generally,  'causally consistent' 
propositions cannot cause an effect incompatible with them. 
A representation of temporal and action domains in this for(cid:173)
malism can be achieved, however, by adding explicit tempo(cid:173)
ral  arguments to propositions, just as in the classical  logic 
(see [Giunchiglia et ai, 2001]). 

A  constraint  is  a  causal  rule  of the form 

Such 
constraints correspond to state constraints in action theories. 
Now, any causal rule implies the corresponding constraint: 
(Reduction) 

Note, however, that the reverse entailment does not hold. 
Actually, given the rest of the postulates, Reduction can re(cid:173)
place the Cut postulate: 
Lemma 2.1. Cut is equivalent to Reduction. 

Another important fact about causal relations is the follow(cid:173)

ing 'decomposition' of causal rules: 

Causal rules of the form 

are ' classically trivial', 
but they play an important explanatory role in non-reflexive 
causal reasoning.  Namely, they say that, in any causally ex(cid:173)
plained interpretation in which A holds, we can freely accept 
B,  since it is  self-explanatory  in this context.  Accordingly, 
such rules could be called conditional abducibles.  We will 
discuss the role of abducibles later as part of the general cor(cid:173)
respondence between causal and abductive reasoning2. 

1 In fact, it has been shown in [Bochman, 2002] that other, weaker 

input-output logics can also be given a semantics of the kind de(cid:173)
scribed in what follows. 

2Note  also  that,  under  the  general  correspondence  between 
causal inference and default logic (see [Turner, 1999]), such rules 
correspond to normal defaults in default logic. 

Now the above lemma says that any causal rule can be de(cid:173)
composed into a (non-causal) constraint and a conditional ab-
ducible.  This decomposition neatly delineates two kinds of 
information conveyed by causal rules. One is a logical infor(cid:173)
mation that constraints the set of admissible models, while the 
other is an explanatory information describing what proposi(cid:173)
tions are caused (explainable) in such models  . 

For a finite set u of propositions, 

will denote their con(cid:173)
junction. We will extend causal rules to rules having arbitrary 
sets of propositions  as premises  using the  following  'com(cid:173)
pactness' recipe: for any set u, 

For a given causal relation =», we will denote by C(u) the 

set of propositions caused by u, that is 

The operator C will play much the same role as the usual 
derivability operator for consequence relations. It satisfies the 
following familiar properties: 

_ 

3  Monotonic semantics of causal inference 
We will describe now a monotonic semantics for causal  re(cid:173)
lations.  Actually,  it will be just a slight modification of the 
semantics given in [Turner, 1999]. 

A  fully  formal  semantic  interpretation  of causal  relations 
could be given in terms of possible worlds frames of the form 
(i,W),  where  i  is  a  propositional  interpretation,  while  W 
is  a  set  of propositional  interpretations  that  contains  i  (see 
[Turner, 1999]). In order to make our descriptions more trans(cid:173)
parent,  however,  we will  identify such frames with pairs of 
theories of the form 
, where a is a world (maximal de(cid:173)
ductively closed set), while u is a deductively closed set in(cid:173)
cluded in a.  Such pairs will be called bitheories.  Clearly, 
any possible worlds frame (i, W) determines a certain bithe-
ory, and vice versa, so all our definitions will admit a purely 
semantic reformulation. 

By a causal semantics we will mean a set of bitheories. 
The corresponding notion of validity for causal rules is given 
in the next definition. 

•  A => B is valid with respect to a causal semantics B if it 

holds in all bitheories from B. 

We will  denote by  =B  the set of all causal rules that are 
valid in a causal semantics B. It can be easily verified that this 
set is closed with respect to the postulates for causal relations, 
and hence we have 

3Cf.  a  similar decomposition  of causal  rules  in  [Thielschcr, 

1997]. 

142 

CAUSALITY 

Propositions that hold in all causally explained worlds are 
considered as the nonmonotonic consequences determined by 
the causal relation.  This semantics is indeed nonmonotonic, 
since the set of such consequences changes nonmonotonically 
with changes in the underlying set of causal rules. 

Now we will establish a correspondence between the above 
semantics and the nonmonotonic semantics of causal theories 
from [McCain and Turner,  1997]. 

the  following theorem  shows  that this  semantics  determines 
precisely the source causal relation, including the causal rules 
with  arbitrary  sets  of premises. 
In  other  words,  the  source 
causal relation is strongly complete for this semantics. 

Thus,  any  causal  semantics  determines  a  causal  relation 
and  vice  versa,  any  causal  relation  is  generated  by  some 
causal semantics. Hence we conclude with the following gen(cid:173)
eral completeness result: 
Corollary 3.3.  A  relation on propositions is a causal relation 
iff it is generated by a causal semantics. 

3.1  Possible worlds  semantics 
Causal relations can also be given a semantic interpretation in 
terms of standard possible worlds models. 

The  following definition provides the notion of validity for 

causal rules in such models: 

Definition  4.2.  Two  causal  theories  will  be  called  (non-
monotonically)  equivalent  if they  determine  the  same  set  of 
causally explained worlds. 

As a first part of our general result, the next theorem shows 
that the postulates of causal inference preserve the above non(cid:173)
monotonic  semantics. 

Theorem  3.4.  A  relation  is  causal  if and  only  if it  is  deter(cid:173)
mined by a quasi-reflexive possible worlds model. 

The  above  theorem  shows,  in  effect,  that  the  logic  of 
causal  relations  is adequate  for the nonmonotonic reasoning 
in causal theories. 

4  The nonmonotonic semantics 
In addition to the monotonic semantics, a causal relation de(cid:173)
termines also a natural nonmonotonic semantics. 

fact  is causally  explained.  It  is  these  worlds that determine 
the nonmonotonic semantics, defined below. 

Definition 4.3. 

•  A causal theory is determinate if it con(cid:173)
tains  only  Horn  rules.  A  causal  relation  will  be  called 
determinate  if  it  is  generated  by  a  determinate  causal 
theory. 

•  A causal theory will be called definite if it is determinate 

and locally  finite. 

Clearly,  any  finite  causal  theory  will  be  locally  finite, 
though not vice  versa.  Similarly,  any  finite  determinate the(cid:173)
ory will be definite.  As can be easily verified, a determinate 

4Thus, any constraint A => f will be a Horn rule in this sense. 

CAUSALITY 

143 

causal  theory is definite  if and only  if,  for any literal  /, there 
is no more than a finite number of rules with the head /. Con(cid:173)
sequently,  our  definition  of definite  theories  turns  out  to  be 
equivalent to that given in [McCain and Turner,  1997]. 

By  a  determinate  subrelation  of a  causal  relation  =>  we 
will mean the least causal relation generated by the set of all 
Horn rules from =». Then we have 
Theorem  4.2.  Any  causal  relation 
equivalent to  its determinate subrelation. 

is  nonmonotonically 

By Theorem 4.1  we can conclude now that any causal the(cid:173)

ory is equivalent to some determinate theory. 
Example.  The causal theory 

Then the following result can be proved: 

Unfortunately, the above algorithm is not modular.  More(cid:173)
over,  it  does  not  preserve  local  finiteness:  there  are  locally 
finite  causal theories such that their determinate counterparts 
are  not  locally  finite.  Still,  in  many  simple  cases  it  gives  a 
convenient recipe for transforming an arbitrary causal theory 
into an equivalent determinate theory. 

Now  we  arc  going  to  show  the  second  part  of our  main 
result, namely that causal relations constitute a maximal logic 
suitable  for reasoning  in causal theories.  To begin with,  we 
introduce 

is a monotonic  (logical)  notion,  and hence,  unlike the non(cid:173)
monotonic equivalence,  it is preserved under addition of new 
causal rules.  For example, though any causal theory is equiv(cid:173)
alent to  a determinate one,  they  may give different results if 
we add some causal rules to them. 

Strongly  equivalent  theories  are  'equivalent  forever',  that 
is, they are interchangeable in any larger causal theory with(cid:173)
out  changing  the  nonmonotonic  semantics.  Consequently, 
strong equivalence can be seen as an equivalence with respect 
to the monotonic logic of causal theories.  And the next result 
shows that this logic is precisely the logic of causal relations. 
Theorem 4.5.  Two causal theories are strongly equivalent if 
and only if they are causally equivalent. 

The  above  result  (and  its  proof)  has  the  same  pattern  as 
the  corresponding  results  about  strong  equivalence  of logic 
programs  and  default  theories  (see  [Lifsehitz  et  al.,  2001; 
Turner, 2001]). 

The above result implies, in effect, that causal relations are 
maximal  inference  relations  that  are  adequate  for  reasoning 
with causal theories:  any postulate that is not valid for causal 
relations can be  'falsified'  by  finding  a suitable extension of 
two  causal  theories  that  would  determine  different  causally 
explained interpretations, and hence would produce different 
nonmonotonic  conclusions. 

5  Causation versus abduction 
Causal  inference has numerous  connections  with other non(cid:173)
monotonic formalisms. Thus, [Turner, 1999] describes the re(cid:173)
lations with circumscription, autoepistemic and default logic. 
In  this  section  we  will  describe  a  correspondence  between 
causal inference and abductive reasoning.  In addition to spe(cid:173)
cific  results,  this  will  give  us  a  broader perspective  on  the 
representation capabilities of causal relations. 

Corollary  4.4.  Causally  equivalent  theories  are  nonmono(cid:173)
tonically  equivalent. 

The  reverse  implication  in  the  above  corollary  does  not 
hold, and a deep reason for this is that the causal equivalence 

A  general correspondence between abductive  frameworks 
and  input-output  logics  has  been  established  in  [Bochman, 
2002], based on the  identification between the above notion 

144 

CAUSALITY 

of explainability and  input-output derivability.  By this corre(cid:173)
spondence, abducibles are representable by 'reflexive' propo(cid:173)
sitions  satisfying  input-output  rules  A=> A,  while  abductive 
frameworks  themselves  correspond  exactly  to  input-output 
logics  satisfying  an  additional  postulate  of  Abduction  (see 
below).  By  these  results,  input-output  logics  allow  to  give 
a syntax-independent representation of abductive reasoning. 

The  abductive  subrelation 

5.1 
We will begin with the following definitions: 

Causal  inference  in  abductive  causal  relations  is  always 
mediated by abducibles.  Consequently,  propositions  caused 
by worlds are caused, in effect, by the abducibles that hold in 
these worlds: 

a  finite  language  should be  well-founded.  Moreover,  let us 
say that a causal relation is  finitary  if it is generated by some 
finite set of causal rules.  Then we have 
Lemma  5.2.  Any finitary causal relation  is  well-founded. 

Finally, the next result shows that all such causal relations 

will be weakly abductive. 
Theorem  5.3.  Any  well-founded  causal  relation  is  weakly 
abductive. 

It  turns  out  that  well-foundedness  is  not  the  only  condi(cid:173)
tion that is sufficient for weak  abductivity.  Thus,  adequately 
acyclic  causal  theories  (see  [McCain  and  Turner,  1998]  for 
a  definition)  are  not  in  general  well-founded,  but  they  also 
satisfy this property. 
Theorem  5.4.  Any  adequately  acyclic  causal  relation  is 
weakly abductive. 

The above results  show that in many cases of interest,  the 
nonmonotonic semantics of causal theories can also be com(cid:173)
puted using abduction.  Still, as a general conclusion, we can 
say  that  causal  inference  constitutes  a proper generalization 
of abductive reasoning beyond the situations where facts are 
explainable by reference to a fixed set of self-explanatory ab(cid:173)
ducibles. 

6  Conclusions and perspectives 
Summing up the main results, we can argue that causal rela(cid:173)
tions constitute a powerful formalism for nonmonotonic rea(cid:173)
soning, especially suitable for representing action domains.  It 
has been shown,  in particular, that it gives an exact descrip(cid:173)
tion  of the  logic  underlying  causal  theories.  We  have  seen 
also  that  it  allows  to  give  a  syntax-independent  representa(cid:173)
tion of abductive reasoning.  If we add to this also the natural 
correspondences  with  other nonmonotonic  formalisms,  such 
as default logic and circumscription (see [Turner,  1999]), we 
can safely conclude that causal inference covers a significant 
part  of nonmonotonic  reasoning. 

Viewed from this perspective, there is still much to be done 
in order to realize the opportunities created by the formalism. 
There are two kinds of problems that need to resolved in this 
respect. 

The  nonmonotonic  semantics  for causal  theories  is  based 
on  the  principle  of universal  causation  which  is  obviously 
very  strong.  The  principle  implies,  for  example,  that  if we 
have  no  causal  rules  for a  certain  proposition,  it  should  be 
false  in  all  explainable  interpretations.  As  a  result,  adding 
a new propositional atom to the  language makes  any  causal 
theory inconsistent, since we have no causal rules for it.  This 
makes  causal  theories  extremely  sensitive  to  the  underlying 
language  in  which  they  are  formulated.  One  way  out  has 
been suggested in [Lifschitz,  1997];  it amounts to restricting 
the  principle  of universal  causation  to  a  particular  subset  of 
explainable propositions.  This approach,  however,  is purely 
syntactical and hence retains language dependence. 

The  abductive  subrelation  of a  causal  relation  preserves 
many  properties  of the  latter.  For  example,  both  have  the 
same constraints and abducibles. 

Recall that in causally explained interpretations any propo(cid:173)
sition  is  caused  by  other  propositions,  the  latter  are  also 
caused  by accepted propositions,  and  so on.  Clearly,  if our 
'causal resources' are limited, such a causal chain should stop 
somewhere.  More  exactly,  it  should  reach  abducible  (self-
explanatory) propositions.  This  indicates that  in many  cases 
the nonmonotonic semantics associated with a causal theory 
should be determined by the corresponding abductive subre(cid:173)
lation.  Below we will make this claim precise. 
Definition  5.2.  A  causal  relation  will  be  called  weakly ab(cid:173)
ductive  if it  is  nonmonotonically  equivalent  to  its  abductive 
subrelation. 

The next definition will give us an important sufficient con(cid:173)

dition  for weak abductivity. 

The  above  definition  describes  a  variant  of  a  standard 
notion  of well-foundedness  with  respect  to  the  (transitive) 
causal  order. 
It  should  be  clear  that  any  causal  relation  in 

More  subtle,  yet  perceptible  difficulties  arise  also  in  rep(cid:173)
resenting  indeterminate  situations  in  causal  theories.  Thus, 
since any causal  theory is reducible to a determinate theory, 
causal  rules  with  disjunctive  heads  are  ignored  in  the  non(cid:173)
monotonic semantics; more exactly, they are informative only 

CAUSALITY 

145 

[Makinson and der Torre, 2000]  D. Makinson and L. Van der 
Input/Output  logics.  Journal of Philosophical 

Torre. 
Logic, 29:383-408, 2000. 

[McCain and Turner, 1997]  N.  McCain  and  H.  Turner. 
In Proceedings 

Causal theories of action and change. 
AAAl-97, pages 460--465, 1997. 

[McCain and Turner, 1998]  N. McCain and H. Turner.  Sat(cid:173)
isfiability planning with causal theories.  In Proceedings 
KR-98, Trenlo, 1998. 

[Schwind, 1999]  C. Schwind.  Causality in action theories. 
Linkoping Electronic Articles in Computer and Informa-
tion Science, 4(4), 1999. 

[Thielscher, 1997]  M. Thiclscher.  Ramification and causal(cid:173)

ity. Artificial Intelligence, 89:317-364, 1997. 

[Turner, 1999] II. Turner. A logic of universal causation. Ar(cid:173)

tificial Intelligence, 113:87-123, 1999. 

[Turner, 2001]  H. Turner.  Strong equivalence for logic pro(cid:173)
grams  and  default  theories  (made  easy). 
In  T.  Eiter, 
W. Faber, and M. Truszczynski, editors, Proceedings LP-
NMR'OL  pages  81-92,  Vienna,  2001.  Springer.  LNAI 
2173. 

to the extent that they imply corresponding non-causal con(cid:173)
straints or Horn rules.  This does not mean,  however, that 
we cannot represent indeterminate information in causal the(cid:173)
ories.  Actually,  one of the  main contributions of [McCain 
and Turner,  1997] consisted in showing how we can do this 
quite naturally in common cases (see also [Lin, 1996]). Still, 
there is yet no systematic understanding whether and how an 
indeterminate information can be represented by Horn causal 
rules. 

A more general  problem concerns the role and place of 
causal inference in general nonmonotonic reasoning. Though 
the  former covers many  areas  of nonmonotonic  reasoning, 
it does not cover them all.  Thus,  it does not seem suitable 
for solving the qualification problem in representing actions. 
Speaking generally, causal reasoning appears to be indepen(cid:173)
dent of the kind of nonmonotonicity described by preferential 
inference from [Kraus et ai,  1990].  This naturally suggests 
that the two kinds of nonmonotonic reasoning with condition(cid:173)
als could be combined into a single formalism, a grand uni(cid:173)
form theory of nonmonotonic reasoning.  Actually, this idea 
is not new; it has been explored more than ten years ago in 
[GefTner, 1992].  It remains to be seen whether current stud(cid:173)
ies of causal reasoning can contribute to viability of such a 
general theory. 
Acknowledgments.  The author is grateful to Vladimir Lifs-
chitz, Hudson Turner, David Makinson and Leendert van der 
Torre, as well as to the anonymous referees, for their instruc(cid:173)
tive comments and suggestions. 

References 
[Bochman, 2002]  A.  Bochman. 

Input-output  logics:  Pro(cid:173)
duction inference, nonmonotonicity, and abduction, 2002. 
(Draft). 

[Console et al, 1991]  L. Console, D. Theseider Dupre, and 
P. Torasso. On the relationship between abduction and de(cid:173)
duction. Journal of Logic and Computation, 1:661-690, 
1991. 

[GefTner, 1992] H. GefTner. Default Reasoning. Causal and 

Conditional Theories. MIT Press, 1992. 

[Giunchiglia et al., 2001]  E.  Giunchiglia,  J.  Lee,  V.  Lifs-
chitz, N. McCain, and H. Turner.  Nonmonotonic causal 
theories, 2001. Artificial Intelligence (to appear). 

[Kraus et al, 1990]  S. Kraus, D. Lehmann, and M. Magidor. 
Nonmonotonic reasoning, preferential models and cumu(cid:173)
lative logics. Artificial Intelligence, 44:167-207, 1990. 

[Lifschitz et al., 2001]  V.  Lifschitz,  D.  Pearce,  and 
A.  Valverde. 
Strongly  equivalent  logic  programs. 
ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 2:526-541, 
2001. 

[Lifschitz, 1997]  V. Lifschitz.  On the logic of causal expla(cid:173)

nation. Artificial Intelligence, 96:451-465, 1997. 

[Lin, 1996]  F. Lin. Embracing causality in specifying the in-
determinate effects of actions. In Proceedings AAA1-96, 
pages 670-676, 1996. 

146 

CAUSALITY 

