Causes and Explanations Revisited 

James D. Park 

Computer Science Deptartment 

University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095 

jd@cs.ucla.edu 

Abstract 

This  paper reconsiders  the  notions  of actual  cause 
and  explanation  in  functional  causal  models.  We 
demonstrate  that  isomorphic  causal  models  can 
generate  intuitively  different  causal  pronounce­
ments.  This  occurs  because psychological  factors 
not  represented  in  the  model  determine  what  cri­
teria  we  use  to  determine  causation.  This  par­
tially  explains  the  difficulty  encountered  in  previ­
ous  attempts  to  define  actual  cause.  Freed  from 
trying  fit  all  examples  to  match  intuition  directly 
(which  is  not  possible  using  only  the  information 
in causal  models),  we provide definitions  for cau­
sation matching the different causal criteria we in­
tuitively apply.  This formulation avoids difficulties 
associated with previous definitions,  and  allows  a 
more refined discussion of what constitutes a cause 
in a given situation.  The definitions of actual cause 
also  allow  for  more  refined  formulations  of expla­
nation. 

Introduction 

1 
Identifying an actual cause in a specific situation is a normal 
part of every day human reasoning. From the specifics of the 
situation,  we  sift  through  the  events,  identifying  those  that 
actually caused the  event  in  question.  This  is  different than 
general  claims  about  causal  tendencies. 
In  fact,  the  causal 
nature of events can actually run counter to the general causal 
tendency of the variables. For example, buying a lottery ticket 
has  the  general  tendency  to  decrease  wealth.  However,  in 
certain circumstances (the numbers on the ticket correspond 
to the  winning  numbers),  it can cause  a  significant  increase 
wealth.  People  are  able  to  make  these  situation  dependent 
pronouncements  fairly easily. 

Automating  causal  determinations  has  a  number  of  ap­
plications,  including natural language processing, diagnosis, 
and  planning.  Unfortunately,  formulating  a  successful  no­
tion  of actual  cause  has  proved  elusive.  Previous  attempts 
were often hindered by trying to embed them in formalisms 
that  are  not  appropriate  for  modeling  causality  (See  [Pearl, 
2000, Chapter 10] for a discussion of these).  Recently, func­
tional  causal  models  [Pearl,  2000]  have proven to be an ef­
fective  formalism  for  modeling  causal  relationships.  There 

have been previous attempts to use functional causal models 
as a basis for defining actual cause, but they have been shown 
to suffer from  serious defects of their own  [Hopkins & Pearl, 
2003].  In this paper, we identify (at least partially) why pre­
vious methods have  failed,  and provide new  definitions that 
avoid many  of their problems.  These  definitions  allow  for a 
more refined determination of actual causation.  Additionally, 
they provide a useful basis for producing explanations. 

.

i a b l e s )

2  Review of causal models 
In  this  section  we  review  the  basic  definitions  from  [Pearl, 
2000] that we will  use.  First we need some notation.  Upper 
case  letters  (e.g.  X,  Y, Z)  represent  variables.  Lower  case 
letters (e.g.  x, y, z) represent a particular value  of the  corre­
sponding variable.  Bold face upper case letters (e.g.  X, Y, Z) 
represent  sets  of variables,  and  bold  face  lower  case  letters 
(e.g.  x, y, z) an instantiation of the corresponding variables. 
A  causal model  is  a  triple  ( U, V,  F)  where  U  is  the  set 
of background (or exogenous) variables (i.e.  their values are 
determined  outside  the  model),  and  V  is  the  set of endoge­
nous variables (i.e. those whose value is determined by model 
is  a  set  of functions  where 
v a r
fx  maps  from 
,  Together,  for any  set­
ting of the  background  variables,  T determines the  values  of 
all  variables  in  V.  The  parents  of a  variable  X  are  the  vari­
ables  that  directly  influence  the  value  of  X  (i.e. 
the  set  of 
variables  that  is  non-trivial  in  fx).  The  causal  diagram  of a 
model  is  a directed  graph  with  vertices  U  U V  where  there 
is  an  edge  from  vertex  X  to  vertex  Y  iff X  is  a parent  of Y 
in  the  model.  We  will  restrict  our attention  to  models  with 
acyclic causal  diagrams.  A  submodel of causal model  M  un­
der intervention X  =  x  is a causal model 
where 
.  This allows 
us to talk about what would have happened if X had been x. 
We  will  write  Yx( u)  to  mean  the  value  that  Y  takes  on  in 
the submodel  Mx  in context U  =  u.  For a propositional  for­
mula  ψ,  defined  over primitives  of the  form 
represents  the  value  of the  formula  when  the  primitives  are 
evaluated  in model  Mx  in context u. 

3  Previous work 
Formulating  the  notion  of cause  has  been  a  topic  of philo­
sophic debate for many years.  Unfortunately, all of the philo-

154 

CAUSALITY 

sophical works of which we are aware either suffer from seri­
ous problems, or are not precise enough to be falsifiable (See 
[Halpem & Pearl, 2001a] for a review of some of these prob­
lems). 

There have been at least two previous attempts to formulate 
actual cause in functional causal models.  The first was the 
causal beam approach [Pearl, 2000].  This notion of actual 
cause seemed to be too restrictive, classifying certain events 
as noncauses that intuitively clearly should have been causes 
(See for example the critique in [Halpern & Pearl, 2001a]). 
The other [Halpem & Pearl, 2001a] (which we will call ASC 
for Alternate situation Strong Cause) tried to remedy those 
problems, but introduced several others.  [Hopkins & Pearl, 
2003] provides a thorough analysis of its problems. 

4  Why so hard? 
The many formulations encountered, and the problems they 
exhibit beg the question: why is ascribing cause so difficult to 
formalize? Consider the following example from [Halpem & 
Pearl, 2001a]:  Two arsonists light matches at opposite ends 
of the forrest.  Both start fires, and the forrest burns down. 
Either arsonist alone was sufficient to burn down the forrest. 
Now, we ask whether arsonist 1 lighting his match caused the 
forrest to burn down. Clearly it did. The reason being that it 
was sufficient to burn it down, and participated in the actual 
causal process that brought it about. 

Consider another example: A prisoner is scheduled for ex­
ecution. The execution proceeds as follows: The executioner 
selects a gun from among several, which may or may not have 
a bullet in the chamber.  The prisoner is given the option of 
death by lethal injection (which is always fatal), or face ex­
ecution by gunshot.  If the prisoner selects gunshot, the ex­
ecutioner fires the weapon.  If the weapon he selected had a 
bullet, it kills the prisoner.  If not, the execution fails and the 
prisoner goes free.  In the situation we consider, the prisoner 
chooses execution by lethal injection. As it turns out, the se­
lected gun was loaded so the prisoner would have died even 
if he had he chosen gunshot. 

Now, we ask if the prisoner's choice of execution method 
caused his death. Obviously it did not. The reason being that 
in this circumstance, regardless of his choice, he would still 
die. That is, his choice had no impact on the outcome. 

Surprisingly, the obvious causal models in these two exam­
ples are in fact isomorphic as are the specific situations con­
sidered. The effect (forrest burns down <-> death) occurs in 
all but one possible instantiation of its direct causes (neither 
arsonist lights their match <-> execution by gunshot is selected 
and the gun is not loaded) and both sufficient conditions oc­
curred in the situation under consideration.  In other words, 
the information that rendered one a cause and the other a non-
cause is not contained in the causal model, or the specific sit­
uation.  We achieved intuitively different results because we 
tested different notions of cause.  In the forest fire example, 
we tested the ability to produce the fire, i.e.  whether it was 
capable of bringing about the result.  In the second exam­
ple, we tested the consequentiality of the choice of execution 
methods, i.e. whether an alternate decision would produce a 
different result. The choice of what test to apply seems to be 

based on psychological factors outside of the causal model. 
We believe  that the difficulties associated with previous 
definitions are at least in part due to the fact that they failed 
to distinguish between different notions of cause.1  In fact, 
we would argue that like many problems in philosophy, one 
reason cause eludes satisfactory definition is because the intu­
itive concept is fundamentally imprecise. What criteria to ap­
ply is often a subjective decision, witnessed by the ease with 
which one can often convince others that an alternate crite­
ria is the appropriate one.  For example, one may argue that 
it is inappropriate to say that arsonist 1 caused the fire since 
regardless of his action, the fire would still have occurred. 

While the choice of criteria for determining cause is im­
precise  and  subject to  factors  not representable  in  a func­
tional causal model, the same is not true once a criteria has 
been chosen.  Each criteria is precise and completely decid-
able based on the causal model and the state of its variables. 
Formulating and illustrating appropriate definitions of these 
criteria is the focus of the next section. 
5  A new proposal 
In this section, we introduce basic definitions which we then 
compose to form criteria for evaluating causal relationships. 
As there are several ways in which an event may be consid­
ered a cause, we provide definitions for the different aspects. 
We believe that all causal tests are based on two basic ideas, 
which are related to , though distinct from, necessity and suf­
ficiency. By combining these two criteria we can produce the 
different criteria used for making causal judgments. 

First, we need some background and auxiliary definitions. 
Foremost among them is what we allow to be causes and ef­
fects. 
Definition 1 An instantiation x, of endogenous variables X 
is an event in context u if X(u) = x. A propositional formula 
ψ defined over the endogenous variables of the model is an 
effect in context u if  ψ(u). 
Any potential cause of an effect must be an event. Note that 
we force events and effects to be true in the situation being 
considered.  This is merely a convenience meant to simplify 
subsequent definitions. 

Since we are concerned with determining cause in a partic­
ular context, the causal diagram of a model is not very infor­
mative. A variable X that in general is necessary to determine 
the value of another variable Y (and hence has an edge from 
X to Y in the diagram), may become irrelevant in a particular 
context.  That is, a particular value of the background vari­
ables u may make the value of Y unresponsive to the value 
of A". This observation motivates the following definition: 
Definition 2 The context diagram of causal world M(u) is 
the directed graph whose vertices are the endogenous vari-
ables of M, and includes each edge (X, Y) where the func­
tion fy is nontrivial in X when the background variables are 
fixed to u. 
The context diagram simplifies reasoning about causal rela­
tionships in a specific context. 

1 [Hall, 2002] makes a similar argument, although the details dif­

fer from ours. 

CAUSALITY 

155 

Another preliminary notion we will need is sufficiency.2 

Definition 3  An event x is sufficient to cause effect ψ in con­
text  u  if  for  all  instantiations  w  of  the  nondescendants  W  of 
X in the context diagram  of 
Note that it must hold only when the nondescendants are ma­
nipulated. Descendants are excluded from manipulation since 
we believe  that the  values  they  take  on,  including  interplay 
between them, are an integral component of determining cau­
sation.  Allowing  them  to  be  manipulated  would  upset and 
skew that process. 

Sufficiency  is  not  really  strong  enough  for  our purposes. 

For example, consider this example from [Hall, 2002]: 

Suzy and Billy both pick up rocks and throw them 
at a bottle.  Suzy's rock gets there  first,  shattering 
the bottle.  Since both throws are perfectly accurate, 
Billy's  would  have  shattered  the  bottle  had  it  not 
been preempted by Suzy's throw 

Figure  1:  Rock throwing example 

Figure  1  shows  the  causal  diagram  of a  model  of the  story 
(the background variables, as well as the functional relation­
ship between variables should be obvious in this story, as well 
as the others, so will not be explicated).  BT (ST) represents 
Billy  (Suzy)  throwing  BH  (SH)  represents  Billy's  (Suzy's) 
rock hitting the bottle, and BS stands for the bottle shattering. 
Billy throwing  is sufficient to cause the bottle to  shatter,  but 
it doesn't actually participate in the causal process that made 
the  bottle shatter.  Suzy's action preempted  Billy's.  We ex­
pect not only sufficiency of the cause, but that in some sense, 
the event actually participates in the causal process.  Defining 
this notion has been one of the primary difficulties in talking 
about actual  cause.  The  following two  definitions  formalize 
these  notions  in  a  way  that  avoids  the  problems  associated 
with previous approaches. 
Definition  4  Let  Z  be  the  children  of  X  in  the  context  dia­
gram of u, and let Y be some non-empty subset of Z. Let W 
be the intersection of the descendants of X (including X) and 
the  ancestors  of  Y  (excluding  Y).  Then  event  xy  is  a  child 
of event x in context 
A child event can be thought of as a next step in an unfolding 
causal process. The criteria that 
is merely to enforce 
the intuition that before a variable takes on a value, its direct 

2Note  that  this  definition  differs  from  the  definition  for suffi­
ciency presented in [Pearl, 2000].  That definition was used for a 
different purpose, and is not appropriate in this context.  It is more 
closely related to, although distinct from the notion of sustenance 
[Pearl, 2000]. 

causes must be  fixed.  That is, a new value can not be added, 
if the relevant parents have not already been included. 

Definition 5 An event x is a strongly sufficient cause of effect 
ψ  in  context  u  if  either  of  the  following  conditions  hold: 

•  For all  instantiations 
•  x is a sufficient cause of ψ and there exists some child 
event  yof  x  which  is  a strongly sufficient cause of ψ in 
context  u 

Effectively,  what  we  require  is  that  the  event  be  sufficient 
for the effect, and that as the causal process progresses from 
the event, the sufficiency is maintained.  This prevents events 
that arc preempted from being strongly sufficient.  For exam­
ple,  w h i
the  only  child 
event, 
is not, so the event is not strongly suf­
ficient.  Suzy  throwing,  on  the  other  hand,  is  strongly  suf­
ficient,  witnessed  by  the  sequence 

l e is  sufficient  for

 

Strong  sufficiency  is  the  first  of the  two  primary  notions 
used to evaluate causality in specific situations.  In fact, strong 
sufficiency by itself corresponds to one of the primary notions 
of causation.  Strong sufficiency corresponds to our intuitions 
about physical causality.  The cause sets in motion a chain of 
events  capable  of bringing  about  the  effect. 
Intuitively,  we 
expect causation  to  be transitive.  If x  causes y  and y  causes 
z,  we  expect x to  cause  z.3  It  is  not hard to  see  that strong 
sufficiency meets that expectation.  In fact, strong sufficiency 
turns out to be the only transitive relation among our defini­
tions of cause. 

The  other  primary  consideration  when  testing  actual 
causality is the notion of consequentiality. In addition to par­
ticipating in the causal process, we often require that an event 
be  in  some  sense  consequential  in  order to be  considered a 
cause.  That consideration motivates the following definition. 
Definition 6  Let Z be the nondescendants of X in the context 
diagram  of u.  Then,  an  event x is potentially  consequential 
with  respect  to  effect  ψ  in  context  u  if  for  some  instantia­
).  Event x 
tions 
is actually consequential with respect to effect ψ if for some 
instantiation 
Like  strong  sufficiency,  actual  conscquentiality  alone  is  a 
common criteria for causation.  For example, in the execution 
example from Section 4 the choice of lethal injection was not 
considered a cause of his death precisely because  it  was not 
consequential.  If instead the gun had not been loaded, which 
would  make  the  decision  consequential,  we  would  consider 
it a  cause.  Note  that  a  consequential  event  necessarily par­
ticipates in the actual causal process.  That is, for every actu­
ally consequential event, there is a minimal strongly sufficient 
event that contains some member of the consequential event. 
Potential  consequentiality  on  the  other  hand  is  not  of it-
self enough for an event to be considered a cause.  However, 
combining it with strong sufficiency produces a very common 
causal criteria. 

3 In fact, this intuition is so strong that some theories of causation 
start with the transitivity of cause as a starting point [Lewis, 1986]. 

156 

CAUSALITY 

Test Strong 
Sufficiency 

Yes 

Test Consequentiality 
| 

|  Potential 
Sustaining 

Actual 
Strong 

No 

Strongly 
Sufficient 

No 

Consequential 

-

-

Table 1: Different types of actual cause can be tested by com­
bining tests for strong sufficiency and consequentiality. 

Definition 7  An event x sustains effect ψ in context u if 'x is 
strongly sufficient and potentially consequential for ψ. 
The notion of sustenance defined here is a modified version of 
the one that appeared in [Pearl, 2000].  It differs in two ways. 
First, it requires strong sufficiency as opposed to merely suf­
ficiency.  Second,  it  fixes  the  variables  W,  against  which  x 
must be tested, while the previous definition has W as one of 
the parameters. 

Sustenance  is  a  very  commonly  applied  criteria  for  cau­
sation.  Most  of the  examples  in  [Halpern  &  Pearl,  2001a] 
which  were deemed causes correspond to our notion  of sus­
taining cause.  In the forrest fire example in Section 4, arsonist 
1  was considered a cause of the fire because it sustained the 
forrest fire. 

A more restrictive causal criteria is also sometimes useful. 
Definition 8  An event x is a strong cause of ψ in context u if 
x is a strongly sufficient and actually consequential cause of 

A strong cause can be thought of as a complete explication of 
why the effect occurred. 

Often we talk about an event helping to cause an event even 
though it is neither consequential  nor sufficient.  It is instead 
part of some cause.  That consideration motivates the  follow­
ing definition. 
Definition 9  An event xy (y may be empty) is a contributory 
cause of effect ψ in context u if x is potentially consequential, 
and for some event z, xz is a minimal sustaining cause of ψ. 
Contributory causation is the closest in spirit to the ASC defi­
nition.  If we insist on minimality, it reduces to singletons just 
as that definition does.  Additionally,  in all  but one example 
included in [Halpern & Pearl, 2001a], contributory causation 
matches the pronouncements of the ASC definition.  We con­
sider that example among others in the next section. 

6  Examples 
The  single  example  presented  in  [Halpern  &  Pearl,  2001a] 
where the  ASC  definition differs from  our definition  of con­
tributory  causation  comes  from  the  following  story  (along 
with some commentary), quoted from [Hall, 2002]: 

You are standing at a switch in the railroad tracks. 
Here comes the train:  If you flip the switch, you'll 
send  the  train  down  the  left-hand  track;  if  you 
leave  where  it  is,  the  train  will  follow  the  right-
hand track.  Either way,  the train will arrive at the 
same point,  since the tracks  reconverge  up ahead. 
Your  action  is  not  among  the  causes  of  this  ar­
rival;  it merely  helps to determine  how  the arrival 

is brought about (namely, via the left-hand track, or 
via the right-hand track). 

Two  models  which  produced  different  causal  pronounce­
ments  were  given,  demonstrating  the  impact  that  model 
choice has on the determination of causation. The model that 
classified it as a cause is the one we arc interested in. Figure 2 
shows the model. F represents the state of the switch, LT (RT) 
whether the train goes down the left (right) track, and A rep­
resents whether the train arrives.  The justification given was 

Figure 2:  A possible model for the train story 

that under normal circumstances, we may not call it a cause, 
but if something abnormal  were to happen (for example, one 
of the  tracks  malfunctions,  or  is  destroyed)  then  the  action 
would be a cause.  Our new definitions say that  flipping the 
switch is a strongly sufficient cause (  In the words of Hall  it 
''helps  to determine how the arrival  is brought about"), but it 
is not even potentially consequential, so is not a contributory 
cause. This seems a more satisfactory result. 

Unlike the ASC definition, these definitions do not always 
reduce  to  singleton  causes  even  if minimality  is  enforced. 
Additionally,  the  different  criteria  produce  causes  that  cor­
respond to different ways that people think about cause. 

For example, consider a situation where 5 people vote re­
garding a ballot measure. The votes are tallied, and the mea­
sure  passes  if 3  or more vote  for it.  The associated diagram 
appears in Figure 3.  Suppose that 4 vote for the measure, and 
1  votes against.  According to the  ASC  definition,  each  in-

Figure 3:  A voting example.  The V1 correspond to the votes 
cast, T the vote tally, and P whether the measure passed. 

dividual who votes for the measure is an actual  cause of the 
measure passing. In the causal beam approach, nothing qual­
ifies as a cause of the measure passing.  In this approach,  it 
depends what type of cause we arc considering. 

Three votes for the measure constitute a strong cause of the 
measure passing, while two do not.  This corresponds to our 
notion that  a majority  of the  votes  is  required  to  cause  it to 
pass. 

Two votes for the measure constitute a consequential cause. 
Changing those votes to vote against the measure would make 

CAUSALITY 

157 

the measure  fail.  This corresponds to the way we often talk 
about  causes  in  elections.  Often  election  outcomes  are  at(cid:173)
tributed  to the  voting behavior of some  minority  of the  elec(cid:173)
torate  (in  U.S.  politics  these  include  "Reagan  Democrats", 
"soccer  moms",  "angry  white  men"  ,  "African  Americans", 
etc).  While  they  are  far  from  sufficient  to  win  an  election, 
we  say  that  they  caused  the  election  result  because  if they 
had voted significantly differently the outcome of the election 
would have been different.  On  the other hand, most people 
understand  that  in  the  vast  majority  of elections  their  single 
vote did not cause the outcome.  This is reflected in our defi(cid:173)
nitions by the fact that none of the criteria yield a single voter 
as a cause in this situation. A single vote for the measure is a 
contributory cause however, as one would expect. 

[Halpern  &  Pearl,  2001a]  provides  a  number of examples 
that  have proved problematic  for other methods.  As most of 
the examples correspond either to issues of sustenance or con-
sequentially4  (and  with  the  exception  of the  train  example 
considered  above,  all  of the positive  examples  are  contribu(cid:173)
tory causes, and the negative examples are not), we will  not 
review  them  all  here.  We  would  like  to  revisit  one  exam(cid:173)
ple that was considered troublesome.  The first version of the 
story is as follows:  A machine severed Fred's finger while he 
was at work.  He was rushed to the hospital  and it was reat(cid:173)
tached.  A  month  later his  finger  worked just as before.  We 
would of course not consider getting his finger cut off a cause 
of it  being  fully  function  later (because  it  is  not  consequen(cid:173)
tial). Now, suppose we add another component to the story:  It 
is possible that Larry the loanshark may be waiting outside for 
Fred, so that he can cut off his finger to make an example of 
him for not paying his loan promptly. If Larry cuts off the fin(cid:173)
ger, he will destroy it so that it can not be reattached.  If Fred 
severs his finger at the factory, he will be rushed to the hos(cid:173)
pital,  so Larry will not have an opportunity to do it himself. 
The  causal  diagram  appears  in  Figure 4.  Now,  consider the 

Figure 4: Finger severing example. FS represents severing his 
finger. LL represents whether Larry is lurking.  LC represents 
whether  Larry  cuts  off his  finger  and  FF  represents whether 
his finger is fully functional 

situation in which Larry turns out not to be waiting outside, 
and Fred does sever his finger. Was Fred cutting his finger off 
a  cause  of his  finger  being  fully  functional  the  next  month? 
According  to the ASC  definition  it  is.  This  was  considered 
disturbing because adding a provision for a contingency that 
did not occur changed the the event from noncause to cause. 

4ln  fact, most of the difficult examples play off of the conflict(cid:173)
ing interpretation of cause between sustenance and consequential ity. 
That is, the event in question is typically either consequential or sus(cid:173)
taining, but not both. 

In  light of our new definitions,  we do  not  see that particular 
consideration  as  a  problem.  According to our definition,  it 
again depends on what you are  looking for.  It is sustaining, 
but it is not consequential.  Typically,  when we are testing if 
an event caused something to remain unchanged, we are look(cid:173)
ing for a consequential cause.  That is clearly the case in this 
example.  However, it is still reasonable to say that cutting off 
his finger at the factory was a sustaining cause, because that 
event makes certain the effect, regardless of what Larry does 
or does not do. 

Our definitions also handle correctly the examples in [Hop(cid:173)
kins  &  Pearl,  2003]  avoiding  the  problems  of ASC,  but  be(cid:173)
cause  of space  limitations  we  will  not  review  them  all  here. 
We will consider a single example of the problem to demon(cid:173)
strate  how these definitions  avoid  it.  Consider the  following 
story:  Before an execution, the captain loads one of the guns 
of the  two  members  of his  firing  squad,  putting  a  blank  in 
the  other  gun.  Both  gunmen  then  fire  simultaneously  and 
the  prisoner  dies. 
In  the  current  situation,  the  captain  put 
the bullet in the gun of gunman  1, and both men shoot.  The 
model  consists  of the  loader,  and  the  two  gunmen  as  direct 
causes  of the  the  variable  representing  whether the  prisoner 
is alive.  Now, we ask if gunman 2  shooting caused the pris(cid:173)
oner's death.  According to the ASC definition,  it did.  Gun(cid:173)
man 2 did not cause the prisoner's death according to any of 
our definitions  of cause.  It  is  clearly  not  consequential,  nor 
sufficient,  so  it can  not  be  a  cause.  It  is not  a  contributory 
cause either because it is not a member of any minimal  suffi(cid:173)
cient cause.  According to these definitions, gunman  1  shoot(cid:173)
ing is a consequential cause, gunman 1 shooting and the cap(cid:173)
tain loading his gun is a strong cause, and gunman 1 shooting 
and the captain loading his gun are both contributory causes. 

7  Explanations 
If we  have  a  probability  distribution  quantifying  our  uncer(cid:173)
tainty about what context will actually occur, we can use that 
distribution,  combined  with  our  model  to  produce  explana(cid:173)
tions for an observed effect. 

Causation forms an integral part of evaluating explanations 
(see  [Chajewska  &  Halpern,  1997;  Pearl,  2000;  Halpern  & 
Pearl, 2001b] for critiques of methods that ignore causal con(cid:173)
siderations when producing causes).  In spirit, we agree with 
the  intuitive  notion  of explanation  put  forth  in  [Halpern  & 
Pearl, 2001b]. That is, an explanation is fundamentally just a 
hypothesized event which if true would be a possible cause of 
the observed phenomenon. Our new view of actual causation, 
however, makes the particulars somewhat different.  Our def(cid:173)
initions of actual cause form the basis for evaluating possible 
explanations.  We allow any instantiation of endogenous vari(cid:173)
ables to be an explanation and compare them based on how 
well they explain the effect.  According to our view, there are 
different types of explanation, just as there are different types 
of causes.  Which type  of explanation to  choose  depends  on 
its intended purpose.  This is in contrast to the approach using 
ASC as the basis for causal explanation.  We believe that this 
approach provides more  flexibility  and is more general than 
ASC based explanations. 

By way of example,  consider the  following  situation:  We 

158 

CAUSALITY 

Table 2:  Posteriors  and explanatory power for possible  expla­
nations  in  the  circuit  example  according to  ASC  definition. 

have  a  circuit  consisting  of a  single  3  input  parity  gate,  with 
inputs  X1,  X2  and  X3,  and  output  Y  (i.e.  Y  —  1  when  an 
odd  number  of the  inputs  arc  1).  Each  input  has  an  associ­
ated  background  variable,  independent  of the  others,  where 
So,  typically 
Now,  suppose  that  we  observe  that 
and  we  want  an  explanation  in  terms  of the  A"  vari­
ables.  The  first  question  is  what  constitutes  an  explanation 
(or  even  a  partial  explanation  in  the  ASC  definition).  Ac­
cording  to the  ASC  based  definition,  the  only  possible  expla­
nations  (or  partial  explanations)  are  singletons.5  Now,  how 
can  we  compare between  them?  The  ASC  approach provides 
three  measures  of the  quality  of an  instantiation  x  as  an  ex­
planation  of effect  ψ  in  light of evidence  e  (which  must  entail 
ψ).  The  first,  named  goodness  is  P r (x  causes  ψ|xe).''  The 
second,  the  posterior  probability  is 
The  third,  ex­
planatory  power  is  
,  The  goodness  of  all 
explanations  in  this  example  are  1.  Also,  the  explanatory 
power, 
since  every  instanti­
ation  is  a  weak  cause  according  to  the  ASC  definition.  Ta­
ble  2  shows  the  explanatory  power  and  posterior  probability 
of the  different  possible  explanations. 
It  is  not  clear  how  to 
choose  between  them  in  this  case.  One  thing to  notice  about 
this  example  is  that  every  variable  is  consequential  in  every 
context,  so  notions  of consequential  causation  (or  by  exten­
sion,  contributory  causation)  become  less  interesting.  We 
would  argue  that  in  this  case,  what  we  are  really  interested 
in  is  sustenance.  Our  definitions  allow  that  to  be  consid­
ered  easily.  For a particular instantiation we can calculate the 
probabilities  P r (x  sustains  
,  P r (x  strongly  causes  ψ|e), 
P r (x  is a consequential  cause  of  
i  from the model and the 
probability  distribution  over  the  background  variables.  For  a 
particular causal  criteria  
the  probability  that  x  is  a 
cause  of ψ given  e  using  criteria  c  is just 

The  probability  of causation  can  then  be  used  as  the  mea­
sure  of explanation  quality.  In  our  circuit  example,  for exam­
ple, 
.444,  which  is  the  maximal  probability  for  sustenance.  This 
explanation  (which  is  not allowed  in  the  ASC  version)  seems 
more  satisfying  than  any  of the  single  variable  explanations. 

5Notc that this is not always the case.  This example was specifi­

cally crafted to exhibit such behavior. 

6 In the ASC definition of explanation, it "causes" would mean is 
a weak cause. We write it in a general form, because these measures 
are applicable to the new method as well 

This  is  not  to  say  that  the  measures  used  in  [Halpern  & 
Pearl,  2001 b] are  not useful.  In  fact  they  can  be  very  useful. 
We  simply  note  that  our  definitions  allow  a  further  analysis 
that  is  useful  in other situations.  They prove  especially useful 
when  we  are  looking  for  a  sufficient  or  sustaining  explana­
tions.  Because  our definitions  can  handle  different  notions  of 
cause,  the  explanations  they  produce  can  be  more  informa­
tive  than  the  explanations  formed  when  using the methods  in 
[Halpern  &  Pearl,  2001b],  where  they  are  restricted  to  one 
weak  form  of cause. 

8  Conclusion 
We  demonstrated that the  intuitive  choice  of causal  criteria  is 
subjective,  and  is  influenced  psychological  factors  not  rcpre-
sentable in a causal model.  The criteria, once chosen however 
can be evaluated from the  information contained in the causal 
model.  We  presented  new  criteria  covering  the  different  no­
tions  of causation.  Fundamental  among  these  is  the  defini­
tion  of  strong  sufficiency,  which  provides  a  simple  and  in­
tuitively  satisfying  definition  for  actually  participating  in  the 
active  causal  process  that  generated  the  effect.  These  defini­
tions  avoid  the  problems  of previous  attempts,  and  allow  for 
a  more  refined  discussion  of actual  causality.  Additionally, 
they  provide  a  foundation  for  evaluating  explanations,  which 
proves  to  be  more  satisfactory  than  previous  attempts  to  use 
functional  causal  models  for  explanation. 

Acknowledgment 
This  work  has  been  partially  supported  by  M U RI  grant 
N00014-00-1-0617 

References 
[Chajewska  &  Halpern,  1997]  Chajewska,  U.,  and  Halpern, 
J.  1997.  Defining  explanation  in  probabilistic  systems. 
In  Proceedings  of  the  13  th  Conference  on  Uncertainty  in 
Artificial 

(UAI),  6 2 - 7 1. 

Intelligence 

LHall,  2002J  Hall,  N.  2002.  Two  concepts  of causation. 

In 

Casuation  and  Counter/actuals.  M IT  Press. 

[Halpern &  Pearl, 2001a]  Halpern,  J.,  and  Pearl,  J.  2001a. 
Causes  and  explanations:  A  structural-model  approach-
part  I:  Causes. 
In  Proceedings  of the  17th  Conference  on 
Uncertainty  in  Artificial  Intelligence 

(UAl),  194-202. 

[Halpern &  Pearl, 2001b]  Halpern,  J.,  and  Pearl,  J.  2001b. 
Causes  and  explanations:  A  structural-model  approach-
part  I I:  Explanations. 
InternationalJoint  Confer­
ence  on  Artificial  Intelligence 

(1JCAI),  27-34. 

In  Proc. 

[Hopkins &  Pearl,  2003]  Hopkins,  M.,  and  Pearl,  J.  2003. 
Clarifying  the  usage  of structural  models  for  comonsense 
causal  reasoning. 
In  Proceedings  of the  AAA1  Spring  Sym­
posium  on  Logical  Formalizations  of  Commonsense  Rea­
soning. 

[Lewis,  1986]  Lewis,  D.  1986.  Causation.  In  Philosophical 

Papers,  volume  11,  159-213.  Oxford  University  Press. 

[Pearl,  2000]  Pearl,  J.  2000.  Causality.  Cambridge  Univer­

sity  Press. 

CAUSALITY 

159 

