Qualitative Map Learning Based on Co-visibility of Objects 

Takehisa Yairi and Koichi Hori 

University of Tokyo 

4-6-1 Komaba Meguro-ku Tokyo, Japan 

yairi@ai.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

Abstract 

This paper proposes a unique map learning method 
for mobile robots based on the co-visibility infor­
mation of objects i.e., the information on whether 
two  objects  are  visible  at  the  same  time  or  not 
from the current position.  This method first esti­
mates empirical distances among the objects using 
a simple heuristics - "a pair of objects observed at 
the same time more frequently is likely to be lo­
cated more closely together". Then it computes all 
the coordinates of the objects by multidimensional 
scaling (MDS) technique.  In the latter part of this 
paper, it is shown that the proposed method is able 
to learn qualitatively very accurate maps though it 
uses only such primitive information, and that it is 
robust against some kinds of object recognition er­
rors. 

Introduction 

1 
Map  learning  problem  of  autonomous  mobile  robots  has 
been a central  issue in the  field  of artificial  intelligence as 
well  as robotics,  because  it contains several  important as­
pects of intelligence such as recognition of environment and 
acquisition  of internal  representations. 
In  fact,  a  variety 
of map  building methods have been developed  for a  wide 
range of robots, tasks and environments so far.  These meth­
ods  are  traditionally  classified  [Kortenkamp  et  a/.,  1998; 
Murphy, 2000] in terms of the way of map representation 
into metric map building methods[Moravec and Elfes, 1985; 
Uhlmann et  al,  1997], topological methods[Mataric,  1992; 
Zimmer, 1996; Shatkay and Kaelbling, 1997], and hybrids of 
them[Thrun et al., 1998]. 

On the other hand, when we turn our attention to a new 
trend of robot navigation called qualitative navigation[Levitt 
and Lawton, 1990; Schlieder, 1993], we can see there is an­
other way of qualitative map representation that is different 
from both the metric and topological representations. A most 
important point of the maps used in this qualitative navigation 
is that they are not required to be accurate in a metric sense as 
long as they correctly preserve the qualitative spatial relation­
ships (such as circular ordering) of the objects or landmarks 
in the actual environment. 

A challenging problem in this paradigm is to construct au­
tonomously such qualitative maps from qualitative observa­
tion information robots obtain.  A representative approach to 
this qualitative map learning problem is [Sogo et al, 2001], 
in which qualitative information of "how object positions are 
classified to two sets with respect to arbitrary straight lines" 
is used to construct a map by propagating "three point" con­
straints. 

In this paper, we also propose a map learning method for 
mobile robots based on qualitative observation information. 
It uses the information of "co-visibility" or whether two ob­
jects are visible or not at the same time from robot's positions, 
which is much more primitive than the information used in 
[Sogo et  al,  2001] and the ordering information[Schlieder, 
1993]. 

In this method, co-visibility of two objects is translated into 
an empirical distance based on a simple heuristics "closely lo­
cated objects are likely to be seen simultaneously more often 
than distant objects and vice versa" or "temporal and spatial 
proximities are approximately equivalent".  Then, positions 
of all objects are calculated by well-known multidimensional 
scaling (MDS) technique. 

A noteworthy feature of this method from a practical view­
point is that it does not require robots localize their own po­
sitions while mapping. Moreover, it is shown that it can learn 
qualitatively accurate maps without higher level infonmation 
such as ordering, and is robust against observation errors. We 
also discuss the validity of the heuristics above from several 
viewpoints. 

2  Problem Definition 
2.1  Assumptions on Environment and Robot 
we consider a map building task by a mobile robot, in which 
the robot estimates the positions of objects  in the environ­
ment by repeated explorations and observations (Figure  1). 
More specifically, we make the following assumptions about 
the environment and robot. 

Environment 
The environment is a closed area containing a finite number 
of objects.  Each object is assigned a unique ID. In addition, 
it is assumed that all objects are about the same size. 

COGNITIVE  ROBOTICS 

183 

as an evaluation criterion of constructed 

We use this 
maps in the later simulation study. 
2.3  Co-visibility and Distance Between Objects 
As previously  mentioned,  we  use  a  heuristics "a pair of ob­
jects observed simultaneously more frequently is likely to be 
located  more  closely  together"  to  estimate  the  distance  be­
tween them.  Though  it  is  hard  to  prove  the  validity  of this 
heuristics strictly in general cases, we consider it is approxi­
mately appropriate for the following reason. 

First, we assume that an object becomes difficult to identify 
as the distance  from the robot increases,  because the  image 
size  of the  object  becomes  smaller and  the  chance  of occlu­
sion increases. 

Given  this  assumption,  the  total  area  size  of the  region 
where the robot can observe two objects simultaneously de­
creases monotonically according to the distance between the 
objects.  For example,  consider the  case the probability that 
an object can be observed from the robot at a distance of r is 
(Figure 3).  If two object A and B are located 
at 
respectively,  the  probability  that  both 
objects  are  visible  from  an  arbitrary  robot  position  X  (x,y) 
becomes 

and 

Then, the'expectcd size of area where both objects are visible 
simultaneously  is 

In the  simplest case that the  robot  is  located  at any place  in 
the  environment  with  equal  probability,  the  probability  that 
the two objects are co-visible  is expected be proportional  to 
Scovis{l),  which is a monotonic decreasing function of/. 

In  section  4,  we  will  discuss  this  "co-visibility  and  dis­
tance" heuristics in a more general form:  "temporal and spa­
tial proximities are approximately equivalent". 

3  Proposed Method 
3.1  Outline of CoviMap 
Based  on  the  assumptions  above,  we  propose  CoviMap -  a 
map  learning  method  based  on  the  co-visibility  of objects. 
In  this  method,  the  mobile  robot  obtains  approximate  posi­
tions of objects based on the co-visibility frequencies of them, 
which  are  updated  repeatedly  by  explorations  and  observa­
tions.  The outline of CoviMap is described as below: 

1.  The robot repeats the following behavior steps and up­
dates the number of observations of each object (nt), and 
the number of simultaneous observations of every pair of 
objects 
(a)  The  robot moves to the next observation position, 

avoiding collisions with the objects. 

Figure  1:  Assumed map building task of a mobile robot (ex­
ploration, observation and map estimation) 

Environment 

Observation 
The robot obtains a panoramic camera image at each observa­
tion point,  and  extracts a  list of recognized or visible objects 
by some image processing and recognition technique.  These 
lists of visible objects are accumulated over time and used to 
build a map later. 

Exploration 
The robot explores  the environment with some randomness, 
avoiding collisions with objects. 

2.2  Evaluation  Criterion  for  Qualitative  Maps 
Though a constructed map is represented in the form of nu­
meric  coordinates  of the  objects  on  2-D  plane  as  ordinary 
metric maps,  its goodness  is measured by the correctness of 
the qualitative spatial  relationships rather than by the metric 
accuracy. 

To  evaluate 

the  qualitative  correctness  of  the  ob­
tained  maps,  we  employ 
triangle 
orientation[Schlieder,  1993;  Sogo  et  al.,  2001]  or  counter-
clockwise order of three points.  In short, triangle orientation 
in  2-D  plane  is  defined  as  +  when 
of three  points 
the  order 
yields  a counter-clockwise  turn,  and  — 
otherwise (Figure 2). 

the  notion  of 

When there are N  objects in the environment, the number 
So 
of all  possible triangles  formed by them becomes 
of a constructed map 
we  define the  orientation  error 
as the percentage of triangles with wrong orientations, com-

184 

COGNITIVE  ROBOTICS 

Figure  3:  Relationship  between  co-visibility  and  distance  of 
two  objects  in  a  simplified  environment 

Figure 4:  Relationship  between  squared  distance  
visibility  frequency 
ment 

and co-
fij  of objects  in  the  simulation  environ­

(b)  It  obtains  a  list  of  visible  objects  Lo  from  the 
panoramic  image  captured  at the  current  position, 
and updates  ni  and  nly)  as bellow: 

2.  After  a  specified  number  of steps,  co-visibility frequen(cid:173)
is  computed  for each  pair of objects  based  on 
of  each 

Then  empirical  distance 

cies 

pair is computed from 

3.  The  robot  obtains the  estimated  positions of all  objects 
by  applying  Multi-Dimensional  Scaling 
(MDS)  to  the  distance  matrix  D  whose  (i,  j)  element 
is 

In the remaining of this section, we explain the second and 

third parts in the above procedure. 

We  also  define  an  empirical  distance  matrix  D  whose  (i,  j) 
element  equals  to 

D  is  a  symmetric  matrix 

and  its diagonal  components  

equal  to zero. 

A  possible  solution  to  the  problem  of deciding  a  suitable 
combination  of function  and  parameter  values  for  
is to se­
lect the  one  which  minimizes  the stress  value  of the  MDS  re­
sults described  later.  Furthermore,  if no appropriate empirical 
distance  functions  are  provided,  non-metric  M DS  (or  ordinal 
MDS) can be used instead. 
Another  problem  is  that  

cannot  be  computed  properly 
for the pairs whose co-visibility frequencies are zero, because 
In  this  case,  CoviMap  uti­
lizes  the  triangular  inequality  constraint  (TIC)  to  correct  the 
value  of 

becomes  some  constant  value. 

as follows: 

3.2  Computation  of Co-visibility  Frequency  and 

Empirical  Distance 

3.3  Map Construction Based on 

Multi-Dimensional  Scaling (MDS) 

Co-visibility  frequency 
follows: 

between two objects is defined as 

fi,j  stands for the conditional probability that two objects are 
visible  at  the  same  time,  given  that  at  least  one  of them  is 
visible.  It takes a value between 0 and  1.  This definition of 

is also known as Jaccard's coefficient. 

With  the  definition  of  co-visibility  frequency 

the 
heuristics introduced in 2.3 can be rewritten as "distance be­
tween  two  objects 
in­
creases". Figure 4 (scattered points) illustrates the actual rela­
tionship between the real (squared) distance and co-visibility 
frequency 
in the simulation environment in section 4. The 
result indicates that the heuristics is approximately valid. 

monotonically  decreases as 

Therefore,  we  introduce  a  notion  of empirical  (squared) 
distance 
between  an  arbitrary  pair of objects,  which  is 
defined by some monotonic decreasing non-negative function 

i.e., 

Multi-dimensional  scaling  (MDS)[Young  and  Householder, 
1938]  is  a  multivariate  data  analysis  technique  used  to  visu­
alize  a  potentially  high-dimensional  data  structure  by  map­
ping  it  into  a  relatively  low  dimensional  space[Cox  and  Cox, 
2001].  The  purpose  of M DS  is  to  find  an  optimal  configura­
tion  of objects  in  a  low-dimensional  space,  when  dissimilari­
ties  or distances  among them  are  given. 

While  there  are  several  kinds  of  M DS  methods[Cox  and 
Cox,  2001],  CoviMap  employs  classical  scaling[Young  and 
Householder,  1938]  method  that  is  a  kind  of metric  MDS  to 
reproduce a map of objects in 2-D plane from the set of empir­
ical  distances.  In  brief,  it  obtains  a  set  of 2-D  coordinates  of 
N  objects  xt  (i  =  1,  •  •  ■,  N)  by  applying  Young-Householder 
transformation  and  spectral  decomposition 
the  empirical 
distance  matrix  D. 

to 

A  non-trivial  problem  of  using  M DS  in  CoviMap  is  that 
there  is  a  fifty  percent  chance  of obtaining  the  mirror  image 
of the  expected  map.  However,  if any  correct  triangle  orien(cid:173)
tation  of three  objects  is  given,  CoviMap  can  detect  the  mirror 
map  and  get the  right  map  by  turning  it over. 

COGNITIVE  ROBOTICS 

185 

Figure  5:  Empirical  distance  functions 
simulation 

used  in  the 

Numbers of Steps 

4  A  Simulation  Study 
We  conducted  a  simulation  study  to  examine  the  effective(cid:173)
WEBOTS  simulator 
ness  of our  method  with  Cyberbotics1 
(ver.2.0). 
4.1  Settings 
Environment and  Objects 
The  environment  is  a  square  field  of  1.5[m]  x  1.5[mJ  con(cid:173)
taining 5 - 30 objects.  Each object is cylinder-shaped (height: 
160[mm], diameter: 48[mm]), and is given a unique ID num(cid:173)
ber like obO,obJ, 
Observation  and  Object Recognition 
The robot has a camera with a resolution of 160  x  120 pix(cid:173)
els, and obtains a panoramic image by rotating and capturing 
several images at each observation position. We make a sim(cid:173)
plified assumption that the robot can recognize an object if its 
image is wider than  10 pixels. 
Exploration  Strategy 
At each observation position, the robot chooses its next mov(cid:173)
ing direction  randomly within the range  of 
and proceeds 
in  the  direction.  In  addition, 
the robot has 8 proximity sensors to detect nearby obstacles 
(objects and walls) around it, and avoids collisions with them. 
Empirical  Distance  Function 
We  chose  a  logarithmic  function  as  the  empirical  distance 
function  as below: 

are parameters which take positive values. In 

where, 
this simulation, we set them as: 
because the stress values of MDS were relatively small  with 
this  combination  compared  with  others.  Figure  5  shows 
the  shape  of this  empirical  distance  function. 
In  addition, 
triangular  inequality  constraint  (TIC)  mentioned  in  3.2  was 
used  to  correct  the  empirical  distances  for  the  object  pairs 
whose co-visibility frequencies were zero. 

4.2  Experiment  1  :  Varying Number  of Objects 
First,  we  examined  the  basic  map  building  capabilities  of 
CoviMap with varying number of objects in the environment 

Figure  6:  (Experiment  1)  Change  of average  map  errors 
comparison among various numbers of objects 

Table  1:  Change of average map  errors  [%]  with 6 different 
numbers  of objects 

from 5 to 30.  In each case, the robot repeated the observa(cid:173)
tion  and  exploration  steps  for  1000  times,  and  built  a  map 
eachtime the number of steps reached  one  of specified num(cid:173)
bers (20,50,100,...,1000).  For each case, we prepared 5 lay-
outs  of objects which  arc  randomly  generated  and  averaged 
the orientation errors. 

Figure 6 and Table  1  show how the average orientation er(cid:173)
ror 
changes according to the number of steps for each 
number  of objects.  As  can  be  seen  from this, 
con(cid:173)
verges to a narrow range (approximately between 2.5[%] and 
3.0[%])  after several  hundreds of steps,  when  the  number of 
objects varies from  10 to 30. This means that CoviMap is not 
affected drastically by the increase in the number of objects. 

Figure 7 illustrates an example of real configuration which 
contains  30  objects,  while  Figure  8  illustrates  a  map  con(cid:173)
structed by CoviMap after 500 steps.  In this case, out of total 
4060 triangles, the number of triangles whose orientations are 
inconsistent between the real map and the constructed map is 
98 
Interestingly,  if we  consider only the 
triangles  whose  largest  angles  are  smaller  than  170[deg]  in 
the real map (the number of such triangles is 3835), the num(cid:173)
ber of inconsistent triangles  falls to 27 
This means our method is able to acquire very accurate qual(cid:173)
itative layouts of the objects, unless the objects are almost on 
a line.  Dotted lines in the figures represent Delaunay graphs 
of the  configurations.  A  comparison  of them  also  tells  that 
the constructed map is qualitatively very accurate. 

186 

COGNITIVE ROBOTICS 

Figure 7:  (Experiment  1) An example of object configuration 
with 30 objects,  dotted lines are edges of Delaunay graph 

Figure  9:  (Experiment  2)  Change  of average  map  errors 
comparison among various non-recognition rates 

Figure  8:  (Experiment  1)  Constructed  map  after  500  steps 

for all  triangles) 

4.3  Experiment 2  :  Robustness  Against Object 

Recognition  Errors 

In the previous experiment,  it was assumed that there are no 
errors in the object recognition process.  In the real environ(cid:173)
ment,  however,  it  is  almost  inevitable  to  fail  in  recognizing 
objects occasionally, due to various uncertainties.  Therefore, 
we examined how the recognition errors affect the quality of 
maps constructed by  CoviMap. 

More  specifically,  we considered two kinds of recognition 
errors  -  non-recognition  and  mis-recognition.  These  errors 
were artificially generated as follows: 

Non-recognition :  Randomly chosen elements in  Lo  are re(cid:173)

moved 

Mis-recognition :  Randomly chosen elements in  L0  are re(cid:173)

placed with other object IDs. 

In  this  experiment,  we  fixed  the  number of objects to  15 
and conducted 5 trials for each of 5 different object configu(cid:173)
rations. 
Result with  Non-recognition  Error 
Figure  9  shows  the  average  orientation  errors  of the  con(cid:173)
structed  maps  when  the  percentage  of  non-recognition  er(cid:173)
ror is set to 0.0 (no errors),  3.0,  10,  20[%]  respectively.  In 
an  early  stage  of  learning,  i.e,  with  fewer  steps,  the  map 
error 
becomes  larger  according  to  the  magnitude  of 
the non-recognition error.  However, the difference becomes 

Figure  10:  (Experiment  2)  Change  of average  map  errors 
comparison  of various  mis-recognition  rates 

smaller  and  almost  negligible  as  the  number  of  steps  in(cid:173)
creases. 

Result with  Mis-recognition  Error 
Next,  Figure  10 shows the results when mis-recognition er(cid:173)
ror is set to 0.0, 0.5, 2,  10[%] respectively.  Not surprisingly, 
the influence of this kind of error on the map error  Erro ri  is 
relatively larger than the non-recognition error. 

In both cases, however, we can conclude CoviMap is robust 
against those recognition errors, in that the map error steadily 
decreases according to the increase of the number of steps. 

5  Related Works 
As  mentioned  before,  the  central  idea  of our  map  building 
method  is  a  simple  heuristics  -  "a  pair  of objects  observed 
simultaneously more  frequently  is  likely to be  located more 
closely",  which  is  used to estimate the  distances and quali(cid:173)
tative configuration of objects from the co-visibility informa(cid:173)
tion of them.  In this section,  we discuss the meaning of this 
heuristics from other viewpoints, especially, considering sev(cid:173)
eral related works in other fields. 

COGNITIVE  ROBOTICS 

187 

First,  as co-visibility of objects can be regarded as co(cid:173)
occurrence of events that objects are visible, a lot of stud­
ies  on  learning  of behavior  and  models  based  on  the  co(cid:173)
occurrence information have been made.  The most basic 
principle related to this issue is Hebb's rule which postu­
lates  that  if two  events  co-occur  often,  the  connection  of 
them should be strengthened. Many recently developed rein(cid:173)
forcement learning methods such as Q-learning[Watkins and 
Dayan,  1992]  are also considered to be based on the co(cid:173)
occurrence or temporal proximity between behavior and re­
ward events. Interestingly, there is another similarity between 
reinforcement learning and our CoviMap. That is to say, the 
former learns a complicated behavior system  from discrete 
events of rewards, while the latter learns a qualitatively accu­
rate map from discrete events of co-visibility among objects. 
The heuristics above can also be regarded as a special 
case of more  general  one - "temporal  and  spatial proxim­
ities  are  approximately  equivalent  in  many  environments". 
In  the  research  of human  spatial  memory,  it  has  been  re­
ported  that  humans  often  rely  on  the  temporal proximity 
rather than the spatial proximity to memorize spatial struc­
tures  of environments[Curiel  and  Radvansky,  1998].  This 
might suggest that the principles and results of CoviMap pre­
sented in this paper are helpful to understand some aspects 
of human spatial memory and cognitive mapping process, al­
though we doubt that an MDS-like algorithm exists in human 
brain. 

6  Conclusion 
In this paper,  we proposed a unique map building method 
for mobile robots named CoviMap which is based on the co-
visibility information  of objects  in the environment.  It can 
learn qualitatively accurate maps from such primitive infor­
mation using a simple heuristics "temporal and spatial prox­
imities are approximately equivalent" and multidimensional 
scaling (MDS) technique.  It was also shown by the simula­
tion results that CoviMap is applicable to large environments 
containing dozens of objects, and robust against observation 
errors such as non-recognition and mis-recognition. 

A most important theoretical issue to be studied is to vali­
date and generalize the heuristics on the equivalence of tem(cid:173)
poral and spatial proximities. Especially, we need to investi­
gate how our method will be affected if the camera image is 
not panoramic but more restricted, or the object recognition 
rate is not isotropic but dependent on the direction.  On the 
other hand, future works from a practical point of view will 
include experiment with real robots, integration of CoviMap 
with qualitative navigation[Levitt and Lawton, 1990], and ex­
tension or replaccment [Faloutsos and Lin, 1995] of MDS. 

References 
[Cox and Cox, 2001] T. Cox and M. Cox. Multidimensional 

Scaling. Chapman & Hall/Crc, 2001. 

[Curiel and Radvansky, 1998]  J. M. Curiel and G. A. Rad-
vansky. Mental organization of maps. Journal of Experi(cid:173)
mental Psychology, 24(1):202-214, 1998. 

[Faloutsos and Lin, 1995]  C. Faloutsos and K. Lin. FastMap: 
A fast algorithm for indexing, data-mining and visualiza­
tion of traditional and multimedia datasets. In Proceedings 
of the 1995 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on 
Management of Data, pages 163-174, 1995. 

[Kortenkamp et al., 1998]  D. Kortenkamp, R. Bonasso, and 
R.  Murphy,  editors.  Artificial Intelligence and Mobile 
Robots : Case Studies of Successful Robot Systems. MIT 
Press, 1998. 

[Levitt and Lawton, 1990]  T. Levitt and D. Lawton.  Quali­
tative navigation for mobile robots. Artificial Intelligence, 
44(3):305,361 1990. 

[Mataric,  1992]  M.  Mataric. 

Integration  of representation 
into goal-driven behavior-based robots.  IEEE Transac(cid:173)
tions on Robotics and Automation, 8(3):304-312, 1992. 
[Moravee and Elfes, 1985] P. Moravec and A. Elfes. High 
resolution maps from wide angle sonar. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au(cid:173)
tomation, pages 116-121, 1985. 

[Murphy, 2000]  R. Murphy.  Introduction To AI Robotics. 

MIT Press, 2000. 

[Schlieder, 1993]  C.  Schlieder.  Representing visible  loca­
tions for qualitative navigation. In N. P. Carret'e and M. G. 
Singh, editors, Qualitative Reasoning and Decision Tech(cid:173)
nologies, pages 523-532. 1993. 

[Shatkay and Kaelbling, 1997]  H. Shatkay and L. Kaelbling. 
Learning topological maps with weak local odometric in­
formation. In Proc. of IJCAI-97, pages 920-927, 1997. 

[Sogo et al, 2001]  T. Sogo, H. Ishiguro, and T. Ishida.  Ac­
quisition and propagation of spatial constraints based on 
qualitative information.  IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 23(3):268-278, 2001. 
[Thrun et al, 1998]  S. Thrun, J. Gutmann, D. Fox, W. Bur-
gard, and B. Kuipers.  Integrating topological and metric 
maps for mobile robot navigation:  A statistical approach. 
In Proc. of AAAI-98, pages 989-995, 1998. 

[Uhlmannet al. , 1997]  J.  K.  Uhlmann,  S.  J.  Julier,  and 
M. Csorba.  Nondivergent simultaneous map-building and 
localization using covariance intersection.  In Navigation 
and Control Technologies for Unmanned Svstems II, pages 
2-11.1997. 

[Watkins and Dayan, 1992] C. Watkins and P. Dayan. Tchni-
cal note: Q-learning. Machine Learning, 8(3-4):279-292, 
1992. 

[Young and Householder, 1938]  G.  Young  and  A.  House­
holder. Discussion of a set of points in terms of their mu­
tual distances. Psychometrika, 3:19-22, 1938. 

[Zimmer, 1996]  U. R. Zimmer. Robust world-modelling and 
navigation in a real world. Neurocomputing, 13:247-260, 
1996. 

188 

COGNITIVE  ROBOTICS 

