Consistency and Set Intersection 

Yuanlin Zhang and Roland H.C. Yap 

National University of Singapore 

3 Science Drive 2, Singapore 

{zhangyl,ryap}@comp.nus.edu.sg 

Abstract 

We  propose  a  new  framework  to  study  properties 
of  consistency  in  a  Constraint  Network  from  the 
perspective  of  properties  of  set  intersection.  Our 
framework comes with a proof schema which gives 
a generic way of lifting a  set  intersection property 
to one on consistency.  Various well known results 
can be derived  with this  framework.  More impor(cid:173)
tantly,  we  use  the  framework  to  obtain  a  number 
of  new  results.  We  identify  a  new  class  of  tree 
convex constraints where local consistency ensures 
global  consistency.  Another result is that in a net(cid:173)
work of arbitrary constraints,  local  consistency im(cid:173)
plies global consistency whenever there arc certain 
m-tight  constraints.  The  most  interesting  result  is 
that  when the constraint  on  every pair of variables 
is properly  m-tight  in an  arbitrary network,  global 
consistency can be achieved by enforcing relational 
m=1 -consistency.  These  results  significantly  im(cid:173)
prove  our  understanding  of  convex  and  tight  con(cid:173)
straints.  This  demonstrates  that  our  framework  is 
a promising and powerful tool for studying consis(cid:173)
tency. 

Introduction 

1 
A  fundamental  problem  in  Constraint  Networks  is  to  study 
properties  of  consistency  in  some  networks  with  particu(cid:173)
lar  constraints  or  structure.  There  have  been  two  main  ap(cid:173)
proaches to this problem. 

The  first  is to  utilise  topological  structure  of the  network. 
For example,  where  the  network  forms  a tree  structure,  arc 
consistency is sufficient to make the network globally consis(cid:173)
tent [Freuder,  1982]. 

Another  approach  is  to  make  use  of  semantic  properties 
of  the  constraints.  For  monotone  constraints,  path  consis(cid:173)
tency implies global consistency [Montanari,  1974].  Dechter 
[1992]  shows  that  a  certain  level  of  consistency  in  a  net(cid:173)
work whose domains are of limited size ensures global  con(cid:173)
sistency.  Van Beek and Dechter [1995] generalize monotone 
constraints to a larger class of row convex constraints.  Later, 
they [1997] study the consistency inside a network with tight 
and loose constraints. 

In this paper,  we present a new framework1  which unifies 
well known results mainly along the second approach (includ(cid:173)
ing  [van Beek and Dechter,  1995;  1997]).  The power of this 
framework  is  that  it  allows  the  study  of the  relationship  be(cid:173)
tween  local  and  global  consistency  from  the  perspective  of 
set  intersection. 

For example,  one  property  of set intersection  is that  if ev(cid:173)
ery pair (2) of tree convex sets intersect, the whole collection 
of these  sets  also  intersect.  The  main point  is that  local  in(cid:173)
formation  on  intersection  of  every  pair  of  sets  gives  global 
information on intersection of all sets.  Intuitively, this can be 
related to getting global  consistency  from  local  consistency. 
Our  framework  enables  us  to  lift  the  result  on  tree  convex 
sets to the following result on consistency.  For a binary net(cid:173)
work of tree convex constraints, (2+1 )-consistency (path con(cid:173)
sistency) implies global consistency. 

Properties of the intersection of tree convex sets, small sets, 
large sets are presented in section 3.  Section 4 develops the 
framework  which  consists  of  a  lifting  lemma  together  with 
a proof schema  which gives  a generic  way of using  the  lift(cid:173)
ing  lemma  to  get  consistency  results  from  properties  of  set 
intersection.  One benefit of the framework lies in that it pro(cid:173)
vides  a  modular  way  to  greatly  simplify  the  understanding 
and  proof of results  on  consistency.  This  benefit  is  consid(cid:173)
erable as often the proof of many existing results is complex 
and "hard-wired". 

We  demonstrate  the  power  of the  framework  by  showing 
three  new  consistency  results  as  well  as  a  number  of  well 
known results.  The  first  is a generalization of global consis(cid:173)
tency  of row  convex  constraints to  a  network  of tree  convex 
constraints which is presented in section 5.  The second is a 
new result on global  consistency on weakly tight networks in 
section 6.  These networks only require certain constraints to 
be  m-tight  rather than all constraints as shown in  [van Beck 
and  Dechter,  1997].  The  final  result  is presented  in  section 
8.  This is most interesting because we can make certain net(cid:173)
works globally consistent by enforcing relational consistency, 
but this may not be achievable in previous work (for example 
[van Beek and Dechter,  1997]). 

'Our work can be related to the  first  approach in those  cases 
where the network topology leads to some set intersection property. 

CONSTRAINTS 

263 

264 

CONSTRAINTS 

4  Set Intersection and Consistency 
In this  section  we  relate  set  intersection with  consistency  in 
constraint networks. 

Underlying  the  concept  of  consistency  is  whether  an  in(cid:173)
stantiation of some variables can be extended to a new vari(cid:173)
able such that all relevant constraints to the new variable arc 
satisfied.  A relevant constraint to a variable Xi is a constraint 
where  only  Xi  is  uninstantiated  and  the  others  are  instanti(cid:173)
ated.  Each relevant constraint allows a set (possibly empty) 
of values for the new variable. This set is called extension set 
below.  The satisfiability of all relevant constraints depends on 
whether the intersection of their extension  sets is non-empty 
(see lemma 4). 

An  extension set is trivial  if it is  empty;  otherwise  it is  non-
trivial. 

Let  a  — 
(a,b,a)  be  an  instantiation  of  variables  Y  = 
{x1,  X2,  x4}.  The relevant  constraints to x  are  cs1,  cs2,  and 
cs3
cs4  is  not  relevant  since  it  has two  uninstantiated  vari(cid:173)
ables. The extension sets of a to u: with respect to the relevant 
constraints are: 

 

E1(a)  -  {d,a),E2{a)  =  {d,b},E3(a)  =  {d,c}. 

The relationship between k-consistency and set intersection 
is characterized by the following lemma which is a direct con(cid:173)
sequence of the definition of k-consistency. 

CONSTRAINTS 

265 

where Eij is the extension set of a to xk with respect to cs, , 
and cs,  , • • •, <'<st  we all relevant constraints. 

The  insight  behind this  lemma  is to  see  consistency  from 

the perspective of set intersection. 

Example.  Consider  again  the  previous  example.  We 
would like to check whether the network is 4-consistent.  Con­
sider the instantiation a of Y  again.  This is  a trivial  consis­
tent instantiation since the network doesn't have a constraint 
among the variables in Y. To extend it to X, we need to check 
the  first  three constraints.  The extension is feasible because 
the  intersection  of  E1,  E2,  and  E3  is  not  empty.  We  show 
the network  is  4-consistent,  by  exhausting  all  consistent  in­
stantiations  of  any  three  variables.  Conversely,  if we  know 
the network is 4-consistent, we can immediately say that the 
intersection of the three extension sets of a to x is not empty. 
U 

The  usefulness  of this  lemma  is that it allows consistency 
information to be obtained from the intersection of extension 
sets, and vice versa.  Using this view of consistency as set in­
tersection, some results on set intersection properties, includ­
ing all those in section 3, can be lifted to get various consis­
tency  results  for a  constraint  network through the  following 
proof schema. 

Proof Schema 
1. (Consistency to Set) From a certain level of consistency 
in  the  constraint  network,  we  derive  information  on  the 
intersection of the extension sets according to lemma 4. 
2.  (Set to Set) From the local intersection information of 
sets, information may be obtained on intersection of more 
sets. 
3.  (Set to Consistency) From the new information on in­
tersection  of extension sets, higher level  of consistency is 
obtained according to lemma 4. 
4.  (Formulate  conclusion  on  the  consistency  of the  con(cid:173)
straint  network).  □ 

Given  the  proof  schema,  lemma  4  is  also  called  the  lifting 
lemma. 

In the following sections,  we demonstrate how the set in­
tersection properties and the proof schema are used to obtain 
new and also well known results on consistency of a network. 

5  Application I:  Global Consistency of Tree 

Convex  Constraints 

The notion of extension set plays the role of a bridge between 
the restrictions to set(s) and properties of special constraints. 
The  sets  in  lemma  1  are  restricted to be tree  convex.  If all 
extension sets of a constraint is tree convex, we call this con­
straint tree convex. 

Definition  5  A  constraint  network  is  tree  convex  if  and  only 
if all constraints are tree convex under a common tree on the 
union of all domains. 

Convex sets naturally give rise to convex constraints which 

is a special case of tree convex constraints. 

Definition 6  A constraint cs  is row convex  with respect to x 
if and only if the sets in 

are convex.  It is  row  convex  if under a  total ordering on  the 
union of involved domains, it is row convex wrt every 
A constraint network is row convex iff all constraints are row 
convex  under  a  common  total  ordering  on  the  union  of all 
domains. 

The consistency results on these networks can be derived 
from the property of set intersection using the proof schema. 
We obtain the main result of this section. 

Theorem  1  (tree  convexity)  Let  R  be  a  network  of con(cid:173)
straints with  arity at most r and 7?, be strongly 2(r  —  1)  +  1 
consistent.  If R is tree convex then it is globally consistent. 

Proof.  The  network  is  strongly  2(r  -  1)  +  1  consistent 
by assumption.  We prove by induction that the network is k 
consistent for any 

Consider any instantiation a of any k - 1 variables and any 
new  variable  x.  Let the  number of  relevant constraints be  /. 
For each relevant constraint there is one extension set of a to 
x.  So we have / extension sets.  If the intersection of all / sets 
is  not  empty,  we  have  a  value  for x  such  that  the  extended 
instantiation satisfies all relevant constraints. 

(Consistency  to  Set)  Consider  any two  of the  /  extension 
sets:  E1  and E2.  The two corresponding constraints involve 
at most 2(r — 1) + 1 variables since the arity of a constraint is 
at most r and each of the two constraints has x as a variable. 
According to the consistency lemma, that 1Z is 2(r -  1)  +  1-
consistent  implies  that  the  intersection  of  E1  and  E2  is  not 
empty. 

(Set to Set)  Since  all  relevant  constraints  are  tree  convex 
under the given tree, the extension sets of a to a: are tree con­
vex.  Henceforth, the fact that every two of the extension sets 
intersect shows that the  intersection  of all  /  extension  sets  is 
not empty, in terms of the tree convex sets intersection lemma. 
(Set to Consistency) From the consistency lemma, we have 

that  R  is  k-consistent.  D 

Since a row convex constraint is tree convex,  we have the 

following result. 

Corollary 4  (row  convexity)  [van  Beck  and  Dechter,  1995] 
Let R be a network of constraints with arity at most r and R 
be strongly 2(r — 1) +1 consistent. If there exists an ordering 
of the domains D1, • • •, Dn of R such that R is row convex, 
R  is globally  consistent. 

This can also be proved directly by lifting corollary  1. 

266 

CONSTRAINTS 

6  Application I I: Global Consistency on 

Weakly  Tight Networks 

In this section, we study networks with some tight constraints. 
The m-tight property of a constraint is related to the cardinal(cid:173)
ity of the extension set in the following way. 

The small set intersection lemma gives the following theo(cid:173)

rem. 
Theorem 2 (Weak Tightness) If a constraint network R with 
constraints of arity at most r is strongly ((m.-f 1)(r - 1) +1 )-
consistent and weakly m-tight at level  ((m +  l ) ( r - l)  +  l), 
it  is globally consistent. 
The proof is similar to the theorem on tree convexity. 

Immediately we have the  following result which is a main 

result in [van Beck and Dechter,  1997]. 
Corollary  5  (Tightness)  [van  Beek  and  Dechter,  1997]  If  a 
constraint network  R  with constraints that are m-tight and of 
arity  at  most  r  is  strongly  ((m  +  l ) (r  -  1)  +  \)-consistent, 
then  it is globally consistent. 
This  result can  of course be directly  lifted  from  corollary  2. 
Corollary 5 requires every constraint to be m-tight.  The weak 
tightness theorem on the other hand does not require all con(cid:173)
straints to be  m-tight.  The following example illustrates this 
difference. 

Example.  For  a  weakly  m-tight  network,  we  are  inter(cid:173)
ested  in its topological  structure.  Thus we have omitted the 
domains of variables here.  Consider a network with five vari(cid:173)
ables labelled  {1,2,3,4,5}.  In this network,  for any pair of 
variables and for any three variables, there is a constraint. As-
sume the network is already strongly 4-consistent. 

Since the network is already strongly 4-consistent, we can 
simply  ignore  the  instantiations  with  less  than  4  variables. 
This  is why  we  introduce  the  level  at  which  the  network  is 
weakly  m-tight.  The  interesting  level  here  is  4.  Table  1 
shows the relevant constraints for each possible extension of 
four instantiated variables  to the  other one.  In  the  first  row, 
1234 —> 5 stands for extending the instantiation of variables 
{1,2,3,4} to variable 5.  Entries in its second column denote 
a constraint. For example, 125 denotes c 125. If the constraints 
on  {1,2,5}  and  {1,3,4}  (suffixed by  *  in the table)  are ra-
tight, the network is weakly m-tight at level 4.  Alternatively, 
if the constraints {1,5},  {2,3}  and  {3,4}  (suffixed by +) are 
77i-tight, the network will also be weakly m-tight.  However, 
the  tightness  corollary  requires  all  binary  and  ternary  con(cid:173)
straints to be m-tight.  The weak m-tightness theorem needs 
significantly less constraints to be 771-tight. Further results are 
in section 8.  D 

Table 1:  Relevant constraints in extending the instantiation of 
four variables to the other one 

7  Application I I I: Constraint Looseness 

The large set intersection  lemma is lifted to the  following 

result on constraint looseness. 

8  Application IV:  Making Weakly Tight 

Networks  Globally  Consistent 

In this section, relational consistency will be used to make a 
constraint network globally consistent. 

All the results on small set intersection and tree convex set 
intersection in section 3 can be rephrased by using relational 
consistency.  For example, a new version of weak tightness is 
shown below.  Its proof can be easily obtained following the 
proof schema. 

CONSTRAINTS 

267 

Consider  the  weak  m-tightncss  theorem  2  in  section  6 
based on  local  k-consistency.  A  weakly  m-tight  network  in 
general may not have the level of consistency required by the 
theorem.  To  obtain  global  consistency,  one  may  try  to  en­
force  this  level  of consistency.  However,  this  may  result  in 
new  constraints  with  higher  arity  in  the  network.  The  new 
constraints may  in turn require a higher level  of consistency 
to ensure global  consistency.  Therefore it is difficult to pre­
dict an  exact  level  of consistency to  enforce  on the network 
to make it globally consistent. 

Using relational consistency, it is possible to obtain global 
consistency by enforcing local consistency on the network.  In 
order to achieve  our main  result we  need a  stronger version 
of  m-tightness  —proper  m-tightness. 

A  constraint  is m-tight  if it  is properly  m-tight.  The  con­

verse may not be true. 

A  weakly properly m-tight network  is  defined  by  replacing 
"m-tight" with "properly m-tight" in definition 8 (section 6). 
We  have  the  following  observation  on  the  weak  m-

tightness and weak proper  m-tightness  of a network. 
Proposition  2  A  constraint  network  is  weakly  m-tight  and 
weakly properly m-tight respectively if the constraint between 
every  two  variables  in  the  network  is  m-tight  and properly 
m-tight  respectively. 

It  is easy to verify that improper m-tightness  of the binary 
constraints is preserved during the procedure to enforce cer­
tain level of consistency in the network.  So we have the main 
result of this section. 
Theorem 5  (Weak Proper-Tightness) Given a constraint net(cid:173)
work whose constraint on  every two  variables is properly  rn-
tight. 
It  is  globally  consistent  after  it  is  made  relationally 
m + 1-consistent. 

This  theorem  follows  immediately  from  the  discussion 
above and theorem 4.  The implication of this theorem is that 
as  long  as  we  have  certain  properly  m-tight  constraints  on 
certain combinations  of variables,  the  network  can be  made 
globally consistent by enforcing relational m+1-consistency. 

9  Summary 
We  demonstrate  how  to  infer properties of consistency  on  a 
network purely by making use  of set  intersection properties. 
In addition to the results shown here,  some other results can 
also be obtained by the lifting lemma.  For example, the work 
of David [1993]  can be  obtained by lifting the  singleton  set 
corollary 3.  The work of Faltings and Sam-Haroud [1996]  is 
on convex constraint networks in continuous domains and the 
idea there is to lift Helly's theorem on intersection of convex 
sets in Euclidean spaces. 

We  show  a  number  of  new  consistency  results  which  we 
believe  are  significant  progress  to  convexity  and  tightness 

of  constraints  since  van  Beek  and  Dechter's  work  [1995; 
1997].  We identify a class of tree convex constraints which is 
a superset of row convex constraints  [van Beek and Dechter, 
1995].  In a network of tree convex constraints, global consis­
tency is ensured by a certain level of local consistency. 

We  show  that  in  a  network  of arbitrary  constraints,  local 
consistency implies global consistency whenever there are rn-
tight constraints on certain variables (e.g.  theorem  2).  How­
ever, when the network does not have the required local con­
sistency,  global  consistency  may  not  be  simply  obtained  by 
enforcing  such  level  of  local  consistency.  A  surprising  re­
sult  is  that  as  long  as  the  constraint  between  every  pair  of 
variables  is properly  m-tight  in  an  arbitrary  network,  global 
consistency  can  be  achieved  by  enforcing a  certain  level  of 
relational consistency  (  theorem  5). 
In  previous  work  (e.g. 
[van  Beek  and  Dechter,  1997]),  all  constraints  arc  required 
to  be  m-tight  which  may  be  violated  by  newly  introduced 
constraints in the process of enforcing the intended relational 
consistency. 

A  promising  line of work  is to find more properties  under 
which  a  network  is weakly  properly  m-tight.  Another obvi­
ous direction is to find other classes of sets with  intersection 
properties which will likely give useful consistency results. 

References 
[David,  1993]  Philippe  David.  When  functional  and  bijec-
tive constraints make a csp polynomial.  In Proceedings of 
Thirteenth  International Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  In(cid:173)
telligence,  volume  1,  pages 224-229,  Chambery,  France, 
1993. 

[Dechter,  1992]  R.  Dechter.  From  local  to  global  consis­

tency.  Artificial Intelligence,  34:1-38,  1992. 

[Freuder,  1982]  E.C.  Freuder.  A  sufficient  condition  for 
backtrack-free  search.  Journal of The ACM,  29( 1):24--32, 
1982. 

[Montanari,  1974]  U.  Montanari.  Networks  of constraints: 
Fundamental properties and applications.  Information Sci(cid:173)
ence, 7 (2):95-} 32, 1974. 

[Sam-Haroud and Faltings,  1996]  D. 

and 
Boi  V.  Faltings.  Solving  non-binary  convex  csps  in 
continous  domains. 
In  Proceedings  of  International 
Conference  on  Principles  and Practice  of Constraint  Pro(cid:173)
gramming,  pages  410-424,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts, 
1996. 

Sam-Haroud 

[van Beek and Dechter,  1995]  P.  van  Beek  and  R.  Dechter. 
On  the  minimality  and  global  consistency  of row-convex 
constraint networks.  Journal of The ACM, 42(3):543-561, 
1995. 

[van Beek and Dechter,  1997]  P.  van  Beek  and  R.  Dechter. 
Constraint tightness and looseness versus local and global 
consistency.  Journal of The ACM, 44(4):549-566,  1997. 

[Zhang and Yap, 2003]  Yuanlin  Zhang  and  Roland  H.  C. 
Yap.  Erratum:  P.  van  Beek  and  R.  Dechter's  theorem 
on constraint looseness and local consistency.  To appear, 
2003. 

268 

CONSTRAINTS 

