Part I:  On the Customizability of Generalized Expected Utility* 

Great Expectations. 

Francis C. Chu  and  Joseph Y. Halpern 

Department of Computer  Science 

Cornell  University 

Ithaca, NY  14853, U.S.A. 

Email:  {fcc,halpern}@cs.cornell.edu 

Abstract 

We  propose  a  generalization  of  expected  utility 
that we call generalized EU (GEU), where a deci­
sion  maker's  beliefs  are  represented  by  plausibil­
ity  measures  and  the  decision  maker's  tastes  are 
represented  by  general  (i.e.,  not  necessarily  real-
valued) utility functions.  We show that every agent, 
"rational" or not, can be modeled as a GEU max­
imizes  We  then  show  that  we  can  customize 
GEU  by  selectively  imposing just  the  constraints 
we  want. 
In  particular,  by  show  how  of Savage's 
postulates corresponds to constraints on GEU. 

Introduction 

1 
Many decision rules have been proposed in the literature. Per­
haps  the  best-known  approach  is  based  on  maximizing  ex­
pected  utility  (EU).  This  approach  comes  in  a  number  of 
variants;  the two most  famous are due to von Neumann and 
Morgenstern  [1947] and  Savage  [1954].  They all  follow the 
same  pattern:  they  formalize  the  set  of alternatives  among 
which  the  decision  maker  (DM)  must  choose  (typically  as 
acts1 or lotteries2). They then give a set of assumptions (often 
called postulates  or axioms)  such  that  the  DM's  preferences 
on  the  alternatives  satisfy  these  assumptions  iff the  prefer­
ences have an EU representation, where an EU representation 
of a preference relation  is basically a  utility  function  (and a 
probability measure when acts are involved) such that the re­
lation among the alternatives based on expected utility agrees 
with  the  preference  relation.  Moreover,  they  show  that  the 
representation  is  essentially  unique. 
In  other  words,  if the 
preferences of a DM satisfy the assumptions, then she is be­
having  as  if  she  has  quantified  her  tastes  via  a  real-valued 
utility  function  (and  her  beliefs  via  a  probability  measure) 

*Work supported in part by NSF under grants IIS-0090145 and 
CTC-0208535  and  by  the  DoD  Multidisciplinary  University  Re­
search Initiative (MURI) program administered by ONR under grant 
N00014-01-1-0795. 

1Formally, given a set S of states of the world and another set C 
of consequences, an act a is a function from S to C that, intuitively, 
associates with each state S the consequence of performing a in ,s. 
2Formally,  a  lottery  is  a  probability  distribution  over  conse­
quences; intuitively, the distribution quantifies how likely it is that 
each consequence occurs. 

and she is relating the alternatives according to their expected 
utility.  The assumptions are typically regarded as criteria for 
rational behavior, so these results also suggest that if a DM's 
beliefs  are  actually  described  by  a  probability  measure  and 
her tastes are described by a utility function, then she should 
relate  the  alternatives  according  to  their  expected  utility  (if 
she wishes to appear rational). 

Despite  the  appeal  of EU  maximization,  it  is  well  known 
that people do not follow its tenets in general [Resnik,  1987]. 
As  a  result,  a host of extensions  of EU  have been  proposed 
that  accommodate  some  of the  more  systematic  violations 
(see, for example, [Gul,  1991; Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1989; 
Giang and Shenoy, 2001; Quiggin,  1993; Schmeidler,  1989; 
Yaari,  1987]).  Again,  the  typical  approach  in  the  decision 
theory  literature  has  been  to  prove representation  theorems, 
showing that,  given a  suggested decision  rule  R,  there  ex­
ists  a  collection  of assumptions  such  that  a preference  rela­
tion  satisfies  the  assumptions  iff it has  an  R  representation, 
where an 7v representation of a preference relation is essen­
tially  a  choice  of tastes  (and  beliefs)  such  that,  given  these 
as  inputs,  R  relates  the  alternatives  the  way  the  preference 
relation does. 

Given  this  plethora  of rules,  it  would be useful  to have  a 
general  framework in  which  to  study  decision making.  The 
framework should also let us understand the relationship be­
tween various decision rules.  We provide such a framework 
in this paper. 

The basic  idea  of our approach  is  to generalize the notion 
of expected  utility  so  that  it  applies  in  as  general  a  context 
as possible.  To this end, we introduce expectation domains, 
which are structures consisting of 

•  three  (component)  domains:  a  plausibility  domain,  a 

utility domain,  and  a  valuation  domain, 

combines plausibility values  and  utility values 
Intuitively, 
much  the  same  way  that  x  combines  probability  and  (real) 
utility, while 
combines the products to form the (general­
ized) expected utility. 

We have three domains because we do not want to require 
that DMs be able to add or multiply plausibility values or util­
ity values, since these could be qualitative (e.g., plausibility 

DECISION THEORY 

291 

values could be  {"unlikely", "likely", "very likely",...}  and 
utility  values  could  be  {"bad",  "good",  "better",  ...}). 
In 
general, we do not assume that 
is an order (or even a pre-
order),  since we  would  like to be able to represent as many 
preference relations and decision rules as possible. 

Once  we  have  an  expectation  domain,  DMs  can  express 
their tastes  and  beliefs  using  components  of the  expectation 
domain.  More  specifically,  the  DMs  express  their  beliefs 
using  a plausibility measure  [Friedman  and  Halpern,  1995], 
whose range is the plausibility domain of the expectation do­
main  (plausibility  measures  generalize probability  measures 
and a host of other representations of uncertainty, such as sets 
of probability measures, Choquet capacities, possibility mea­
sures,  ranking  functions,  etc.)  and  they  express  their tastes 
using a utility  function whose  range  is the  utility domain of 
the expectation domain.  In an expectation domain, it is pos­
sible to define a generalization of expected utility, which we 
call generalized EU (GEU).  The  GEU  of an  act is basically 
the  sum  (in  the  sense  of ©)  of products  (in  the  sense  of <8>) 
of plausibility  values  and  utility  values  that  generalizes  the 
standard definition of (probabilistic) expected utility over the 
reals in the obvious way. 

We  start  by  proving  an  analogue  of Savage's  result  with 
respect to the  decision  rule  (Maximizing)  GEU.3  We  show 
that every preference relations on acts has a GEU  represen­
tation (even  those  that do not  satisfy  any of Savage's postu­
lates),  where  a  GEU representation  of a  preference  relation 
basically  consists  of an  expectation  domain  E,  plausibility 
measure  PI,  and  utility  function  u,  such  that  the  way  acts 
are related according to their GEU agrees with the preference 
relation (Theorem  3.1).  In  other words,  no matter what  the 
DM's preference relation on acts is, she behaves as if she has 
quantified her beliefs by a plausibility measure and her tastes 
via a utility function, and is relating the acts according to their 
(generalized)  expected utility as defined by the 
of 
some  expectation  domain.  That  is,  we  can  model  any DM 
using  GEU,  whether  or not the  DM  satisfies  any  rationality 
assumptions.  An important difference between our result and 
that of Savage is that he was constructing EU representations, 
which consists of a real-valued utility function u and '& prob(cid:173)
ability measure  Pr  (and the  expectation  domain  is  fixed,  so 

a  framework  in  which  we  can  represent  all  preference  rela­
tions,  we  can  then  consider  what  preference  relations  have 
"special"  representations,  in  the  sense  that  the  expectation 
domain, plausibility measure, and utility function in the rep­
resentation satisfy some (joint) properties.  This allows us to 
show  how  properties  of expectation  domains  correspond  to 
properties of preference relations.  We  can then  "customize" 
GEU by placing just the  constraints  we  want.  We  illustrate 
this by showing how each of Savage's postulates corresponds 
in a precise sense to an axiom on GEU. 

Intuitively, a decision rule maps tastes (and beliefs) to pref­
erence  relations  on  acts.  Given  two  decision  rules  R1  and 
R2,  an  R1  representation of R2 is basically a function T that 
maps  inputs  of  R2  to  inputs  of  R1  that  represent  the  same 
tastes and beliefs, with the property that R1(T(Z)) =  R2(x)-
Thus, T models, in a precise sense, a user of R2 as a user of 
R1,  since T preserves tastes  (and  beliefs).  In  a  companion 
paper [Chu and Halpern, 2003] we show that (almost) every 
decision rule has a GEU representation. 

Although there has been a great deal  of work  on decision 
rules,  there  has  been  relatively  little  work  on  finding  gen­
eral  frameworks  for  representing  decision  rules. 
In  partic­
ular,  there  has  been  no  attempt  to  find  a  decision  rule  that 
can represent all preference  relations.  There has been work 
in  the  fuzzy  logic  community  on  finding  general  notions  of 
integration  (which  essentially  amounts  to  finding  notions  of 
expectation)  using generalized  notions  of 
see, for 
example, [Benvenuti and Mesiar, 2000]. However, the expec­
tation domain used in this work is (a subset of) the reals; ar­
bitrary expectation domains are not considered.  Luce [1990; 
2000] also considers general addition-like operations applied 
to utilities, but his goal is to model joint receipts (which are 
typically modeled as commodity bundles in economics) as a 
binary operation, rather than to represent decision rules. 

The  rest of this paper is  organized as  follows.  We  cover 
some  basic  definitions  in  Section  2:  plausibility  domains, 
utility domains, expectation domains, decision problems, and 
GEU.  We  show  that  every  preference  relation  on  acts  has 
a GEU  representation  in  Section  3.  In  Section 4,  we  show 
that each of Savage's postulates corresponds to an axiom  on 
GEU.  We  conclude  in  Section 5.  Proofs of theorems  stated 
are available at http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/halpcrn. 

Given  that  GEU  can  represent  all preference  relations,  it 
might be argued that GEU is too general—it offers no guide­
lines as to how to make decisions.  We view this as a feature, 
not a bug, since our goal is to provide a general framework in 
which to express and study decision rules, instead of propos­
ing  yet  another  decision  rule.  Thus  the  absence  of "guide­
lines"  is  in  fact an absence of limitations:  we do not want to 
exclude any possibilities at the outset,  even preference rela­
tions that are not transitive or are incomplete.  Starting from 
3Many  decision rules  involve  optimizing  (i.e.,  maximizing  or 
minimizing) some value function on the acts.  Sometimes it is ex­
plicitly mentioned whether the function is to be maximized or min­
imized  (e.g.,  "Minimax  Regret"  says  explicitly to  "minimize  the 
maximum regret") while other times only the function name is men­
tioned  and  it  is  implicitly understood what  is meant (e.g.,  "EU" 
means "maximize EU").  In this paper we will use "Maximizing 
GEU" and "GEU" interchangeably. 

2  Preliminaries 
2.1  Plausibility, Utility, and Expectation Domains 
Since  one  of the  goals  of this  paper  is  to  provide  a  general 
framework  for  all  of decision  theory,  we  want  to  represent 
the tastes and beliefs of the DMs  in as general a framework 
as possible.  In particular, we do not want to force the DMs to 
linearly preorder all consequences and all events (i.e., subsets 
of the set of states).  To this end, we use plausibility measures 
to represent  the beliefs  of the  DMs and  (generalized)  utility 
functions to represent their tastes. 

292 

DECISION THEORY 

Clearly  plausibility  measures  are  generalizations  of prob­
ability measures.  As pointed out in  [Friedman and Halpern, 
1995], plausibility measures generalize a host of other repre­
sentations of uncertainty as well.  Note that while the proba­
bility of any two sets must be comparable  (since  R  is totally 
ordered), the plausibility of two sets may be incomparable. 

We  also  want to  represent the tastes of DMs  using some­
thing  more  general  than  R,  so  we  allow  the  range  of utility 
functions to be utility domains, where a utility domain is a set 
U  endowed with  a  reflexive binary  relation 
.  Intuitively, 
elements  of U  represent  the  strength  of likes  and  dislikes  of 
the  DM  while elements of P represent the strength of her be­
liefs.  Note that we do not require the DM's preference to be 
transitive  (although  we  can  certainly  add  this  requirement). 
Experimental  evidence  shows  that  DMs'  preferences  occa­
sionally do seem to violate transitivity. 

An act a  is simple iff its  range  is finite.  That  is,  a  is simple 
if it  has  only  finitely  many  consequences.  Many  works  in 
the  literature  focus  on  simple  acts  (e.g.,  [Fishburn,  1987]). 
We  assume  in  this  paper  that  A  contains  only  simple  acts; 
this means that we can define (generalized) expectation using 
finite sums,  so we do not have to  introduce infinite series or 
integration  for  arbitrary  expectation  domains.  Note  that  all 
acts  are  guaranteed  to  be  simple  if either  S  or  C  is  finite, 
although we do not assume that here. 

A  decision  problem  is  essentially  a  decision  situation  to­
gether  with  information  about  the  tastes  and  beliefs  of the 
DM;  that  is,  a  decision  problem  is  a  decision  situation  to­
gether with the subjective part of the circumstance that faces 
the  DM.  Formally,  a  (plausibilistic)  decision  problem  is  a 
tuple  V  =  (A,  E, u, PI),  where 

•  A  =  (A, 5, C)  is a decision situation, 

•  u : C —► U is a utility function, and 
•  PI : 2s —► P is a plausibility measure. 

We say that V is monotonic iff E is monotonic. 

2.3  Expected  Utility 
Let  V  — 
{{A,S, C), E, u,Pl)  be  a  plausibilistic  decision 
problem.  Each  a  €  A  induces  a  utility  random  variable 
uu  :  S —> U  as  follows:  uu(s)  =  u(a(s)).  In the standard 
setting (where utilities are real-valued and PI is a probability 
measure Pi), we can identify the expected utility of act a with 
the expected value of ua  with respect to Pr, computed in the 
standard way: 

We  say  that  E  is  monotonic  iff (2.1)  holds.  It  turns out that 
monotonicity does not really make a difference by itself;  see 
the comments after the proof of Theorem 3.1. 

2.2  Decision  Situations  and  Decision  Problems 
A  decision  situation  describes  the  objective  part  of the  cir­
cumstance that the DM faces (i.e., the part that is independent 
of the tastes and beliefs of the DM). Formally, a decision sit­
uation is a tuple A  =  (A, 5, C), where 
•  S is the set of states of the world, 
•  C is the set of consequences, and 
•  A is a set of acts (i.e., a set of functions from S to C). 

4Sometimes we use x to denote Cartesian product; the context 

will always make it clear whether this is the case. 

Note that the notion  of additivity we defined  is a joint prop­
erty of several components of a decision problem (i.e., <3), <&, 
u,  and  PI)  instead  of being a property of PI  alone.  Additiv­
ity  is  exactly  the  requirement  needed  to  make  the  analogue 
of (2.4) equivalent to (2.3).  While decision problems involv­
ing probability  are  additive,  those  involving  representations 
of uncertainty  such  as  Dempster-Shafer belief functions  are 
not, in general. 

DECISION THEORY 

293 

3  Representing Arbitrary Preference 

Relations 

In this section, we show that every preference relation on acts 
has  a GEU  representation.  GEU,  like  all  decision  rules,  is 
formally a function from decision problems to preference re-

The idea is to let each consequence be its own utility and 
such that 

each set be its own plausibility, and define 

all simple acts; in particular, A contains all constant acts. 
We do not assume that here.) 

4  Representing Savage's Postulates 
Theorem  3.1  shows that  GEU  can  represent any preference 
relation.  We  are  typically  interested  in  representing  prefer­
ence  relations  that  satisfy  certain  constraints,  or postulates. 
The goal of this section is to examine the effect of such con­
straints on the components that make up GEU.  For definite-
ness, we focus on Savage's postulates. For ease of exposition, 
we restrict to additive decision problems in this section; recall 
that this restriction does not affect Theorem 3.1. 

A  set Vc  of axioms about (i.e.,  constraints  on) plausibilis-
tic decision problems represents a set of postulates  Pr  about 
decision situations and preference relations iff 

Theorem 3.1  can be viewed as saying that the empty set of 
axioms represents the empty set of postulates. 

5Note  that,  unlike  most  representation  theorems,  there  is  no 
uniqueness condition.  However, we can show that our representa­
tion is canonical in a certain sense. 

294 

DECISION THEORY 

that  X1,...,  Xn  is a partition of Y  iff the  Xis  are nonempty 
and pairwise disjoint, and  Ui  Xi  =  Y. 

Fix  some  decision  situation  (A,  S,  C).  Readers  familiar 
with  [Savage,  1954]  will  recall  that  Savage  implicitly  as­
sumes  that  A  consists  of  all  possible  functions  from  S  to 
C,  since  the  DM  can  be  questioned  about  any  pair  of func­
tions.  Throughout this paper, we have assumed that A could 
be  any  nonempty  subset  of the  set  of all  simple  acts. 
It  is 
possible  to  maintain  that  assumption  here,  though  some  of 
the postulates would fail, not because 
does not relate cer­
tain  members  of A,  but  because  A  does  not  contain  certain 
pairs of acts.  We could adapt the postulates by "relativizing" 
them (so acts not in A are not required to be related) as we do 
in the  full  paper;  however,  that  involves changing the  state­
ments of Savage's postulates somewhat, and the presentation 
becomes more complicated.  To simplify the exposition here, 
we  assume  in  this  section  only  that  A  consists  of all simple 
acts.  Here are Savage's first six postulates (stated under the 
assumption  that  A  consists  of all  simple  acts  from  S  to  C, 
so  that,  for example,  if a  and  b are  in  A,  and  X  C  S,  then 

C 

S into events such that the DM's preference about a and b is 
unaffected if c were to happen in any element of the partition. 
Savage also has a seventh postulate, but it is relevant only for 
general (nonsimple) acts; since we consider only simple acts, 
we omit it here. 

Since we  focus on additive decision problems  in this sec­
tion,  we  can  define  a  notion  of  conditional  GEU,  which 
greatly simplifies the presentation of the GRU axioms. Given 

PI  is  the  standard  necessary  condition  for  representation 
by  EU  (and  many  of its generalizations),  since the reals  are 

DECISION THEORY 

295 

References 
[Benvenuti and Mesiar, 2000]  P.  Benvenuti  and  R.  Mesiar. 
Integrals  with  respect  to  a  general  fuzzy  measure. 
In 
M.  Grabisch,  T.  Murofushi,  and  M.  Sugeno,  editors, 
Fuzzy  Measures  and  Applications—Theory  and  Applica(cid:173)
tions, pages 205-232. Physica Verlag, Heidelberg, 2000. 
[Chu and Halpern, 2003]  F. Chu and J. Y. Halpern. Great ex­
pectations. Part II:  Generalized expected utility as a uni­
versal decision r u l e. In I J C AJ '03, 2003. 

[Fishburn,  1987]  P.  C.  Fishburn,  Reconsiderations  in  the 
foundations of decision under uncertainty.  The Economic 
Journal  97(388):825-841,1987. 

[Friedman and Halpern,  1995]  N.  Friedman  and  J.  Y. 
Halpern.  Plausibility  measures:  a  user's  guide. 
In 
Proc.  11th Conf.  Uncertainty in AI, pages  175-184.  1995. 
[Giangand Shenoy,2001]  P. H. Giang and P. P.  Shenoy.  A 
comparison  of axiomatic  approaches  to  qualitative  deci­
sion making using possibility theory.  In Proc.  17th  Conf. 
Uncertainty in Al, pages  162-170, 2001. 

[Gilboa and Schmeidler,  1989]  I. Gilboa and D.  Schmeidlcr. 
Maxmin expected utility with a non-unique prior.  Journal 
of  Mathematical  Economics,  18:141-153,  1989. 

[Gul,  1991]  F.  Gul.  A  theory  of disappointment  aversion. 

Econometrics  59(3):667-686,  1991. 

[Lehmann,  1996]  D.  Lehmann. 

Generalized  qualitative 
probability;  Savage revisited.  In Proc.  12th  Conf  Uncer(cid:173)
tainty in Al, pages 318-388,  1996. 

[Luce,  1990]  R. D. Luce.  Rational versus plausible account­
ing equivalences  in preference judgments.  Psychological 
Science, 1:225-234,  1990. 

[Luce, 2000]  R.  D.  Luce.  Utility  of  Gains  and  Losses: 
Measurement-Theoretical  and  Experimental  Approaches. 
Lawrence Erlbaum, London, 2000. 

[Neumann and Morgenstern,  1947]  J.  von  Neumann  and 
O.  Morgenstern.  Theory of Games and Economic Behav(cid:173)
ior.  Princeton University Press, 2nd edition,  1947. 

[Quiggin,  1993]  J.  Quiggin.  Generalized  Expected  Utility 
Theory:  The  Rank-Dependent  Expected  Utility  Model. 
Kluwer,  1993. 

[Resnik,  1987]  M.  D.  Resnik.  Choices:  An  Introduction  to 

Decision  Theory.  University of Minnesota Press,  1987. 

[Savage,  1954]  L.  J.  Savage.  Foundations  of  Statistics.  Wi­

ley, 1954. 

[Schmeidler,  1989]  D.  Schmeidler.  Subjective  probability 
and  expected  utility  without  additivity.  Econometrica, 
57:571-587, 1989. 

[Yaari,  1987]  M.  E.  Yaari.  The dual  theory of choice  under 

risk.  Econometrica,  55(1):95-\\5,  1987. 

Al  says  that  the  expected  utility  values  are  linearly  pre-
ordered;  more  specifically,  A  1(a)  says  that  they  are  totally 
preordered  and  A 1(b)  says  that  the  relation  is  transitive. 
Note  that  Al  does  not  say  that  the  whole  valuation  domain 
is  linearly  preordered:  that  would  be  a  sufficient  but  not  a 
necessary  condition  for  GEU(D)  to  satisfy  PI.  Since  we 
want  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions  for  our  represen­
tation  results,  some  axioms  apply  only  to  expected  utility 
values  rather than  to  arbitrary  elements  of the  valuation  do­
main.  As  the  following  theorem  shows,  every  subset  of 
{Al(a), Al (b),..., AG}  represents the corresponding subset 
of  { P l ( a ) , P l ( b ) , . . . , P 6 }. 

Theorem 4.1 is a strong representation result. For example, 
if we are interested in capturing all of Savage's postulates but 
the  requirement  that 
is  totally  ordered,  and  instead are 
willing to allow it to be partially ordered (a situation explored 
by  Lehmann  [1996]),  we simply need to drop axiom A 1(b). 
Although we have focused here on Savage's postulates,  it is 
straightforward to  represent many of the other standard pos­
tulates  considered  in  the  decision  theory  literature  in  much 
the same way. 

5  Conclusion 
We  have  introduced  GEU,  a notion  of generalized  EU  and 
shown that GEU can (a) represent all preference relations on 
acts and (b) be customized to capture any subset of Savage's 
postulates.  In  [Chu and Halpern,  2003], we show that GEU 
can be viewed as a universal decision rule in an even stronger 
sense:  almost every decision rule has a GEU representation. 
Thus,  the  framework  of expectation  structures  together with 
GEU provides a useful level of abstraction in which to study 
the general problem of decision making and rules for decision 
making. 

296 

DECISION THEORY 

