Part I I: Generalized Expected Utility as a Universal Decision Rule* 

Great Expectations. 

Francis C. Chu  and  Joseph Y. Halpern 

Department of Computer  Science 

Cornell  University 

Ithaca, NY  14853, U.S.A. 

Email:  {fcc,halpern}@cs.cornell.edu 

Abstract 

Many different rules for decision making have been 
introduced in the literature.  We show that a notion 
of generalized expected  utility proposed  in a com­
panion paper [Chu and Halpern, 2003] is a univer­
sal  decision rule,  in the  sense that  it can represent 
essentially all other decision rules. 

Introduction 

1 
A  great  deal  of effort has  been  devoted  to  studying decision 
making.  A  standard formalization decribes the choices a de­
cision maker (DM) faces as acts, where an act is a function 
from  states  to  consequences.  Many  decision  rules  (that  is, 
rules for choosing among acts, based on the tastes and beliefs 
of the  DM)  have  been  proposed  in  the  literature.  Some  are 
meant  to  describe  how  "rational"  agents  should  make  deci­
sions, while others aim at modeling how real agents actually 
make decisions.  Perhaps the best-known approach  is that of 
maximizing expected utility (EU).  Normative  arguments  due 
to  Savage  [1954]  suggest that  rational agents should  behave 
as if their tastes are represented by a real-valued utility func­
tion  on  the  consequences,  their  beliefs  about  the  likelihood 
of events (i.e., sets of states) are represented by a probability 
measure, and they are maximizing the expected utility of acts 
with respect to this utility and probability. 

Despite  these  normative arguments,  it  is well  known  that 
EU often does not describe how people actually behave when 
they  make  decisions  [Resnik,  1987];  thus  EU  is  of limited 
utility  if we  want  to  model  (and  perhaps  predict)  how  peo­
ple  will  behave.  As  a  result,  many  alternatives  to  EU  have 
been proposed in the literature (see, for example, [Gul, 1991; 
Gilboa  and  Schmeidler,  1989;  Giang  and  Shenoy,  2001; 
Quiggin,  1993;  Schmeidler,  1989;  Yaari,  1987]).  Some  of 
these  rules  involve representations of beliefs  by  means other 
than  a  (single)  probability  measure;  in  some  cases,  beliefs 
and tastes are combined in ways other than the standard way 
which  produces  expected  utility;  yet  other  cases,  such  as 
Maximin and Minimax Regret [Resnik,  1987], do not require 
a representation of beliefs at all. 

*Work supported in part by NSF under grants IIS-0090145 and 
CTC-0208535  and  by  the  DoD  Multidisciplinary  University  Re­
search Initiative (MURI) program administered by ONR under grant 
N00014-01-1-0795. 

In a companion paper  [Chu  and Halpern,  2003],  we pro­
pose a general framework in which to study and compare de­
cision  rules.  The  idea  is  to  define  a  generalized  notion  of 
expected utility (GEU), where a DM's beliefs are represented 
by plausibility  measures  [Friedman and  Halpern,  1995]  and 
the DM's tastes are represented by general (i.e., not necessar­
ily  real-valued)  utility  functions.  We  show  there  that  every 
preference  relation  on acts has a GEU  representation.  Here 
we show that GEU is universal in a much stronger sense:  we 
show that essentially all decision rules have GEU representa­
tions.  The notion of representing one decision rule using an­
other seems to be novel.  Intuitively, decision rules are func­
tions  from  tastes  (and  beliefs)  to  preference  relations,  so  a 
representation of a decision rule is a representation of a func(cid:173)
tion, not a preference relation. 

Roughly speaking, given two decision rules  R1  and  R2,  an 
R1  representation  of 'R2 is  a  function  T  that  maps  inputs  of 
R2  to  inputs  of  R1  that  contain  the  same  representation  of 
tastes  (and  beliefs)  such that 
.  Thus, T 
models, in a precise sense, a user of R2 as a user of R1, since 
r preserves tastes (and beliefs).  We show that a large collec­
tion  of decision  rules have GEU  representations and charac­
terize the collection.  Essentially, a decision rule has a GEU 
representation iff it is uniform in a precise sense.  It turns out 
that there are well-known decision rules, such as maximizing 
Choquet  expected  utility  (CEU)  [Schmeidler,  1989]  (which 
essentially assumes that the DM is representing beliefs using 
a Dempster-Shafer belief function Bel, and then maximizing 
CEU with respect to Bel), that have no GEU representations. 
This is because r is not allowed to modify the representation 
of the tastes (and beliefs).  We then define a notion of ordinal 
representation, in which r  is allowed to modify the represen­
tation of the tastes  (and beliefs),  and  is required to preserve 
only  the ordinal  aspect  of the tastes  (and  beliefs).  We  show 
that  almost  all  decision  rules,  including  CEU,  have  ordinal 
GEU representations. 

There seems to be no prior work in the literature that con­
siders how one decision rule can represent another.  Perhaps 
the  closest results  to  our own  are  those  of Lehmann  [2001]. 
He proposes a "unified general  theory of decision" that con­
tains both  quantitative and  qualitative decision theories.  He 
considers a particular decision rule he calls Expected Quali-
tative  Utility Maximization,  which  allows  utilities  to  be  non­
standard real  numbers;  he defines a  certain preorder on the 

DECISION THEORY 

297 

nonstandard  reals  and  makes  decisions  based  on  maximiz­
ing expected utility (with respect to that preorder).  That his 
framework has EU as a special  case is immediate, since for 
the standard reals, his preorder reduces to the standard order 
on the reals.  He argues informally that Maximin is a special 
case of his approach, so that his approach can capture aspects 
of more qualitative decision making as well.  It is easy to see 
that Lehmann's approach is a special case of GEU; his rule is 
clearly not universal in our sense. 

2  Preliminaries 
To make this paper self-contained, much of the material in the 
first three subsections of this section  is taken  (almost  verba­
tim) from [Chu and llalpern, 2003]. 

2.1  Plausibility,  Utility,  and  Expectation  Domains 
Since  one  of the  goals  of this  paper  is  to  provide  a  general 
framework  for  all  of decision  theory,  we  want  to  represent 
the tastes and beliefs of the DMs in as general a framework as 
possible.  To this end, we use plausibility measures to repre­
sent the beliefs of the DMs and (generalized) utility functions 
to represent their tastes. 

Sometimes we use  x to denote Cartesian product; the context 

will always make it clear whether this is the case. 

E1  and  E2  say  that  0  is  associative  and  commutative.  £3 
says  that  T  is  the  left-identity  of ®  and  E4  ensures  that  the 
expectation domain respects the relation on utility values. 

The standard expectation  domain,  which  we  denote  E,  is 
(R, [0,1], R, +, x ), where the ordering on each domain is the 
standard order on the reals. 
2.2  Decision Situations and Decision Problems 
A  decision  situation  describes  the  objective  part  of the  cir­
cumstance that the DM faces (i.e., the part that is independent 
of the tastes and beliefs of the DM).  Formally, a decision sit­
uation is a tuple A —  {A, 5, C), where 
•  S is the set of states of the world, 
•  C is the set of consequences, and 
•  A is a set of acts (i.e., a set of functions from S to C). 

An act a is simple iff its range  is finite.  That is,  a  is simple 
if it  has  only  finitely  many  consequences.  Many  works  in 
the  literature  focus  on  simple  acts  (e.g.,  [Fishburn,  1987]). 
We  assume  in  this  paper  that  A  contains  only  simple  acts; 
this means that we can define (generalized) expectation using 
finite sums,  so we do not have to introduce infinite series or 
integration  for  arbitrary  expectation  domains.  Note  that  all 
acts  are  guaranteed  to  be  simple  if either  S  or  C  is  finite, 
although we do not assume that here. 

A  decision  problem  is  essentially  a  decision  situation  to­
gether with  information  about the  tastes  (and  beliefs)  of the 
DM;  that  is,  a  decision  problem  is  a  decision  situation  to­
gether with the subjective part of the circumstance that faces 
the  DM.  Formally,  a nonplausibilistic decision problem  is  a 
tuple  (A, U, u),  where 

•  A  =  (A,5,  C)  is a decision situation, 
•  U is a utility domain, and 
•  u : C —> U is a utility function. 

A  plausibilistic  decision  problem  is  a  tuple  (A,  E,  u,  PI), 
where 

•  A —  (A, 5, C) is a decision situation, 
•  E=  (U,,  P, V, ®, ®)  is an expectation domain, 
•  u : C —> U is a utility function, and 
•  PI : 2s: —> P is a plausibility measure. 

We could have let a plausibilistic decision problem be simply 
a  nonplausibilistic  decision problem  together  with  a plausi­
bility  domain  and  a plausibility  measure,  without  including 
the other components of expectation domains.  However, this 
turns out to complicate the presentation (see below). 

We  say that V  is standard iff its  utility  domain  is R  (and, 
if D is plausibilistic,  its plausibility  measure  is a probability 
measure and its expectation domain is E). 
2.3  Expected Utility 
Let V be a decision problem with S as the set of states, U as 
the utility domain, and u as the utility function.  Each act a of 
V induces a utility random variable ua  :  S  —►  U as follows: 
ua(s)  =  u(a(s)). 
If in  addition  V  is  plausibilistic  with  P 
as the plausibility domain and PI as the plausibility measure, 

298 

DECISION THEORY 

that is, 

for each state 

•  Minimax Regret (REG)  is based on a different philoso(cid:173)
phy.  It tries to hedge a DM's bets, by doing reasonably well 
no matter what the actual state is.  It is also a nonplausibilistic 
rule. As a first step to defining it, given a nonplausibilistic de(cid:173)
cision problem 
let 
is the  least  upper bound 
of the  utilities in state  s.  The regret of a  in state  .s,  denoted 
note that no act can do better than a by 
For 
more than r(a, s)  in state s.  Let 
example, suppose that 
and  the DM picks  a.  Sup(cid:173)
pose that the  DM  then  learns that the true state  is  so  and  is 
offered a chance to change her mind. No matter what act she 
picks, the utility of the new act cannot be more than 2 higher 
.  REG  orders acts by their regret and thus takes 
then 
the "best" act to be the one that minimizes 
Intuitively, 
this rule tries to minimize the regret that a DM would feel  if 
she discovered what the situation actually was:  the "I wish 1 
had  done  a2  instead  of  a1"  feeling.  Thus, 
iff 
Like Maximin,  Nature  is viewed as an 
adversary that would  pick  a  state  that  maximizes  regret,  no 
matter  what  act  the  DM  chooses. 
It  is  well  known  that,  in 
general, Maximin, REG, and EU give different recommenda(cid:173)
tions [Resnik,  1987]. 

•  The Maxmin Expected Utility rule (MMEU) [Gilboa and 
Schmeidler,  1989]  assumes  that  a  DM's  beliefs  are  repre(cid:173)
sented  by  a  set  V  of probability  measures.  Act  a1  is  pre(cid:173)
ferred  to  a2  if the  worst-case  expected  utility  of  a1  (taken 
over all the probability measures in V) is at least as large as 
the  worst-case  expected utility  of a2.  Thus  MMEU  is,  in  a 
sense,  a hybrid  of EU  and Maximin.  To  view MMEU  as  a 
function  on  decision  problems,  we  must  first  show  how  to 
represent a set of probability  measures as a single plausibil(cid:173)
ity  measure.  We  do this  using an  approach  due to  Halpern 
[2001].  Let the plausibility domain 
that is,  all 
functions from V to [0,1], ordered pointwise; in other words, 
Thus,  in  this 
is  the  constant  function  0  and  T  is the  constant 
domain, 
function  1.  For each 
be the function 
that  evaluates  each  probability  measure  in  V  at  A";  that  is, 
it 
is easy to verify that  PIp  is a plausibility measure.  We view 
PIp  as a representation of the set V of probability measures; 
clearly V can be recovered from 
The domain  of MMEU 
consists  of all  plausibilistic  decision  problems  of the  form 
where  V  is 
MMEU(D) A2 
.  Note  that  this 

a  set  of probability  measures  on 

for  all 

Let 

let 

•  (Dempster-Shafer) belief functions [Dempster, 1967] are 
a  representation  of  uncertainty  that  generalize  probability. 
That  is,  every probability  measure  is  a  belief function,  but 
the  converse  is  not  necessarily  true.2  Given  a  belief func(cid:173)
tion  Bel,  it  is  well-known  that  there  exists  a  set  PBcl  of 
probability  measures  such  that  for  all . 
Bel(Ar)  = 
[Dempster,  1967].  A  notion  of expected 

2Due to lack of space, we assume that the reader is familiar with 

belief functions. 

2.4  Decision  Rules 
Intuitively,  a  decision  rule  tells  the  DM  what  to  do  when 
facing a decision problem  in order to get a preference rela(cid:173)
tion on acts—e.g., compare the expected utility of acts.  Just 
as  we  have  nonplausibilistic  decision  problems  and  plausi(cid:173)
bilistic  decision  problems,  we  have  nonplausibilistic  deci(cid:173)
sion  rules  and  plausibilistic  decision  rules.  As  the  name 
suggests,  (non)plausibilistic  decision  rules  are  defined  on 
(non)plausibilistic decision problems. 

We do not require decision rules to be defined on all deci(cid:173)
sion  problems.  For example,  (standard)  EU  is  defined  only 
on standard plausibilistic decision problems.  More formally, 
a  (non)plausibilistic decision rule  R  is a function whose do(cid:173)
main, denoted dom(R.), is a subcollection of the collection of 
(non)plausibilistic decision problems,  and whose range,  de(cid:173)
noted ran (R), is a collection of preference relations on acts. 
If 
doin(R)  and a1 and a2 are acts in V, then we write 

Here are a few examples of decision rules: 

l

e

r

o

b

•  GEU is a plausibilistic decision rule whose domain con(cid:173)
sists of all plausibilistic decision problems.  Given a decision 
p
for all 
have 
acts 
_ of A. Note that GEU would not be a decision rule 
according to this definition if plausibilistic decision problems 
contained only a  utility function  and a plausibility measure, 
and did not include the other components of expectation do(cid:173)
mains. 

we 

m

•  Of course, standard EU is a decision rule (whose domain 

consists of all standard plausibilistic decision problems). 

•  Maximin  is  a nonplausibilistic  decision rule  that  orders 
acts according to their worst-case consequence.  It is a con(cid:173)
servative rule; the "best" act according to Maximin is the one 
with the best worst-case consequence.  Intuitively, Maximin 
views  Nature  as  an  adversary  that  always  pick  a  state  that 
realizes the worst-case consequence,  no matter what act the 
DM  chooses.  The  domain  of (standard)  Maximin  consists 
of nonplausibilistic  decision  problems  with  real-valued  util-

DECISION THEORY 

299 

Although it can represent many decision rules, GEU cannot 
represent  CEU.  We  can  in  fact  characterize  the  conditions 
under which a decision rule is representable by GEU. 

There is a trivial condition that a decision rule must satisfy 
in order for it to have a GEU representation.  Intuitively, a de­
cision rule  R  respects utility if R relates acts of constant util­
ity according to the relation between utility values.  Formally, 
a decision rule 7v respects utility iff for all  
dom(R.)  with 
A  as  the  set of acts,  S  as  the  set of states,  U  as  the  utility 
A,  if 
domain,  and  u as the utility function,  for all  a1,a2 

for all states 

then 

(3.5) 
We  say  that  R  weakly  respects  utility  iff (3.5)  holds  for  all 
constant acts (but not necessarily for all acts of constant util­
ity). It is easy to see that GEU respects utility, since 
for all 
. Thus 
if  R  does  not  respect  utility,  it  has  no  GEU  representation. 
While  respecting utility  is  a necessary condition  for a deci­
sion rule to have a GEU representation, it is not sufficient.  It 
is also necessary for the decision rule to treat acts that behave 
in similar ways similarly. 

is a substructure  of 

Two acts a1, a2  in a decision problem V are indistinguish-

able, denoted 

iff either 

300 

DECISION THEORY 

Intuitively, we can think of utility random variables and utility 
lotteries as descriptions of what an act a  does in terms of the 
tastes (and beliefs) of the DM.  If 7v is uniform, we can view 
7v as relating the acts indirectly by relating their descriptions. 
As the following theorem shows, all uniform decision rules 

have GEU representations. 
Theorem 3.4:  For all decision rules  R,1Z  has a GEU repre(cid:173)
sentation iff R, is uniform and R respects utility. 
Proof:  The " if direction is somewhat similar in spirit to the 
proof of Theorem 3.6, given below; due to the lack of space, 
we omit this direction. 

The  reader  may  have  noticed  an  incongruity  here.  Ex­
ample  3.3  shows  that  MMEU  has  a  GEU  representation; 
moreover, as shown earlier, MMEU produces essentially the 
same  order  on  acts  as  CEU.  However,  CEU  has  no  GEU 
representation.  There  is  no  contradiction  to  Theorem  3.4 

The key reason that GEU cannot represent nonuniform de­
cision rules is because they do not respect the indistinguisha-
bility relations imposed by the utility function (and the plau­
sibility measure).  Recall that we require that  r{D)  ~  "D be­
cause we want a user of one decision rules to appear as if she 
were using another, without pretending that she has different 
tastes (and beliefs).  So we want r to preserve the tastes (and 
beliefs)  of its  input. 

There is a long-standing debate in the decision-theory liter­
ature as to whether preferences should be regarded as ordinal 
or cardinal.  If they are  ordinal,  then all  that  matters  is  their 
order.  If they  are  cardinal,  then  it  should  be  meaningful  to 
talk  about the differences between preferences,  that  is,  how 
much more a DM prefers one consequence to another.  Simi­
larly,  if representations of likelihood are taken to be ordinal, 
then all that matters is whether one event is more likely than 
another.  As we  show below,  if we require only that r{V)  and 
V describe the same ordinal tastes (and beliefs), then we can 
in  fact express almost all  decision  rules,  including CEU,  in 
terms of GEU. 

We  want to show next that  almost all  decision rules have 
an ordinal GEU representation.  Doing so involves one more 
subtlety.  Up to  now,  we have  assumed that plausibility  do­
mains are partially ordered.  This  implies that two plausibil­
ity measures that represent the same ordinal beliefs necessar­
ily  induce  the  same  indistinguishability  relation  (because  of 
antisymmetry).  Thus,  in  order to  distinguish  sets  that  have 
equivalent plausibilities when computing expected utility us­
,  we  need  to  allow plausibility  domains  to  be 
ing 
partially preordered.  So, for this result, we assume that 
is 
a reflexive and transitive relation that is not necessarily anti­
symmetric (i.e., we could have that 
but 

and 

DECISION THEORY 

301 

Theorem 3,6:  A  decision rule  R  has an ordinal GEU repre(cid:173)
sentation  iff R weakly respects utility. 
Proof:  There are two cases, plausibilistic and nonplausibilis-
tic.  They  are  almost  identical;  we just  do the  plausibilistic 
case here.  (Also, the "only if" direction is quite similar to the 
one in the oroof of Theorem 3.4. so we omit it here.') 

Theorem  3.6  shows that GEU  can  emulate  essentially  all 
decision  rules.  Thus, there is a sense in which GEU can be 
viewed as a universal decision rule. (We remark that although 
we have focused here on alternatives that are acts, in the sense 
of Savage, that is, functions from states to consequences, it is 
not hard to show—and we do in the full paper—that the same 
results  hold  if alternatives are taken  to be  horse  lotteries,  in 
the sense of Anscombe and Aumann [1963].) 

References 
[Anscombe and Aumann,  1963]  F.  J.  Anscombe  and  R.  J. 
Aumann.  A  definition  of subjective  probability.  Annals 
of Mathematical Statistics, 34(1): 199-205, March 1963. 

[Choquet,  1953]  G. Choquet.  Theory of capacities.  Annates 

de  I'lnstitut Fourier  (Grenoble),  5:131-295,  1953. 

[Chu and Halpern, 2003]  F. C. Chu and J. Y. Halpern.  Great 
Expectations. Part 1: On the customizability of generalized 
expected utility.  In Proc.  Seventeenth  International Joint 
'01),  pages 
Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (IJCAI 
35-40, 2003. 

[Dempster,  1967]  A. P. Dempster. Upper and lower probabil­
ities induced by a multivalued mapping. Annals of Mathe-
matical Statistics, 38:325-339,  1967. 

[Fishburn,  1987]  P.  C.  Fishburn.  Reconsiderations  in  the 
foundations of decision  under uncertainty.  The Economic 
Journal, 97(388):825-841, December  1987. 

[Friedman and Halpern,  1995]  N.  Friedman  and  J.  Y. 
Halpern.  Plausibility  measures:  a  user's  manual. 
In 
Proc.  Eleventh  Conference  on  Uncertaintv  in  Artificial 
Intelligence  (UAI  '95), pages  175-184.  1995. 

[Giang and Shenoy, 2001]  P. H. Giang and P. P. Shenoy.  A 
comparison  of axiomatic  approaches  to  qualitative  deci­
sion making using possibility theory. In Proc. Seventeenth 
Conference  on  Uncertaintv  in  Artificial  Intelligence  (UAI 
2001), pages 162-170,2001. 

[Gilboa and Schmeidler,  1989]  1. Gilboa and D. Schmeidler. 
Maxmin expected utility with a non-unique prior.  Journal 
of  Mathematical  Economics,  18:141-153,  1989. 

[Gul,  1991]  F.  Gul.  A  theory  of disappointment  aversion. 

Econometrica, 59(3):667-686, May  1991. 

[Halpern, 2001]  J. Y. Halpern.  Conditional plausibility mea­
sures  and  Bayesian  networks.  Journal  of A.I.  Research, 
14:359-389,2001. 

[Lehmann, 2001]  D.  Lehmann.  Expected  qualitative  utility 
maximization.  Games  and  Economic  Behavior,  35(1-
2):54-79, April 2001. 

[Quiggin,  1993]  J.  Quiggin.  Generalized  Expected  Utility 
Theory:  The  Rank-Dependent  Expected  Utility  Model. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, Mass.,  1993. 

[Resnik,  1987]  M.  D.  Resnik.  Choices;  An  Introduction  to 
Decision  Theory.  University  of Minnesota  Press,  Min­
neapolis, 1987. 

[Savage,  1954]  L.  J.  Savage.  Foundations  of  Statistics.  John 

Wiley & Sons, New York,  1954. 

[Schmeidler,  1989]  D.  Schmeidler.  Subjective  probability 
and  expected  utility  without  additivity.  Econometrica, 
57:571-587, 1989. 

[Yaari,  1987]  M.  E.  Yaari.  The dual  theory of choice under 

risk.  Econometrica, 55(1):95-115, January  1987. 

302 

DECISION THEORY 

