Qualitative Decision under Uncertainty:  Back to Expected Utility 

Helene Fargier 

1RIT,  118 Route de Narbonne 
31062 Toulouse Cedex, France 

Regis  Sabbadin 
INRA-UBIA, 

BP 27 - 31326 Castanet-Tolosan Cedex - France 

fargier@irit.fr sabbadin@toulouse.inra.fr 

Abstract 

Different  qualitative  models  have  been  proposed 
for  decision  under  uncertainty  in  Artificial  Intelli­
gence,  but they  generally  fail  to satisfy the princi­
ple  of strict  Pareto  dominance  or  principle  of "ef­
ficiency", in contrast to the classical numerical cri­
terion  —  expected  utility. 
In  [Dubois  and  Prade, 
1995J  qualitative  criteria  based  on  possibility  the­
ory have been proposed, that are appealing but inef­
ficient in the above sense.  The question  is whether 
it  is  possible  to  reconcile  possibilistic  criteria  and 
efficiency.  The  present  paper  shows  that  the  an­
swer  is  yes,  and  that  it  leads  to  special  kinds  of 
expected utilities. It is also shown that although nu­
merical, these expected utilities remain qualitative: 
they lead to two different decision procedures based 
on min, max and reverse operators only, generaliz­
ing the leximin and leximax orderings of vectors. 

1 

Introduction and motivation 

A  numerical  approach  is  classically  advocated  (see  e.g. 
[Savage,  1954])  for encoding  both  the  information  pertain­
ing to the  states  of nature  and the  preferences  on Ar:  uncer­
tainty is represented by a probability distribution p and pref-

Information  about  preference  and  uncertainty  in  decision 
problems  cannot  always  be  quantified  in  a  simple  way,  but 
only qualitative evaluations can sometimes be attained.  As a 

1 Since expected utility is not sensitive to linear transformations 
of u, the choice of [0,1] as the range for u is made for convenience. 

consequence, the topic of qualitative decision theory is a nat­
ural one  to consider  [Pearl,  1993;  Dubois and  Prade,  1995; 
Brafman and Tennenholtz,  1997; Dubois et al,  1998b; Doyle 
and Thomason,  1999;  Giang  and  Shenoy,  2000;  Dubois  et 
al,  2000],  Giving  up the quantification  of utility and uncer­
tainty  has  led  to  give  up  the  expected  utility  (EU)  criterion 
as  well:  the  principle  of most  theories  of qualitative  deci­
sion  making  is  to  model  uncertainty  by  an  ordinal  plausi­
bility  relation  on  events  and  preference  by  a  complete pre-
ordering  on  consequences. 
In  [Dubois  and  Prade,  1995; 
Dubois  et  ai,  1998b]  two  qualitative  criteria  based  on  pos­
sibility theory,  an  optimistic and a pessimistic  one,  are  pro­
posed and axiomatized whose definitions only require a finite 
ordinal  scale  L  = 
for  evaluating  both 
utility and plausibility: 

{0L  <  ■■•  <  1L} 

criterion which is "optimistic", or "adventurous". 

Although  appealing from a qualitative point  of view, pos­
sibilistic  utilities  suffer  from  a  lack  of  decisiveness  called 
the  "drowning  effect":  when  two  acts  give  an  identical  and 
extreme  (either  good  or  bad)  consequence  in  some  plausi­
ble  state,  they  may  be  undistinguished by  these  criteria,  al­
though  they  may  give  significantly  different  consequences 

DECISION THEORY 

303 

Since we are looking for complete and transitive relations 
it is natural to think of refinements based on expected utility. 
Savage [1954] has indeed shown that, as soon as a complete 
preorder is desired that satisfies the STP and some very nat­
ural axioms, the EU criterion is almost unavoidable.  So, the 
question  is:  are there any expected utility criteria  that refine 
the possibilistic  criteria  ? 

be a QPU model. When considering 
the  optimistic  (resp.  pessimistic)  criterion,  we  are  looking 
for a probability  distribution P and  a  utility  function  u  such 
that 
.  The idea 
is  to  build  the  EU  criteria  by  means  of a  transformation  x: 
L —> [0,1] that maps 
Definition 2 (Probabilistic transformation of a scale) 

to a probability distribution: 

model.  A probabilistic trans(cid:173)
formation of L w.r.t. n is a mapping X ; L —> [0,1] such that 

is  a probability  distribution. 

Notice  the  presence  of the  condition 

that  ex­
presses the fact that the impossibility of an event (represented 
by a degree of 0L, in possibility theory) is expressed by a null 
probability.  But the most plausible events (possibility degrees 
of  1L,  obviously  do  not  receive  a  probability  degree  of  1, 
since  they  may  be  mutually  exclusive.  Notice  also  that  we 
are  looking  for  a  unique  function  X  for  transforming  L  — 
both p and u will  be built upon  this transformation.  This  is 
due to the fact that we assume that preference and uncertainty 
levels arc commensurate and belong to the same scale :  it is 
thus natural to transform the degrees regardless whether they 
model uncertainty or preference. 

Moreover,  and  originally represent all the information 
available to the user, both in terms of uncertainty of the actual 
state of the world and preference over possible consequences. 
So, no undesirable arbitrary information should be introduced 
in the refined decision  model  and p and u must be as close 
as possible  to  the  original  information:  we  are  looking  for 
"unbiased" transformations of L.  Formally: 

2.1 
Expected  utility  refinements  of optimistic  QPU 
Let us first provide a tractable sufficient condition for a prob­
abilistic  transformation  to  generate  an  expected  utility  that 

Most  of the  qualitative  approaches  [Pearl,  1993;  Dubois 
and Prade, 1995; Brafman and Tennenholtz, 1997; Giang and 
Shenoy,  2000],  fail to satisfy Pareto dominance.  But this  is 
not the case within  expected utility theory,  since this model 
obeys  the  following  Sure-Thing Principle  (STP)  that  insures 
that identical consequences do not influence the relative pref­
erence between two acts: 

This means that possibilistic decision criteria cannot obey 
the STP, except in a very particular case: when the actual state 
of the world is known, i.e. when there is no uncertainty at all! 
So, we cannot stay in the pure QPU framework and escape the 
drowning effect altogether.  The idea is then to cope with the 
difficulty by proposing refinements of the possibilistic criteria 
that obey the Sure Thing Principle 2. 

This  paper shows  (Section  2)  that any possibilistic  model 
can be refined by an expected utility.  The kind of expected 
utility that is at work,  and the very special  probability mea­
sure that underlies it, are studied in Section 3 under the light 
of related  work.  It  is  also  shown  (Section  4)  that  although 
numerical,  these  expected utility  criteria  remain  qualitative, 
since they lead to a decision procedure based solely on min, 
max and reverse operators — these new procedures general­
ize well known leximin and leximax decision procedures . 

2The idea of refining QPU first appeared in [Dubois et al., 2000]: 
the principle was to break ties thougth an extra criterion (e.g. refin­
ing the pessimistic QPU by the optimitic QPU or by another max-
tnorm aggregation). The use of a max operator kept the approach in 
an ordinal framework, but forbade the full satisfaction of the STP 

304 

DECISION THEORY 

attached to the states by 
and P2  —  X2  ° 
the  ones  attached to  the  consequences  by  u1  —  \\  o 

Notice that Proposition 4 does not mean that the numbers 
, nor 
and 
are the same - it only means that the two models 
are  ordinally  equivalent,  that  they  make  the  same  decisions 
and order the events and the consequences in the same way. 
It also implies that the refinements that docs not belong to this 
class (they may exist, e.g. those which introduce a total order 
in S or in X) cannot be unbiased  :  they must either introduce 
a strict preference between equivalent consequences or order 
equi-plausiblc states. 

So, we get the following result for optimistic QPU models: 

At this point in the paper we have proved an important re­
sult  for bridging  qualitative possibilistic  decision theory  and 
expected  utility  theory:  we  have  shown  than  any  optimistic 
or  pessimistic  QPU  model  can  be  refined  by  a  EU  model. 
Thus,  we may conclude that (i) possibilistic decision criteria 
are compatible with the classical expected utility criterion and 
(ii) choosing a EU model is advantageous, since it leads to a 
EU-refinement  of the  original  rule  (thus  overcomes  the  lack 
of decisiveness  of the  possibilisitic  criteria),  it  satisfies  the 
STP and the principle of Pareto.  But this does not mean that 
qualitativeness and ordinality are given up.  In Section 4, we 
will  show that,  although probabilistic  and based on  additive 
manipulations of numbers, these criteria remain ordinal. This 
is very natural:  since we start with an ordinal model and do 
not  accept  any  bias,  we  produce  another  (probabilistic  but) 
ordinal  model,  in which  the  numbers  only  encode  orders  of 
magnitude — this is the topic of the next Section. 

We  have  hence  obtained  what  we  were  looking  for:  for 
any QPU model we are able to propose an EU model that re­
fines 
As  a refinement,  it  is  perfectly  compatible 
with but more decisive than the optimistic utility.  Moreover, 
it does not use other information than the original one -  it is 
unbiased.  Since based on expected utility, it obviously satis­
fies the Sure Thing Principle as well as Pareto Dominance. 

DECISION THEORY 

305 

Such  measures  are  often  encountered  in  the  AI  literature. 
First, they have much in common with [Spohn,  1990]'s k, — 
functions:  these  disbelief degrees  can  indeed be  interpreted 
as  the  order  of magnitude  of a  e  probability  [Pearl,  1993; 
Giang and Shenoy,  1999],  which is obviously a big stepped 
probability.  Moreover,  big  stepped  probabilities  also  form 
a  special  class  of  lexicographic  probabilities  in  the  sense 
of [Blume  et  al,  1991;  Lehmann,  1998]  — we  add  the  re­
striction  that  here  all  the  states  within  a  single  cluster  arc 
equiprobable.  Indeed  each cluster corresponds to a class  of 
equipossible  states  and  since  we  are  looking  for  unbiased 
transformations, equipossibility  leads to equiprobability.  Fi­
nally, Definition 5 generalizes the notion of big-stepped prob­
ability  of [Snow,  1999;  Benferhat  et al. , 1999]  — which  is 
recovered when each cluster is a singleton. Big stepped prob­
abilities have also been proposed by [Dubois et a/.,  1998a] as 
a way to refine any possibility/necessity measure 4. 

This  reasoning  on  the  order  of magnitude  also  applies  to 
utility:  in a discrete setting, big-stepped utilities can be de­
fined in the same way: 

are big  stepped utilities.  It  is  also  the  case  of the  c  utilities 
that  underly  k-utility  functions  [Pearl,  1993;  Wilson,  1995; 
Bonet and  Geffner,  1996;  Giang and  Shenoy,  2000].  These 
works have  advocated an  approach to decision under uncer­
tainty based on  k-functions,  but without taking the STP into 
account  (decision  is  made  on  the  order  of magnitude  only, 
with a criterion comparable to optimistic utility).  The present 
work makes a step further:  in order to satisfy Pareto optimal­
ly, we go back to the underlying E utilities and probabilities, 
using  double  exponents  for  epsilons  instead  of simple  ones 
— we remain "big stepped" on the join scale.  The other con­
tribution of our approach  is that it can be followed to encode 
pessimistic utilities as well. 

[La Valle and Fishburn, 1992; Hammond, 1998; Lehmann, 
1998]  have  studied  decision  models  of lexicographic prob-
abilities  or  lexicographic  utilities,  but  in  these  models,  the 
lexicographic  characteristic  is  used  only  on  one  of the  two 
dimensions  (either  the  likelihood  level,  or  the  utility  level). 
We operate on both dimensions  simultaneously  using a join 
transformation. 

4  QPU refinements are qualitative 
Although  probabilistic  and  based  on  additive  manipulations 
of utilities, our EU criteria remain ordinal, as paradoxical as 
it may seem at first sight. To establish this claim, this Section 
relates the previous  EU criteria to the ordinal comparison of 

vectors.  When S is  finite,  the comparison of acts can indeed 
be seen as a comparison of vectors of pairs of elements of L: 

Definition 8 (Maxmin  relation) 

ordinal  comparison  of degrees  and  we  will  show  the  equiv­
alence  between this purely  syntactical  decision rule  and the 
above EU models. 

4.1  Case of total  ignorance 

and min operators is well known, as it is known that it suffers 
from  a  lack  of decisive  power.  That  is  why  refinements  of 

Definition 9 (Leximax, Leximin) 

and are very efficient:  the only pairs  of ties are vectors that 
are identical up to a permutation of their elements. 
4.2  General  Case 
Since the leximax and leximin comparisons are good candi­
dates in a particular case, we have imagined an extension of 

306 

DECISION THEORY 

The leximax procedure can  in particular be applied to the 

5  Conclusion 
The topic of Qualitative  Decision Theory  has  received much 
attention in the past few years and several approaches, includ­
ing QPU, have been proposed. This latter model forms a con­
venient  framework  for  a  qualitative  expression  of problems 
of decision under uncertainty.  However, it suffers from a lack 
of decisiveness.  We  have  proposed  EU-based  refinements 
of QPU  which  proved  to  be  perfectly  compatible  with  the 
original qualitative expression of knowledge and preferences: 
the  only  difference  is  that  lexicographic  (leximax(leximni) 
or 
(leximax))  comparisons  are  used  instead  of 
rnaxmin  or  minmax.  The  axiomatization  of these  decision 
procedures  is  out of the scope  of this  paper.  It actually con­
sists  in  the  5  basic  Savagean  axioms,  together  with  "mild" 
versions  of the  pessimism  or optimism  axioms  of possibilis-
tic utilities (see [Fargier and Sabbadin, 2003]). 

lexiinin 

U(/(-s))}-  Again, we conjecture that replacing min  and max 
with their lexicographical  versions allows an efficient refine­
ment and lead to Choquet-EU criteria [Gilboa,  1987]. 

dures are purely ordinal: the degrees in L are only compared 
using  min,  max  and  reverse  operators —  only  their relative 
orders  matter.  Our  final  result  is  that  these  refinements  are 
equivalent to the EU-refinemcnts identified in Section 2. 

Appendix 
Most  of  the  proofs  are  omitted 
and 
2003]  or  at 
bia.inra.fr/T/sabbadinAVEB/FargierSabbadin03Rap.html. 
We provide here the skecthes of the most interesting ones. 

for  sake  of  brevity 
and  Sabbadin, 
http://www-
: 

found 

in 

[Fargier 
following  address 

can 

be 

the 

DECISION THEORY 

307 

[Dubois and Prade,  1995]  D.  Dubois  and  H.  Prade.  Possi­
bility theory as a basis for qualitative decision theory.  In 
Proc.  ofIJCAI'95,  pages  1925-1930,  1995. 

[Dubois et al,  1998a]  D.  Dubois,  H.  Fargier,  and  H.  Prade. 
In  Proc.  of IPMU'98, 

Possibilistic  likelihood  relations. 
pages 1196-1203. EDK,  1998. 

[Dubois et  al,  1998b]  D.  Dubois,  L.  Godo,  H.  Prade,  and 
A. Zapico.  Making decision in a qualitative setting:  From 
decision  under  uncertainty  to  case-based  reasoning. 
In 
Proc. of KR '98, pages 594-605, 1998. 

[Dubois et al,  1998c]  D. Dubois, H. Prade, and R. Sabbadin. 
Qualitative decision theory with sugcno integrals.  In Proc. 
of  UAI'98,  pages  121-128,  1998. 

[Dubois et  al,  2000]  D.  Dubois,  L.  Godo,  H.  Prade,  and 
A.  Zapico.  Advances  in qualitative  decision theory:  Re­
fined rankings. 
In  Proc.  IBERAM1A  '00,  pages 427-436, 
2000. 

[Fargier and Sabbadin, 2003]  H.  Fargier  and  R.  Sabbadin. 
Bridging the gap between qualitative decision theory and 
expected  utility.  Technical  Report  IR1T/03-08-R,  1R1T, 
April 2003. 

[Giang and Shenoy, 1999]  P. H. Giang and P. P. Shenoy.  On 
transformations  between  probability  and  spohnian  disbe­
lief functions.  In Proc.  ofUAI'99,  pages 236-244,  1999. 

[Giang and Shenoy, 2000]  P. H. Giang and P. P.  Shenoy.  A 
qualitative  utility  theory  for  spohn's  theory  of epistemic 
beliefs.  In Proc.  ofUAI'2000,  pages 220-227,  2000. 

[Gilboa,  1987]  I.  Gilboa.  Expected  utility with  purely sub­
jective  non-additive  probabilities.  Journal  of Mathemati-
cal Economics,  16:65-88,  1987. 

[Hammond, 1998]  P. J. Hammond.  Consequentialism,  non 
archimedean  probabilities  and 
lexicographic  expected 
utility,  In:  The  logic  of  strategy.  C.  Bicchieri,  R.  Jeffrey 
and B. Skyrms, 1998. 

[La Valle and Fishburn, 1992]  I. H. La Valle and P. C. Fish-
burn.  State-independent subjective expected lexicographic 
utility. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5:217-240, 1992. 
[Lehmann,  1998]  D.  Lehmann.  Nonstandard  numbers  for 
qualitative  decision  making.  In  Proc.  of TARK'98,  pages 
161-174, 1998. 

[Moulin,  1988]  H.  Moulin.  Axioms  of  Cooperative  Decision 

Making.  Wiley, New-York,  1988. 

[Pearl,  1993]  J. Pearl. From conditional oughts to qualitative 

decision theory.  In Proc. of UAJ'93, pages  12-20,  1993. 

[Savage,  1954]  L.J.  Savage.  The Foundations  of Statistics. 

Wiley, New York,  1954. 

[Snow, 1999]  P. Snow.  Diverse confidence levels in a proba­
bilistic  semantics  for  conditional  logics.  Artificial  Intelli(cid:173)
gence, 113(l-2):269-279, 1999. 

[Spohn,  1990]  W. Spohn.  A general non-probabilistic theory 
In  Proc.  ofUAI'9(),  pages  315-

of inductive  reasoning. 
322. Elsevier Science, 1990. 

[Wilson,  1995]  N. Wilson.  An order of magnitude calculus. 

In Proc.  of UAI'95, pages  548-555,  1995. 

From this, it can be shown that (i) the sub products, in the expres­
sion of the expected utility, are ranked in the same way by any x and 
that (ii) the act with the biggest j-product is surely strictly preferred 
to the other act (whatever the values of the remaining terms). 

References 
[Benferhat  etal,  1999]  S.  Benferhat,  D.  Dubois,  and 
H.  Prade.  Possibilistic  and  standard  probabilistic  se­
mantics  of  conditional  knowledge.  Journal  of  Logic  and 
Computation, 9:873-895,  1999. 

[Blume et al., 1991]  L.  Blume,  A.  Brandenburger,  and 
E.  Dekel.  Lexicographic  probabilities  and  choice  under 
uncertainty. Econometrica, 59(1 ):61-79, 1991. 

[Bonet and Geffner,  1996]  B. Bonet and H. Geffner. Arguing 
for decisions:  A qualitative model  of decision making.  In 
Proc. of UAI' 96, pages 98-105, 1996. 

[Brafman and Tennenholtz,  1997]  R.  Brafman  and  M.  Ten-
nenholtz.  Modeling agents as qualitative decision makers. 
Artificial  Intelligence,  94:217-268,  1997. 

[Doyle and Thomason,  1999]  J. Doyle and R. H. Thomason. 
Background  to  qualitative  decision  theory.  AI Magazine, 
20(2):55-68, 1999. 

308 

DECISION THEORY 

