Iterated Belief Change: A Transition System Approach

Aaron Hunter and James P. Delgrande

School of Computing Science
Faculty of Applied Sciences

Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC, Canada
{amhunter, jim}@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract

We use a transition system approach to reason
about the evolution of an agent’s beliefs as ac-
tions are executed. Some actions cause an agent
to perform belief revision and some actions cause
an agent to perform belief update, but the inter-
action between revision and update can be non-
elementary. We present a set of basic postulates
describing the interaction of revision and update,
and we introduce a new belief evolution operator
that gives a plausible interpretation to alternating
sequences of revisions and updates.

Introduction

1
Formalisms for reasoning about action effects typically focus
on the representation of actions that change the state of the
world. However, several formalisms have been introduced
for reasoning about actions that change the beliefs of an agent
without altering the state of the world [Shapiro et al., 2000;
van Ditmarsch, 2002; Herzig et al., 2004]. In order to rea-
son about multiple actions in this context, it is necessary to
consider sequences of alternating belief revisions and belief
updates. However, to date there has been little explicit dis-
cussion about the formal properties of such sequences.

This paper makes two contributions to the existing work
on epistemic action effects. The ﬁrst contribution is the de-
velopment of a transition system framework suitable for rea-
soning about belief change. The new framework provides a
simple tool for reasoning about revision and update in a single
formalism, and it facilitates the treatment of conditional up-
dates. The second contribution is the presentation of a princi-
pled approach to the interaction between revision and update.
There are plausible examples in which agents appear to revise
a prior belief state in response to a new observation; such ex-
amples are difﬁcult to represent in existing formalisms.

2 Background and Motivation
2.1 Belief Change
We distinguish two kinds of belief change. Belief revision
occurs when an agent receives new information about a static
world. The original approach to belief revision is the AGM
approach [Alchourron et al., 1985]. Due to limitations on

space, we do not review the approach here; instead, we simply
assume that the reader is familiar with the AGM postulates.
Belief update, on the other hand, is the process in which the
beliefs of an agent are modiﬁed in response to a world that
has changed. One standard approach to belief update is the
Katsuno and Mendelzon approach, which follows the AGM
tradition by introducing a set of rationality postulates for be-
lief update [Katsuno and Mendelzon, 1992].
2.2 Reasoning about Action
We introduce some standard terminology for describing tran-
sition systems [Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1998]. An action sig-
nature is a pair hF, Ai of non-empty sets, respectively called
the set of ﬂuent symbols and the set of action symbols. Infor-
mally, ﬂuent symbols are propositional variables representing
properties of the world that may change over time and action
symbols are atomic symbols representing deterministic ac-
tions that may be performed. A state is an interpretation over
F, and a transition system is a directed graph where each node
is labeled by a state and each edge is labeled by a set of ac-
tion symbols. The edges in a transition system indicate how
the ﬂuents change values in response to the execution of in-
dividual actions. We use the capital letter A, possibly with
subscripts, to range over actions. The notation ¯A will be used
to denote a ﬁnite sequence of actions of indeterminate length.
A belief state is a set of states. We can think of a belief
state as expressing a proposition. Informally, a belief state is
the set of states that an agent considers possible. In this paper,
we use lower case Greek letters to denote belief states. We are
interested in belief change resulting from two distinct kinds of
actions: ontic actions and epistemic actions. Ontic actions are
actions that change the state of the world, whereas epistemic
actions change the beliefs of an agent without altering the
state of the world. Informally, after executing an ontic action,
an agent should update the current belief state on a point-wise
basis. On the other hand, if an agent executes an epistemic
action, then the current belief state should be revised.
2.3 The Basic Problem
As noted above, belief update occurs when an ontic action
is performed. Hence, we deﬁne belief update operators that
take two arguments: a belief state and an ontic action. Epis-
temic actions are identiﬁed with observations, which are sim-
ply sets of interpretations. As a result, revision operators also

take two arguments, each of which is a set of interpretations.
Informally, the observation α provides evidence that the ac-
tual world is in α. Let (cid:5) be an update operator and let ∗ be
a revision operator. We are interested in giving a reasonable
interpretation to sequences of the form

κ (cid:5) A1 ∗ α1 (cid:5) ··· (cid:5) An ∗ αn.

Illustrative Example

There are intuitively plausible examples in which applying
the operators iteratively results in an unsatisfactory result. In
the next section, we introduce one such example.
2.4
We extend the litmus paper problem originally presented in
[Moore, 1985]. In the original problem, there is a beaker con-
taining either an acid or a base, and there is an agent holding a
piece of litmus paper that can be dipped into the beaker to de-
termine the contents. The litmus paper turns red if it is placed
in an acid and it turns blue if it is placed in a base. We extend
the problem by admitting the possibility that the paper is not
litmus paper, instead it is just plain white paper.

Boutilier points out that the standard approach to belief
change provides an unintuitive representation of this prob-
lem [Boutilier, 1995]. One issue is that the standard approach
does not allow conditional action effects; an agent simply up-
dates the initial belief state by the new color of the litmus
paper. Intuitively, this seems incorrect because there are ac-
tually two independent belief changes that occur. First, the
agent dips the paper in the beaker and projects each possi-
ble world to the outcome of the dipping action. Second, the
agent looks at the paper and observes the new color. Hence,
the problem involves an update followed by a revision.

Even if the belief change is broken into two steps, the stan-
dard approach is limited in that an agent can only revise the
current belief state. Suppose that an agent initially believes
that the paper is litmus paper, but then it remains white after
dipping it in the beaker. In this case, the agent should con-
clude that the paper was never litmus paper to begin with.
This indicates that it is sometimes necessary for agents to re-
vise prior belief states in the face of new knowledge.

We will return to this example periodically as we introduce
formal machinery that provides a more natural representation.

3 A Transition System Approach
3.1 Metric Transition Systems
Standard transition systems do not provide a useful basis for
performing belief revision, because belief revision generally
requires some notion of plausibility among states or formulas.
In order to deﬁne a revision operator, we introduce a distance
function between states. A metric over 2F is a function d that
maps each pair of states to a non-negative real number, and
satisﬁes the following conditions:
1. d(w1, w2) = 0 iff w1 = w2
2. d(w1, w2) = d(w2, w1)
3. d(w1, w2) + d(w2, w3) ≥ d(w1, w3).
We will generally be concerned with metrics that return only
integral distances, so from here on we will use the term metric
to refer to integer-valued metrics.

Deﬁnition 1 A metric transition system is a triple hS, R, di
where
1. S ⊆ 2F
2. R ⊆ S × A × S
3. d is a metric on S

Informally, if w1 is close to w2, then an agent considers w1
to be a plausible alternative to w2.
3.2 Belief Update
In this section, we deﬁne belief update with respect to a tran-
sition system. Recall that we update a belief state by an action
with effects given by a transition system. This contrasts with
the standard approach, in which a belief state is updated by a
formula. The advantage of our approach is that it facilitates
the representation of actions with conditional effects.
Intuitively, after executing an action A, an agent updates
the belief state by projecting every state s to the state s0 that
would result if they executed A in s.
Deﬁnition 2 Let T = hS, R, di be a metric transition system.
The update function (cid:5) : 2S × A → 2S is deﬁned as follows

α (cid:5) A = {f | (e, A, f) ∈ R for some e ∈ α}.

Note that the distance function d does not play any role in
belief update.

We brieﬂy illustrate that transition systems can be used to
deﬁne a standard update operator in which a belief state is
updated by a formula rather than an action. Given F, let A
be the set of action symbols of the form Aφ, where φ is a
conjunction of literals over F. Deﬁne TF to be the transi-
tion system with S = 2F and RsAφs0 just in case s0 |= φ
and s0 agrees with s on every atom that does not occur in φ.
Informally, the action Aφ corresponds to an update by φ.
Proposition 1 The update operator obtained from TF satis-
ﬁes the Katsuno and Mendelzon postulates.
3.3 Belief Revision
With each metric transition system T , we associate a revi-
sion function. The revision function associated with T is
the distance-based revision function deﬁned in [Delgrande,
2004]. We choose this approach because it requires the in-
troduction of relatively little formal machinery and, provided
that d satisﬁes some natural conditions, this revision operator
satisﬁes the AGM postulates.
Deﬁnition 3 Let T = hS, R, di be a metric transition system.
The revision function ∗ : 2S × 2S → 2S is deﬁned as follows

κ ∗ α = {w ∈ α | ∃v1 ∈ κ,∀v2 ∈ α,∀v3 ∈ κ,

d(w, v1) ≤ d(v2, v3)}.

Hence, if an agent is in belief state κ, then κ ∗ α is the set of
all worlds that are minimally distant from some world in κ.
3.4 Litmus Paper Revisited
We revisit the litmus paper problem in the context of metric
transition systems. The problem can be represented with the
following action signature:

h{Red, Blue, Acid, Litmus},{d ip}i.

{Litmus}

{Litmus, Acid}

dip

dip

?

{Litmus, Blue}

?

{Litmus, Red , Acid}

∅

dip

?
∅

{Acid}

dip

?
{Acid}

Figure 1: Extended Litmus Paper Problem

Intuitively, Red is true if the paper is red, B lue is true if the
paper is blue, Acid is true if the beaker contains an acid, and
Litmus is true if the paper is litmus paper. The effects of
dipping are given by the transition system in Figure 1. We
can extend this to a metric transition system by deﬁning d to
be the Hamming distance between states. Note also that we
assume all actions are executable in all states, but self-loops
are omitted from Figure 1 for ease of readability.

Recall that we are interested in an agent that initially be-
lieves they are holding a piece of white litmus paper. Hence,
the initial belief state E is

E = {{Litmus},{Litmus, Acid}}.
After dipping the paper, we update the belief state:

E (cid:5) d ip = {{Litmus, Blue},{Litmus, Red, Acid}}.

At this point, the agent observes that the paper is neither blue
nor red. This observation is represented by the following set:

O = {∅,{Litmus},{Acid},{Litmus, Acid}}.

The naive suggestion is to simply revise E (cid:5) d ip by O, giving

E0 = {{Litmus},{Litmus, Acid}}.

However, this is not a plausible ﬁnal belief state. Given the
transition system in Figure 1, it is clear that white litmus pa-
per can not remain white after a dipping action. Hence, suc-
cessively applying the update and revision operators obtained
from the transition system does not yield a plausible result.
4 Rationality Postulates
In this section, we give a set of rationality postulates spec-
ifying some natural properties that we expect to hold when
an update is followed by a revision. The postulates are not
overly restrictive and they do not provide a basis for a cate-
gorical semantics; they simply provide a point for discussion
and comparison. Our underlying intuition is that the most re-
cent observation should always be incorporated, provided that
it is consistent with the history of actions that have been ex-
ecuted. Hence, the postulates are only appropriate for action
domains in which there are no failed actions.
Assume a ﬁxed propositional signature F . Let κ and α
be sets of worlds, and let ¯A be a sequence of actions. We
adopt the shorthand notation κ (cid:5) ¯A as an abbreviation for the
sequential update of κ by each element of ¯A. The following
postulates describe some basic properties of the interaction
between an update operator (cid:5) and a revision operator ∗.

1. If (2F (cid:5) ¯A) ∩ α 6= ∅, then (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∗ α ⊆ α
2. If (2F (cid:5) ¯A) ∩ α = ∅, then (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∗ α = κ (cid:5) ¯A
3. (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∩ α ⊆ (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∗ α
4. If (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∩ α 6= ∅, then (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∗ α ⊆ (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∩ α
5. (κ (cid:5) ¯A) ∗ α ⊆ 2F (cid:5) ¯A
We give some intuitive motivation for each postulate.

Postulate 1 is a straightforward AGM-type assertion that
α must hold after revising by α, provided α is possible af-
ter executing ¯A. Postulate 2 handles the situation where it
is impossible to be in an α-world after executing ¯A. In this
case, we simply discard the observation α. These postulates
together formalize the underlying assumption that there are
no failed actions.

Taken together, Postulates 3 and 4 assert that revising by
α is equivalent to taking the intersection with α, provided
the intersection is non-empty. These postulates are similar
to the AGM postulates asserting that revisions correspond to
expansions, provided the observation is consistent with the
knowledge base.

Postulate 5 provides the justiﬁcation for revising prior be-
lief states in the face of new knowledge. The postulate asserts
that, after revising by α, we must still have a belief state that
is a possible consequence of executing ¯A. In some cases, the
only way to assure that α holds after executing ¯A is to modify
the initial belief state. We remark that the postulates do not
indicate how the initial belief state should be modiﬁed.

5 Belief Evolution
5.1 Representing Histories
Transition systems are only suitable for representing Marko-
vian action effects; that is, effects that are determined entirely
by the current state and the action executed. However, exam-
ples like the litmus paper problem indicate that sometimes
agents need to look at prior belief states as well. Hence, even
if ontic action effects are Markovian, it does not follow that
changes in belief are Markovian. As such, we need to intro-
duce some formal machinery for representing histories.
Deﬁnition 4 A belief trajectory of length n is an n-tuple
hκ0, . . . , κn−1i of belief states.
Intuitively, a belief trajectory is an agent’s subjective view
of how the world has changed. We remark that a belief tra-
jectory represents the agent’s current beliefs about the world

history, not a historical account of what an agent believed at
each point in time.

We will also be interested in observation trajectories and
action trajectories, each of which is simply another n-tuple.
Deﬁnition 5 An observation trajectory of length n is an n-
tuple OBS = hOBS1, . . . , OBSni where each OBSi ∈ 2S.
Deﬁnition 6 An action trajectory of length n is an n-tuple
ACT = hACT1, . . . , ACTni where each ACTi ∈ A.
Each set OBSi is interpreted to be evidence that the actual
world is in OBSi at time i. An action trajectory is a history
of the actions an agent has executed. Note that, as a matter of
convention, we start the indices at 0 for belief trajectories and
we start the indices at 1 for observation and action trajecto-
ries. The rationale for this convention will be clear later. We
also adopt the convention hinted at in the deﬁnitions, whereby
the nth component of an action trajectory OBS will be de-
noted by OBSn, and the nth component of an action trajec-
tory ACT will be denoted by ACTn

We deﬁne a notion of consistency between action trajecto-
ries and observation trajectories. The intuition is that an ac-
tion trajectory ACT is consistent with an observation trajec-
tory OBS if and only if each observation OBSi is possible,
given that the actions (ACTj)j≤i have been executed.
Deﬁnition 7 Let ACT = hACT1, . . . , ACTni be an action
trajectory and let OBS = hOBS1, . . . , OBSni be an obser-
vation trajectory. We say that ACT is consistent with OBS if
and only if there is a belief trajectory hκ0, . . . , κni such that,
for all i ≥ 1,
1. κi ⊆ OBSi
2. κi = κi−1 (cid:5) ACTi.
If ACT is consistent with OBS, we write ACT||OBS.

A pair consisting of an action trajectory and an observation
trajectory gives a complete history of all actions that have
occurred. As such, it is useful to introduce some terminology.
Deﬁnition 8 A world view of length n is a pair W =
hACT, OBSi, where OBS is an observation trajectory and
ACT is an action trajectory, each of length n.
If ACT||OBS, we say that hACT, OBSi is consistent.
5.2 A New Belief Change Operator
We introduce a new operator ◦ that takes two arguments: a be-
lief state and a world view. Roughly speaking, we would like
κ ◦ hACT, OBSi to be the belief trajectory that results from
the initial belief state κ and the alternating action-observation
sequence ACT1, OBS1, . . . , ACTn, OBSn. We call ◦ a be-
lief evolution operator because it takes a sequence of actions,
and returns the most plausible evolution of the world.
The formal deﬁnition of ◦ is presented in the following sec-
tions. The deﬁnition relies on a ﬁxed revision operator ∗ and
a ﬁxed update operator (cid:5). As such, it might be more accu-
rate to adopt notation of the form ◦∗,(cid:5), but we opt for the less
cumbersome ◦ and assume that the underlying operators are
clear from the context. We remark, in particular, that every
ﬁnite metric transition system generates a unique belief evo-
lution operator. However, it is worth noting that the deﬁnition
of ◦ does not rely on any speciﬁc approach to revision.

The action domains of interest for belief evolution will be
those in which it is reasonable to assume that action trajecto-
ries are correct and actions are successful. This is intuitively
plausible in a single agent environment, because it simply
amounts to assuming that an agent has complete knowledge
about the actions that they have executed. Hence, in the def-
inition of ◦, the belief trajectory returned will always be con-
sistent with the actions that have been executed.
5.3
In this section, we assume that observations are always cor-
rect. Formally, this amounts to a restriction on the class of
admissible world views. In particular, we need not consider
inconsistent world views.

Infallible Observations

We need to introduce a bit of notation.

let ¯A =
Deﬁnition 9 Let T be a transition system;
A0, . . . , An; and let α be a set of states. Then α−1( ¯A) de-
notes the set of all w such that there is a path from w to an
element of α following the edges A0, . . . , An.
Hence, α−1( ¯A) is the set of states that can precede a world in
α, given that the sequence ¯A has been executed.

For illustrative purposes, it is useful to consider world
views of length 1. Suppose we have an initial belief state
κ, an ontic action A and an epistemic action α. Without for-
mally deﬁning the belief evolution operator ◦, we can give an
intuitive interpretation of an expression of the form

κ ◦ hhAi,hαii = hκ0, κ1i.

The agent knows that the actual world is in α at the ﬁnal point
in time, so we must have κ1 ⊆ α. Moreover, the agent should
believe that κ1 is a possible result of executing A from κ0. In
other words, we must have κ0 ⊆ α−1(A). All other things
being equal, the agent would like to keep as much of κ as
possible; therefore, the natural solution is the following:
1. κ0 = κ ∗ α−1(A),
2. κ1 = κ0 (cid:5) A.
This procedure can be applied to world views of length
greater than 1. The idea is to trace every observation back
to a precondition on the initial belief state. After revising the
initial belief state by all preconditions, each subsequent belief
state can be determined by a standard update operation.

We have the following formal deﬁnition for ◦.

In the
let ACT i denote the subsequence of actions

deﬁnition,
ACT1, . . . , ACTi.
Deﬁnition 10 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT be an action
trajectory of length n and let OBS be an observation trajec-
tory of length n such that ACT||OBS. Deﬁne
κ ◦ hACT, OBSi = hκ0, . . . , κni

where

1. κ0 = κ ∗T

i OBS−1

i

(ACT i)

2. for i ≥ 1, κi = κi−1 (cid:5) ACT1 (cid:5) ··· (cid:5) ACTi.
We remark that the intersection of observation preconditions
in the deﬁnition of κ0 is non-empty, because ACT||OBS.
demonstrate that ◦ subsumes both revision and update.
each proposition, we assume that ACT||OBS.

The following propositions are immediate, and they
In

Proposition 2 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT = hAi and
let OBS = h2Fi. Then

κ ◦ hACT, OBSi = hκ, κ (cid:5) Ai.

In the following, we assume that λ is a null action that never
changes the state of the world.
Proposition 3 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT = hλi and let
OBS = hαi. Then

κ ◦ hACT, OBSi = hκ ∗ α, κ ∗ αi.

Hence, both revision and update can be represented through
the ◦ operator. As such, it is reasonable to adopt the following
notation for trajectories of length 1:

κ (cid:5) ACT ∗ OBS = κ ◦ hhACTi,hOBSii.

Proposition 4 If ACT||OBS, the operators ∗ and (cid:5) (deﬁned
above) satisfy the interaction postulates (1)-(5).
The three preceding propositions demonstrate the suitability
of ◦ as a natural operator for reasoning about the interaction
between revision and update.
5.4 Fallible Observations
We address fallible observations by allowing inconsistent
world views.
If a world view is inconsistent, then there is
no initial belief state that supports all of the observations,
so some observations need to be ignored. To deal with in-
consistency, we adopt the convention previously explored in
[Nayak, 1994] and [Papini, 2001], in which more credence is
given to the most recent observations. We demonstrate that
◦ can be extended naturally to represent belief change under
this convention. In order to state the extended deﬁnition, we
need to be able to extract a maximally consistent sub-view
from an inconsistent world view.
Deﬁnition 11 Let W = hACT, OBSi be a world view of
length n. Deﬁne τ(W ) = hACT, OBS0i, where OBS0 =
ni is deﬁned by the following recursion.
hOBS0

n (ACT ) 6= ∅ then OBS0

n = OBSn,

1, . . . , OBS0
otherwise OBS0

• If OBS−1
• For i < n, if
OBS−1

i

n = 2F.

(ACTi) ∩\

(OBS0

j)−1(ACTj) 6= ∅

j>i

then OBS0
otherwise OBS0

i = OBSi,

i = 2F.

The observations in τ(W ) are determined by starting with the
most recent observation, then working backwards through the
observations from most recent until the initial observation.
At each point, we keep an observation if it is consistent with
the observations that followed it; otherwise, we discard the
observation as incorrect.

The following properties are immediate.
• If W is a world view, then τ(W ) is consistent.
• If W is a consistent world view, then τ(W ) = W .

Recall that the original deﬁnition of ◦ applied only to consis-
tent world views. By passing through τ, we can extend the
deﬁnition to apply to arbitrary world views.

Deﬁnition 12 Let κ be a belief state, and let W be a world
view of length n. If W is inconsistent, then κ◦W = κ◦τ(W ).
We could equivalently have stated a single deﬁnition for ◦ by
passing all world views through τ. We have presented the
deﬁnition in two cases in order to highlight the distinct treat-
ment of fallible observations. The extended deﬁnition is still
satisfactory from the perspective of the rationality postulates.
Proposition 5 The operators ∗ and (cid:5) (obtained from ◦) sat-
isfy the interaction postulates (1)-(5).
Thus far, applying the ◦ operator requires tracing action pre-
conditions back to the initial state for revision, then applying
action effects to get a complete history. If we are only con-
cerned with the ﬁnal belief state, then there are many cases in
which we do not need to go to so much effort.
Proposition 6 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT be an action
trajectory of length n and let α be a belief state such that
α ⊆ κ (cid:5) ACT . If OBS is the observation trajectory with
n − 1 null observations followed by α, then the ﬁnal belief
state in κ ◦ hACT, OBSi is (κ (cid:5) ACT ) ∗ α.
The proposition indicates that, given a single observation that
is consistent with the actions that have been executed, we can
simply revise the outcome of the actions and we get the cor-
rect ﬁnal belief state.
5.5 Litmus Paper Concluded
We conclude the litmus paper example by giving a plausible
treatment based on a belief evolution operator. The world
view W V = hhd ipi,hOii represents a dipping action fol-
lowed by the observation that the paper is still white. If ◦ is
deﬁned from the metric transition system in Figure 1, the ﬁnal
belief state in E ◦ W V is given by

E ∗ O−1(d ip) (cid:5) d ip = E ∗ {∅,{Acid}} (cid:5) d ip

= {∅,{Acid}}.

This calculation is consistent with our original intuitions, in
that the agent revises the initial belief state before updating by
the d ip action. This ensures that we will have a ﬁnal belief
state that is a possible outcome of dipping. Moreover, the ini-
tial belief state is revised by the pre-image of the ﬁnal obser-
vation, which means it is modiﬁed as little as possible while
still guaranteeing that the ﬁnal observation will be feasible.
Note also that the ﬁnal belief state given by this calculation is
intuitively plausible. It simply indicates that the contents of
the beaker are still unknown, but the agent now believes the
paper is not litmus paper. Hence, a belief evolution operator
employs a plausible procedure and returns a desirable result.

6 Relationship with Iterated Revision
If the null action is the only action permitted, then belief evo-
lution is closely related to iterated revision. We brieﬂy con-
sider the suitability of belief evolution operators for reasoning
about iterated revision. In the following proposition, let ¯λ de-
note a sequence of null actions of indeterminate length.
Proposition 7 For any κ and OBS, there is a unique belief
state κ0 such that κ ◦ h¯λ, OBSi = hκ0, . . . , κ0i.

This result is consistent with the view that belief evolution
operators return a trajectory representing an agent’s current
beliefs about the evolution of the world. We remark that, in
general, κ0 is not obtained by successively revising by the el-
ements of OBS. Moreover, we claim that this is appropriate
for action domains in which recency determines the plausi-
bility of an observation.

Darwiche and Pearl present a set of four postulates for it-
erated revision [Darwiche and Pearl, 1997].
It is easy to
verify that many belief revision operators do not satisfy the
Darwiche-Pearl postulates if applied in succession. However,
if we deﬁne the iterated revision κ ∗ OBS1 ∗ . . . ∗ OBSn to
be the unique belief state in κ ◦ h¯λ, OBSi, then we get the
following result.
Proposition 8 Iterated revision, as deﬁned by any belief evo-
lution operator ◦, satisﬁes all four Darwiche-Pearl postu-
lates.
Hence, given any belief revision operator, we can formulate
an adequate approach to iterated revision by passing to the
corresponding evolution operator.

7 Discussion
We make some brief remarks about related formalisms for
reasoning about epistemic action effects. Our formalism is
similar to the multi-agent belief structures of [Herzig et al.,
2004] in that both approaches combine revision with update
based on actions with conditional effects. However, multi-
agent belief structures do not consider any non-elementary
interaction between revision and update. On the other hand,
the Situation Calculus approach of [Shapiro et al., 2000] im-
plicitly handles the interaction of revision and update cor-
rectly. The “revision actions” employed in that formalism are
provably equivalent to belief evolution operators. Correctly
identifying these actions as evolution operators improves the
intuitive plausibility of iterated belief change in the Situation
Calculus approach.

The framework presented in this paper requires an agent to
believe the most recent observation. A more general approach
would attach a plausibility value to every observation, and
then an agent would keep the most plausible observations.
We are currently working on such a generalization. Similarly,
we are looking at attaching plausibilities to action histories
in order to represent domains in which an agent is uncertain
about the actions that have been executed.

8 Conclusion
We have presented a transition system framework for rea-
soning about the epistemic effects of actions. We identiﬁed
ontic action effects with belief update and epistemic action
effects with belief revision, and we focused on the interac-
tion between iterated update and revision operators. We il-
lustrated by example that the interaction between update and
revision can be non-elementary, so we proposed a set of ratio-
nality postulates restricting the interaction and demonstrated
that the postulates all hold in our transition system frame-
work. By contrast, existing formalisms for reasoning about
epistemic action effects either ignore the interaction between

revision and update or they deal with it implicitly. Hence,
our formalism contributes to the existing work on epistemic
action effects in two ways. First, it is able to provide simple
object level representations of action domains in which prior
belief states need to be revised. Second, it provides an explicit
treatment of the the interaction between revision and update,
which has not always been salient in related formalisms.

References
[Alchourron et al., 1985] C.E. Alchourron, P. Gardenfors,
and D. Makinson. On the logic of theory change: Par-
tial meet functions for contraction and revision. Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 50(2):510–530, 1985.

[Boutilier, 1995] C. Boutilier. Generalized update: Belief
change in dynamic settings. In Proceedings of IJCAI 1995,
pages 1550–1556, 1995.

[Darwiche and Pearl, 1997] A. Darwiche and J. Pearl. On
the logic of iterated belief revision. Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
89(1-2):1–29, 1997.

[Delgrande, 2004] J.P. Delgrande. Preliminary considera-
tions on the modelling of belief change operators by met-
ric spaces. In Proceedings of NMR 2004, pages 118–125,
June 2004.

[Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1998] M. Gelfond and V. Lifschitz.
Action languages. Link¨oping Electronic Articles in Com-
puter and Information Science, 3(16):1–16, 1998.

[Herzig et al., 2004] A. Herzig, J. Lang, and P. Marquis. Re-
vision and update in multi-agent belief structures. In Pro-
ceedings of LOFT 6, 2004.

[Katsuno and Mendelzon, 1992] H. Katsuno

and A.O.
Mendelzon. On the difference between updating a knowl-
edge base and revising it.
In Peter Gardenfors, editor,
Belief Revision, pages 183–203. Cambridge University
Press, 1992.

[Moore, 1985] R.C. Moore. A formal theory of knowledge
and action. In J.R. Hobbs and R.C. Moore, editors, For-
mal Theories of the Commonsense World, pages 319–358.
Ablex Publishing, 1985.

[Nayak, 1994] A.C. Nayak. Iterated belief change based on

epistemic entrenchment. Erkenntnis, 41:353–390, 1994.

[Papini, 2001] O. Papini. Iterated revision operations stem-
ming from the history of an agent’s observations.
In
H. Rott and M. Williams, editors, Frontiers in Belief Revi-
sion, pages 279–301. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
[Shapiro et al., 2000] S. Shapiro, M. Pagnucco, Y. Lesper-
ance, and H.J. Levesque. Iterated belief change in the situ-
ation calculus. In Proceedings of KR 2000, pages 527–538.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2000.

[van Ditmarsch, 2002] H.P. van Ditmarsch. Descriptions of
game actions. Journal of Logic, Language and Informa-
tion (JoLLI), 11:349–365, 2002.

