On the Undecidability of Description and Dynamic Logics with Recursion and 

Counting 

Piero A. Bonatti 

Univcrsita di Napoli "Federico I I" 

bonatti@na.infn.it 

Abstract 

The  evolution  of  Description  Logics  (DLs)  and 
Propositional  Dynamic  Logics  produced  a  hierar­
chy  of decidable  logics  with  multiple  maximal  el­
ements.  It would be desirable to combine different 
maximal  logics  into  one  super-logic,  but  then  in­
ference  may  turn  out  to  be  undecidable.  Then  it 
is important to characterize the decidability thresh­
old for these logics. In this perspective, an interest­
ing open question pointed out by Sattler and Vardi 
[Sattler and Vardi,  1999]  is whether inference in a 
hybrid  μ-calculus  with  restricted  forms  of graded 
modalities is decidable, and which complexity class 
it belongs to.  In this paper we prove that this calcu­
lus and  the corresponding 
are un­
decidable.  Second, we prove undecidability results 
for logics that support both a transitive closure op­
erator over roles and number restrictions. 
Keywords:  Description  logics,  hybrid  μ-calculus, 
regular  roles,  graded  modalities,  number  restric­
tions. 

Introduction 

1 
Description logics are popular knowledge representation lan­
guages, with important applications to the semantic web, soft­
ware engineering and heterogeneous databases.  Description 
logics (DLs) are strictly related to propositional dynamic log­
ics (PDLs),  that play an  important role  in  software and pro­
tocol  verification  based on  automated  reasoning techniques. 
The analogies between  the two frameworks are so tight that 
DLs  and  PDLs  can  be  regarded as  syntactic  variants  of the 
same family of logics. 

The simplest DLs and PDLs can be easily embedded into 
a fragment of L2, that is, first-order logic with two variables. 
Application requirements led researchers to extend these ba­
sic logics with more expressive constructs, such as fixpoints, 
nominals  (that  represent  individuals  in  DLs),  transitive  clo­
sure operators similar to Kleene's star, and equivalents of gen­
eralized  quantification  called  number  restrictions  (or  count­
ing) in DLs and graded modalities in PDLs.  At the same time, 
applications require these logics to be decidable and have ac­
ceptable computational complexity. 

The  evolution  of  DLs  and  PDLs  produced—and  keeps 
on  extending—a  hierarchy  of  decidable  logics  with  multi­
ple  maximal  elements.  Currently,  two  of the  maximal  de­
cidable  DLs  are 
(featuring  fixpoints  and  nomi­
nals [Sattler and Vardi,  1999; Bonatti, 2002]) and 
(featuring  fixpoints  and  number  restrictions).  The  corre­
sponding PDLs are the  hybrid 
with graded modalities, respectively [Sattler and Vardi,  1999; 
Kupferman et al,  2002]. 

and the 

Of course, it would be desirable to combine the features of 
different maximal logics into one super-logic.  A combination 
of  
a n d w o u ld   help—for  example—in 
describing  the  functional  behavior  of  e-Services  (cf.  [Bon­
atti,  2002]  and  related comments  on  SVC(X)  in  Section  5). 
However, in the super-logic inference may turn out to be too 
complex, and in particular undecidable. 

A related, interesting open question pointed out by Sattler 
and  Vardi  [Sattler  and  Vardi,  1999]  is  whether  inference  in 
the  union  of  the  hybrid 
with 
graded  modalities  is  decidable,  and  which  complexity class 
it  belongs  to.  More  precisely,  Sattler  and  Vardi  mention  a 
slightly  simpler  logic:  a  hybrid 
with  determin­
istic  programs.  Deterministic  programs  are  a  special  case 
of graded  modality,  whose  counterpart  in  DLs  arc features, 
i.e.,  functional  roles.  The  DL  corresponding  to  the  hybrid 

and the 

with deterministic programs is called 

The  main  contribution  of this  paper  is  a  negative  answer 

to  the  above  open  question.  We  prove  that  the  hybrid 
calculus  with  deterministic  programs  and  the  correponding 
are undecidable.  For this purpose, we use a 

novel approach based on nested  fixpoints. 

The second contribution is an undecidability result for log­
ics that support number restrictions together with regular role 
expressions.  These  results  show  that  transitive  role  closure 
can be more expressive than  fixpoints  in some contexts. 

In  the next section  we  recall  the  basic  notions  about DLs 

and the hybrid 

and  t h e S e c t i on  3  is  devoted  to  the  undecidabil­
ity  proof for 
with de­
terministic  programs.  Section  4  briefly  illustrates  the  unde­
cidability result for the combination of transitive closure and 
number restrictions.  Finally,  Section  5  concludes the  paper 
with a brief discussion of the results and some directions for 
further  research.  Some  proofs  will  be  omitted  because  of 
space limitations. 

DESCRIPTION LOGICS 

331 

2  Preliminaries 
The  vocabulary  of the  description  logics  we  deal  with  in  this 
paper  is  specified  by  the  following  disjoint  sets  of symbols: 
a set  of atomic  concepts  At,  a  set  of nominals  N o m,  a  set  of 
concept  variables Var,  and  a  set  of atomic  roles  AR. 

The  set  of  roles  is  the  smallest  superset  of AR  such  that  if 

and  R*  are  roles. 

are roles then 
Let R be a role, A"  

Var and  n  N.  The  set  of concepts  is 
the  smallest  superset of At  U  Nom  U  Var such  that  if C,  C",  D 
arc concepts, then 
are con(cid:173)
cepts,  provided  that  all  the  free  occurrences  of  A"  in  C"  lie 
within  the  scope  of an  even  number of operators  ->  and 

and 

,  7)  where 

is  a  set  of  individuals  and 

Semantics  is  based  on  interpretations  of  the  form  X  = 
is  an  inter(cid:173)
At  U  Nom  onto  some 

pretation  function  mapping  each  A  
A7 
Furthermore,  nominals  must  be  mapped  onto  singletons.  A 
valuation  on 

AR  onto  some 

n.  As  usual, 

,  and  each  R 

is  a  f

I 

u

o

I 

n

c

t

i

denotes the  valuation  such that 

and 
The  meaning  of  inverse 

for all 
roles  is 

Y  

while 
transitive  closure  of  R7. 

and 

denotes the  reflexive 

The  meaning  of compound concepts  is  determined by  pairs 

( I, P).  

we  denote  the  cardinality  of a  set  S. 

Subscript  p  will  be  sometimes  omitted  when  it  applies  to  a 
closed  concept (i.e.,  such  that  all  variables  are  bound by  p). 

Other  standard  constructs  can  be  derived  from  the  above 

concepts.  We use the  symbol  

to  define  abbreviations. 

Here 
all  free  occurrences  of X  with  -X". 

is  the  concept  obtained  from  C  by  replacing 

)  and 

An  assertion  has  the  form  

The  syntactic  restrictions  on  concept  variables  make  ev(cid:173)
ery  concept  C  monotonic  with  respect  to  its  free  variables. 
Then 
j  denote  exactly  the  least  and 
the greatest  fixpoints  of  C ( X ),  that can  be characterized with 
the  standard  iterative  constructions. 
_ 

where  C  and  D  are 
closed concepts.  It is satisfied by X (equivalently, X is a model 
of  the  assertion) 
.  A  TBox  is  a  finite  set  of 
assertions.  A  TBox  is  satisfiable  iff it  has  a  model,  that is,  an 
X that satisfies all  the assertions in the TBox.  Symmetric pairs 
will  be  abbreviated 
of assertions  such as  
by  C 
if  every  model  of  T 
satisfies 

D.  A  TBox  T  entails  

and 

iff  

_ 

(plus  all 

the  constructs  definable 

from  these). 

In  ALC, 

are  supported,  an  O  if  Nom 

By  convention,  the  name  of  a  description  logic  contains 
ACC  if the  logic  extends  ACC.  Moreover,  the  name  contains 
an  X  if  inverse  roles  
a  Q  if  number  restrictions  
are  supported,  and  a 
V  if  fixpoints  are  supported.  For  example,  ACCIO  denotes 
the  extension  of  ACC  with  inverse  roles  and  nominals.  A 
subscript  /  indicates  that  roles  may  be  declared  to  be  func(cid:173)
tions.  Note  that  such  assertions  are  a  special  case  of number 
restriction,  as  they  can  be  expressed  with  axioms  of the  form 
If  the  logic  supports  role  operators  besides 
inversion,  we  list  those  operators  as  superscripts.  For exam(cid:173)
ple 
denotes  the  extension  of ACCX  with  role  union 
and  reflexive transitive  closure. 

Description  logics can be regarded as variants of the propo-
Individuals  correspond  to  possible  worlds 
sitional 
and  roles  correspond  to  accessibility  relations.  Atomic  con(cid:173)
In  particular, 
cepts  play  the  role  of  propositional  symbols. 
can  be embedded into  the  hybrid  
with 
deterministic  programs  and  graded  modalities  ( ( n,  P)F  and 
via  the  following  satisfiability-preserving  transla(cid:173)

tion.  For all  propositions p,  and  for all  n  >  0, 

Moreover,  functional  roles  are  mapped  onto  deterministic 
programs  (whose  accessibility  relation 
is  the  graph  of  a 
function),  and  nominals  are  mapped  onto  their  equivalents 
(called  nominals,  too),  that  in  P DL  terms  arc  propositional 
symbols  that  are  true  in  exactly  one  world.  Program  o 
denotes  the  universal  program  whose  accessibility  relation 
consists  of  all  pairs  of  possible  worlds.  The  reader  is  re(cid:173)
ferred  to  [Sattler  and  Vardi,  1999;  Kupferman  et  a/.,  2002; 
De  Giacomo,  1995]  for further details. 

3  Undecidability  of 
This  section  is  devoted  to  the proof of the  following theorem. 

Theorem 3.1 
isfiability  and  entailment  are  all  undecidable. 

In  

,  concept  satisfiability,  TBox  sat(cid:173)

We  find  it  convenient  to  prove  this  theorem  by  first  reduc(cid:173)
ing  domino  problems  to  TBox  satisfiability,  and  then  extend(cid:173)
ing  this  result to  the  other decision  problems. 

Recall  that  domino  problems  consist  in  placing  tiles  on 
an  infinite  grid,  satisfying  a  given  set  of  constraints  on  ad(cid:173)
jacent  tiles.  Formally,  a  domino  problem  is  a  structure  V  — 
(T,  H,  V),  where  T  is  a  set  of tile  types  and  
spec(cid:173)
ify  which  tiles  can  be  adjacent  horizontally  and  vertically, 
respectively.  A  solution  to  V  is  a  tiling,  that  is,  a  function 
r  : 

such  that 

The  description  logic  ACC  is  a  fragment  of  the  logic  de(cid:173)

scribed  so  far,  supporting  only  atomic roles,  

and 

The  existence  of  a  solution  for  a  given  domino  problem  is 
known  to  be  undecidable  (cf.  [Gradel  et al,  1999]). 

332 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

Domino  problems  are  reduced  to  reasoning  problems  by 
characterizing  (i)  the  grid  and  (ii)  correct tilings.  Formally, 
the grid is a structure 

In  description  logics, 

can  be  denoted  by  two 
roles,  h  and  v. 
If  the  two  roles  characterize  the  grid  cor(cid:173)
rectly (see Figure  1(a)), then characterizing the solutions of a 
domino problem is easy, even within simple (and decidable) 
description  logics  such  as  ACC,  by  means  of the  following 
assertion: 

Here  for each  tile  type  t,  a  distinct  concept  name  Cf  is  in(cid:173)
troduced.  Assertion  (1)  basically  states that each  individual 
is  a  tile  (first  term),  that  distinct  tile  types  contain  different 
tiles  (rest  of the  first  line),  and  that  the  tiling  preserves  the 
constraints specified by H and V  (second line). 

The real problem is characterizing the grid, because there 
is no direct way to force h and v to commute.  Here we shall 
provide  a  projective characterization  of G,  that  is,  we  shall 
capture exactly  the class  of interpretations  isomorphic to  the 
expansion 
is a unary 
relation and 

We proceed in three steps. First, h and v must be forced to 
be injective functions.  For this purpose, we declare all  roles 
and  their  converse  to  be  functional,  which  is  equivalent  to 
adopting the following assertion, for all roles R. 

(2) 
Second, all nodes are classified with respect to their incom(cid:173)
ing and outcoming edges. Note that the domain and the range 
of a role B can be defined as follows. 

Now we can define the vertical and the horizontal borders of 
the  grid  (Bv  and  Bh,  respectively),  and  the  internal  nodes 
(C).  O is a nominal that represents the origin of the grid. 

The following assertions state the properties of O  and force 
the above concepts to cover all the domain. 

(3) 
(4) 
Third, we characterize the global  structure of the grid.  The 
next assertions ensure that the vertical border Bv and the hor(cid:173)
izontal border  Bh  have the desired structure (i.e., they should 
be isomorphic to N). 

Note  that  Bv  and  Bh  contain  no  cycles,  because  of (2)  and 
(3),  so  the  two  fixpoints  induce  infinite  linear sequences  of 
nodes. 

Finally,  we  introduce  an  assertion  that  forces h, and  v  to 

commute everywhere. 

(7) 

Informally speaking, the  constructive characterization of the 
fixpoint in  (7)  corresponds to  a  visit  of the  grid  along diag(cid:173)
onals directed north-west (Figure  1(b)).  At each iteration,  a 
new node x0  is considered.  Subformula 
ensures that 
xo  is connected to the  last visited element x\  in  such a way 
that h and v commute. Actually, h and v are not explicitly re(cid:173)
quired to commute.  They actually do (equation (9)) because 
each  visited  node  x  but  the  last  one  (i.e.,  x\)  must be  con(cid:173)
nected by vo  h  and h~ o v to another visited node (Proposi(cid:173)
tion 3.3.e), therefore, by (2), there exist no further links voh~ 
and //  o v  connecting x to (the not yet visited node)  X0.  It 
follows that only  x1  can be connected to  X0  as specified by 
i.  This makes h and v commute and ensures that x0  is 
unique.  Every time the vertical border Bv  is reached, subfor(cid:173)
adds the first element of the  next diagonal.  For 
mula 
this  purpose,  subformula 
looks  for  diagonals 
entirely contained in  X  (the set of nodes visited so far) so that 
a new diagonal is not entered before the previous one has been 
completely visited.  Figure  1(c) illustrates this phase.  Let A', 
be the current set of visited nodes.  The black circles are the 
elements  of 
equals 
X1,  because the latter contains precisely the first 3 diagonals. 
In the following we formalize all the above intuitions. 

.  In this example, 

Let T consist of the assertions (2), the local constraints (3) 
and (4), and the fixpoint assertions (5), (6) and (7). In the rest 
of this section, let  I  be a model of T. 

First we introduce some notation related to the domain el(cid:173)

ements of X. 

Note that  edj  is not necessarily defined, because  h~I  is par(cid:173)
tial.  Informally speaking, d counts diagonals and j is the dis(cid:173)
placement  within  a  diagonal  (cf.  Figure  1(b)).  Indexes  are 
ordered lexicographically.  Define 

For  all sets 
with _-maximal index (if any).  The restriction of 

let  max(S)  be  the  element 

admits a successor relation, namely: 

With  a  slight  abuse  of  notation, 

will  denote 

(5) 
(6) 

Next we need a constructive characterization of the fixpoint 
in assertion (7).  To improve readability, in the following we 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

333 

a b b r e v

i a t e F o r m u l ae 

fixpoint can be characterized as follows. 

will  be  treated  in  a  similar way.  Then  the 

(8) 

To ensure that the  fixpoint  is actually reached within w steps, 
as implicitly claimed by the above construction, it suffices to 
show that 
Proposition 3.2 
decreasing  sequences 

that  is,  for  all  non-
is  an  ordinal, 

is  continuous, 

is continuous. 

The  following technical result formalizes the intuitive ex(cid:173)

planation of the nested  fixpoint  construction. 
Proposition 3.3  For all integers i 
there exists 
such that: 

Since (9) holds for arbitrary 
is the unique member of 

Now,  since 

(d,j), we immediately get point b. 

To prove c, note that 

(9) 
, we have that x0 
and hence point a holds. 
= 

Point e follows from the corresponding l.H.e and (9). 
We  are  only  left  to  show  that  /  holds.  The  induction 
If 

hypothesis  l.H.J  covers  all  cases  but 

(k,l)  = 

(d,/). 

334 

DESCRIPTION LOGICS 

This concludes the proof tor Case  l. 

Moreover, 
clude that / is an isomorphism. 
Proposition 3.5  G*  is a model of T. 

We con­

Since the 

TBox  T is a projective characteriza­

tion  of G (by  Propositions  3.4  and  3.5)  and  the 
assertion (1) is satisfied only by correct tilings, we derive the 
following lemma. 
Lemma 3.6  Satisfiability  of 
able. 

TBoxes is undecid-

We  are  left  to  extend this  lemma  to  concept satisfiability 
and  entailment.  This  is  done  through  the  following  reduc­
tions. 
Lemma 3.7  In all extensions of 

a.  TBox satisfiability can be reduced to concept satisfiabil­

ity  in polynomial time. 

b.  Concept unsatisfiability can be reduced to entailment in 

polynomial  time. 

By Lemma 3.6 and Lemma 3.7, we conclude that the main 

result of this section. Theorem 3.1, holds. 

Finally, with Theorem 3.1  and the standard embedding of 
description logics into propositional dynamic logics, we im­
mediately obtain the following result. 
Corollary  3.8  Formula satisfiability in  the hybrid μ-calculus 
with  deterministic programs is  undecidable. 

We are now ready to prove the two propositions that con­

firm  that T characterizes the grid. 

4  Regular roles and counting 
Description  logics  with  regular role  expressions introduce a 
form  of recursion  (Kleene's  star,  or  reflexive  transitive  clo­
sure) different from  fixpoints.  It  is  interesting to investigate 
the interplay of this form of recursion and counting. 

Consider 

(the extension of  ALCIO  with role 
union and reflexive transitive closure). We prove its undecid-
ability  by  characterizing  domino  problems  with  unbounded 
grids (i.e., grids without borders) in 
. The grid is 
modelled by splitting the injective functional role h (resp. v) 
into  the disjoint  union  of two  roles  ho  and  h1  (resp.  vo  and 
v1),  alternated as shown in Figure 2(a).  Nodes are then par-
tioned  into  four  c
incoming and outcoming edges 

s e s,  according  to  their 

l a s

All nodes are forced to belong to one of these four classes by 
an assertion 

Furthermore, the four assertions 

(16) 

force the desired alternation  of 

(where 
V0 and v1 (cf. Figure 2(a)). 
Now  the compound role 

applied to a node C0 
can reach at most five different nodes 
(cf. Figure 2(b)), 
because  the  alternation  of edges  with  index  0  and  1  (more 
precisely,  assertions (16)) guarantees that  c1,  c3,  c4  have no 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

335 

functionality  assertions  (2).1  As  a  corollary,  the  hybrid 
calculus  with  deterministic  programs  is  proved  to  be  unde­
cidable.  Moreover,  Theorem  4.1  shows  that  role  union  and 
transitive  closure  cannot  occur  together  within  number  re­
strictions  (it  provides  also  evidence  that  *  is  more  expressive 
than  fixpoints). 

These  results  have  immediate  implications  on  VCR  [Cal-
vanese  et  al,  1999],  a  rich  DL  with  n-ary  relations.  Recall 
that  μ  ALCTQ  can  be  embedded  into  
[Calvanese  et 
can  be  embedded  into  VCR 
al,  1999].  Similarly,  ALCIQ 
(the  fragment  of  
without  fixpoints).  Then  Theo­
rem 3.1  and Theorem 4.1  imply that decidability is  preserved 
neither  by  extending  
with  nominals,2  nor  by  extend­
ing  DLR  with  role operators  U  and  *. 

from  

logics  SVC(X) 

family  of  service  description 

An  interesting question  arising  from  these results  concerns 
[Bonatti, 
in  the  sense 

the 
2002].  These  logics  are  analogous  to  
that  they  model  mappings  (that  can  be  regarded  as  n-ary  re­
lations).  SVC(X)  differs 
because  the  former 
features  set  abstraction  and  composition,  while  DLRμ  sup­
ports  number  restrictions.  Service  descriptions  in  SVC(X) 
are  supposed  to  extend  an  underlying  ontology  written  in  a 
standard  description  logic  X  (modelling  concepts  and  roles 
only).  The  main  reasoning  tasks  for  SDL(X)  are  proved 
to  be  decidable  by  embedding  SVC(X)  into  decidable  ex­
tensions  of  both  
and  X.  By  the  undecidability  of 
,  it  follows  that  this  technique  cannot  be  applied 
when  X  supports  number  restrictions,  or  simply  functional 
roles.  Then  the  (un)decidability  of  SVC(X),  when  .V  sup­
ports number restrictions  of some  sort,  remains  an  interesting 
open  issue. 

References 
[Bonatti,  2002]  P.A.  Bonatti.  Towards  Service  Description 
Logics.  In  Proc.  of  JEUA  '02,  L N AI  2424,  pages  74-85, 
2002.  Springer. 

[Calvanese  et al,  1999]  D.  Calvanese,  G.  De  Giacomo,  M. 
Lenzerini.  Reasoning  in  expressive  description  logics 
with  fixpoints  based  on  automata  on  infinite  trees. 
In 
Proc.  of  IJCAI  99,  pages  84-89,  1999.  Int.l  Joint  Com-
mettee  on  Artificial  Int. 

[De  Giacomo,  1995]  G.  De  Giacomo.  Decidability  of class-
PhD  The­

based  knowledge 
sis,  Universitadi  Roma "La  Sapienza",  1995. 

representation  formalisms. 

[Gradel  et al,  1999]  E.  Grade!, M.  Otto, E.  Rosen.  Undecid­
ability  results  on  two-variable  logics.  Archive  for  Math­
ematical  Logic,  38:213-354,  1999. 

[Kupferman et al,  2002]  O.  Kupferman,  U.  Sattler,  M.Y. 
In 

Vardi.  The  Complexity  of  the  Graded  
Proc.  of CADE  2002,  pages  423-437,2002.  Springer. 

ISattler and Vardi,  1999]  U.  Sattler,  M.Y.  Vardi.  The  hybrid 
In  Proc.  of  IJCAR'O1,  LNCS  2392,  pages 

27-30, 2001. Springer. 

'We  conjecture  this  result  still  holds  when  functionality  asser­

tions are restricted to atomic roles only. 

2This  application  of our  results  constitutes  an  alternative  proof 

of a known result (De Giacomo, personal communication). 

Figure 2:  Modeling an even grid G 

outcoming  vj  edges, and that C2, C3 C4 have no outcoming h1, 
edges. 

Then  the  following  assertions  (where  

that  for each  node  in  ni,j  h1  and  vj  commute. 

imply 

(17) 

In  fact—with  reference  to  Figure  2(b)—for all  C0  in  ni,j,  as­
sertion  (16)  forces  nodes  c0-c4  to  belong  to  different  (mutu­
ally  disjoint)  concepts  nx,y,  with  the  exception  of  c3  and  C4, 
both  of which  belong  to n1 _  i,1  _j.  Now  if
then  (17) 
would  be  violated  (there  would  be  5  nodes  reachable  with 
(i.e.,  h0,  h1  vo, v1  char-

so  h1  and  vjcommute 

 

acterize  the  unbounded grid). 

We  are only  left to  model correct tilings.  It suffices to adapt 

assertion  (1)  by  replacing  h  and  v  with  
V1,  respectively.  From  the  above  discussion  we  derive  the 
following  theorem. 

and 

Theorem 4.1 

is  undecidable. 

On  the  c o n t

expression  i
the  decidable logic 

n

is  decidable. 

r a r y ,
is  equivalent  to  an  expression  in 
thanks  to  the  equivalence 

In  fact,  every 

Then  Theorem  4.1  suggests  that  transitive  closure  is  more 
powerful  than 
this  context  (the  extension  of 
with  fixpoints  is  decidable,  while  the  extension 

fixpoints  in 

with  *  is  not). 

5  Discussion and conclusions 
Description  logics  evolved  into  a  hierarchy  of decidable  log­
ics  with  multiple  maximal  elements.  Some  support fixpoints, 
inverse roles,  and  either nominals  or number restrictions  (but 
not  both)  iSattler  and  Vardi,  1999;  Kupferman  et  al,  2002]. 
Others support rich sets of role operators, including union  and 
transitive  closure. 

The  results  of this  paper  show  that  the  above  features  can­
not be easily combined into one decidable logic.  In particular, 
no  decidable extension  of  ALCI  can  simultaneously  support 
fixpoints,  nominals  and  number restrictions,  even  in  the  very 
special  case  where  number  restrictions  are  confined  into  the 

336 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

