Decidability  of SHIQ  with  Complex Role  Inclusion Axioms 

Ian Horrocks 

Ulrike  Sattler 

Department of Computer Science, 

Institut fur Theoretische Informatik, 

University of Manchester, UK 
horrocks@cs.man.ac.uk sattler@tcs.inf.tu-dresden.de 

TU Dresden, Germany 

Abstract 

Motivated by medical terminology applications, we 
investigate  the  decidability  of the  well  known  ex­
pressive  DL,  SHIQ,  extended  with  role  inclusion 
axioms  (RIAs)  of the  form  Ro  S 
P.  We show 
that this extension is undecidable even when RIAs 
are restricted to the forms R o S  R or S o R  R,k 
but that decidability can be regained by further re­
stricting RIAs to be acyclic.  We present a tableau 
algorithm for this  DL and report on  its  implemen­
tation, which behaves well in practise and provides 
important additional functionality in a medical ter-
minology application. 

1  Motivation 
The  description  logic  (DL)  SHIQ  [Horrocks  et  a/.,  1999; 
Horrocks and Sattler, 2002b] is an expressive knowledge rep­
resentation  formalism  that  extends  ACC  [Schmidt-SchauB 
and  Smolka,  1991]  (a notational  variant  of the  multi  modal 
logic  K  [Schild,  1991])  with  qualifying  number restrictions, 
inverse  roles,  role  inclusion  axioms  (RIAs)  R 
5,  and 
transitive  roles.  The  development  of SHI Q  was  motivated 
by several applications, one of which was the representation 
of knowledge  about  complex  physically  structured  domains 
found, e.g., in chemical engineering [Sattler, 2000] and med­
ical terminology [Rector and Horrocks,  1997]. 

Although  SHIQ  allows  many  important  properties  of 
such  domains  to  be  captured  (e.g.,  transitive  and  inverse 
roles),  one  extremely  useful  feature  that  it  cannot  express 
is  the  "propagation"  of  one  property  along  another  prop­
erty [Padgham and Lambrix, 1994; Rector, 2002; Spackman, 
2000].  E.g., it may be useful to express the fact that certain 
locative  properties  are  transfered  across  certain  partonomic 
properties so that a trauma or lesion located in a part of a body 
structure is recognised as being located in the body structure 
as a whole. This enables highly desirable inferences such as a 
fracture of the neck of the femur being inferred to be a kind of 
fracture of the femur, or an ulcer located in the gastric mucosa 
being inferred to be a kind of stomach ulcer. 

The  importance  of  these  kinds  of  inference,  particularly 
in medical terminology applications, is illustrated by the fact 
that the Grail DL [Rector et al., 1997], which was specifically 

designed for use with  medical terminology, is able to repre­
sent these kinds of propagation (although it is quite weak  in 
other  respects).  Moreover,  in  another  medical  terminology 
application using the comparatively inexpressive DL  ACL,  a 
rather complex "work around'' is performed in order to repre­
sent similar propagations [Schulz and Hahn,  2001].1  Similar 
expressiveness  was  also  provided  in  the  CycL  language  by 
the t r a n sf e r s T h ro statement [Lenat and Guha,  1989]. 

It  is  quite  straightforward  to  extend  SHIQ  so  that  this 
kind of propagation can  be expressed:  simply  allow for role 
inclusion axioms of the form 
which then enforces 
all  models I to interpret the composition of R7  with  Si  as a 
sub-relation of P1.  E.g., the above examples translate  into 

hasLocationo  isDivisionOf  

hasLocation, 

which implies that 

is subsumed by/a specialization of 

) 

Unfortunately,  this  extension  leads  to  the  undecidability  of 
the interesting inference problems; see [Wessel, 2001] for an 
undecidability proof and I Baldoni, 1998;Baldoni et al., 1998; 
Demri, 2001 ] for the closely related family of Grammar Log(cid:173)
ics.  On closer inspection of the problem, we observe that only 
RIAs of the form  RoS  S or  SoR  S are required in order 
to express propagation.  Surprisingly,  it  turns out  that  SHIQ 
extended with this restricted form of RIAs is still undecidable. 
Decidability can be regained, however, by further restricting 
the set of RIAs  to  be acyclic  (in  a non-standard way).  This 
additional restriction does not seem too severe: the above ex­
amples are still  covered,  acyclic  sets  of RIAs  should suffice 
for many  applications,  and  cycles  in  RIAs  may  even  be  an 
indicator of modelling flaws [Rector, 2002].  We call this de-
cidable  logic  'RIQ. 

Here, we present the above undecidability result and prove 
the  decidability  of SHIQ  with  acyclic  RIAs  via  a  tableau-
based  decision  procedure for concept  satisfiability.  The  al­
gorithm  works by transforming concepts  of the  form 
where R is a role, into concepts of the form 
where A is 
a non-deterministic  finite  automaton (NFA). These automata 

'in this approach, so-called SEP-triplets are used both to com­
pensate for the absence of transitive roles in ACC, and to express 
the propagation of properties across a distinguished "part-of role. 

DESCRIPTION LOGICS 

343 

arc  derived  from  a  set  of RIAs  TZ  by  first  unfolding  TZ  into  a 
set  of  implications  exp(7v)  between  regular  expressions  and 
roles,  and  then  transforming  the  regular expressions  into  au­
tomata.  The  algorithm  is  of the  same  complexity  as  the  one 
for SHIQ—in  the  size  of  exp(R)  and  the  length  of the  input 
concept—but, unfortunately,  exp(R.)  is exponential in  R.  We 
present a  syntactic restriction  that avoids  this  blow-up;  inves­
tigating  whether  this  blow-up  can  be  avoided  in  general  will 
be  part  of future  work.  Finally,  in  order to  evaluate  the  prac­
ticability  of this  algorithm,  we  have  extended  the  DL  system 
FaCT  [Horrocks,  1998] to deal with acyclic RIAs.  We discuss 
how  the  properties  of NFAs  are  exploited  in  the  implementa­
tion,  and  we  present  some  preliminary  results  showing  that 
the  performance  of  the  extended  system  is  comparable  with 
that of the original, and that it is  able to compute inferences of 
the  kind  mentioned above  w.r.t.  the  well  known  Galen  medi­
cal  terminology knowledge base  [Rector and Horrocks,  1997; 
Horrocks,  1998]. 

For  full  proofs,  the  interested  reader  is  referred  to  [Hor­

rocks and  Sattler,  2002a]. 

2  Preliminaries 
In  this  section,  we  introduce the  DL  S'H+IQ.  This  includes 
the  definition  of syntax,  semantics,  and  inference problems. 

Definition  1  Let  C  and R  be  sets  of concept and role  names. 
The  set  of roles  is 
For  roles  R1  (each 
of which  can  be  inverse),  a  role  inclusion  axiom  (RIA)  is  an 
expression  of the form 
R2-  A  generalised role box 

is  a  set  of RIAs. 
with 
each 

role 
.  Inverse  roles  are 

An 

interpretationassociates, 

name  R,  a  binary 
interpreted  as  usual, 

relation 
i.e., 

An  interpretation  1  is  a  model  of a  g-RBox  TZ  if  it  satisfies 
each  inclusion  assertion  in  TZ,  i.e.,  if 

where  o  stands for  the  composition  of binary  relations. 

Transitive  role  names  were  not  introduced  since 

is  equivalent to  saying  that  R  is  a transitive role. 

To avoid considering roles such as R 

,  we define a func­
tion  Inv on roles as follows:  lnv(R)  =  R~  if R is a role name, 
and  lnv(R)  =  S  if  R  =  S -. 

Obviously, 

then  each  model  of  TZ  also  satisfies 
Inv(S)  (Inv(S)  o  lnv(R)  
Inv(S)  and 
Thus,  in  the  following,  we  assume  that  a 

g-RBox  always  contains  both  "directions"  of a  RIA. 

For  a  g-RBox  R,  we  define  the  relation 

to  be  the 

transitive-reflexive closure  of  

over TZ. 

The  set  of 

Definition  2  A  role  S  is  simple  if it  does  not  have  implied 
does  not  hold. 
sub-roles,  i.e.,  if 
-concepts  is  the  smallest  set  such  that 
(i)  every  concept  name  is  a  concept,  and, 
(ii)  if  C,  D  are 
concepts,  R  is  a  role  (possibly  inverse),  S  is  a  simple  role 
(possibly  inverse),  and n  is  a  nonnegative  integer, 

implies 

then 

concepts. 

are  also 

consists  of a  set 

An  interpretation 

,  called 
the  domain  of  l,  and  a  valuation  i  which  maps  every  concept 
to a  subset  of _ 
such 
that,  for  all  concepts  C,  D, 
roles  R,  S,  and  non-negative 
integers  n, 
the  following  equations  are  satisfied,  where  #M 
denotes  the  cardinality  of a  set  M: 

and every  role  to  a  subset  of 

A  concept  C  is  called  satisfiable  w.r.t.  a  g-RBox  R.  iff there 
A  concept  D  subsumes  a 
f_  
holds 
I,  an  element 

is  a  model  J  of 7v  with 
concept  C  w.r.t.  TZ 
f
i
for  each  model  X  of  "R..  For  an  interpretation 

(written 

is  called  an  instance  of  a  concept  C  iff 

Remarks:  number  restrictions  
restricted  to  simple  roles  (intuitively  these  are  (possibly  in­
verse) roles that are not implied by others) since  SHIQ  with­
out  this  restriction  is  undecidable  [Horrocks  et  ai,  1999]. 

are 

For  DLs  that  are  closed  under  negation,  subsumption  and 

(un)satisfiability can  be  mutually  reduced: 
is  unsatisfiable,  and  C  is  unsatisfiable  iff 
some  concept  name  A. 
It  is  straightforward  to  extend  these 
reductions  to  g-RBoxes  and  TBoxes.  In  contrast,  the  reduc­
tion  of  inference  problems  w.r.t.  a  TBox  to  pure  concept  in­
ference  problems  (possibly  w.r.t.  a  g-RBox),  deserves  spe­
cial  care:  S'HIQ 
is  expressive enough  to  internalise TBoxes, 
i.e.,  to  reduce  reasoning  w.r.t.  TBoxes  to  reasoning  with­
out  TBoxes  [Schild,  1991;  Horrocks  et a/.,  1999].  Thus,  in 
the  following,  we  restrict  our  attention  to  the  satisfiability  of 
S H + I Q - c o n c e p t s. 

R e l a t i o n s h ip  w i th  o t h er  f o r m a l i s ms 

2.1 
G r a m m ar  logics  are  a  class  of  propositional  multi  modal 
logics  where  the  accessibility  relations  are  "axiomatised" 
through  a grammar  [Farinas  del  Cerro  and  Penttonen,  1988]. 
More  precisely,  for 
modal  parameters,  the  production 
r
.  Analogously to 
ant  for the RIA 
the  DL  case,  the  semantics  of a  grammar  logic  takes  into  ac­
count  only  those  frames/relational  structures  that  "satisfy  the 
grammar". 

an  be  viewed  as  a  notational  vari­

u

e

c

l

Now  grammars  are  traditionally  organised  in  (refinements 
of)  the  Chomsky  hierarchy,  which  induces  a  hierarchy  of 
grammar  logics,  e.g.,  context free  grammar  logics  are  those 
propositional multi  modal  logics  where the  accessibility  rela­
tions can be axiomatised through a context free grammar. Un­
surprisingly,  the  expressiveness  of  the  grammars  influences 
the  expressiveness  of  the  corresponding  grammar  logics. 
It 
was  shown  that  satisfiability  of  regular  grammar  logics  is 
ExpTime-complete  [Demri,  2001],  whereas  this  problem  is 
undecidable  for context free  grammar  logics  [Baldoni,  1998; 
Baldoni  et  al.,  1998].  The latter result is closely related to the 
undecidability proof in  [Wessel,  2001]. 

344 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

Here,  we  are  concerned  with  (a)  multi  modal 

logics 
that  provide  for  a  converse  operator  on  modal  parameters 
and  graded  modalities  (to  restrict  the  number  of  accessible 
worlds;  see,  e.g.,  [Tobies,  2001])  and  (b)  a certain  sub-class 
of context-free grammars.  In  our undecidability  proof in  Sec­
tion  3,  the  main  difficulty  was  to  develop  a  grammar  that 
generates 
the 
productions  of 
construct a  "similar"  grammar  G  with 

l a n g u a g e u s
the 

i ng  only 

We  can 

m

f

o

r

.  The  production  rules  of G  are 

Role  value  maps  (RVMs)  [Brachman  and  Schmolze,  1985; 
the  RIAs 
Schmidt-Schauss,  1989]  are  closely  related  to 
investigated  here. 
RVMs  arc  concepts  of 
the 
form 
roles,  whose  interpreta­

tion 

is defined as follows: 

that 
Thus  the  RIA  R  o 
T  is equivalent to saying  that each  individual  must be  an 
T.  The  undecidability  proof  of  K L - O NE 
, and 

where  (R1  . ..  Rm  )I{x)  denotes  the  set of those  
are  reachable  from  x  via  
S 
instance  of  RS 
[Schmidt-Schauss,  1989]  also  involves  RVMs  
thus  cannot be  adapted  easily  to  our  logic. 

is undecidable 

3  SH+IQ 
Due  to  the  syntactic  restriction  on  RIAs,  we  were  not  able 
to  adapt  the  undecidability  proof  for  ACC  with  context-free 
or  linear  grammars  in  [Baldoni,  1998;  Baldoni  et  al,  1998; 
Demri,  2001],  the  one  for  ACC  with  role  boxes  [Wessel, 
2001],  or  the  one  for  K L - O NE  [Schmidt-Schauss,  1989]  to 
prove undecidability of  SH+IQ. 
In  the following, we  sketch 
the  reduction  of  the  undecidable  domino  problem  [Berger, 
1966]  to  SH+IQ  satisfiability. 

Definition  3  A  domino  system  V  — 
a  non-empty  set  of domino  types  D  — 
sets  of horizontally  and  vertically  matching 
and 
a  given  V, 
that  for  all  in, 

The  problem 
there  exists  a  tiling  t 

is 

: 

pairs 

to  determine 

(D,  H,V)  consists  of 
{D\,.  .  .,  Dn},  and  of 

if, 

for 
such 
and 

For a  domino  system  D,  we  define  a  SH+ 

IQ-concept  CD 
and a g-RBox  RD  such that V has a tiling  iff  CD  is  satisfiable 
w.r.t.  RD.  Due to space  limitation,  we only  present' 

where 

denotes addition and subtraction modulo four. 
Existential  and  number  restrictions  on  roles  h  and  v  (for 
the horizontal and vertical neighbours) are used to ensure that 
a  point  has  at  most  one  vertical  and  at  most  one  horizontal 

2Thanks to Christof Loding at RWTH Aachen! 

Figure  l:  The  staircase  structure  and  the  effects  of RD. 

successor, and that these successors satisfy  the horizontal  and 
vertical  matching  conditions  induced  by  H  and  V;  this,  as 
well  as  ensuring  that  each  point  is  associated  with  exactly 
one  domino type,  is  standard in  domino reductions. 

The  next  step  is  rather  special:  we  do  not  enforce  a  grid 
structure,  but  a  structure  with  "staircases",  which  is  illus­
trated  in  Figure  l.  To  this  purpose,  we  introduce  four  sub-
roles  V0,  . . .,  v3  of  v  and  four  sub-roles  
of  h,  and 
ensure  that  we  only  have  "staircases".  An  i-staircase  is  an 
alternating  chain  of  vi  and  hi  edges,  without  any  other  vj 
or  hj-successors.  At  each  point  on  the  r-axis,  two  staircases 
start  that  need  not  meet  again,  one  /-staircase  starting  with 
vi  and  one  i  ■;"1-staircase  starting  with  
.  A  symmetric 
behaviour  is  enforced  for  the  nodes  on  the  y-axis. 

It  only  remains  to  ensure  that,  if two  elements  6,  b'  repre­
sent  the  same  point  in  the  grid,  then  they  are  associated  with 
the  same  domino type:  b and  b'  "represent the  same  point"  if 
there is an n  and an  instance a on the x-ov the  y-axis  such that 
both b and b'  are reachable by following a staircase starting at 
a  for  n  steps,  i.e.,  if there  is  a  v1h1-path  (resp. 
of 
length  n  from  a  to  b,  and  a 
path)  of length  n  from  a  to  b'. 

To  this  purpose,  we  add  super  roles  xt  of  hl  and  yl  of 
vt  (for  which  we  use  dashed  arrows  in  Figure  1),  and  the 
last  group  of  RIAs  in  RD.  These  role  inclusion  axioms  en­
force  appropriate,  additional  role  successorships  between  el­
ements,  and  we  use  the  additional  roles  xi  and  yi  since  we 
only  want  to  have  at  most  one  vi  or  hi-successor.  For  each 
2  staircases  starting  at  the  same  element  on  one  of the  axes, 
these  RIAs  ensure  that  each  pair of elements  representing  the 
same  point  is  related  by  y,.  To  see  this,  consider  the  conse­
quences of the  RIAs  for elements  representing the  four points 
( 1 , 0 ) , . . .,  (2,1),  and  "apply"  the  R IA  
.  Next, 
, which yields the 
"apply" 
yo-link  between  the  two  elements  representing  (2,1).  Then, 
starting  with  
,  we  can  continue  with  the  points 
( 2 , 1 ) , . . .,  (3,2)  and  work  up  the  role  inclusion  axioms  and 
up  the  staircase. 

, and finally 

The above observations imply  that  the concept  CD  is  satis­

fiable  w.r.t.  To  and  72p  iff V  has  a  solution. 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

345 

is decidable 

Theorem 1  Satisfiability  of SH+XQ-concepts  w.r.t.  gener-
alized RBoxes is undecidable. 
4  RIQ 
In this section, we show that  SHIQ  with acyclic generalised 
RBoxes,  RIQ, 
is  decidable.  We  present  a  tableau-based 
algorithm  that  decides  satisfiability  of  RIQ-concepts,  and 
therefore also subsumption  in  7ZXQ  and,  using  internalisa-
tion,  both  inferences w.r.t.  TBoxes.  The tableau algorithm 
implemented in  the FaCT system  [Horrocks,  1998]  was ex-
tended to  the  one presented  here,  and  the empirical  results 
are reported in Section 5. 

Unfortunately, the size of  exp(R)  can be exponential in  the 
size  of  R.  A  further  syntactic  restriction  which  avoids  this 
exponential blow-up is described in Section 4.1. 

The regular role terms on the left hand side of  exp(R)  are 
read with the standard semantics for regular role expressions, 
(i.e., using union, composition, and transitive closure of bi­
nary relations, see, e.g., [Schild,  1991]).  We use L(p) to de­
note the language described by a regular expression p. 

Lemma  1  An  interpretation X is a  model of an  acyclic gen(cid:173)
eralised RBox 'R  iff  I  is a  model of exp(R). 

and  either 

Definition 4  Let  R  be a g-RBox (containing always both di(cid:173)
rections of a RIA; see above). A role R directly affects a role 
or 
Let  "affects "  be  the  transitive  closure of 
"directly affects".  An  acyclic  generalised RBox  (a-RBox)  is 
a g-RBox where  "affects" has no cycles.  7ZXQ is the restric(cid:173)
tion of  SH+IQ  to a-RBoxes. 

_ 

Please note that, in a-RBoxes, we car no longer say that a 
since this 

role  R is symmetric using 
would yield an "affects" cycle of length 2. 
Syntactic transformations Before specifying this algorithm, 
we transform the RBox to make the presentation of the algo­
rithm easier—basically, we unfold the role hierarchy to make 
all  implications explicit. 

Firstly,  for  each  (possibly  inverse)  role  R  we  define  two 

regular expressions as follows: 

Secondly,  we  iteratively  replace  roles  in  pR  with  unions  of 
regular expressions of roles,  working our way  up  the affect­
ing relation.  We start with roles "almost" minimal w.r.t.  the 
affecting relation, i.e., we start with roles R such that all roles 
5  which affect R are not affected.  We proceed with roles di­
rectly  affected by  roles  that are either already treated or not 
affected by other roles, and do the following: 

and, 

for each 

occurring in pn  do 

After  this  recursion,  we  define  exp(7£) 
R occurs in  R. 

:= 

Due to  the  acyclicity  of  R  the  recursion  in  this  transfor­
mation  terminates after at  most  n  steps  for n  the  number of 
role inclusion axioms in  R.  Please note that, by construction, 
for  each  (possibly  inverse)  role  R  occurring  in  R,  exp(R) 
contains exactly one inclusion 
For example, for the RIAs  R 

the above transformation yield a set exp(R) containing 

The  Tableau  Algorithm  tries  to  construct,  for  an  input 
RIQ-concept  D and an a-RBox  R,  a tableau (an abstraction 
of a model) for D w.r.t.  7Z.  We can prove that this algorithm 
constructs  a  tableau  for  D  and  7Z  iff  D  is  satisfiable  w.r.t. 
R,  and thus decides satisfiability  of  RIQ  concepts w.r.t.  an 
a-RBox.  But for the use of NFAs introduced below, this algo­
rithm  is quite similar to the one  for  SHIQ  [Horrocks et al., 
1999; Horrocks and Sattler, 2002b]. 
R 

exp(R),  and we can 
build  a  non-deterministic  finite  automaton  (NFA)  AR  with 
Due  to  the  use  of non-deterministic  au­
.  Otherwise, AR  is a 

If  R  occurs  in  R,  then 

can be of size linear in 

tomata, 
(two-state) automaton  with 

For  A  an  NFA  and  q  a  state  in  A,  Aq  denotes  the  NFA 
obtained  from  A  by  making  q  the  (only)  initial  state  of A, 
to denote that  A  has  a transition 
and we use 
labelled with S from q to q'. 

As usual, each concept can be easily transformed into an 
equivalent one in negation  normal  form (NNF,  i.e.,  negation 
occurs in front of concept names only), and we use 
for the 
NNF of a concept C.  For a concept C, clos(C)  is the smallest 
set that contains C and that is closed under sub-concepts and 
-  Then  fclos(C,  R)  is  the  superset  of  clos(C,R)  that  con­
for each S occurring in 7v or C with q a state in 
tains 

A  completion  tree  T  for  a  RIQ  concept  D  and  an  a-
RBox  R  is  a  tree  where each node x  is  labelled  with  a  set 
and each edge (x, y) from a node x to its 

successor y  is  labelled with a non-empty set 
of  (possibly  inverse)  roles  occurring  in  D  and  R.  Finally, 
completion trees come with an explicit inequality relation 
on nodes which is implicitly assumed to be symmetric. 

If  R 

L((x,y)) 

for  a  node  x  and  its  successor  y  and 
then y is called an S-successor of x and x is called an 
Inv(S)-predecessor of y.  If y is an 5-successor or an  lnv(S)-
predecessor of  x,  then  y  is  called  an  S-neighbour  of x.  Fi­
nally, ancestor is the transitive closure of predecessor. 

For  a  role  5,  a  concept  C  and  a  node  x  in  T  we  define 

is an  5-neighbour of x and 

A  node  is  blocked  iff  it  is  either  directly  or  indirectly 
blocked.  A  node  x  is  directly  blocked iff none  of its  ances­
tors are blocked, and  it has  ancestors  x'  y  and y'  such that 
(1)  y  is  not  the  root node;  (2)  x  is  a  successor of x'  and y 
is  a successor of  y'  and (3) 
, 
.  A node y is indirectly blocked if one 

of its ancestors is blocked. 

346 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

cides satisfiability of  RIQ-concepts  w.r.t.  a-RBoxes. 

Theorem 2  The  tableau algorithm  decides satisfiability and 
subsumption of  RIQ-concepts  w.r.t. a-RBoxes and TBoxes. 

4.1  Avoiding the blow-up 
So  far,  the  satisfiability  algorithm  presented  here  involves 
an exponential blow-up compared to similar algorithms that 
are implemented in  state-of-the-art description  logic reason-
ers [Horrocks, 1998; Haarslev and Moller, 2001]: the closure 
fclos(D,R)  is  exponential  in  R  since  we  have  "unfolded" 
the a-RBox  R  into the possibly exponentially large exp(R). 
While  investigating whether and how this exponential blow-
up can be avoided, we observe that a further restriction of the 
syntax  of a-RBoxes avoids this blow-up: 

An  a-RBox  R  is  called  simple  if,  whenever 

are  in  R,  then  R1  and  R2  do  not  have  a 
and 
common subrole  R'  that occurs on  the right hand side of an 
axiom 

For a simple a-RBox  R,  exp(R)  is only polynomial in the 
size of TZ since each term used in the substitution step of the 
construction of exp(R) from  R  is at most used once in each 
other axiom. 

Thus,  for  simple  role  hierarchies,  the  tableau  algorithm 
presented  here  is  of the  same  worst  case  complexity  as  for 
SHIQ,  namely  2NExpTime.  A  detailed  investigation  of the 
exact complexity will be part of future work. 

5  Empirical Evaluation 
In order to evaluate the practicability of the above algorithm, 
we have extended the DL system FaCT [Horrocks,  1998] to 
deal  with  RIQ,  and we  have carried out a preliminary em(cid:173)
pirical evaluation. 

From a practical point of view, one potential problem with 
the  RIQ  algorithm is that the number of different automata, 
and  hence  the  number  of  different 
concepts,  could 
be  very  large.  Moreover,  many of these  automata could  be 
equivalent (i.e., accept the same languages).  This could ad(cid:173)
versely effect blocking, and thus lead to a serious degradation 
in performance [Horrocks and Sattler, 2002b]. 

The FaCT implementation addresses these  possible prob(cid:173)
lems  by  transforming  all  of  the  initial  NFAs  into  minimal 
deterministic  finite  automata  (DFAs)  using  the  AT&T FSM 
Library™  [Mohri et al.,  1998].  One DFA is constructed for 
each  role,  the  states  in  each  automaton  are  uniquely  num(cid:173)
bered,  and  the  implementation  uses  concepts  of  the  form 
where  A  is  the  number of a  state  in  one  of the  au(cid:173)
tomata. Because the automata are deterministic, for each con(cid:173)
cept of the form 
can  add  at  most one  concept to  the  label  of a given neigh(cid:173)
bouring node y per role in the label of the edge (x\ y).  More(cid:173)
over, because the automata are minimal, 
leads to the 
in some successor node as a result of re(cid:173)
presence  of 
peated applications of the 
is equivalent 
to 
are numbers, such com(cid:173)
parisons are very easy, and minimisation of automata avoids 
unnecessary blocking delays. 

in the label of a node x, the 

The implementation  is  still  at the  "beta"  stage,  but it has 
been  possible  to  carry  out  some  preliminary  tests  using  the 

Figure  2:  The Expansion Rules  for 'RIQ. 

For a node 
concept  name 
concept 

is said to contain a clash if,  for some 
or  if  there  is  some 
and  x  has  n  +  1  S-neighbours 
and 

n.  A  completion  tree  is  clash-free  if none of its  nodes con(cid:173)
tains a clash,  and it is complete if no rule from Figure 2 can 
be applied to it. 

For a  RIQ-concept  D, the algorithm starts with the com(cid:173)
pletion  tree  consisting  of a  single  root  node  x  with L (x)  = 
{D}  and  ,  empty.  It applies the expansion rules in Figure 2, 
stopping when a clash occurs, and answers "D  is satisfiable 
w.r.t. TV9 iff the completion rules can be applied in such a way 
that they yield a complete and clash-free completion tree, and 
"D  is unsatisfiable w.r.t.  R"  otherwise. 

Most of the  rules  have  been  used  before for fragments of 
RIQ—only 
are new: they are elegant gen(cid:173)
eralisations of standard rules for value restrictions taking into 
account automata. 

the three 

As usual, we can prove termination, soundness, and com(cid:173)
pleteness of the tableau  algorithm to show that it indeed de-

DESCRIPTION LOGICS 

347 

well  known  Galen  medical  terminology  KB  I Rector and  Hor-
rocks,  1997; Horrocks,  1998].  This KB contains 2,740 named 
concepts  and 413  roles,  26 of which  are  transitive.  The  roles 
are  arranged  in  a  relatively  complex  hierarchy  with  a  maxi­
mum  depth  of  10.  Classifying  this  KB  using  FaCTs  SHIQ 
reasoner  takes  116s  on  an  800  M Hz  Pentium  I II  equipped 
Linux  PC.  Classifying the same  KB  using the new  'RIQ,  rea­
soner took  a  total  of 275s,  but  this  includes  135s  to  compute 
the minimal  DFAs for the role box (it should be noted that this 
is  an  unusually large and complex role box,  and  that comput­
ing  the  DFAs  is  a preprocessing step  that  will  not need  to  be 
repeated  when the remainder of the  KB  is extended,  modified, 
or queried).  This  result  is  encouraging as  it shows that,  in  the 
case  of the  Galen  KB  at  least,  using  automata  in  
con­
cepts  does  not,  in  itself,  lead  to  an  unacceptable degradation 
in  performance. 

The  KB  was  then  extended  with  several  RIAs  that  express 
the  propagation  of location  across  various  partonomic  roles. 
These  included 

h a s L o c a t i o no  i s S o l i d D i v i s i o n Of 

h a s L o c a t i o no 

i s L a y e r Of  

h a s L o c a t i o n, 
h a s L o c a t i o n. 

Classifying  the  extended  KB  took  280s,  an  increase  of only 
2%  (3.5%  if  we  exclude  the  DFA  computation  time).  Sub-
sumption queries  w.r.t.  this  KB  revealed  that,  e.g., 

was  implicitly  a  kind  of 

(NeckOf Femur is  a  solid  division  of Femur),  and 

( G a s t r i c M u c o sa is  a  layer of Stomach).  None  of these  sub-
sumption  relationships  held  w.r.t.  the  original  K B.  The  times 
taken  to  compute  these  relationships  w.r.t.  the  classified  KB 
could  not  be  measured  accurately  as  they  were  of  the  same 
order as  a system  clock tick  (10ms). 
References 
[Baldoni et al,  1998]  M. Baldoni, L.  Giordano,  and A.  Martelli.  A 
tableau calculus for multimodal logics and some (un)decidabihty 
results.  In Proc.  of TABLEAUX-98, vol.  1397  of LNAL  Springer-
Verlag, 1998. 

[Baldoni,  1998]  M.  Baldoni.  Normal  Multimodal  Logics:  Auto(cid:173)
matic Deduction  and Logic Programming  Extension.  PhD thesis, 
Dip. di Informatica, Univ. degli Studi di Torino, Italy,  1998. 

[Bergcr,  1966]  R. Berger.  The undecidability of the dominoe prob­

lem.  Mem. Amer. Math. Soc, 66,  1966. 

[Brachman and Schmolze,  1985]  R. J. Brachman and J. Schmolze. 
An  overview  of the  KL-ONE knowledge  representation  system. 
Cognitive Science, 9(2): 171-216,  1985. 

iDemri, 2001]  S.  Demri.  The complexity of regularity in grammar 
logics  and  related  modal  logics.  J.  of Logic  and  Computation, 
11(6), 2001. 

[Farinas del Cerro and Penttonen,  1988]  L.  Farinas  del  Cerro  and 
M.  Penttonen.  Grammar  logics.  Logique  et  Analyse,  121-
122:123-134,  1988. 

[Haarslev and Moller, 2001]  V.  Haarslev  and  R.  Moller.  RACER 
In  IJCAR-01,  vol.  2083  of  LNAI  Springer-

system  description. 
Verlag, 2001. 

[Horrocks and Sattler, 2002a)  I.  Horrocks 

and  U.  Sattler. 
of 
inclusion 
LTCS-Report  02-06,  Dresden  University  of 
2002,  available  at  http://lat.inf.tu-

Decidability 
axioms. 
Technology,  Germany, 
drcsdcn.de/research/rcports.html. 

SHIQ 

with 

complex 

role 

[Horrocks and Sattler, 2002b]  I.  Horrocks  and  U.  Sattler.  Opti­
In  Proc.  of ECAI  2002,  IOS  Press, 

mised  reasoning  for  shiq. 
2002. 

[Horrocks et al.,  1999]  I. Horrocks, U. Sattler, and S. Tobies.  Prac­
In  Proc.  of 

tical  reasoning  for  expressive  description  logics. 
LPAR'99, vol.  1705  in LNAL Springer-Verlag,  1999. 

[Horrocks,  1998]  I.  Horrocks.  Using  an  Expressive  Description 
Logic:  FaCT or Fiction?  In  Proc.  of'KR-98, Morgan  Kaufmann, 
1998. 

[Lenat and Guha,  1989]  D.  B.  Lenat  and  R.  V.  Guha.  Building 

Large Knowledge-Based Systems.  Addison Wesley,  1989. 

[Mohri  etal,  1998]  M.  Mohri,  F  C.  N.  Pereira,  and  M.  Riley.  A 
Rational  Design for a  Weighted  Finite-Slate  Transducer  Library. 
vol.  1436 in LNCS. Springer-Verlag,  1998. 

[Padgham and Larnbrix,  1994]  L.  Padgham  and  P.  Lambrix.  A 
In 

framework  for  part-of  hierarchies  in  terminological  logics. 
Proc. of KR-94, Morgan Kaufmann, 1994. 

[Rector and Horrocks,  1997]  A.  Rector  and  I.  Horrocks.  Experi­
ence  building  a  large,  re-usable  medical  ontology  using  a  de­
scription  logic  with transitivity and  concept  inclusions.  In  Proc. 
of the  WS on  Ontological  Engineering,  AAAI Spring  Symposium 
(AAAL97).  AAAI  Press,  1997. 

[Rector et al.,  19971  A. Rector,  S. Bcchhofer,  C.  A. Goble,  I.  Hor­
rocks,  W.  A.  Nowlan,  and  W.  D.  Solomon.  The  G R A IL concept 
modelling  language  for  medical  terminology.  Artificial  Intelli(cid:173)
gence in Medicine, 9:139-171,  1997. 

[Rector, 2002]  A.  Rector.  Analysis  of propagation  along transitive 
roles:  Formalisation of the galen experience with medical ontolo­
gies. In Proc. of DL 2002, CEUR-WS, 2002. 

[Sattler, 2000]  U.  Sattler.  Description  logics  for the representation 
of aggregated objects. In Proc. of ECAI 2000. IOS Press, 2000. 
[Schild,  1991]  K. Schild.  A correspondence theory for terminolog­

ical  logics:  Preliminary  report.  In  Proc.  of  IJCAI-9I,  1991. 
[Schmidt-SchauB and Smolka,  1991]  M.  Schmidt-SchauB 

and 
G.  Smolka.  Attributive concept descriptions  with complements. 
Artificial  Intelligence,  48(1): 1-26,  1991. 

[Schmidt-Schauss,  1989]  M.  Schmidt-Schauss.  Subsumption  in 
KL-ONE is undecidable.  In Proc.  of KR-89, Morgan  Kaufmann, 
1989. 

[Schulz and Hahn, 2001]  S. Schulz and U. Hahn.  Parts, locations, 
and  holes  -  formal  reasoning  about  anatomical  structures. 
In 
Proc.  ofAIME200I,  vol.  2101  of LNAL  Springer-Verlag,  2001. 
[Spackman, 2000]  K.  Spackman.  Managing  clinical  terminology 
hierarchies  using  algorithmic calculation of subsumption:  Expe­
rience with SNOMED-RT. J of the Amer. Med. Informatics Ass., 
2000.  Fall Symposium Special Issue. 

[Tobies, 2001]  S. Tobies. PSPACE reasoning for graded modal log­

ics. J. of Logic and Computation, 11(1):85-106, 2001. 

[Wessel, 2001]  M. Wessel.  Obstacles on the way to qualitative spa­
tial  reasoning  with  description  logics:  Some  undecidability  re­
sults. In Proc. of DL 2001, CEUR-WS, 2001. 

348 

DESCRIPTION  LOGICS 

