Model-based Diagnosis of Hybrid Systems 

Sriram Narasimhan 

Gautam Biswas 
Dept. of EECS & ISIS 
NASA Ames Research Center  Vanderbilt University 
Nashville, TN 37235 

Moffett Field, CA 94035 

QSS Group 

sriramfajarc.nasa.gov 

gautam.biswas@vanderbilt.edu 

Abstract 

Recent  years  have  seen  a  proliferation  of  em(cid:173)
bedded  systems  that  combine  a  digital  (discrete) 
supervisory  controller  with  an  analog  (continu(cid:173)
ous)  plant.  Diagnosing  faults  in  such  hybrid  sys(cid:173)
tems,  require  techniques  that  are  different  from 
those  used  for  discrete  and  continuous  systems. 
In addition, these algorithms have  to be deployed 
online  to  meet  the  real  time  requirements  of em(cid:173)
bedded  systems.  This  paper  presents  a  method(cid:173)
ology  for  online  tracking  and  diagnosis  of hybrid 
systems.  We  demonstrate  the  effectiveness  of the 
approach with experiments conducted  on the fuel 
transfer  system  of fighter  aircraft. 

Introduction 

1 
This  paper  addresses  the  problem  of  designing  and  im(cid:173)
plementing  online  monitoring  and  diagnosis  systems  for 
complex  systems  whose  behavior  is  hybrid  (discrete  + 
continuous)  in  nature.  Hybrid  modeling  covers  naturally 
occurring  systems,  such  as  cell-cycle  control  systems  in 
biology.  They  also  capture  the  behavior  of  embedded 
systems that are common in the avionics, automotive,  and 
robotics  domains.  This  wide  applicability  of hybrid  sys(cid:173)
tems  has  inspired  a  great  deal  of research  from  both  con(cid:173)
trol  theory and  theoretical  computer science. 

We  focus  on  a  special  class  of embedded  hybrid  sys(cid:173)
tems,  characterized  by  continuous  plant  dynamics  and  a 
discrete  supervisory  controller.  The  plant  dynamics  are 
defined  by  continuous  state  variables  associated  with  the 
components  of the  plant.  The  controller  generates  actua(cid:173)
tor  signals  at  discrete  time  points  that  can  change  the 
plant  configuration  by  turning  components  ON  and  OFF, 
and  changing  component  parameter  values  and  the  set 
points  of  regulators.  Therefore,  hybrid  system  models 
have  to  seamlessly  integrate  discrete  and  continuous  be(cid:173)
havior  analyses  using  multiple  system  models.  As  a  re(cid:173)
sult,  tasks  like  monitoring,  fault  diagnosis,  and  control 
require  appropriate  model  selection  and  switching  to  be 
performed online as system behavior evolves. 

This  paper  discusses  methodologies  for  the  model-
based  diagnosis  (MBD)  of hybrid  systems.  Current  tech(cid:173)
niques  in  MBD  apply  well  to  dynamic  systems  whose 
behavior  is  modeled  with  discrete  event  [9,  17],  or  con(cid:173)

tinuous  models  [5,  14].  Discrete  event  approaches  to  hy(cid:173)
brid  system  diagnosis  are  based  on  abstractions  of nomi(cid:173)
nal  and  faulty  behavior system behavior  into  event  trajec(cid:173)
tories.  This  process  may  result  in  loss  of  information 
critical  for  fault  isolation  and  control.  Our  work  in  con(cid:173)
tinuous  diagnosis  has  demonstrated  that  behavior  tran(cid:173)
sients  are  the  key  to  quick  diagnosis  of abrupt  faults[10]. 
It  may  also  be  computationally  expensive 
to  pre-
enumerate  all  possible  nominal  and  faulty  behavior  tra(cid:173)
jectories.  Traditional  algorithms  for  continuous  diagnosis 
use  a  single  model  that  does  not  accommodate  discrete 
changes.  Therefore,  discrete  effects  of  mode  changes 
have  to  be  modeled  by  complex  continuous  non-linear 
functions that are hard to analyze online  in real time. 

Recent  work  on  diagnosis  of hybrid  systems  [3,  6,  8] 
has  focused  on  discrete  faults,  and  requires  the  pre-
enumeration  of the  model  in  all  modes  to  perform  diag(cid:173)
nosis.  We present an  online model-based  diagnosis meth(cid:173)
odology  for  parametric  faults  in  hybrid  systems  that  is 
based on tracking hybrid behaviors  (continuous behaviors 
interspersed  with  discrete  changes),  but  unlike  hybrid 
automata  models 
[1]  pre-enumeration  of  all  system 
modes  is  avoided  by  generating  models  at  runtime  as 
mode  switches  occur. 

into 

the 

The  fault  isolation  task  has  to  take  into  account  possi(cid:173)
ble  mode  changes  during  diagnostic  analysis.  The  occur(cid:173)
rence  of a  fault  necessarily  implies  that  one  no  longer has 
a  correct  model  of  system  behavior; 
therefore,  mode 
changes  cannot  be  correctly  predicted.  To  address  this, 
the  fault  isolation  task  incorporates  a  search  process, 
where  mode  changes  may  have  to  be  hypothesized  and 
incorporated 
diagnosis 
scheme.  The  fault  isolation  process  becomes  even  more 
complicated  if fault  detection  is  delayed,  and  the  diagno(cid:173)
sis  algorithm  has  to  roll  back  modes  to  identify  the  mode 
in which  the fault occurred.  We have developed a generic 
tracking, 
isolation  scheme, 
which  address  all  of the  issues  we  have  outlined  above. 
The  rest of the paper presents  our hybrid modeling,  track(cid:173)
ing,  and  diagnosis  scheme  for  solving  the  hybrid  diagno(cid:173)
sis problem. 

fault  detection,  and 

consistency-based 

fault 

2  Unified  Modeling  Framework 
We use a unified modeling framework called hybrid bond 
graphs  that  extends  continuous  bond  graph  modeling  [7] 

376 

DIAGNOSIS 

vided  as  input  to  the  FSA.  The  overall  mode  of the  sys(cid:173)
tem  is  determined  by  a  parallel  composition  of modes  of 
modes  of the  individual  switched junctions. 

Formally,  hybrid  bond  graphs  can  be  defined  as  a  tri(cid:173)
ple:  HBG  =  {BG,  M.  a},  where  BG  is  the  bond  graph 
model,  M  =  {M1  M2,  ...,  Mkf  is  a  set  of  finite  state  of 
automata,  and  a  is  the  mapping  between  each  M,  and  a 
junction  in  the  bond  graph.  Each  M,  is  a  finite  state 
automaton  of  the  type  described  above,  with  an  output 
function  that  maps  each  state  of M,  to  either  on  or off.  A 
system  mode  change  is  defined  by  one  or  more junction 
automata  changing  state,  and  this  results  in  a  new  bond 
graph model. 
Figure  1  illustrates  the  fuel  transfer  system  that  we  use 
for  our  experiments.  The  fuel  system  is  designed  to  pro(cid:173)
vide  an  uninterrupted  supply  of fuel  at  a  constant  rate  to 
the  aircraft  engines,  and  at  the  same  time  to  maintain  the 
center  of gravity  of the  aircraft.  The  system  is  symmetri(cid:173)
cally  divided  into  the  left  and  right  parts  (top  and  bottom 
in  the  schematic).  The  four  supply  tanks  (Left  Wing 
(LWT),  Right  Wing  (RWT),  Left  Transfer  (LTT),  and 
Right  Transfer  (RTT))  are  full  initially.  During  engine 
operation,  fuel  is  transferred  from  the  supply  tanks  to  the 
receiving  tanks  (Left  Feed  (LFT)  and  Right  Feed  (RFT)) 
based  on  a  pre-defined  sequence.  The  fuel  transfer  se(cid:173)
quence  is  controlled  by  valves  on  pipes  at  the  outlet  of 
the  supply  tanks  and  the  inlet  to  the  feed  tanks.  The  hy(cid:173)
brid  bond  graph  segment  for  the  connection  between  a 
wing  tank  and  a  feed  tank,  shown  in  Figure  2,  illustrates 
the  component-oriented  modeling  approach  for  the  HBG. 
An  element  called  switching  implements  the  finite  state 
automata  discussed  earlier.  The  HBG  framework  also 
associates  one  or  more  parameters  with  system  compo(cid:173)
nents.  We  exploit  this  in  defining  a  component-based 
diagnosis  methodology,  where  faults  in  components  are 
represented  as  deviations  in  their  parameter  values.  For 
example,  there  are  six  potential  fault  candidates  in  the 
fuel  transfer  subsystem  in  Figure  2.  (Pump,  Efficiency, 
Wing  Tank,  Pipe,  Switched,  and  Feed).  In  earlier  work, 
we  have  shown 
the  HBG 
framework  and the hybrid automata representation  [16]. 

the  equivalence  between 

2.3  A l t e r n a te  M o d el  Representations 
The  bond  graph  can  be  used  to  systematically  derive  al(cid:173)
ternate  model  representations.  Three  representations  are 
used  to  solve  different  sub-tasks  in  the  diagnosis  scheme: 
(i)  state  space  equations,  for  tracking  of  continuous  be(cid:173)
havior,  (ii)  temporal  causal  graphs  for  qualitative  fault 
isolation,  and  (iii)  input  output  equations,  for  parameter 
estimation  and  refinement  of the  fault  isolation  results.  A 

Figure 1: Fuel System Schematic 

to  provide  compact  representations  for  hybrid  models.  Its 
component  based  and  hierarchical  representation  is  ex(cid:173)
pressed  as  topological  structures  that  facilitate  causal 
analysis  of  system  dynamics.  It  also  provides  standard 
techniques  for deriving  state space  and  input output equa(cid:173)
tion  formulations  that  are  suitable  for  tracking  and  esti(cid:173)
mation tasks  [15]. 

that  captures  energy-based 

2.1  Bond  Graphs 
A  bond  graph  (BG)  is  a  domain-independent  topological 
representation 
interactions 
among  the  different  physical  processes  that  make  up  the 
system.  The  vertices  in  the  graph  represent  subsystems 
modeled  as  generic  physical  processes:  capacities,  iner(cid:173)
tias,  and  dissipators  that  can  have  linear  and  non-linear 
behaviors.  Bonds  are  energy  pathways  by  which  subsys(cid:173)
tems/processes exchange energy  in the system.  Two addi(cid:173)
tional  types  of vertices  (0  and  1  junctions)  represent  do(cid:173)
main  independent  generalizations  of  Kirchoff  s  laws  and 
are  used  as  connection  points  between  the  sub-systems. 
There  exist  systematic  techniques  to  construct  the  bond 
graph  from the system description  [2]. 

language 

to 

include  discrete 

2.2  H y b r id  Bond  Graphs 
Additional  mechanisms  are  introduced  into  the  continu(cid:173)
ous  BG 
transitions  and 
model  switching.  We  use  switched junctions proposed by 
Mosterman  and  Biswas  [13],  where  each junction  in  the 
bond  graph  may  be  switched  on  (activated)  and  off (de(cid:173)
activated).  An  activated junction  behaves  like  a  conven(cid:173)
tional  BG  junction.  All  the  bonds  incident  on  a junction 
turned  off are  made  inactive,  and  hence  do  not  play  any 
part  in  the  system  dynamics.  Note  that  activating  or  de(cid:173)
activating junctions  affect  the  behavior  of adjoining junc(cid:173)
tions. 

A  Finite  State  Automaton  (FSA)  implements  the junc(cid:173)
tion  switching 
function.  The  FSA  may  have  several 
states,  and  each  state  maps  to  either  the  off mode  (i.e.,  it 
causes  the junction  to  turn  off)  or  the  on  mode  (i.e.,  the 
junction  turns  on)  of  the  junction.  Mode  transitions  de(cid:173)
fined  solely  by  external  controller  signals  define  con(cid:173)
trolled  switching,  and  those  expressed  by  internal  vari(cid:173)
ables  crossing  boundary  values  define  autonomous 
switching.  For  controlled  switching  the  control  signal  is 
provided  as  input to  the  FSA.  For autonomous  switching, 
the  function  determining  the  transition  condition  is  pro(cid:173)

DIAGNOSIS 

377 

detailed  description  of temporal  causal  graphs  (TCG)  can 
be  found  in[14,  15]  and  is  not  repeated  here.  Essentially 
the  TCG  captures  causal  and  temporal  relations  between 
variables  in  the  system.  The  vertices  in  the  graph  repre(cid:173)
sent  variables  of  the  system  and  the  edges  (with  labels) 
represent the types  of relations between  the variables. 

3  M BD  Architecture 
Our  diagnosis  architecture  implements  a  scheme  to  track 
the  nominal  system  dynamics  using  an  observer  that  is 
robust  to  model  uncertainties  and  noise  in  the  measure(cid:173)
ments.  It  uses  a  fault detection  scheme to trigger the fault 
isolation  scheme  when  discrepancies  are  detected  be(cid:173)
tween  the  observed  and  predicted  measurements,  tracks 
and  analyzes  the  fault  transients  using  fault  signatures  to 
isolate the  fault, and  then  employs a quantitative parame(cid:173)
ter  estimation  scheme  to  determine  the  magnitude  of the 
fault.  Our  work  focuses  on  component  parameter  faults, 
which  are  multiplicative,  i.e.,  faults  directly  affect  the 
system  dynamics  models.  As  discussed earlier,  the hybrid 
nature  of the  system complicates  the tracking and  diagno(cid:173)
sis  tasks,  because  mode  transitions  cause  model  switch(cid:173)
ing,  which  has  to  be  included  in  the  online  behavior 
tracking  and  fault  isolation  algorithms.  For  pragmatic 
reasons  we  simplify  our  algorithms  by  making  the  single 
fault  assumption. 

We  have  developed  a  novel  approach  that  combines 
qualitative  and  quantitative  algorithms  for  fault  isolation. 
This  extends  our  earlier  work  [12]  on  fault  isolation  in 
continuous  systems.  The  qualitative  approach  overcomes 
limitations  of quantitative  schemes,  such  as  convergence 
and  accuracy  problems  in  dealing  with  complex  non-
linearities  and  lack  of  precision  of  parameter  values  in 
system  models.  It plays  a  significant role  in  cutting down 
on  computational  complexity,  enabling  online  algorithms 
for  fault  isolation  in  the  hybrid  framework.  The  qualita(cid:173)
tive reasoning scheme  is  fast and effective, but it has lim(cid:173)
ited  discriminatory  ability.  To  uniquely  identify  the  true 
fault  candidate,  we  employ  a  quantitative  parameter  esti(cid:173)
mation  scheme,  which  also  returns  the  magnitude  of the 
deviated  parameter. 

T r a c k i ng  and  F a u lt  Detection 

3.1 
Our  hybrid  observer  is  implemented  as  a  combination  of 
an extended Kalman filter (EKF) and a hybrid automaton 
to  track  continuous  behavior  in  individual  modes  of op(cid:173)
eration,  and  discrete  mode  changes  (controlled  and 
autonomous),  respectively.  At  mode  changes,  the  new 
state  space  model  and  the  initial  state  of  the  system  are 
recomputed.  Model  uncertainty  and  measurement  noise 
are  implemented  as  white,  uncorrected  Gaussian  distri(cid:173)
butions with zero mean.  The  state  space model in mode q 
is defined as: 

where  w  is  distributed  N(O,Q)  and  v  is  distributed N(0,R), 
and  Q  and  R  are  process  and  measurement  noise  covari-

ance  matrices. 

It  is  assumed  that  wk  incorporates  the 
term  that  captures  modeling  errors  in  the  system. 
In  our  work,  the  Q  and  R  matrices  were  determined  em(cid:173)
pirically.  The  extended  Kalman  filter  algorithm  follows 
the methodology presented  in  [4]. 

Mode  change  calculations  are  based  on  the  system 
mode  at  time  step k, 
and  the  continuous  state  of  the 
system, 
.  The  discrete  controller signals  to  the plant  are 
assumed  known.  For  controlled  transitions,  we  assume 
such  a  signal  is  input  at  time  step  k,  and  the  appropriate 
mode  transition  is  made  at  time  step  k+1  to  qk_1.  For 
autonomous  transitions,  the  estimated  state  vector,  xk  is 
used  to  compute  the  Boolean  functions  that  signal  mode 
transitions.  Note  that  several  transition  functions  may  be 
triggered  simultaneously.  They  are  combined  to  derive 
the new  system mode.  A  mode  transition  results  in  a new 
state equation  model,  i.e.,  the matrices Fq,  Gq,  Cv,  and DH 
are  recalculated  online.  We  have  developed  an  efficient 
symbolic  solver  that  can  construct  state  equation  models 
from  equation  fragments.  The  equation  fragments  corre(cid:173)
spond  to  constituent  equations  defining  component  be(cid:173)
havior,  and  the  junction  relations.  When  switching  oc(cid:173)
curs,  sets  of  equation  fragments  are  de-activated,  and 
others  are  activated.  The  new  state  equations  are  then 
derived  incrementally.  To  simplify  analysis,  we  assume 
that  mode changes  and  faults  occur only  after the  Kalman 
filter  state  estimate  has  converged  to  its  optimal  behav(cid:173)
ior.  Further  details  of  the  observer  implementation  are 
presented in  [15]. 

Fault  detection  is  performed  by  first  computing  esti(cid:173)
mates  of the  output  variables  yk  from  the  state  estimates 
xk.  We then compute a smoothed estimate yk using an FIR 
filter.  Finally  we  compute  the  residual  (yk-ok),  where  ok 
are  the  observations  at  time  step  k.  If this  residual  rk  is 
above  a  threshold  e  for  a  pre-defined  number  of  time 
steps, then a fault is signaled. 
3.2  Fault  Isolation  and  Identification 
Once  a fault has been detected,  fault isolation and identi(cid:173)
fication  is  performed  to  uniquely  isolate  the  fault  and 
determine  its  magnitude.  Our  fault  isolation  and  identifi(cid:173)
cation architecture  is  presented  in Figure 4  involves  three 
roll-
(ii)  qualitative 
steps: 
forward,  and  (iii)  quantitative  parameter  estimation. 

(i)  qualitative 

roll-back, 

378 

DIAGNOSIS 

For  hybrid  systems,  discontinuous  changes  in  meas(cid:173)
ured  variables  can  only  occur  at  the  point  of failure  or  at 
points  at  which  discrete  mode  changes  occur  in  the  plant 
behavior.  At  all  other  time  points  the  plant  behavior  is 
continuously  differentiate.  We  take  advantage  of  this 
fact  for  qualitative  analyses  of all  measured  variables,  yk. 
The  residual  (rk)  for any  variable  is  defined  as  the  differ(cid:173)
ence  between  the  measure  plant  output  and  the  nominal 
expected  plant  output.  Since  both  of  these  are  continu(cid:173)
ously  differentiable  after  the  fault  occurrence,  and  after 
each  mode  change,  the  residual  can  be  approximated  by 
the Taylor scries  expansion: 

-•* 

We  can  then  represent  the  residual  as  the  coefficients 
of the  magnitude  and  higher  order  derivative  terms  of the 
residual. 
in  quantitative 
form,  qualitative  values  (-,  0,  and  +)  are  used  to  indicate 
if the coefficient  is  below,  at,  or above  zero. 

Instead  of  representing  them 

The  qualitative  analyses  that  comprise  of the  roll-back 
and  roll-forward  steps  work  on  these  qualitative  coeffi(cid:173)
cients.  After  detection  of the  fault,  the  signal  to  symbol 
generator  is  responsible  for  converting  the  measured  ob(cid:173)
servations  to  symbolic  form  at  each  time  step.  The  dis(cid:173)
cussion  of  the  computation  of  the  residual  and  the  con(cid:173)
verting  it  to  symbolic  form  is  presented  in  [11],  and  not 
repeated here. 

The roll-back  algorithm can be summarized  as  follows. 
Given  the  observer  estimated  mode  trajectory  Q  =  {q1.q2, 
we  first  use  the  back  propagation  algorithm  [14] 
The  deviated  symbols 
to  generate  hypotheses  in  mode 
at  the  time  of  fault  detection 
are  back  propagated 
through  the  temporal  causal  graph  in  mode  qk  to  identify 
causes  for  the  deviations.  Since  the  fault  may  have  oc(cid:173)
curred  in  previous  modes,  we  then  go  back  in  the  mode 
trajectory  and  create  hypotheses  in  each  of the  previous 
where  n  is  a  number  deter(cid:173)
modes 
mined  externally  by  diagnosability  studies.  During  the 
crossover  from  a  mode  to  a  previous  mode,  the  symbols 
need  to be propagated back across  the mode change.  This 
is  done  by  using  the  inverse  of  the  reset  functions  (y1) 
associated  with  the  mode  transition.  For  example,  the 
symbols  to  be  propagated  in  mode  qk.t  is  obtained  as  y 
The  hybrid  hypotheses  generation  algorithm 
returns  a hypotheses set, 
, where each 
hypothesis  h,  is  a  three-tuple  {q,p,k},  where  q  represents 
the  mode  in  which  the  fault  is  hypothesized  to  have  oc(cid:173)
curred, p  is  the parameter whose  deviation corresponds to 
the fault, 

is the direction of deviation of parameter  P. 

The  occurrence  of the  fault  may  change  the  parameters 
of  the  functions  that  determine  autonomous  transitions 
leading  the  observer to  incorrectly  predict  (or not predict) 
an  autonomous  transition.  Hence  the  current  mode  esti(cid:173)
mated by the hybrid observer may not be the actual mode 
of  system  under  hypothesized  fault  conditions.  We  need 
to  estimate  the  current  mode  of the  system  for  each  hy(cid:173)
pothesis.  However,  we  still  do  not  have  the  quantitative 
value  for  the  faulty  parameter,  implying  that  we  cannot 
accurately  determine  the  current  mode  of the  system.  To 

Fig. 4: Fault Isolation and Identification Architecture 

solve  this  problem  we  take  advantage  of the  fact  that  the 
same  sequence  of  mode  transitions  in  any  order  would 
lead  the  system  to  the  same  end  state.  This  follows  from 
the  fact  that  each  mode  transition  essentially  changes  the 
status  of  a  switched  junction  in  the  hybrid  bond  graph 
representation.  Based  on  this  observation,  for  each  hy(cid:173)
pothesis,  we  apply  all  controlled  transitions  (assuming 
that  no  autonomous  transitions  have  occurred)  that  have 
occurred  since  the  hypothesized  fault  mode  to  get  an  es(cid:173)
timated  current  mode.  This  is  known  as  the  roll-forward 
process. 

We  can  now  use  the  model  (TCG)  to  predict  the  ex(cid:173)
pected  qualitative  values  for  the  residuals  (signatures)  in 
the  current  estimated  mode  for  each  hypothesis.  This  is 
done  through  a  forward  propagation  algorithm  [14].  The 
fault  hypotheses  in  the  estimated  current  mode  are  com(cid:173)
pared with the symbols  generated  by  the signal  to  symbol 
generator  using  a  progressive  monitoring  scheme  [14].  If 
there  is  a  mismatch,  the  hypothesis  cannot  be  dropped 
immediately, we assume  that an  autonomous mode transi(cid:173)
tion  may  have  caused  this  mismatch.  We  apply  all  possi(cid:173)
ble  autonomous  transitions  to  the  current  estimated  mode 
and  derive  m  new  estimated  current  modes  for  the  hy(cid:173)
pothesis,  where  m  is  the  number  of possible  autonomous 
transitions.  For  each  of these  m  new  modes,  we  can  gen(cid:173)
erate  the  qualitative  signature  using  forward  propagation 
and  compare  this  against  observations.  In  case  of  mis(cid:173)
match  we  hypothesize  occurrence  more  autonomous  tran(cid:173)
sitions  and  repeat  the  process.  Once  the  total  number  of 
transitions  (controlled  +  hypothesized  autonomous)  ex(cid:173)
ceeds  the  diagnosability  limit,  further  mismatches  in  sig(cid:173)
natures and symbols eliminate hypotheses. 

In  other  work  [12],  we  have  shown  the  limited  dis(cid:173)
criminatory  capabilities  of  the  qualitative  progressive 
monitoring  scheme.  This  often  leads  to  multiple  fault 
hypotheses  being  reported  as  the  diagnostic  result.  Even 
when  we  are  left  with  only  one  hypothesis,  determining 
the  magnitude  of  the  parameter  associated  with  the  hy(cid:173)
pothesis  is  essential  to  continue  tracking  the plant  behav(cid:173)
ior  in  the  faulty  situation.  We  use  a  parameter estimation 
technique  based  on  the  least-squares  estimation  method 
for  further  fault  isolation  and  identification.  Applying  a 
statistical  hypothesis  testing  scheme  to  the  error  in  the 
fault  identification  task  leads  to  unique  fault  isolation, 

DIAGNOSIS 

379 

and  an  estimate  of  the  deviated  parameter  value.  Con(cid:173)
sider the  input output equation  form: 

where  U arc  the  inputs,  Y are  the outputs,  a's  and b's  are 
constant  coefficients  and  q  is  the  forward  delay  operator. 
The  typical  parameter  estimation  task  is  to  estimate  the 
a's  and  b's  using  measurements,  u  and  y.  The  optimal 
where 0 is a vec(cid:173)
estimate is given by: 
tor  of  a's  and  b's, 
is  the  regression  vector,  and  Z  is 
current output vector.  The  single  fault  assumption  im(cid:173)
plies  that  only  one  parameter  in  unknown.  So,  for  each 
remaining  hypothesis,  we  rewrite 
in  terms  of the  corre(cid:173)
sponding  hypothesized  fault  parameter p.  If we  assume  a 
first  order  polynomial  relation  (it  is  possible  to  extend 
this 
where  K1  and  K()  are  matrix  constants.  Now  we  can  re(cid:173)
formulate  the  estimation  problem  and  obtain  the  optimal 
estimate for/7 as: 

to  arbitrary  polynomial  relations): 

For  each  remaining  hypothesis,  we  compute  the  input 
output  equations  of  the  system  in  the  estimated  current 
mode  from  the  bond  graph.  This  can  be  achieved  by 
computing  the  temporal  causal  graph  from  the  bond 
graph.  The  TCG  can  then  be  used  to  compute  the  signal 
flow  graph,  which  can  be  used  to  derive  the  input  output 
equations.  Please  note  that  the  signal  flow  graph  still 
contains  parameters  in  symbolic  form  as  opposed  to  ac(cid:173)
tual  numeric  values.  This  gives  us  a  parameterized  input 
output  equation.  We  then  calculate  the  K1  and  K0  matri(cid:173)
ces.  Finally we accumulate u and y values,  and estimate p 
using  the  above  expression.  This  may  also  be  used  for 
fault  isolation  by  plugging  back  the  estimated  parameter 
in  the  state  space  equations  and  computing  the  predicted 
values  for  the  outputs.  Hypotheses  whose  predicted  out(cid:173)
put  values  are  statistically  different  from  actual  output 
values are eliminated.  Table  1  illustrates an experimental 
run  for  a  left  wing  tank  pump  degradation  (33%  loss)  at 
time  step  150.  The  initial  change  was  observed  in  the 
transfer manifold pressure at time step = 433  (Fig.  5),  but 
two  mode  changes  occurred  between  the  fault  occurrence 
and  its  detection.  The  roll  back  process  was  employed, 
and  this  produced  an  initial  list  of  13  candidates.  Detect(cid:173)
ing  that  the  transfer  manifold  pressure  was  discontinuous 

reduced the  candidate  set  to  10  faults.  As  other measure(cid:173)
ments  deviated  over  time  (first  left  wing  tank  pressure, 
then  left  feed  tank  pressure),  the  candidate  set  was  fur(cid:173)
ther  refined.  Mode  changes  required  the  re-derivation  of 
the  system  models,  and  the  computation  of  new  signa(cid:173)
tures  to  track  system  behavior.  The  qualitative  scheme 
reduced  the  candidate  set  to  4,  and  then  the  parameter 
estimation  scheme was  invoked.  This  resulted  in  generat(cid:173)
ing  the  correct  fault  hypothesis,  and  a  correct  estimation 
of the  faulty  parameter. 

E x p e r i m e n t al  Results 

4 
We  demonstrate 
the  effectiveness  of  our  diagnosis 
scheme  on  a  real  world  example,  the  fuel  system  of 
fighter aircraft (Fig.  1).  The  pumps  are  modeled  as  a 
source  of  effort  (pressure)  with  a  transformation  factor 
that  defines  its  efficiency.  The  pipes  are  modeled  as 
nonlinear  resistances. 

The  diagnosis  experiments  used  a  controller  sequence 
provided  by  Boeing.  The  performance  of the  hybrid  ob(cid:173)
server  in  tracking  the  nominal  data  (with  3%  noise) 
through  mode  transfers  is  illustrated  in  Figure  5  for  the 
transfer  manifold  and  left  wing  tank  pressure  measure(cid:173)
ments.  The  dots  represent  the  measured  data  and  the 
black  line  shows  the  observer  estimates.  A  number  of 
diagnosis  experiments  were  run  for  different  noise  values 
and  fault magnitudes (see  [15]  for details). 

Table 2:  Fuel System Diagnosability 

(TTR), 

(iv)  Fuselage  Tank  Resistance 

Table  2  summarizes  the  different  fault  classes  that  can 
be  distinguished  by  our  diagnosis  algorithms.  The  fault 
classes  are  as  follows:  (i)  Wing  Tank  Pump  (WTP),  (ii) 
Wing  Tank  Resistance  (WTR),  (iii)  Fuselage  Tank  Pump 
(TTP), 
(v) 
Switched  Pipe  Resistance  (SPR),  (vi)  Feed  Tank  Pump 
(FTP),  and  (vii)  Feed  Tank  Resistance  (FTR).  The  V 
mark  in  row  i  and  column j  indicates  that  fault class  i  can 
be  distinguished  from  fault  class j.  The  x  mark  indicates 
that  the  current  controller  sequence  and  set  of measure(cid:173)
ments  are  not  sufficient  to  distinguish  between  the pair in 
question.  From  the  table,  we  see  that  we  cannot  distin(cid:173)
guish  between  tank  pump  faults  and  tank  outlet  pipe  re(cid:173)
sistance  faults.  However,  this  is  true  only  for a  pump  ef(cid:173)
ficiency  (TF-)  decrease  and  pipe  resistance  increase  (R+). 
Since  the pump  efficiency  cannot  increase  (no 
pipe resistance decreases, R-, (i.e.,  leaks) can be uniquely 
identified.  All  other classes  of faults  can  be  distinguished 

380 

DIAGNOSIS 

in  Proc. 

in  Engineer(cid:173)

1979,  Cam(cid:173)

Hybrid 

Systems, 

in 

Fifth 

in  Planetary  Rovers, 

:  modeling  and  simulation  of  mechatronic 

2.  Biswas,  G.  and  X.  Y u.  A  Formal  Modeling  Scheme for 
Continuous  Systems:  Focus  on  Diagnosis, 
IJCA1 
1993.  Chambery,  France,  p  1474-1479. 
3.Dearden,  R.  and  D.  Clancy.  Particle  Filters  for  Real-
Time  Fault  Detection 
in  Thirteenth 
Intl  Wkshp.  on  Principles  of  Diagnosis,  2002.  Semmer-
ing,  Austria. 
4. Gelb,  A.,  Applied  Optimal  Estimation. 
bridge,  M A,  USA:  M IT  Press. 
5. Gertler,  J..,  Fault  detection  and  Diagnosis 
ing  Systems.  1998,  New  York:  Marcel  Dekker. 
6. Hofbaur,  M.W.  and  B.C.  Williams.  Mode  Estimation  of 
Probabilistic 
International 
Workshop  on  Hybrid  Systems:  Computation  and  Control 
(HSCC  '02).  2002.  Stanford,  C A,  USA:  Springer. 
7. Karnopp,  D.,  D.L.  Margolis,  and  R.C.  Rosenberg,  Sys-
tem  dynamics 
systems.  3rd  ed.  2000,  New  York:  Wiley. 
8. Koutsoukos,  X.,  et  al.  Fault  Modeling  for  Monitoring 
and  Diagnosis  of  Sensor-Rich  Hybrid  Systems, 
IEEE 
Conference  on  Decision  and  Control.  2001.  Orlando,  FL. 
9.  Lunze,  J.  and  J.  Schroder,  Sensor  and  Actuator  Fault 
Diagnosis  of  Systems  with  Discrete 
Inputs  and  Outputs. 
in  press,  IEEE  Transactions  on  Systems,  M a n,  and  Cy(cid:173)
bernetics,  March,  2002. 
10.  Manders,  E.  and  G.  Biswas.  Transient  Detection  and 
in  Continuous 
Analysis 
Dynamic  Systems, 
Intelligent  Signal 
Processing  (WISP 
11.  Manders,  E.,  P.J.  Mosterman,  and  G.  Biswas.  Signal 
techniques  for  Robust  Diagno(cid:173)
to  Symbol 
sis 
Intl  Wkshp  on  Principles  of 
Diagnosis.  1999.  Loch  A w e,  Scotland. 
12.  Manders, 
et 
tive/Quantitative  approach 
complex  dynamic  systems, 
sium,  2000.  Budapest,  Hungary,  p.512-517. 
13.  Mosterman,  P.J.  and  G.  Biswas,  A  Theory  of discon(cid:173)
tinuities 
in  Physical  System  Models.  Journal  of  Franklin 
Institute,  1998.  335(B):  p.  401-439. 
14.  Mosterman,  P.J.  and  G.  Biswas,  Diagnosis  of  Con(cid:173)
tinuous  Valued  Systems 
in  Transient  Operating  Regions. 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Systems,  M a n,  and  Cybernetics, 
1999.  29:  p.  554-565. 
15.  Narasimhan,  S.,  Model-based  Diagnosis  of  Hybrid 
Systems, 
in  Computer  Science.  2002,  Vanderbilt  Univer(cid:173)
sity:  Nashville. 
16.  Narasimhan,  S.  and  G.  Biswas.  An  Approach 
Model-Based  Diagnosis 
Systems:  Computation  and  Control 
Stanford,  C A:  Springer  Verlag. 
17.  Sampath,  M.,  et  al.,  Failure  Diagnosis  using  Dis(cid:173)
crete-Event  Models. 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Control  Sys(cid:173)
tems  Technology,  1996.  4:  p.  105-124. 

combined  Qualita(cid:173)
efficient  Fault 
in 
Intl.  Safe Process  Sympo(cid:173)

of  Hybrid  Systems, 
(HSCC 

to 
in  Hybrid 
'02).  2002. 

of  Abrupt  Faults 
on 

Intl  Wkshp. 

Transformation 
in 

in  TRANSCEND, 

'()!).  2001.  Budapest,  Hungary. 

for  Diagnosis 
in 

in 

E., 

al. 

A 

to 

in 

Isolation 

Figure  5:  Transfer  manifold  and  Left  W i ng  T a nk 

Pressure 

from  one  another. 
achieved  only  after  mode  changes  occur. 

In  sonic  cases,  the  isolation  may  be 

5 

S u m m a ry 

the 

tracking, 

fault  detection, 

In  this  paper  we  have  presented  an  integrated  approach 
to  solving 
isolation,  and 
identification  tasks  for  hybrid  systems.  The  novel  contri(cid:173)
bution  of  the  presented  work  is  the  extension  of  continu-
ous  system  model-based  diagnosis  techniques  to  hybrid 
systems.  These  include  the  hybrid  observer  that  combines 
an  extended  Kalman  filter  and  hybrid  automaton,  hybrid 
fault  isolation  through  roll  back  and  roll  forward  using 
qualitative  analysis,  and  the  single  parameter  estimation 
for  further  fault  isolation  and  identification.  Our  work  is 
motivated  by  the  requirements  of  the  fault  accommoda(cid:173)
tion  task,  where  diagnosis  has  to  be  performed  online  for 
embedded  systems  during  their  operation.  Hybrid  diagno(cid:173)
sis  techniques  directly  apply  to  embedded  systems  and 
else  where  [15].  We  have  also  demonstrated  through  time 
and  space  complexity  analysis  that  our  algorithms  can  be 
applied  to  online  analysis  in  resource  constrained  envi(cid:173)
ronments. 

A c k n o w l e d g m e n ts 
The  D A R P A / I XO  SEC  program 
(F30602-96-2-0227), 
N A SA  IS  NCC  2-1238,  and  The  Boeing  Company  (Kirby 
Keller  and  T im  Bowman)  have  supported  the  activities 
described  in  this  paper.  We  would  like  to  thank  Dr.  Ga-
bor  Karsai,  Tivadar  Szemcthy,  Nagabhushan  Mahadevan, 
and  Eric  Manders  for  their  help. 

References 
1.  Alur,  R.,  et  al.,  Hybrid  Automata  -  An  Algorithmic  Ap-
proach 
of  Hybrid  Sys(cid:173)
in  Computer  Science:  Hybrid  Sys(cid:173)
tems,  Lecture  Notes 
tems 1.  1994,  Springer  Verlag.  p.  209-229. 

to  Specification  and  Verification 

DIAGNOSIS 

381 

