Active Learning with Strong and Weak Views: A Case Study on Wrapper 

Induction 

Ion Muslea, Steven N. Minton, Craig A. Knoblock 

muslea@isi.edu,  minton@fetch.com,  knoblock@isi.edu 

U. of Southern California, Fetch Technologies, Inc., U. of Southern California, 

4676 Admiralty Way 

Marina del Rey, CA 90292 

Abstract 

Multi-view learners reduce the need for labeled data 
by  exploiting  disjoint  sub-sets  of features  (views), 
each  of which  is  sufficient  for  learning.  Such  al(cid:173)
gorithms  assume  that  each  view  is  a  strong  view 
(i.e., perfect learning is possible in each view).  We 
extend the multi-view framework by  introducing a 
novel  algorithm,  Aggressive  Co-Testing,  that  ex(cid:173)
ploits both strong and weak views; in a weak view, 
one  can  learn  a concept that  is  strictly  more gen(cid:173)
eral or specific than the target concept.  Aggressive 
Co-Testing uses the weak views both for detecting 
the  most  informative examples  in  the  domain  and 
for improving the accuracy of the predictions.  In a 
case study on 33 wrapper induction tasks, our algo(cid:173)
rithm requires significantly fewer labeled examples 
than existing state-of-the-art approaches. 

Introduction 

1 
Labeling training data for learning algorithms is a tedious, er(cid:173)
ror prone, time consuming process. Active learning addresses 
this  issue  by detecting  and asking the user to  label  only the 
most  informative  examples  in  a  domain.  In  this  paper,  we 
focus  on  Co-Testing  [Muslea  et al,  20001,  an  active  learn(cid:173)
ing technique for domains with multiple views;  i.e., domains 
with disjoint  sub-sets of features,  each  of which  is  sufficient 
for learning.  Co-Testing  is  a  2-step  iterative  algorithm  that 
(1) uses the few available labeled examples to learn a hypoth(cid:173)
esis in each view and (2) queries (i.e., asks the user to label) 
examples on which the views predict a different label.  Such 
queries are highly informative because they correct mistakes 
made by  one of the  views:  whenever the views disagree,  at 
least one of them must be wrong. 

Co-Testing was  successfully applied to  wrapper induction 
[Muslea  et al,  2000J,  an  industrially  important  application. 
In wrapper induction the goal is to learn rules that extract the 
relevant  data  from  collections  of Web  pages  that  share  the 
same  underlying  structure;  e.g.,  extract  the  book  titles  and 
prices from amazon. com. For wrapper induction, Co-Testing 
uses two views:  the sequences of tokens that precede and fol(cid:173)
low  the  extraction  point,  respectively.  The  extraction  rules 
learned  in  these  views  are  finite  automata  that consume  an 
item's prefix or suffix within the page, respectively. 

The  main  limitation  of  existing  Co-Testing  algorithms 
[Muslea et  al,  2000; 2002a] is that they are designed to use 
only views that are adequate for learning,  thus being unable 
to also exploit imperfect views that would permit a faster con(cid:173)
vergence to the target concept.  To address this problem, we 
extend the multi-view learning framework by introducing the 
idea of learning from strong and weak views.  By definition, 
a strong view consists of features that are adequate for learn(cid:173)
ing  the  target concept;  in  contrast,  in  a  weak  view one can 
only learn a concept that is more general or specific than the 
target concept.  We  introduce a novel algorithm, Aggressive 
Co-Testing,  that  exploits  both  strong  and  weak  views  with(cid:173)
out additional data engineering costs. We also describe a case 
study on wrapper induction, which shows that Aggressive Co-
Testing clearly outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms. 

To  illustrate  the  idea of strong  and weak  views,  consider 
the task of extracting fax numbers from a directory of restau(cid:173)
rant  Web  pages  such  as  Zagat.  The  two  wrapper induction 
views described above are strong views because each of them 
is (typically) sufficient to extract the item of interest  [Muslea 
et  al.,  2000]. 
In  addition  to  these  two  strong  views,  we 
can  also  exploit  a  view  that  consists  of  tokens  within  the 
item  to  be  extracted. 
In  this  view,  we  learn  the  grammar 
" ( Number )  Number - Number" that describes the content of 
the fax numbers. This additional view is a weak view because 
the  grammar above  represents  a concept more  general than 
the  target  one;  i.e.,  it  cannot discriminate  between  fax  and 
phone numbers that appear within the same Web page. 

Aggressive Co-Testing for wrapper induction works as fol(cid:173)
lows:  first,  it  uses  a  few  labeled  examples  to  learn  a  rule 
in each view (i.e.,  one weak and two strong rules).  Then  it 
queries an unlabeled example on which the two strong rules 
extract different strings,  both  of which  are  inconsistent  with 
the content-based grammar.  Each such query is likely to rep(cid:173)
resent a mistake not only in one, but in both strong views, thus 
leading to faster convergence.  We use a collection of 33 dif(cid:173)
ficult extraction tasks to show that using the weak view dra(cid:173)
matically reduces the need  for labeled data:  compared with 
existing  state  of the  art  active  learners,  our novel  algorithm 
requires between 45% and 8 1% fewer labeled examples. 

2  Related work 
The  idea  of exploiting  complementary  information  sources 
(i.e.,  types  of  features)  appears  in  various  multi-strategy 

INFORMATION  EXTRACTION 

415 

learners.  Of particular interest are two recent papers  [Kush-
merick et  al,  2001; Nahm and Mooney, 2000]  in  which the 
authors use sets of features that clearly do not have the same 
expressive  power.  This  work can  be  seen  as  learning  from 
strong and weak views, even though it was not formalized as 
such, and it was not used for active learning. 

Kushmerick et al.  12001] focus on classifying the lines of 
text on a business card as a person's name, affiliation, address, 
phone number, etc.  In this domain, the strong view consists 
of the words that appear on each line, based on which a Naive 
Bayes text classifier is learned. In the weak view, one can ex(cid:173)
ploit the relative order of the  lines on  the card by  learning a 
hidden  Markov Model  that predicts  the probability of a par(cid:173)
ticular ordering of the lines on the business card (e.g., name 
followed by address, followed by phone number). 

This  weak  view  defines  a  class  of concepts  that  is  more 
general than  the target concept:  all  line orderings are possi(cid:173)
ble, even though they are not equally probable.  The order of 
the  text  lines  cannot be  used  by  itself to  accurately  classify 
the lines. However, when combined with the strong view, the 
ordering information leads to a classifier that clearly outper(cid:173)
forms the stand-alone strong view [Kushmerick et al., 2001]. 
Another algorithm that can be seen as learning from strong 
and  weak  views  is  DISCOTEX  I Nahm  and  Mooney,  2000], 
which  extracts job  titles,  salaries,  locations,  etc  from  com(cid:173)
puter science job postings  to the newsgroup  a u s t i n. jobs. 
DISCOTEX  proceeds  in  four  steps: 
it  uses  RAPIER 
fCaliff and Mooney,  1999]  to learn extraction rules for each 
item of interest. Second, it applies the learned rules to a large, 
unlabeled corpus of job postings and creates a database that 
is populated  with  the  extracted data.  Third,  by  text  mining 
this  database,  DISCOTEX  learns  to  predict the  value of each 
item  based on the values of the other  fields.  For example,  it 
may discover that " IF  the 
include 
C++  and  CORBA  THEN  the  development  p l a t f o r ms 
include  windows".  Finally,  when the system  is deployed 
and the RAPIER rules fail to extract an item, the mined rules 
are used to predict the item's content. 

job  requirements 

first, 

In this scenario, the RAPIER rules represent the strong view 
because they are sufficient for extracting the data of interest. 
In contrast, the mined rules represent the weak view because 
they cannot be  learned or used by themselves.  Furthermore, 
as DISCOTEX discards all  but the most accurate of the mined 
rules, which are highly-specific, it follows that the weak view 
can be used to learn only concepts that are more specific than 
the target concept. Nahm and Mooney show that these mined 
rules improve the extraction accuracy by capturing informa(cid:173)
tion that complements the RAPIER extraction rules. 

3  Preliminaries 
In  this  section  we  first  explain  the  main  idea  behind  Co-
Testing algorithms [Muslea et al.,  2000; Muslea, 2002], and 
then we describe the strong and weak views that we use for 
wrapper induction. 

3.1  Background:  the Co-Testing approach 
Figure 1 provides a formal description of the Co-Testing fam(cid:173)
ily of algorithms.  Given a base  learner £,  a set  L  of labeled 

Figure  1:  Co-Testing algorithms repeatedly query examples 
for which the two views make a different prediction. 

examples,  and  a set  U  of unlabeled ones,  Co-Testing works 
as follows:  first,  it learns the classifiers  h1  and  h2  by apply(cid:173)
ing  the  algorithm  C  to  the  projection  of the  examples  in  L 
onto the two views, VI  and V2.  Then it applies  h1  and h2 to 
all unlabeled examples in  U  and detects the set of contention 
points,  which  are  unlabeled  examples  for  which  h1  and  h2 
predict a different label.  Finally, it asks the user to label one 
of the contention points and repeats the whole process. 

The various members of the Co-Testing family differ from 
each other with two respects:  the strategy used to select the 
next query,  and  the  manner in  which  the  output hypothesis1 
is  constructed. 
In  other  words,  each  Co-Testing  algorithm 
is  uniquely  defined  by  the  choice  of  the  heuristics  Select-
QueryO and CreateOutputHypothesis().  In turn, these two 
heuristics depend on the properties of both the application do(cid:173)
main and the base learner C. 

We consider here two types of query selection strategies: 
-  random:  randomly choose a contention point. This strategy 
is appropriate for base learners that lack the capability of 
estimating the confidence of their predictions. 

-  max-confidence: choose the contention point on which both 
h1  and  h2  make  the  most  confident  prediction.  This 
strategy  is appropriate for high accuracy domains (e.g., 
wrapper induction), in  which  there is  little  or no noise. 
On such tasks, discovering examples that are misclassi-
fied "with  high  confidence"  translates  into  queries  that 
"fix big mistakes," thus leading to fast convergence. 

We also consider two "output hypothesis" heuristics: 

-  winner-takes-all.  the  output  hypothesis  is  the  one  learned 
in  the view that makes the smallest number of mistakes 
over the TV queries. 

-  majority  vote:  examples  are  labeled  according to  the  pre(cid:173)

diction of most views (requires at least three views). 

3.2  W r a p p er induction:  the strong  views 
In  wrapper  induction,  each  item  of interest  is  described  by 
three  strings of variable  length:  the  item's content,  together 

1 Once training is completed, the output hypothesis is used to pre(cid:173)

dict the label of all new, unseen examples. 

416 

INFORMATION  EXTRACTION 

Figure 2:  The forward and backward strong rules (i.e.,  Rl  and R2) find the beginning of the phone number by consuming its 
suffix or prefix, respectively.  R3 is a content-based grammar that describes the structure of the item to be extracted. 

R 3: 

(Number)  Number  -  Number 

with  its prefix and suffix within the document.  As this is not 
a typical machine learning representation in which an exam(cid:173)
ple's  description  in  each  view  consists  of a  fixed  set  of fea(cid:173)
tures , we describe here in detail how Co-Testing can be ap(cid:173)
plied to wrapper induction.  As a first step, we introduce the 
basic  ideas  in  STALKER  iMuslea et  al,  2001],  which is the 
wrapper induction algorithm that we use as base learner. 

Consider the  illustrative task of extracting phone numbers 
from  Web  pages  similar  to  the  one  shown  in  Figure  2. 
In 
STALKHR,  an  extraction  rule  consists  of a start  rule  and  an 
end rule that identify the beginning and the end of the  item, 
respectively. Given that start and end rules are extremely sim(cid:173)
ilar,  we  describe  here  only  the  former.  In  order to  find  the 
beginning of the phone number, one can use the start rule 

Rl  =  SkipTo 

"Phone:<i>" 

This  rule  is  applied forward,  from  the  beginning of the  doc(cid:173)
ument,  and  it  ignores  everything  until  it  finds  the  string 
Phone: <i>.  For a slightly more complicated extraction task, 
in which toll-free numbers appear in italics and the other ones 
in bold, one can use a disjunctive start rule such as 

An  alternative  way  to  detect  the  beginning  of  the  phone 

number is to use the start rule 

which  is  applied  backward,  from  the  end  of the  document. 
R2  ignores  everything  until  it  finds  "Fax"  and  then,  again, 
skips back to the first open parenthesis. 

As  shown  in  [Muslea  et  al.,  2001],  the  above  extraction 
rules  can  be  learned  based  on  user-provided  examples  of 
items  to  be  extracted.  Note  that  Rl  and  R2  represent  de(cid:173)
scriptions of the same concept (i.e., start of phone number) in 
two different views.  That is, the views VI  {forward view) and 
V2  (backward  view)  consist  of the  sequences  of tokens  that 
precede and follow the beginning of the item, respectively. 

Note  that both  VI  and  V2  represent strong  views:  as  the 
Web pages to be wrapped share the  same underlying struc(cid:173)
ture, STALKER can be seen as uncovering and exploiting this 
underlying  structure  for extraction  purposes.  Consequently, 
both the forward and backward rules are expected to extract 
the relevant data from any page. 
3.3  Wrapper induction: the weak view 
Besides the two strong views above, one can also use a third, 
content-based view, which describes the actual item to be ex(cid:173)
tracted.  For example, when extracting phone numbers, one 

may exploit the  fact  that they can be described  by a simple 
grammar:  " ( Number )  Number - Number'.  Similarly, when 
extracting  URLs,  one  can  take  advantage  of the  fact  that  a 
typical URL starts with the string " h t t p: //www.", ends with 
the string ". h t m l ", and contains no HTML tags. 

In this paper, we use the following features to describe the 

content of each item to be extracted: 
-  the length  range (in tokens) of the seen examples.  For in(cid:173)
stance, phone numbers in the format" ( Number ) Number 
- Number' consist of six tokens (i.e., the three numbers, 
the dash, and the two parentheses). 

-  the token types that appear in the training examples.  This 
feature consists of the  set of the  most specific wildcards 
(e.g.,  Number,  AllCaps,  etc)  that  match  the  tokens  en(cid:173)
countered in  the  item  to be extracted.  For example,  in 
the  phone  number case,  this  list  consists  of two  wild(cid:173)
cards:  Number and  Punctuation.  The  complete  hierar(cid:173)
chy of wildcards is described in Figure  3. 

-  a start-pattern  such  as  " h t t p: //www."  or " (  Number  )", 

which describes the beginning of the item of interest. 

-  an  end-pattern  such  as  "AlphaNum.html"  or  "Number  -

Number'',  which describes the end of the item. 

In order to learn the content-based description of an  item, 
we  use  as  base  learner  a  simplified  version  of the  DataPro 
algorithm [Lerman and Minton, 2000]. After tokenizing each 
of the user-provided examples of strings to be extracted, the 
weak-view learner proceeds as follows: 
-  the length range is determined by  finding  the examples that 

contain the largest and the smallest number of tokens; 

-  the  token  types are obtained  by  going through the tokens 
that appear in the labeled examples and adding to the set 
of "seen types" the most specific wildcard that covers it. 
-  a  start-pattern  of length  one  consists  of the  most  specific 
wildcard that covers the  first  token in  all labeled exam(cid:173)
ples;  if  all  examples  start  with  the  same  token,  such 
as  " ("  in  the  phone  number  example,  the  actual  to(cid:173)
ken  is preferred to the  most specific  wildcard.  A  start-
pattern of length k  is generated by repeating the proce(cid:173)
dure above for the first, second,..., up to k-th position. 
-  the end-pattern is  learned in  the same manner as the start 

pattern, but using the A; tokens at the end of the item. 

Note  that,  unlike  the  forward  and  backward  views,  the 
content-based view is a weak view because, for many extrac(cid:173)
tion tasks, this view does not uniquely define the item of inter-

INFORMATION  EXTRACTION 

417 

they  use  different query  selection  strategies  and  output  hy(cid:173)
potheses. More precisely, Naive Co-Testing randomly queries 
one of the contention points and generates a winner-takes-all 
output  hypothesis  (i.e.,  the  rule  that  makes  the  fewest  mis(cid:173)
takes on the queries extracts the data from all documents). 

5  Empirical Evaluation 
The algorithms in the experimental comparison 
In this empirical evaluation we compare the  following algo(cid:173)
rithms:  Aggressive  Co-Testing,  Naive  Co-Testing,  Qucry-
by-Bagging,  and  Random  Sampling.  The  first  two  algo(cid:173)
rithms were described in the previous section; Random Sam(cid:173)
pling, which is used as strawman, is identical with Naive Co-
Testing, except that it randomly queries one of the unlabeled 
examples instead of one of the contention points. 

Query-by-Bagging lAbe and Mamitsuka,  1998]  is the only 
single-view  active  learner that can  be  used  in  a  straightfor(cid:173)
ward  manner with  STALKER and,  more generally,  for wrap(cid:173)
per  induction.2  Even  Query-by-Boosting  [Abe  and  Mamit(cid:173)
suka,  19981,  which  is  similar to Query-by-Bagging, cannot 
use STALKER as a base learner:  as STALKER rarely - if ever -
makes mistakes on small training sets, it eliminates the ability 
of the boosting algorithm to generate a diverse committee. 

Query-by-Bagging is based on the idea of creating a com(cid:173)
mittee of extraction rules and then  querying the example on 
which  the  committee  is  the  most  split  (i.e.,  the  rules  in  the 
committee extract the largest number of distinct strings);  the 
algorithm's  actual  predictions  are  made  by  majority  voting 
the committee of rules.  Query-by-Bagging generates a com(cid:173)
mittee  of  10  extraction  rules,  each  of  which  is  learned  by 
training  STALKER  with  examples  obtained  by  re-sampling 
with  replacement the original training set.  We  are forced to 
use  such  a  small  committee  because  of the  scarcity  of the 
training data: as STALKER is expected to train on a handful of 
examples,  sampiing-with-replacement from  a  few  examples 
leads to few distinct training sets for creating the committee. 
Query-by-Bagging is  run  once  in  each  view,  and  we  report 
only the best results, which are obtained in the forward view. 
The datasets 
In  order  to  empirically  compare  the  algorithms  above,  we 
use the wrapper induction testbed introduced by Kushmerick 
[2000].  It consists of 206 extraction tasks from 30 Web-based 
information  sources.3  As  shown  in  [Muslea  et  al.,  2001], 
on  most of these  206  tasks  STALKER  learns  100%  accurate 
rules  from just  one  or  two  randomly-chosen  labeled  exam(cid:173)
ples.  We  consider  here  the  33  most  difficult  tasks  in  the 
testbed, which were also used in previous work on multi-view 
learning [Muslea et al., 2000; 2002b]: 
-  the 28 tasks on which 20 random examples are insufficient 

for learning  100%-accurate rules in both strong views; 

2Typical wrapper induction algorithms do not have the properties 
that active learners require of their base learners; e.g., the ability to 
evaluate the confidence of each prediction [Lewis and Gale, 1994], 
or to randomly sample hypotheses from the version space [Seung et 
al., 1992], or to generate most specific and most general extraction 
rules [Cohn etai,  1994]. 

3These  datasets  can  be  obtained  from  the  RISE  repository: 

h t t p:  //www.  i si  .edu/~muslea/RISE/index.html. 

Figure 3:  The hierarchy of wildcards used for wrapper induc(cid:173)
tion. The parent-child relationship denotes the ls MoreGener-
alThen relationship.  For example, the most general wildcard 
is AnyToken,  which  matches all  possible tokens.  non-Html, 
which is a child of AnyToken, denotes all tokens than arc not 
HTML tags (i.e., alphanumeric tokens and punctuation signs). 

est.  This is a consequence of the fact the view uses only fea(cid:173)
tures that describe the content of each  item.  For Web pages 
that contain  several items with  similar descriptions,  such  as 
multiple email  addresses,  phone numbers,  URLs,  or names, 
the content-based grammar cannot discriminate between  the 
various items with similar descriptions. 

4  Aggressive Co-Testing 
We  introduce  now  Aggressive  Co-Testing,  which  provides 
a  framework  for  naturally  exploiting  both  strong  and  weak 
views.  For Aggressive Co-Testing, the contention points are 
defined as unlabeled examples on which the strong views pre(cid:173)
dict a different label. For the wrapper induction problem, Ag(cid:173)
gressive Co-Testing uses the two strong and one weak views 
described earlier (i.e.,  the  forward,  backward,  and content-
based views).  Consequently, the contention points are unla(cid:173)
beled documents from which the forward and backward rules 
extract different strings.  Aggressive Co-Testing uses the  la(cid:173)
beled examples to learn one hypothesis in each view, detects 
the contention points, and then uses the following heuristics: 
-  SelectQueryO returns the contention point on  which both 
strong  rules  violate  the  largest  number  of  constraints 
learned in the weak view; e.g., the extracted strings are 
longer than the seen examples, the start- and end- pat(cid:173)
terns do not match, etc. This is a max-confidence query(cid:173)
ing  strategy  because  the  content-based  view  is  maxi(cid:173)
mally  confident  that  the  strong  rules  extract  incorrect 
strings. 

-  CreateOutputHypothesisO  uses  the  three  views  for ma(cid:173)
jority  voting.  That  is,  given  a  new,  unseen  document, 
both  strong  rules  are  applied  to  it;  if  they  extract  the 
same string, this string is returned as the answer.  Oth(cid:173)
erwise  the  "winner"  is  the  strong rule  that  violates  the 
fewest constraints  learned in  the  weak view.  Note that 
this  flexible  approach allows Co-Testing to use the most 
appropriate strong rule for each document in the dataset. 
To  better  understand  how  Aggressive  Co-Testing  works, 
we  contrast  it  now  with  Naive  Co-Testing  [Muslea  et  al., 
2000],  which  uses  only  the  two  strong  views.  Both  algo(cid:173)
rithms detect the contention points in  the same  manner,  but 

418 

INFORMATION  EXTRACTION 

-  the five additional tasks on which, in order to learn  100%-
accurate rules in both strong views, STALKER requires a 
large number of random examples [Muslea, 2002]. 

The empirical  results 
For each  of these  33  tasks,  we  use  20-fold cross-validation 
to compare the performance of the algorithms above.  Within 
each fold, the algorithms start with the same two randomly-
chosen examples and then  make a succession  of queries.  In 
the end, the error rate is averaged over the 20 folds. 

Figure 4 summarizes the algorithms1 performance over the 
In  each  graph,  the  X  axis  shows  the  number  of 
33  tasks. 
queries  made  by  the  algorithm,  while  the  Y  axis  shows  the 
number of tasks for which a  100% accurate rule was learned 
after exactly  X  queries.  Each  algorithm  is  allowed  to  make 
18  queries,  for a total  of 20  labeled examples.  By conven(cid:173)
tion, the "19  q u e r i e s" data point denotes tasks for which a 
100% accurate rule is not learned even after 18 queries. 

Aggressive Co-Testing clearly outperforms the other algo(cid:173)
rithms:  it makes an average of 2.43 queries over the 30 tasks 
that are solved with  100%  accuracy;  furthermore, on  11  of 
these  30  tasks,  a  single  query  is  sufficient  to  learn  the  cor(cid:173)
rect  rule.  In  contrast,  Naive Co-Testing,  which comes  sec(cid:173)
ond, makes an average of 4.4 queries per task and converges 
in a single query on just four of the 33 tasks.  Also note that 
Aggressive Co-Testing  solves  correctly  two  of the  five  tasks 
that cannot be solved by Naive Co-Testing; the other two al(cid:173)
gorithms fail to solve 23 and 26 of the 33 tasks, respectively. 
Even  though  Aggressive  Co-Testing  makes  45%  fewer 
queries  that  Naive  Co-Testing,  at  first  glance  the  difference 
between 2.43 and 4.4 queries per task may seem small. How(cid:173)
ever,  one  must  take  into  account  that  wrapper  induction  is 
used  in  information  agents  [Knoblock  et  al,  2001],  which 
typically use hundreds of extraction rules; in this context, Ag(cid:173)
gressive Co-Testing makes a tremendous difference. 

To put our work into a  larger context,  we briefly compare 
the results above with the ones obtained by W I EN  [Kushm-
crick, 20001, which is the only wrapper induction system for 
which there are published results  for all  the extraction tasks 
used here.  As the two experimental setups are not identical,4 
this  is just  an  informal comparison that contrasts Co-Testing 
with a state-of-the-art approach to wrapper induction. 

The results  in  [Kushmerick, 2000] can be summarized as 
follows: W I E N, which uses random sampling, learns the cor(cid:173)
rect extraction rule on  15 of the 33 task.  On these  15 tasks, 
WIEN requires between 25 and 90 labeled examples5 to learn 
the correct rule.  For the same  15 tasks, both Aggressive and 
Naive  Co-Testing  learn  100%  accurate  rules  from  at  most 
eight labeled examples (two random plus at most six queries). 

4Instcad  of using  cross-validation,  WIEN  repeatedly  splits  the 

dataset into randomly chosen training and test sets. 

5For WIEN, an example consists of a document in which all items 
of interest arc labeled;  e.g., a page with  15 labeled names repre(cid:173)
sents a single example. In contrast, STALKER counts the 15 labeled 
strings as 15 examples.  We convert the WIEN results into equiva(cid:173)
lent STALKER-like ones by multiplying the number of WIEN labeled 
pages by the average number of item occurrences per page. 

Discussion 
The empirical results deserve several comments.  First of all, 
the  experiments  illustrate  the  benefits  of  a  framework  that 
naturally integrates strong and weak  views:  Aggressive Co-
Testing exploits the strengths and mitigates the weaknesses of 
each individual view.  For example,  we do not use the weak 
view  to  identify  the  contention  points  because  its  mistakes 
may be "unfixable" (remember that in a weak view one learns 
a concept more general/specific than the one of interest).  On 
the other hand, we use the weak view both to detect the highly 
informative contention points and to find the most appropriate 
strong view for each prediction. 

In  contrast to  Aggressive Co-Testing,  existing  multi-view 
learners [Blum and Mitchell,  1998; Muslea et al, 2000] can 
use only the strong views, thus losing an important source of 
information.  Similarly, single-view learners must either pool 
all features together or simply  ignore all but one view.  Note 
that,  in  practice,  pooling the features together may not be a 
straightforward task: 
-  in  DISCOTEX  iNahm  and  Mooney,  2000],  the  text  min(cid:173)
ing  features  (the  weak  view)  are  the  extracted  items, 
which  become  available  only  after  the  extraction  rules 
are learned and applied to the unlabeled corpus. 

-  the main contribution of iKushmerick et al, 2001 ] consists 
of a novel algorithm that exploits features from both the 
strong and weak views (i.e., the words in each text line, 
and the lines's order within the business card). 

Second, we ran an additional experiment to determine the 
usefulness  of  the  weak  view  with  respect  to  each  heuristic 
(i.e., query selection and output hypothesis).  We considered 
two  hybrid  algorithms  between  Aggressive  and  Naive  Co-
Testing:  one  uses  the  random  and  majority  vote  heuristics, 
while  the  other  uses  max-eonfidence  and  winner-takes-all; 
i.e., each hybrid exploits the weak view in only one of the two 
heuristics.  Because of space constraints,  we just summarize 
our  findings:  the  two  hybrids  outperform  Naive  and  under-
perform Aggressive  Co-Testing;  more  precisely,  they  make 
an  average of 3.0  and  3.9  queries per task,  respectively.  In 
other words,  the  weak  view  improves both  the  query  selec(cid:173)
tion and the output hypothesis. 

Finally, note that on three of the 33 tasks, Aggressive Co-
Testing  fails  to  learn  100%-accurate rules;  in  fact,  on these 
tasks Query-by-Bagging and Random Sampling obtain more 
accurate  rules  than  both  Aggressive  and  Naive  Co-Testing. 
This  happens  because,  on  these  three  tasks,  the  backward 
view is significantly less accurate than the forward one. Con(cid:173)
sequently,  the  distribution  of the  queries  is  skewed  towards 
mistakes  of  the  "bad  view",  which  arc  not  informative  for 
either view:  the "good view" extracts the correct string any(cid:173)
way,  while  the  "bad  view"  is  inadequate  to  learn  the  target 
concept. To cope with this problem, we plan to use view val(cid:173)
idation  [Muslea et al, 2002b], which predicts whether or not 
the strong views are appropriate for a particular task. 

6  Conclusion and Future Work 
In  this  paper we  introduce  the  concepts  of strong  and  weak 
views  and  present a  novel  active  learner that  naturally  inte(cid:173)
grates  and exploits both  types  of views.  In  a case  study  on 

INFORMATION  EXTRACTION 

419 

wrapper induction, we show that weak views represent a pow(cid:173)
erful  source  of information  that  can  be  used  both  to  detect 
highly informative examples and to  improve the algorithm's 
predictions. On a set of 33 difficult extraction tasks, our novel 
algorithm converges by making up to 81 % fewer queries than 
other state of the art active learners. 

We  intend  to continue our work  along several  directions. 
First,  we plan to investigate the use of weak views for semi-
supervised multi-view  learning  [Blum  and  Mitchell,  19981. 
Second,  we  intend  to extend  view  validation  [Muslea  et al, 
2002b]  so that it also  accounts for weak views.  Finally,  we 
are interested in a theoretical analysis of learning from strong 
and weak views. 

Acknowledgments 
This material is based upon work supported in part by the De(cid:173)
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and Air 
Force  Research  Laboratory  under  contract/agreement  num(cid:173)
bers  F30602-01-C-0197  and  F30602-00-1-0504,  in  part  by 
the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under grant num(cid:173)
bers F49620-01 -1 -0053 and F49620-02-1 -0270, in part by the 
United  States  Air  Force  under contract number F49620-02-
C-0103,  and  in  part  by  a  gift  from  the  Microsoft Corpora(cid:173)
tion.  The  U.S.Government  is  authorized  to  reproduce  and 
distribute  reports  for  Governmental  purposes  notwithstand(cid:173)
ing any copy right annotation thereon. The views and conclu(cid:173)
sions contained herein are those of the authors and should not 
be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies 
or endorsements,  either expressed  or  implied,  of any  of the 
above organizations or any person connected with them. 

References 
[Abe and Mamitsuka,  1998]  Naoki Abe and Hiroshi Mamit-
suka.  Query learning using boosting and bagging.  In Pro(cid:173)
ceedings of ICML-98, pages 1-10, 1998. 

[Blum and Mitchell,  1998]  Avrim  Blum  and  Tom  Mitchell. 
Combining labeled and unlabeled data with co-training. In 
Proceedings of COLT-98, pages 92-100, 1998. 

[Califf and Mooney,  1999]  Mary Elaine Califf and Raymond 
Mooney.  Relational  learning  of  pattern-match  rules  for 
information extraction.  In Proceedings ofAAAI-99, pages 
328-334, 1999. 

[Cohnef a/., 1994]  David Cohn, Les Atlas, and Richard Lad-
ner.  Improving generalization with  active  learning.  Ma(cid:173)
chine Learning,  15:201-221,1994. 

[Knoblock et al, 2001]  Craig  Knoblock,  Steven  Minton, 
Jose-Luis Ambite,  Naveen Ashish,  Ion  Muslea,  and An(cid:173)
drew Philpot.  The Ariadne approach to Web-based Infor(cid:173)
mation  Integration. 
International Journal  of Cooperative 
Information Sources,  10(1/2): 145-169,2001. 

[Kushmerick et al, 2001 ]  Nicholas  Kushmerick,  Edward 
Johnston, and Stephen McGuinness.  Information extrac(cid:173)
In  UCAI-2001  Workshop  on 
tion  by  text  classification. 
Adaptive  Text Extraction and Mining,  2001. 

I  Kushmerick,  2000]  Nicholas  Kushmerick.  Wrapper  induc(cid:173)
tion:  efficiency  and  expressiveness.  Artificial Intelligence 
Journal, 118(1 -2): 15-68,2000. 

[Lerman and Minton, 2000]  Kristina  Lerman  and  Steven 
Minton.  Learning the common structure of data.  In Proc(cid:173)
eedings  ofAAAI-2000,  pages  609-614,2000. 

[Lewis and Gale,  1994]  David  Lewis  and William  Gale.  A 
sequential  algorithm  for training  text  classifiers.  In  Pro(cid:173)
ceedings of Research and Development in Information Re(cid:173)
trieval, pages 3-12,  1994. 

[Muslea et al., 2000]  Ion Muslea, Steven Minton, and Craig 
Knoblock.  Selective  sampling  with  redundant views.  In 
Proceedings  ofAAAI-2000,  pages  621-626,2000. 

1 Muslea et al, 2001] Ion Muslea, Steven Minton, and Craig 
Knoblock.  Hierarchical  wrapper induction  for semistruc-
tured  sources.  Journal  of Autonomous Agents  and Multi-
Agent Systems, 4:93-114,2001. 

[Muslea et al, 2002a]  Ion Muslea, Steven Minton, and Craig 
Knoblock.  Active  +  Semi-supervised  Learning  =  Ro(cid:173)
bust  Multi-view  Learning.  In  Proceedings  ofICML-2002, 
pages 435-442,2002. 

[Muslea et al., 2002bl  Ion  Muslea,  Steven  Minton,  and 
Craig Knoblock. Adaptive view validation:  A first step to(cid:173)
wards automatic  view detection.  In  Proceedings oflCML-
2002, pages 443-450, 2002. 

[Muslea, 2002]  Ion  Muslea.  Active  Learning  with  Multiple 
Views. PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science, Uni(cid:173)
versity of Southern California, 2002. 

[Nahm and Mooney, 2000]  Un-Yong  Nahm  and  Raymond 
Mooney.  A mutually beneficial integration of data mining 
and information extraction.  In  Proceedings ofAAAI-2000, 
pages 627-632,2000. 

[Seung etal,  1992]  H.  Sebastian  Seung,  Manfred  Opper, 
and Haim Sompolinski. Query by committee. In Proceed(cid:173)
ings of COLT-1992, pages 287-294,  1992. 

420 

INFORMATION  EXTRACTION 

