Evaluating Significance of Inconsistencies 

Anthony Hunter 

Department of Computer Science 

University College London 

Gower Street 

London WC1E 6BT, UK 
a.hunter@cs.ucl.ac.uk 

Abstract 

Inconsistencies  frequently  occur  in  knowledge 
about  the  real-world.  Some  of  these  inconsis(cid:173)
tencies may be more significant than others,  and 
some knowledgebases (sets of formulae) may con(cid:173)
tain more inconsistencies than others. This creates 
problems of deciding whether to act on these in(cid:173)
consistencies, and if so how.  To address this, we 
provide a general characterization of inconsistency, 
based on quasi-classical logic (a form of paracon-
sistent logic with a more expressive semantics than 
Belnap's four-valued logic, and unlike other para-
consistent logics, allows the connectives to appear 
to behave as classical connectives). We analyse in(cid:173)
consistent knowledge by considering the conflicts 
arising  in  the  minimal  quasi-classical  models for 
that knowledge.  This is used for a measure of co(cid:173)
herence for each knowledgebase, and for a measure 
of significance  of inconsistencies  in  each  knowl(cid:173)
edgebase.  In this paper, we formalize this frame-
work, and consider applications in managing het(cid:173)
erogeneous sources of knowledge. 

Introduction 

1 
An approach to measuring inconsistency is to use proposi(cid:173)
tional quasi-classical (QC) logic [Hunter, 2002]. In this, each 
inconsistent set of formulae is reflected in the QC models for 
the set, and then the inconsistency is measured in the models. 
Obviously,  this is not possible in classical logic, or indeed 
many non-classical logics, because there is no model of an 
inconsistent set of formulae. QC logic, a form of paraconsis-
tent logic, can model inconsistent sets of formulae. There are 
other paraconsistent logics that we could consider, for exam(cid:173)
ple Belnap's four-valued logic [Belnap, 1977], or Levesque's 
3-interpretations iLevesque, 1984], or Grant's generalizations 
of classical satisfaction [Grant, 1978], but these, as we will il(cid:173)
lustrate, involve the consideration of too many models. This 
increases the number of models that need to be analysed and 
it underspecifies the nature of the conflicts. 

However,  the  original  proposal  for  measuring  inconsis(cid:173)
tency based on QC logic does not provide an evaluation of 
the significance of inconsistencies.  As an illustration of the 
need to evaluate significance, consider two news reports on a 

World Cup match, where the first report says that Brazil beat 
Germany 2-0, and the second report says that Germany beat 
Brazil 2-0.  This is clearly a significant inconsistency.  Now 
consider two news reports on the same football match, where 
the first report says that the referee was Pierluigi Collina and 
the second report says that the referee was Ubaldo Aquino. 
This inconsistency would normally be regarded as relatively 
insignificant. 

In this paper,  we extend the idea of measuring inconsis(cid:173)
tency via QC models by giving a new framework for measur(cid:173)
ing the significance of inconsistencies in a knowledgebase. 
To do this, we review aspects of QC logic and a measurement 
of inconsistency based  on  it.  We  then  present our frame-
work for evaluating the significance of inconsistencies.  We 
show this leads to a generalization of a four-valued seman(cid:173)
tics where instead of a single truth value to denote inconsis(cid:173)
tency, we have an infinite sequence of inconsistent truth val(cid:173)
ues Dx where 
. We then discuss how we can use QC 
logic together with significance functions for reasoning and 
analysing with heterogeneously sourced information such as 
news from different newsfeeds. 

2  Review of QC Logic 
We review the propositional version of quasi-classical logic 
(QC Logic) [Besnard and Hunter, 1995; Hunter, 2000]. 
Definition 1 The language of QC logic is that of classical 
propositional logic. We let C denote a set of formulae formed 
in the usual way from a set of atom symbols A, and the con(cid:173)
nectives 
, then Atoms(r) returns the 
set of atom symbols used in T. 
Definition 2 Let a be an atom, and let  be a complementa(cid:173)
tion operation such that 
operator is not part of the object language, but it makes some 
definitions clearer. 
Definition 3  Let 
d i s j u n c t T he 
d e n o t e d ), is defined as the clause obtained 
by removing a%from 
Example 1  Let 
literals. Hence, 

be  a  clause  where  are 

be a clause that includes a 

focus  of 

The 

Focus is used to capture a form of resolution in the seman(cid:173)
tics of QC logic. A model in QC logic is a form of Herbrand 
model. 

468 

KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 

Definition 4  Let  A  be  a  set of atoms.  Let  O  be  the  set of 
objects defined as follows, where 
is a positive object, and 
—a is a negative object. 

We call any 

a QC model.  So X can contain both 

for some atom 

a

c

and 

e

For each atom 

means  that  in  X  there  is  a  reason  for the  belief 
in  X  there  is  a  reason  against  the  belief 

hX 
and that 
Similarly, 
means  that in  X  there  is a reason against the be(cid:173)
lief a and that in X  there is a reason for the  belief 
This 
effectively gives us a four-valued semantics. Though for non-
atomic formulae the semantics, defined next,  is significantly 
different to [Belnap,  1977]. 
Definition 5  Let 
satisfaction.  For a model X,  we define 
, and 

be a satisfiability  relation  called strong 
as follows, where 

are  literals  in 
iff there is a reason for the belief a in X 

is a literal in  C. 

of a connective in classical  logic may not yield the same set 
is entailed by 
of conclusions.  For example,  in  QC logic, 
and 
is entailed by 
and 
.  QC logic is much better behaved in 
this respect than  other paraconsistent  logics  such as 
[da 
Costa,  1974], and consistency-based logics such as [Benfer-
hat  et  al.,  1993].  Furthermore,  the  semantics  of QC  logic 
directly models inconsistent sets of formulae. 

Example 3 Consider the following sets of formulae. 

Whilst four-valued logic [Belnap,  1977] also directly mod(cid:173)
els  inconsistent  sets  of  formulae,  there  are  too  many  Bel-
nap  models  in  many  situations.  Consider for example 

.  There  is  one  minimal  QC  model 

,  but 
there  are  a  number  of  Belnap  models  that  satisfy  this  set. 
QC  logic  has  a  reduced  number  of  models  because  of  the 
constraint  in the definition  of strong  satisfaction  for disjunc(cid:173)
tion that ensures that if the complement of a disjunct holds in 
the model, then the resolvent should also hold in the model. 
This strong constraint means that various other proposals for 
many-valued  logic  will  tend  to  have  more  models  for  any 
given knowledgebase than QC logic.  In particular, the short(cid:173)
comings  of  Belnap's  four-valued  logic  also  apply  to  three-
valued logics such as 3-interpretations by  [Levesque,  1984], 
and a similar proposal by [Grant,  1978]. 

Strong  satisfaction  is  used  to  define  a  notion  of  entail(cid:173)
ment for QC  logic.  There  is  also a natural deduction proof 
theory  for  propositional  QC  logic  [Hunter,  2000]  and  a 
semantic  tableau  version  for  first-order  QC  logic  [Hunter, 
2001].  Entailment  for  QC  logic  for  propositional  CNF for(cid:173)
mulae is coNP-complete, and via a linear time transformation 
these formulae can be handled using classical  logic theorem 
provers [Marquis and Porquet, 2001]. 

The definitions  for QC  models and  for strong  satisfaction 
provide  us  with  the  basic  concepts  for  measuring  inconsis(cid:173)
tency.  QC  logic  exhibits  the  nice  feature  that  no  attention 
needs to be paid to a special form that the formulae in a set 
of premises should have.  This is in contrast with other para-
consistent logics  where  two  formulae  identical  by  definition 

3  Measuring coherence of QC models 
We  now  consider  a  measure  of  inconsistency  called  coher(cid:173)
ence  [Hunter,  2002].  The opinionbase of a QC model A"  is 
the set of atomic beliefs (atoms) for which there are reasons 
for  or  against  in  X,  and  the  conflictbase  of A"  is  the  set  of 
atomic beliefs with reasons for and against in X. 
Definition 8  Let 

Conflictbase(X)  = 
Opinionbase(Ar) — 

In  finding  the  minimal  QC  models  for  a  set  of  formu(cid:173)
lae,  minimization  of  each  model  forces  minimization  of 
the  conflictbase  of  each  model.  As  a  result  of  this  min(cid:173)
imization,  if 
,  then 
(1)  Conflictbase(X)  =  Conflictbase(r)  and  (2)  either 
Opinionbase(X)  =  Opinionbase(y)  or  Opinionbase(A)  is 
not a subset of Opinionbase(Y). 

Increasing the size of the conflictbase,  with respect to the 
size of the opinionbase, decreases the degree of coherence, as 
defined below. 

KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 

469 

Definition 9  The  Coherence function  from 
is given below when X is non-empty, and Coherence 

into  [0,1], 
i = 1. 

If Coherence(X)  =  1,  then  X  is a totally coherent,  and if 
Coherence(AT)  =  0,  then X  is  totally  incoherent,  otherwise, 
A" is partially coherent/incoherent. 

A significance  function  gives  an  evaluation  of the signifi(cid:173)
cance of the conflicts in a QC model. This evaluation is in the 
range  [0,1]  with 0 as least significant and  1  as most signifi(cid:173)
cant. 

Different minimal QC models for the same knowledgebase 

are not necessarily equally coherent. 

The  definitions  for mass  assignment and  mass-based  sig(cid:173)
nificance correspond to mass assignment and belief functions 
(respectively)  in  Demspter-Shafer  theory  fShafer,  1976]. 
However,  here they are used to formalise significance rather 
than uncertainty.  To ease reading in the following,  we drop 
the superscript and subscript for significance functions. 
Proposition 1  Let  m  be a  mass assignment  for 
a  significance  function  for  m, 
of simple  cumulativity  holds  for  all  X,  Y 
Y  implies 

If S  is 
then  the  following  property 

Given that simple cumulativity holds, we see that specify(cid:173)
ing significance in terms of mass assignment is more efficient 
than directly specifying the significance. 

4  Significance functions 
We  now  present  a new  framework  for measuring  the signif(cid:173)
icance of inconsistencies  arising in  QC models,  and  thereby 
in sets of formulae.  The approach is based on specifying the 
relative significance of incoherent models using the notion of 
a mass assignment which is defined below. 

So  mass-based  significance  is  not  additive.  Also  the  re(cid:173)
maining  significance  need  not  be  for the  complement  of X 
(ie,  Xc).  Some  may be assigned to models not disjoint from 
X.  We  now consider some constraints on  mass  assignments 
that give useful properties for mass-based significance. 

We have the constraint 

=  0  to ensure  that 
for all 
Condition 1 
ensures mass is only assigned to models that contain conflicts 
and condition 2 ensures the total mass distributed sums to  1. 
Given some 
, a mass assignment can be localized 
on small subsets of 
, or lim(cid:173)
ited to large subsets of 
. A mass assignment can be regarded 
as a form of metaknowledge, and so it needs to be specified 
for a domain, where the domain is characterized by 
, and so 
the possible models of the domain are subsets  of 

, spread over many subsets of 

A focal mass assignment puts the mass onto the totally in(cid:173)
coherent models, and a solo mass assignment puts the mass 
on the smallest totally incoherent models. 
Proposition  3Ifm  is  a  solo  mass  assignment  for 
is focal mass assignment for 

then m 

Significance is additive for totally incoherent models when 

the mass assignment is solo. 
Proposition 4  Let m be a solo mass assignment  for 
S  be  a  mass-based significance function for  m  and let  X 

Let 

470 

KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 

A  useful  feature  of a  focal  mass-based  significance  func(cid:173)
tion is that as the number of conflicts  rises in  a model,  then 
the significance of the model rises.  This is formalized by the 
following  notion  of conflict cumulativity.  It does not hold  in 
general (see Example 9). 

b  is  a  significance  function for  in,  then  the following  prop-

Since the conflictbase is common for all minimal QC mod(cid:173)

els for a knowledgebase, we obtain the following. 

The  next  two  results  capture  notions  of  monotonicity  for 

mass-based significance. 

This is illustrated in the next example 

In this section, we have augmented the measurement of in(cid:173)
consistency in QC models with an evaluation of significance. 
In the next section, we provide a semantics. 

5  Semantics for mass-based significance 
A mass assignment can be regarded as transforming the four-
valued semantics of QC logic into a many-valued logic. 

We  now  extend  the  significance  functions  to  knowledge-

each  of those  models  as  equally  acceptable,  or equivalently 
we  regard each  of those  models  as  equally  representative of 

Some  knowledgebases  have  zero  significance. 

The knowledge lattice is illustrated in Figure  1.  It is a dis(cid:173)
tributive lattice.  The key difference between Belnap's lattice 
and ours is the value Doth has been split into a chain of truth 
values  b0,  •-.  B1.  If we equate the truth values  {N, T, F, B0} 
with  the  Belnap  truth  values  {Neither,  True,  False,  Both}, 
respectively,  then Belnap's four-valued lattice is a sublattice 
of the knowledge lattice. 

Definition  17  A  many-valued  model  is  a  tuple  (K,^,t) 
where 
is  the  knowledge  lattice  and  t  is  a  truth  as(cid:173)
signment function from the set of atoms A to K. 

In the following, we restrict consideration to solo mass as(cid:173)
signments, though this restriction can be relaxed with slightly 
more complex definitions. 
Definition 18  Let m be a solo mass assignment  for 
let 

and 
he many-valued model.  We describe (X, M) and 

KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 

471 

Figure  1: The Knowledge Lattice 

as being isomorphic models when 

following  conditions  hold: 

and the 

We can define a valuation function that extends a truth as(cid:173)
signment  to  any  formula  by  an  inductive  definition  on  the 
structure of a.  However, for brevity, we will adopt a shortcut 
based on the 
Definition  19  Let  (X,m)  and 
els. A valuation function, denoted  Vt,from 
so that 
a  is non-atomic. 

be isomorphic mod(cid:173)
to K is defined 
when a is an atom, and as follows when 

relation. 

Since we could have defined the valuation function equiv-
alently  in  an  inductive definition  on  the structure of the  for(cid:173)
mulae, we can obtain propositions such as the following that 
relate the valuation function applied to a formula and applied 
to its subformulae. 

This semantics relates to QC logic strong satisfaction rela(cid:173)

tion with the mass-based significance function as follows. 
Proposition 10  Let m be a solo mass assignment for 
let 

Also 
and t  be  a  truth  assignment  where  (X, in)  and 
T 

are isomorphic models.  If < 

_ 

if 
Proposition 11  Let  , 
where 
Coherence(A')  =  0,  and let m  be a  solo  mass  assignment 
for 
and (A", in)  and 
significance function for  m. 

are isomorphic models.  Let S be a 

be a many-valued model where 

Let 

Let 

The  semantics therefore extends  QC  logic  so that  in  case 
of inconsistency,  the  Bi  truth  value  reflects  the  significance 
of the inconsistency, where  B0  is the least significant and B1 
is  the  most  significant. 
It  is  straightforward  to  extend  this 
semantics to focal mass assignments. 

6  Significance  of inconsistencies in  news 
In this section,  we consider news reports.  Having some un(cid:173)
derstanding of the "degree of inconsistency" of a news report 
can help in deciding how to act on it.  Moreover, inconsisten(cid:173)
cies between information in a news report and domain knowl(cid:173)
edge can tell us important  things about the news report.  For 
this  we  use  a significance  function  to  give  a value for each 
possible  inconsistency  that  can  arise  in  a  news  report  in  a 
given domain.  We  may  also use  significance  in  the  follow(cid:173)
ing ways:  (1) to reject reports that are too inconsistent; (2) to 
highlight unexpected news;  (3) to focus on repairing signifi(cid:173)
cant  inconsistencies;  and  (4)  to monitor sources  of informa(cid:173)
tion to identify sources that are unreliable. 

How we use the significance function depends on  the ap(cid:173)
plication.  In  our simple example below,  we assume  a news 
report is a set of ground predicates. Each term is used to rep(cid:173)
resent  a  piece  of information  in  a  news  report  and  may  be 
equivalent  to  a  word,  or  number,  or  a  simple  phrase.  The 
predicate  symbol  is  used  to  tag  or categorise  each  piece  of 
information. 

A potential  inconsistency that can arise in a news report is 
any set of literals that may be rebutted by the domain knowl(cid:173)
edge. 

472 

KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 

Definition 20  Let Φ be  a  news  report and let 
knowledge.  For 

be domain 
is rebutted by 

Example 16 Domain knowledge for weather reports may in­
clude: 

the  report  T1 

in  Example  15,  we  get 

So  with 
that 
{temp(30C),pptn(snow)}  is  rebutted by  clause  I,  and that 
{pollen(high), pptn(snow)}  is rebutted by clause 3. 
Example 17  Continuing Example 15,  we adopt the mass as­
signment  as follows: 

following 

-  0.4, 

significance 

So the reports T1 to  T5  in Example 15,  together with the do­
gives 
main  knowledge  in  Example  16,  denoted  here by 
the 
evaluations.— 
0.7, 
=  0.6, 
-  0.3, 
=  0.1.  If we  set  the  threshold of acceptability for 
a news report t1 at a significance evaluation of 0.3, then only 
T4  and T5 would be acceptable, the others would be rejected. 
This  small  example  illustrates  how  we  may  find  some  in­
consistencies acceptable and others unacceptable, thereby se­
lect  some  news  reports  in  preference  to  others.  For  larger 
examples,  it may be necessary  to specify a mass assignment 
for  many  possible  incoherent  models.  One  solution  for this 
is  to  generate  a  mass  assignment  from  a  partially  specified 
mass assignment.  Mass is assigned to particular models and 
then mass for further models is obtained by interpolation.  In 
particular, domains with some numerical data,  such as sport 
reports  or  weather  reports,  can  be  addressed  with  this  ap-
proach.  For example, if we are only interested in inconsisten­
cies about temperature,  and  we  have  a range of possibilities 
from rain(lcm),...,  to rain(50cm),  then the mass could be 
assigned to two models such as {+ rain(lcm), -  rain(lcm)} 
and {-f-rain(50cm), -rain(50cm)}, and then the remaining 
mass assigned by interpolation. 

7  Discussion 
Whilst  a  number of approaches  to  handling  inconsistent  in­
formation  touch  on  the  issue  of  measurement  of  inconsis­
tency, the topic is underdeveloped.  Information theory can be 
used  to  measure  the  information  content  of sets  of inconsis­
tent formulae [Lozinskii, 1994]. This increases with additions 
of consistent information  and decreases with additions of in­
consistent information.  However, it does not provide a direct 
measure of inconsistency since for example, the value for 
.  Another approach to handling 
is the same as for 
inconsistent  information  is  that of possibility  theory  [Dubois 
et al,  19941.  Let 
is a 

be a weighted formula where 

classical  formula and 
A  possibilistic  knowledge­
base B is a set of weighted formulae.  An a-cut of a possibilis­
tic knowledgebase, denoted 
The inconsistency degree of B, denoted  Inc(B),  is the max­
imum  value  of a  such  that  the 
is  inconsistent.  How­
ever,  this  approach  does  not  discriminate  between  different 
inconsistencies.  For this,  there  is  a  need  for an  underlying 
paraconsistent logic such as QC logic. 

References 
[Belnap,  1977]  N  Belnap.  A  useful  four-valued  logic. 

In 
G  Epstein,  editor,  Modern  Uses  of Multiple-valued Logic, 
pages 8-37. Reidel,  1977. 

[Benferhat et al.,  1993]  S Benferhat, D Dubois, and H Prade. 
Argumentative  inference  in  uncertain  and  inconsistent 
In  Proceedings  of Uncertainty  in  Arti­
knowledge  bases. 
ficial  Intelligence,  pages  1449-1445.  Morgan  Kaufmann, 
1993. 

[Besnard and Hunter,  1995]  Ph  Besnard  and  A  Hunter. 
Quasi-classical  logic:  Non-trivializable  classical  reason­
ing from inconsistent information.  In Symbolic and Quan­
titative Approaches  to  Uncertainty,  volume  946  of LNCS, 
pages 44-51,  1995. 

Ida Costa,  19741  N C da Costa. On the theory of inconsistent 
formal  systems.  Notre  Dame  Journal  of Formal  Logic, 
15:497-510, 1974. 

[Dubois et  al,  19941  D Dubois, J Lang,  and H Prade.  Pos­
In  Handbook  of Logic  in  Artificial  Intelli­
sibilistic  logic. 
gence and Logic Programming, volume 3, pages 439-513. 
Oxford University Press,  1994. 

[Grant,  1978]  J  Grant.  Classifications for inconsistent theo­
ries.  Notre  Dame  Journal  of  Formal  Logic,  19:435-444, 
1978. 

[Hunter, 20001  A  Hunter.  Reasoning  with conflicting  infor­
mation  using  quasi-classical  logic.  Journal  of Logic  and 
Computation,  10:677-703, 2000. 

[Hunter, 2001]  A Hunter.  A semantic tableau version of first-
order quasi-classical  logic.  In  Symbolic  and Quantitative 
Approaches  to  Uncertainty,  volume  2143  of LNCS,  pages 
544-556,2001. 

[Hunter, 2002]  A Hunter. Measuring inconsistency in knowl­
In  Proceedings  of the 
edge  via  quasi-classical  models. 
National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (AAAT  02), 
pages 68-73. MIT Press, 2002. 

[Levesque,  1984]  H  Levesque.  A  logic  of implicit  and  ex­
plicit belief. In Proceedings of the National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence  (AAAF84),  pages  198-202,  1984. 

[Lozinskii,  1994]  E Lozinskii.  Information and evidence in 
logic  systems.  Journal  of Experimental  and  Theoretical 
Artificial  Intelligence,  6:163-193,  1994. 

[Marquis and Porquet, 2001]  P  Marquis  and  N  Porquet. 
Computational aspects of quasi-classical entailment.  Jour­
nal of Applied Non-classical Logics, 11:295-312, 2001. 

[Shafer,  1976]  G  Shafer.  A  Mathematical  Theory  of Evi­

dence.  Princeton University Press, 1976. 

KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 

473 

