Constructing Diverse Classifier Ensembles using Artificial Training Examples 

Prem Melville and Raymond J. Mooney 

Department of Computer Sciences 

University of Texas 

1 University Station, C0500 

Austin, TX 78712 

melville@cs.utexas.edu, mooney@cs.utexas.edu 

Abstract 

Ensemble  methods  like bagging and boosting that 
combine  the  decisions  of  multiple  hypotheses  are 
some  of  the  strongest  existing  machine  learning 
methods.  The  diversity  of  the  members  of  an 
ensemble  is  known  to  be  an  important  factor  in 
determining  its  generalization  error.  This  paper 
presents  a  new  method  for  generating  ensembles 
that  directly  constructs  diverse  hypotheses  using 
additional  artificially-constructed  training  exam(cid:173)
ples.  The  technique  is  a  simple,  general  meta-
learner that  can  use  any  strong  learner as  a  base 
classifier to build diverse committees.  Experimen(cid:173)
tal  results  using decision-tree  induction  as  a  base 
learner demonstrate that this approach consistently 
achieves  higher  predictive  accuracy  than  both  the 
base classifier and bagging (whereas boosting can 
occasionally  decrease  accuracy),  and  also  obtains 
higher accuracy than boosting early in the learning 
curve when training data is limited. 

Introduction 

1 
One  of the  major  advances  in  inductive  learning  in  the  past 
decade  was  the  development of ensemble  or  committee  ap(cid:173)
proaches that learn and retain multiple hypotheses and com(cid:173)
bine  their decisions during  classification  [Dietterich,  2000]. 
For example, boosting [Freund and Schapire,  1996],  an en(cid:173)
semble method that learns a series of "weak" classifiers each 
one  focusing on  correcting  the  errors  made by  the  previous 
one,  has been  found to be one of the  currently  best generic 
inductive classification methods [Hastie et al. , 2001 ]. 

Constructing a diverse committee in which each hypothesis 
is as different as possible (decorrelated with other members 
of the ensemble) while still  maintaining consistency with the 
training data is known to be a theoretically important property 
of a good committee [Krogh and Vedelsby,  1995].  Although 
all successful ensemble methods encourage diversity to some 
extent,  few  have focused directly on the goal of maximizing 
diversity.  Existing methods that focus on achieving diversity 
[Opitz and  Shavlik,  1996;  Rosen,  1996]  are fairly  complex 
and  are  not  general  meta-learners  like  bagging  [Breiman, 
1996]  and  boosting that  can  be  applied to  any  base  learner 
to produce an effective committee [Witten and Frank,  1999]. 

We present a new meta-learner (DECORATE,  Diverse En(cid:173)
semble  Creation  by  Oppositional  Relabeling  of  Artificial 
Training  Examples)  that  uses  an  existing  "strong"  learner 
(one that provides high accuracy on the training data) to build 
an effective diverse committee in a fairly simple, straightfor(cid:173)
ward manner.  This is accomplished by adding different ran(cid:173)
domly constructed examples to the training set when building 
new committee  members.  These  artificially constructed ex(cid:173)
amples are given category  labels that disagree with  the cur(cid:173)
rent  decision  of the  committee,  thereby  easily  and  directly 
increasing  diversity  when  a  new  classifier  is  trained  on  the 
augmented data and added to the committee. 

Boosting  and  bagging  provide  diversity  by  sub-sampling 
or re-weighting the  existing  training  examples.  If the  train(cid:173)
ing set is  small,  this limits the amount of ensemble diversity 
that these methods can obtain. DECORATE ensures diversity 
on  an  arbitrarily  large  set  of additional  artificial  examples. 
Therefore, one hypothesis is that it  will result in  higher gen(cid:173)
eralization accuracy when the training set is small.  This pa(cid:173)
per presents experimental results on a wide range of UCI data 
sets comparing boosting, bagging, and DECORATE, all using 
J48  decision-tree  induction  (a  Java  implementation  of C4.5 
[Quinlan, 1993] introduced in [Witten and Frank, 1999]) as a 
base learner.  Cross-validated learning curves support the hy(cid:173)
pothesis that "DECORATEd trees" generally result in  greater 
classification accuracy for small training sets. 

2  Ensembles and Diversity 
In  an  ensemble,  the  combination  of  the  output  of  several 
classifiers  is  only  useful  if  they  disagree  on  some  inputs 
[Krogh  and  Vedelsby,  1995].  We  refer  to  the  measure  of 
disagreement  as  the  diversity  of the  ensemble.  There  have 
been  several  methods  proposed  to  measure ensemble  diver(cid:173)
sity  [Kuncheva  and  Whitaker,  2002]  —  usually  dependent 
on the measure of accuracy.  For regression, where the mean 
squared error is  commonly used  to  measure  accuracy,  vari(cid:173)
ance  can  be  used  as  a  measure  of diversity.  So  the  diver(cid:173)
sity  of  the  ith  classifier  on  example  x  can  be  defined  as 
di\x) 
are 
the  predictions of the  iih  classifier  and  the  ensemble  respec(cid:173)
tively.  For this setting Krogh et al  11995] show that the gen(cid:173)
eralization  error,  E",  of  the  ensemble  can  be  expressed  as 
E  =  E-  D,  where  E and  D  are  the  mean error and diversity 
of the ensemble respectively. 

= 

LEARNING 

505 

For classification problems, where the 0/1  loss function is 
most  commonly  used  to  measure  accuracy,  the  diversity  of 
the ith  classifier can be defined as: 

(1) 

However,  in  this  case  the  above  simple  linear  relationship 
does not hold between  E,  E and  D.  But there is still  strong 
reason to believe that increasing diversity should decrease en(cid:173)
semble error [Zenobi and Cunningham, 20011.  The underly(cid:173)
ing principle of our approach is to build ensembles of classi(cid:173)
fiers that are consistent with the training data and maximize 
diversity as defined in (1). 
3  DECORATE: Algorithm Definition 
In  DECORATE  (see Algorithm  1),  an ensemble is generated 
iteratively, learning a classifier at each iteration and adding it 
to the current ensemble. We initialize the ensemble to contain 
the classifier trained on the given training data. The classifiers 
in each successive iteration are trained on the original training 
data and also on some artificial data.  In each iteration artifi(cid:173)
cial  training examples are generated from the data distribu(cid:173)
tion; where the number of examples to be generated is spec(cid:173)
ified as a fraction, 
, of the training set size.  The labels 
for these  artificially  generated training examples are chosen 
so as to differ maximally from the current ensemble's predic(cid:173)
tions.  The construction  of the  artificial  data is  explained  in 
greater detail in the following section. We refer to the labeled 
artificially  generated  training  set  as  the  diversity  data.  We 
train a new classifier on the union of the original training data 
and the diversity data.  If adding this new classifier to the cur(cid:173)
rent ensemble increases the ensemble training error, then we 
reject  this  classifier,  else  we  add  it to the  current ensemble. 
This process is repeated until we reach the desired committee 
size or exceed the maximum number of iterations. 

To classify  an  unlabeled  example,  x,  we  employ  the  fol(cid:173)
lowing  method.  Each  base  classifier,  Ci,  in  the  ensemble 
C*  provides  probabilities  for  the  class  membership  of x.  If 
Pci,y(x)  is  the  probability  of example  x  belonging  to  class 
y  according  to  the  classifier  Ci,  then  we compute  the  class 
membership probabilities for the entire ensemble as: 

is  the  probability  of  x  belonging  to  class  y. 
where 
We then select the most probable class as the label for x i.e. 

3.1  Construction  of Artificial  Data 
We generate artificial training data by randomly picking data 
points  from  an  approximation  of the  training-data  distribu(cid:173)
tion. For a numeric attribute, we compute the mean and stan(cid:173)
dard deviation from the training set and generate values from 
the  Gaussian  distribution  defined  by  these.  For  a  nominal 
attribute,  we  compute  the  probability  of occurrence of each 
distinct value in its domain and generate values based on this 
distribution.  We use Laplace smoothing so that nominal at(cid:173)
tribute values not represented  in  the  training  set  still  have a 

non-zero probability of occurrence.  In  constructing artificial 
data points, we make the simplifying assumption that the at(cid:173)
tributes are independent.  It is possible to more accurately es(cid:173)
timate  the joint probability  distribution  of the  attributes;  but 
this would be time consuming and require a lot of data. 

In each iteration, the artificially generated examples are la(cid:173)
beled based on the current ensemble.  Given an example, we 
first  find  the class  membership probabilities predicted by the 
ensemble, replacing zero probabilities with a small non-zero 
value.  Labels are then  selected,  such that the probability of 
selection  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  current ensemble's 
predictions. 

4  Experimental Evaluation 
4.1  Methodology 
To  evaluate  the  performance  of  DECORATE  we  ran  experi(cid:173)
ments on  15 representative data sets from the UCI repository 
[Blake and Merz,  19981 used in similar studies [Webb, 2000; 

506 

LEARNING 

Quinlan,  1996].  We  compared  the  performance  of  D E C O(cid:173)
RATE to that of Adaboost, Bagging and J48, using J48 as the 
base  learner for the  ensemble  methods  and  using  the  Weka 
implementations of these methods [Witten and Frank,  1999]. 
For the ensemble methods,  we  set  the ensemble size  to  15. 
Note that in the case of DECORATE, we only specify a max(cid:173)
imum ensemble size,  the algorithm terminates if the number 
of iterations  exceeds  the  maximum  limit  even  if the  desired 
ensemble  size  is  not  reached.  For  our experiments,  we  set 
the maximum number of iterations in  DECORATE to 50.  We 
ran  experiments varying  the  amount of artificially  generated 
data,  Rsize,  and found that the results do not vary much for 
the range 0.5 to  1.  However,  Rsize  values lower than 0.5 do 
adversely affect DECORATE, because there is insufficient ar(cid:173)
tificial data to give rise to high diversity. The results we report 
are for  RSize  set to  1, i.e.  the number of artificially generated 
examples is equal to the training set size. 

The performance of each learning algorithm was evaluated 
using  10 complete  10-fold cross-validations.  In each  10-fold 
cross-validation each data set is randomly split into  10 equal-
size segments and results are averaged over 10 trials. For each 
trial, one segment is set aside for testing, while the remaining 
data  is  available  for training.  To  test  performance on  vary(cid:173)
ing amounts of training data, learning curves were generated 
by testing  the  system  after training on  increasing  subsets  of 
the overall training data.  Since we would like to summarize 
results over several data sets of different sizes,  we select dif(cid:173)
ferent percentages of the total  training-set size as the points 
on the learning curve. 

To  compare  two  learning  algorithms  across  all  domains 
we  employ  the  statistics  used  in  [Webb,  2000],  namely  the 
win/draw/loss record and the geometric mean error ratio. The 
win/draw/loss  record  presents  three  values,  the  number  of 
data  sets  for  which  algorithm  A  obtained  better,  equal,  or 
worse  performance  than  algorithm  B  with  respect  to  classi(cid:173)
fication  accuracy.  We  also  report  the  statistically  significant 
win/draw/loss record; where a win or loss  is only counted if 
the difference in values is determined to be significant at the 
0.05  level by a paired  t-test.  The geometric mean error ratio 
where  EA  and  EB  are  the  mean 
is defined as 
errors of algorithm  A  and B  on the same domain.  If the ge(cid:173)
ometric mean error ratio is less than one it implies that algo(cid:173)
rithm A performs better than B, and vice versa.  We compute 
error ratios so  as to capture  the degree  to  which algorithms 
out-perform each other in win or loss outcomes. 

4.2  Results 
Our results  are  summarized  in  Tables  1-3.  Each  cell  in  the 
tables presents the accuracy of DECORATE versus another al(cid:173)
gorithm.  If the difference is statistically  significant, then  the 
larger of the  two  is  shown  in  bold.  We  varied  the  training 
set sizes from  1-100% of the total  available data,  with more 
points  lower  on  the  learning  curve  since  this  is  where  we 
expect to  see  the  most difference between  algorithms.  The 
bottom of the tables provide summary statistics, as discussed 
above, for each of the points on the learning curve. 

DECORATE has more significant wins to losses over Bag(cid:173)
ging  for  all  points  along  the  learning  curve  (see  Table  2). 

DECORATE also outperforms Bagging on the geometric mean 
ratio.  This suggests that even in cases where Bagging beats 
DECORATE the improvement is less than DECORATE'S im(cid:173)
provement on Bagging on the rest of the cases. 

DECORATE  outperforms  AdaBoost early on  the  learning 
curve both on significant wins/draw/loss record and geomet(cid:173)
ric mean ratio; however, the trend is reversed when given 75% 
or  more  of the  data.  Note  that  even  with  large  amounts  of 
training data, DECORATE'S performance is quite competitive 
with Adaboost - given 100% of the data DECORATE produces 
higher accuracies on 6 out of 15 data sets. 

It  has  been  observed  in  previous  studies  [Webb,  2000; 
Bauer  and  Kohavi,  1999]  that  while  AdaBoost  usually  sig(cid:173)
nificantly reduces the error of the base learner, it occasionally 
increases it, often to a large extent. DECORATE does not have 
this problem as is clear from Table 1. 

On many data sets, DECORATE achieves the same or higher 
accuracy as Bagging and AdaBoost with many fewer training 
examples. Figure 1  show learning curves that clearly demon(cid:173)
strate this point.  Hence, in domains where little data is avail(cid:173)
able or acquiring labels is expensive, DECORATE has an ad(cid:173)
vantage over other ensemble methods. 

We  performed additional  experiments  to  analyze the role 
that diversity plays in error reduction.  We ran DECORATE at 
10  different  settings  of  Rsize  ranging  from  0.1  to  1.0,  thus 
varying the diversity of ensembles produced.  We  then com(cid:173)
pared the diversity of ensembles with the reduction in gener(cid:173)
alization error.  Diversity of an ensemble is computed as the 
mean diversity of the ensemble members (as given by Eq.  1). 
We compared ensemble diversity with the ensemble error re(cid:173)
duction,  i.e.  the  difference  between  the  average error of the 
ensemble members and the error of the entire ensemble (as in 
[Cunningham and Carney, 2000]). We found that the correla(cid:173)
tion coefficient  between  diversity and ensemble error reduc(cid:173)
tion is 0.6225 
, which is fairly strong.  Further(cid:173)
more,  we  compared diversity  with  the base  error reduction, 
i.e.  the difference between the error of the base classifier and 
the ensemble error. The base error reduction gives a better in(cid:173)
dication of the  improvement in  performance of an  ensemble 
over  the  base  classifier.  The  correlation  of diversity  versus 
the base error reduction is 
. We note that 
even  though this correlation  is  weak,  it is  still  a statistically 
significant  positive  correlation.  These  results  reinforce  our 
belief that increasing ensemble diversity  is a good approach 
to reducing generalization error. 

To determine how the performance of DECORATE changes 
with ensemble size, we ran experiments with increasing sizes. 
We  compared results  for training  on  20%  of available  data, 
since the advantage of DECORATE is most noticeable low on 
the learning curve.  Due  to  lack of space,  we do not include 
the results for all  15 datasets, but present five representative 
datasets (see Figure 2).  The performance on other datasets is 
similar. We note, in general, that the accuracy of DECORATE 
increases  with  ensemble  size;  though on  most datasets,  the 
performance levels out with an ensemble size of 10 to 25. 

lThe p-value is the probability of getting a correlation as large as 
the observed value by random chance, when the true correlation is 
zero. 

LEARNING 

507 

Figure 1: DECORATE compared to AdaBoost and Bagging 

5  Related Work 
There have been some other attempts at building ensembles 
that focus on the issue of diversity. Liu et al  [1999]  and Rosen 
[1996] simultaneously train neural networks in an ensemble 
using a correlation penalty term in their error functions. Opitz 
and  Shavlik  [1996]  use  a  genetic  algorithm  to  search  for a 
good  ensemble  of networks.  To  guide  the  search  they  use 
an objective function that incorporates both an accuracy and 
diversity term.  Zenobi  et  al  [2001]  build  ensembles  based 
on different feature subsets;  where feature selection is done 
using  a  hill-climbing  strategy  based  on  classifier error and 
diversity.  A classifier is rejected if the improvement of one of 
the metrics lead to a "substantial" deterioration of the other; 
where "substantial" is defined by a pre-sct threshold. 

In all  these approaches, ensembles are built attempting to 
simultaneously  optimize the  accuracy  and  diversity  of indi(cid:173)
vidual ensemble members. However, in DECORATE, our goal 
is to minimize ensemble error by increasing diversity.  At no 
point  does  the  training  accuracy  of the  ensemble  go  below 

80 

508 

LEARNING 

that of the base classifier;  however,  this  is  a possibility with 
previous methods.  Furthermore,  none  of the  previous stud(cid:173)
ies  compared  their methods  with  the  standard ensemble ap(cid:173)
proaches such as Boosting and Bagging (fOpitz and Shavlik, 
1996] compares with Bagging, but not Boosting). 

Compared  to  boosting,  which  requires  a  "weak"  base 
learner that does not completely fit the training data (boosting 
terminates once it constructs a hypothesis with  zero training 
error), DECORATE requires a strong learner, otherwise the ar(cid:173)
tificial  diversity training data may prevent it from adequately 
fitting the real  data.  When applying boosting to strong base 
learners,  they  must  first  be  appropriately weakened in  order 
to  benefit from  boosting.  Therefore,  DECORATE  may  be  a 
preferable ensemble meta-learner for strong learners. 

To our knowledge, the only other ensemble approach to uti(cid:173)
lize artificial training data is the active learning method intro(cid:173)
duced in  ICohn et  al,  1994].  The goal of the committee here 
is to select good new training examples rather than to improve 
accuracy using the existing training data.  Also, the labels of 
the artificial examples are selected to produce hypotheses that 
more faithfully represent the entire version space rather than 
to produce diversity. Cohn's approach labels artificial data ei-
ther all positive or all negative to encourage, respectively, the 
learning of more general or more specific hypotheses. 

6  Future Work and Conclusion 
In  our current approach,  we  are encouraging diversity using 
artificial  training  examples.  However,  in  many  domains,  a 
large amount of unlabeled data is already available.  We could 
exploit these unlabeled examples and label them as diversity 
data.  This would allow DECORATE to act as a form of semi-
supervised learning  that exploits both labeled  and  unlabeled 
data [Nigam et al., 2000]. 

Our  current  study  has  used  J48  as  a  base  learner;  how(cid:173)
ever, we would expect similarly good results with other base 
learners.  Decision-tree  induction  has  been  the  most  com(cid:173)
monly used base learner in other ensemble studies,  but there 
has been some work using neural networks and naive Bayes 
[Bauer and Kohavi,  1999; Opitz and Maclin,  1999].  Exper(cid:173)
iments  on  "DECORATing" other  learners  is  another area for 
future work. 

By  manipulating  artificial  training  examples,  DECORATE 
is  able  to use a strong  base  learner to produce an  effective, 
diverse ensemble.  Experimental results demonstrate that the 
approach is particularly effective at producing highly accurate 
ensembles when training data is limited, outperforming both 
bagging and boosting low on the learning curve.  The empir(cid:173)
ical  success  of DECORATE  raises  the  issue  of developing  a 
sound theoretical understanding of its effectiveness.  In gen-

LEARNING 

509 

eral, the idea of using artificial  or unlabeled examples to aid 
the construction of effective ensembles seems to be a promis(cid:173)
ing approach worthy of further study. 

Acknowledgments 
This  work was  supported by DARPA  EELD  Grant F30602-
01-2-0571. 

References 
[Bauer and Kohavi,  1999]  E.  Bauer  and  R.  Kohavi.  An 
empirical  comparison of voting classification  algorithms: 
Bagging,  boosting  and  variants.  Machine  Learning,  36, 
1999. 

iBlake and Merz,  1998]  C.  L.  Blake  and  C.  J.  Merz. 
learning  databases. 

UCI 
http://www.ics.uci.edurmlearn/MLRepository.html, 

repository  of  machine 

iKrogh and Vedelsby, 1995]  A. Krogh and J. Vedelsby. Neu(cid:173)
ral network ensembles,  cross  validation and active learn(cid:173)
ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys(cid:173)
tems 7, 1995. 

iKuncheva and Whitaker, 2002]  L. 

and 
C.  Whitaker.  Measures  of diversity  in  classifier  ensem(cid:173)
bles  and  their  relationship  with  the  ensemble  accuracy. 
submitted, 2002. 

Kuncheva 

[Liu and Yao,  1999]  Y.  Liu and X.  Yao.  Ensemble learning 

via negative correlation.  Neural Networks,  12,  1999. 

[Nigam et al, 2000]  K.  Nigam,  A.  K.  McCallum,  S. Thrun, 
and T. Mitchell. Text classification from labeled and unla(cid:173)
beled documents  using  EM.  Machine Learning,  39:103-
134,2000. 

[Opitz and Maclin,  1999J  David Opitz  and Richard  Maclin. 
journal 

Popular  ensemble  methods: 
of Artificial Intelligence Research, 11.169-198,1999. 

study 

An 

[Breiman,  1996]  Leo Breiman. Bagging predictors. Machine 

Learning,  24(2): 123-140,1996. 

ICohn etal,  1994]  D.  Cohn,  L.  Atlas,  and  R.  Ladner. 

Im(cid:173)
proving  generalization  with  active  learning.  Machine 
Learning,  15(2):201-221,1994. 

[Cunningham and Carney, 2000]  P. Cunningham and J. Car(cid:173)
ney.  Diversity  versus  quality  in  classification  ensembles 
based on feature selection.  In 11th European Conference 
on Machine Learning, pages  109-116,2000. 

[Dietterich, 2000]  T.  Dietterich.  Ensemble methods in  ma(cid:173)
chine learning. In J. Kittler and F. Roli, editors, First Inter(cid:173)
national Workshop on Multiple Classifier Systems, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, pages  1-15. Springer-Verlag, 
2000. 

[Freund and Schapire,  1996]  Yoav  Freund  and  Robert  E. 
Schapire.  Experiments with a new boosting algorithm.  In 
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Ma(cid:173)
chine Learning, July 1996. 

[Hastieral, 2001]  Trevor  Hastie,  Robert  Tibshirani,  and 
Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning. 
Springer Verlag, New York, August 2001. 

[Opitz and Shavlik,  19961  D. Opitz and J. Shavlik.  Actively 
searching for an effective neural-network ensemble.  Con-
nection Science, 8, 1996. 

[Quinlan,  1993]  J.  Ross  Quinlan.  C4.5:  Programs for Ma(cid:173)
chine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo,CA,  1993. 
[Quinlan, 1996]  J.  Ross  Quinlan.  Bagging,  boosting,  and 
C4.5. In Proceedings of the 13th National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, August 1996. 

[Rosen, 1996]  B. Rosen.  Ensemble learning using decorre-

lated neural networks.  Connection Science, 8, 1996. 

[Webb, 2000]  G.  Webb.  Multiboosting:  A  technique  for 
combining boosting and wagging.  Machine Learning, 40, 
2000. 

[Witten and Frank,  1999]  Ian  H.  Witten  and  Eibe  Frank. 
Data  Mining:  Practical  Machine  Learning  Tools  and 
Techniques with Java Implementations.  Morgan Kauf(cid:173)
mann, San Francisco, 1999. 

[Zenobi and Cunningham, 2001]  G. Zenobi and P. Cunning(cid:173)
ham.  Using diversity in preparing ensembles of classifiers 
based on different feature subsets to minimize generaliza(cid:173)
tion error. In Proceedings of the European Conference on 
Machine Learning, 2001. 

510 

LEARNING 

