Learning Minesweeper with Multirelational Learning 

Lourdes Pefia Castillo 

Otto-von-Guericke-University 

Magdeburg, Germany 

Abstract 

Minesweeper is  a  one-person  game  which  looks 
deceptively  easy  to  play,  but  where  average  hu(cid:173)
man performance is far from optimal.  Playing the 
game requires  logical,  arithmetic and probabilis(cid:173)
tic reasoning based on spatial relationships on the 
board.  Simply checking a board state for consis(cid:173)
tency is an NP-complete problem.  Given the dif(cid:173)
ficulty of hand-crafting  strategies  to play  this  and 
other games, AI researchers have always been in(cid:173)
terested  in  automatically  learning  such  strategies 
from experience. In this paper, we show that when 
integrating certain techniques  into a general pur(cid:173)
pose learning system (Mio), the resulting system is 
capable of inducing a Minesweeper playing strat(cid:173)
egy that beats the winning rate of average human 
players. 
In  addition,  we  discuss  the  necessary 
background  knowledge,  present experimental  re(cid:173)
sults demonstrating the gain obtained with our tech(cid:173)
niques and show the strategy learned for the game. 

Introduction 

1 
Minesweeper is a popular one-player computer game written 
by Robert Donner ami Curt Johnson which was included in 
Microsoft Windows© in 1991. At the beginning of the game, 
the player is presented with a px q board containing pq tiles 
or squares which are all blank. Hidden among the tiles are M 
mines distributed uniformly at random on the board. The task 
of the player is to uncover all the tiles which do not contain a 
mine.  At each turn the player can select one of three actions 
(moves):  to mark a tile as a mine; to unmark a tile; and to 
uncover a tile.  In the last action, if the tile contains a mine, 
the player loses; otherwise, the number of mines around the 
tile is displayed. In the 4 x 4 board depicted in Fig. 1 left, the 
number 1 located on the second row from top indicates that 
there is one and only one mine hidden among the eight blank 
neighbouring tiles. 

Although the  simplicity  of its  rules makes  Minesweeper 
look deceptively easy, playing the game well is indeed chal(cid:173)
lenging:  A player requires logic and arithmetic reasoning to 
perform certain moves given the board state, and probabilis(cid:173)
tic reasoning to minimize the risk of uncovering a mine when 

Stefan Wrobel 

Fraunhofer AIS, Sankt Augustin 
and University Bonn, Germany 

i 

Figure  1:  Left:  Available information on a board.  Right: 
Seven tiles can be determined safe (s) and one a mine(m) 

a safe move cannot be done.  Given the difficulty of hand(cid:173)
crafting playing strategies for this and other games,  AI re(cid:173)
searchers have always been interested in the possibility of au(cid:173)
tomatically learning such strategies from experience.  How(cid:173)
ever, with the exception of reinforcement learning [Tesauro, 
1995], most of the playing strategies and heuristics used in 
game playing programs are coded and tuned per hand in(cid:173)
stead of automatically learned.  In this work, we use a gen(cid:173)
eral purpose ILP system,  Mio,  to learn a playing strategy 
for Minesweeper.  Multirelational learning or ILP consists in 
learning from examples usually within the framework pro(cid:173)
vided by clausal logic. 

The task of learning rules to deduce Minesweeper moves 
proved itself to be an arduous test for current multirelational 
learning systems. In this paper, we describe how recent opti(cid:173)
mizations make possible for Mio to discover a Minesweeper 
playing strategy.  Experimental results obtained by playing 
Minesweeper using this strategy show a better performance 
than that obtained on average by non-expert human players. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  The 
next section discusses the complexity of the game and de(cid:173)
scribes the learning task. Section 3 describes the background 
knowledge, the learning system and the new techniques used. 
Section 4 shows our empirical results on the effectiveness of 
the learning techniques, the strategy obtained and its perfor(cid:173)
mance at game playing. Related work is surveyed in Section 5 
and Section 6 concludes. 

2  Minesweeper 
2.1  Why Is Minesweeper Interesting? 
Minesweeper has been shown to be NP-complete by simulat(cid:173)
ing boolean circuits as Minesweeper positions [Kaye, 2000]. 
Kaye describes the Minesweeper consistency problem as the 
problem of determining if there is some pattern of mines in 
the blank squares that give rise to the numbers seen in a given 

LEARNING 

533 

board  partially  filled  with  numbers  and  marked  mines,  and 
thus determining that the data given is consistent. 

One realizes the complexity of the game by calculating an 
estimate for the size of its search  space.  Consider an  8  x  8 
board with  M  =  10  mines;  in  this  case  at the  beginning of 
the game the player has pq  =  64 tiles from which to choose 
a move (i.e., a tile to uncover) and in the last move, assuming 
the player does  not uncover a mine,  there are  11  tiles  from 
which to choose one. This leads to 
possible move 
sequences to win a game.  Alternatively, one can calculate the 
probability of a  random  player winning  a game.  In the first 
move  the  probability  that  the  random  player  chooses  a  tile 
which does not contain a mine is 54/04, and in the last move 
it  has  1/11  chance  to  choose  the  only  tile  without  a  mine. 
Then, the probability of a random player winning a game  is 
and that is only for the easiest playing level! 
Another measure  of the  complexity of Minesweeper is the 
number of games won on average by non-expert human play(cid:173)
ers.  To  estimate  the  average  human  performance  playing 
Minesweeper, we carried out an informal study.  In the study, 
eleven  persons  who  have  played  Minesweeper before  were 
asked  to  play  at  least  ten  times  in  an  8  x  8  board  with  10 
mines.  Every participant was told to aim for accuracy rather 
than for speed. In this study, a person won on average 35% of 
the games with a standard deviation of 8%. 

The  Learning Task 

2.2 
In Minesweeper there are situations that can be "solved" with 
nontrivial reasoning.  For example, consider Fig.  1 left where 
the  only  available  information  about  the  board  state  are  the 
numbers.  After  careful  analysis  one  finds  that  the  squares 
with an s (see Fig.  1 right) do not contain a mine, the square 
with an m is a mine, and the state of the blank tiles cannot be 
determined if we do not know how many mines are hidden in 
the board.  There are other Minesweeper situations where the 
available  information is not enough to identify a safe square 
or a mine,  as  in Fig.  2,  and the best option available to  the 
player is to make an informed guess, i.e., a guess that mini(cid:173)
mizes the risk of blowing up by uncovering a mine. 

In this work, we consider the learning task in Minesweeper 
to be the  induction  of rules to  identify  all  the safe squares^ 
and squares with a mine which can be deduced given a board 
state.  For instance, we want the system to learn rules to clas(cid:173)
sify all the blank tiles in Fig.  1  either as safe or mine. 

3  The Learning Tools 
In machine learning it is possible to choose between a propo-
sitional  representation  (in  the  form  of attribute-value  tuples) 
and a multirelational representation (in the form of logic pred(cid:173)
icates).  A multirelational  representation  has the  expressive(cid:173)
ness  required  to  describe  the  concepts  involved  when  rea(cid:173)
soning  about  Minesweeper,  and  is  thus  more  intuitive  than 
the propositional one.  For this reason we use multirelational 
learning for the learning task described above.  Usually a mul(cid:173)
tirelational learning system takes as input background knowl(cid:173)
edge  B,  positive (E+) and negative (E~)  examples of a target 

A safe square is a blank tile which given the current board state 

cannot contain a mine. 

concept such that 
and has 
to find a clausal  theory T which minimizes the classification 
error on  future  instances.  Next we  describe  the  background 
knowledge and the system used. 

3.1  Background  Knowledge 
The  background knowledge  provides  the  system  with  infor(cid:173)
mation  about  the  domain  and  is  given  in  the  form  of logic 
predicates  (facts  and  rules,  or  clauses).  A  predicate  is  de(cid:173)
and,  in our case,  argi  in(cid:173)
scribed as 
dicates the argument's type. The background knowledge pro(cid:173)
vided  to  the  learning  system  about  Minesweeper  is  shown 
in  Table  1.  The  predicates  in  the  background  knowledge 
were  defined by trying to  abstract the  concepts  used by hu(cid:173)
mans when explaining their own Minesweeper playing strate(cid:173)
gies.  These  concepts  were  obtained  from  the  first  author's 
Minesweeper  playing  experience  and  from  Minesweeper 
pages on the web. 

In the predicates listed in Table  1, a TD is a determined or 
uncovered tile,  i.e.,  a number 0 . .. 8  is shown on the tile;  a 
TV is an undetermined or blank tile; Board is the board state 
characters 0 . .. 8, m, u; Zone is a list 
given as a list of 
of determined tiles,  and Set is a set of undetermined tiles to(cid:173)
gether  with  the  number  of mines  hidden  among  those  tiles. 
In addition, each symbol preceding an argument denotes how 
that argument should be instantiated when calling the predi(cid:173)
is an  input argument and should be instanti(cid:173)
cate, 
ated to a non-variable term; 
is an output argument 
and should be uninstantiated, and a 
indicates that the 
constant value of an output argument can appear in a rule. 

534 

LEARNING 

Predicate 
zoneOflnterest(+TU, +Board, -Zone) 

Description 
. returns in Zone the tiles which are determined neighbours of TU and 
the determined tiles which share an undetermined neighbour with them 
(see Fig. 4 center). 
returns how many mines remained to be marked. 
gives the set of tiles in the fringe3  where all the remaining mines are. 

totalMinesLeft(+Board,-Int) 
allMineslnFringe(+Board, -Set) 
setHasXMines(-TD, +Board, +Zone, -Set) gives in Set the undetermined neighbours of TD (TD is in Zone), 
and the number of mines hidden among them (sec Fig. 4 right). 

diffSetHasXMines(+Setl, +Set2, -Set)  ...  returns in Set all and only the tiles of Setl  which are not also in Set2 

inSet(+TU, +Set) 
lengthSet(+Set,+Int) 
minesInSet(+Set,-#Int) 

and the number of mines hidden among the tiles in Set. 
is true when TU is a member of Set. 
is true when Set contains Int tiles. 
returns the number of mines hidden among the tiles in Set. 

Table  1:  Minesweeper background knowledge 

(also called bottom clause).  This 

3.2  The  System 
Mio  is  an  example-driven  covering  system  (see  Fig.  3)  in(cid:173)
troduced  by  Pena  Castillo  and  Wrobel  [2002b]  which  uses 
a  Progol-like  declaration  language  and,  the  same  as  Pro-
gol [Muggleton,  1995], lower bounds the search space with a 
most specific clause 
is 
a maximally specific clause which entails (covers) a positive 
example  e.  Mio  performs  a  general-to-specific  (top-down) 
IDA*  [Korf,  1985]  search to  find  a clause to add to the the(cid:173)
ory.  In addition, Mio selects stochastically the examples from 
which it learns, performs parallel search to increase the stabil(cid:173)
ity of the example-driven approach,  and enforces type strict(cid:173)
ness.  Three other techniques arc  implemented in  Mio to al(cid:173)
low  the  learning  of Minesweeper rules:  macro-operators  (or 
macros,  for short) to reduce the search space, greedy search 
with  macros  to  speed  up  the  learning  process,  and  active 
learning to guide the exploration of the instance space. 
Macros 
Macros  in  multirclational  learning  [Pena  Castillo  and  Wro(cid:173)
bel,  2002a]  are a formal  technique to reduce the hypothesis 
space explored by a covering system.  A macro is a sequence 
of literals,  chosen  from  the bottom  clause,  which  is  created 
based  on provider-consumer  relationships between  the  liter(cid:173)
als.  A  literal  is  a provider if it  has  output arguments,  and  it 
is  a  consumer  if it  receives  as  an  input  argument  a  variable 
provided  by  another  literal  in  the  bottom  clause.  Pena  and 
Wrobel  show  that  by  adding  macros  instead  of literals  to  a 
clause, the number of clauses evaluated by the system is sig(cid:173)
nificantly reduced. 
Greedy Search  with  Macros 
In  [Pena Castillo and  Wrobel,  2002a]  macros  are used with 
IDA*.  It  is  well  known  that greedy  search  explores  on  av(cid:173)
erage  less  nodes  than  IDA*;  however,  greedy  search  could 
miss  a  solution  because  it  underestimates  the  importance 
of provider  literals  without  discriminative  power  which  are 
nonetheless  necessary  to  introduce  new  variables  (this  is 
known  as  the  myopia problem).  Since  macros  add  several 
literals at once to a clause, they might reduce the myopia of 
greedy search allowing us to gain in efficiency without losing 

3Fringe refers to all the blank tiles with a determined neighbour. 

too  much  in  effectiveness.  We  implement  a  greedy  search 
with  macros  which  consists  of a  lookahead  step  where  all 
the macros are combined with each other and the best evalu(cid:173)
ated clauses arc selected.  Then if the selected clauses can be 
extended (refined) the  system tries to combine these clauses 
with all the macros available and selects the best candidates. 
This last step is repeated until there is no clause which can be 
extended and the best candidates are returned. 

Active  Inductive  Learning 
In  the  covering  algorithm  a  clause  is  learned  which  covers 
(explains) some positive examples and none (or few) negative 
ones; however, in domains such as games and puzzles, thou(cid:173)
sands of examples are required to contain most of the possible 
game situations; on the other hand, considering thousands of 
examples when evaluating a rule slows down the learning pro(cid:173)
cess. Thus, to improve the efficiency of the exploration of the 
instance space, active learning [Cohn et  al,  1994] is included 
in Mio. 

Active  inductive  learning  consists  of the  following  steps. 
At the  beginning,  Mio  learns  from  few  randomly  drawn  ex(cid:173)
amples  and  when  it  has  learned  some  clauses  gives  these 
clauses to an active learning server. The active learning server 
returns to Mio counterexamples*.  These counterexamples are 
selected from examples given by a random example generator 
(or random  sampler).  While Mio  iterates on  the new exam(cid:173)
ples received, the server tests the rules obtained against ran(cid:173)
domly  drawn  examples,  discards  all  the rules  below  a  user-
defined  accuracy  value  and  collects  new  counterexamples. 
This  validation  step  on  the  server  side  avoids  overfitting5. 
These steps arc repeated until a user-defined maximum num(cid:173)
ber of iterations is reached or no counterexample is found. 

Active  inductive  learning  is  similar  in  spirit  to  integrative 
windowing  [Furnkranz,  1998]  with two main differences:  in 
our  approach  random  sampling  is  done  dynamically  and  a 
client-server  architecture  is  used  which  allows  to  treat  test(cid:173)
ing and learning as separated processes. 

4 A counterexample is a positive example not covered by a set of 
clauses T or a negative example covered by at least one clause in T. 
5Overfitting refers to obtaining results with  high classification 

error over new data despite null or almost null training error. 

LEARNING 

535 

Figure 4:  A rule  learned by Mio.  Left:  Is the highlighted tile safe?  Center:  zoneOflntcrest corresponding to the highlighted 
tile.  Right:  Applying difference operations to the sets determined by the tiles inside a circle is concluded that the tile 40 is safe 

4  Empirical Results 
4.1 
Improvements Obtained with each Technique 
Experiments were carried out to determine the effects on the 
rules obtained and on the system efficiency, of macros, greedy 
search with macros, and active inductive learning. To produce 
the training examples, we randomly generate board configu(cid:173)
rations and take  all  blank tiles  with  at  least one  determined 
neighbour as  examples.  If the  blank tile  does  not contain  a 
mine is  labeled as safe, otherwise it is labeled as mine.  Af(cid:173)
terwards, contradictory examples are removed.  In the exper(cid:173)
iments,  the  learning  task  was  to  learn  rules  to  identify  safe 
tiles.  The rule to discover mines was learned using the best 
setting (i.e., using active learning, macros and greedy search). 
For the completeness of this work, we ran Progol [Muggle-
ton and Firth,  2001]  and Foil  [Quinlan and Cameron-Jones, 
1995] on the same learning task as Mio;  however, we failed 
to make the systems learn correct rules about safe tiles.  Pro(cid:173)
gol search was interrupted due to search limits implemented 
in  the  system  (although  the  maximum  stack  depth and  res(cid:173)
olutions  steps  were  set  to  50000  and  10000,  respectively), 
and Foil pruned determined literals which are needed.  This 
might  imply  that  the  optimizations  included  in  Mio  are  in(cid:173)
deed necessary to learn a Minesweeper playing strategy.  Ta(cid:173)
ble 2 shows the empirical results with four Mio settings. 

All  the  experiments  with  active  learning  were performed 
with the same seeds which means that the same training ex(cid:173)
amples  are  generated  by  the  random  sampler  and  that  Mio 
selects the same examples to guide the search.  For the exper(cid:173)
iments without active learning, we took five random samples 
from  the  set  of examples  used  in  the  active  learning  exper(cid:173)
iments.  The  size  of the  sample  is  equal  to  the  number  of 
examples  received by Mio  when  performing  active  learning 
(40 positive  and  34  negative  examples).  We carried  out  an 
extra  experiment  where  Mio  was  given  the  complete  set  of 
examples (2890 positive and  1306 negative) used by the ac(cid:173)
tive  learning server to test Mio's rules and select counterex(cid:173)
amples;  however, this experiment was stopped after Mio ran 
for  10 days.  To reduce the running time of the experiments, 
we  set the  maximum number of clauses explored per search 
to 4000 clauses. 

Table 2 shows that each optimization added to Mio reduces 
the average number of rules (nodes) explored per search and 

the number of times  the  search  is  interrupted  because  of the 
search  limit.  Without active  learning, overfitting occurs and 
erroneous  rules  are  obtained.  The  performance  of the  rules 
obtained  with  IDA*+M  is worse than that of the  IDA*  rules 
because  Mio  with  macros  explores  a  larger  part  of the  hy(cid:173)
pothesis space and thus the  IDA*  +  M  setting overfits more 
the training data.  However, if no limit in the maximum num(cid:173)
ber of clauses explored per search is set, both settings (IDA* 
and IDA*+M) obtain the same Riles.  The running time of the 
fastest setting (AL+GS+M) is 56hrs. 
4.2  Rules  Learned 
Table 3  shows the rules with the highest winning rate which 
were obtained by  using both AL+GS+M  and AL+IDA*+M. 
An  extra  rule  was  obtained  with  the  latter setting;  however, 
this  extra  rule  does  not  improve  the  playing  performance. 
One important feature of the rules learned by Mio is that they 
can be applied independently of the size of the board and the 
number of mines.  The rules vary in complexity.  Rule S-l  and 
Rule  M-l  correspond  to  the  trivial  situations  where  a  deter(cid:173)
mined  tile  needs  k  mines  and K: mines  are  already  marked, 
and where a determined tile needs k mines and it has A; blank 
neighbours, respectively. 

On the other hand, Rule S-3 can be seen as one of the most 
complex  rules  because  it  involves  three  determined  tiles  to 
deduce a safe tile.  Fig. 4 left shows a board state where Rule 
S-3  is the only one which allows to identify a safe tile.  The 
rule  obtains  the  zoneOflntcrest  corresponding  to  the  unde(cid:173)
termined  tile  considered  (Fig.  4  center).  Then  by  applying 
difference operations on the sets determined by three uncov(cid:173)
ered tiles  from the zoneOflnterest (see Fig.  4 right),  the set 
([40], 0) is obtained and thus it is deduced that tile 40 is safe. 

4.3  Game  Playing 
To  evaluate  the  performance  at  game  playing  of  each  set 
of rules  obtained,  we  used  each  set  of rules  as  the  playing 
strategy  of an automatic  Minesweeper player and calculated 
the percentage of games  won  by  the  player in  1000 random 
games (see Table 2).  The playing conditions were the same 
as the ones presented to the human players; i.e., at the begin(cid:173)
ning the player is presented with an empty 8 x8 board with 
M  =  10  mines  and  can  uncover  a  mine  in  the  first  move. 
Note that  in  most Minesweeper implementations,  one  never 
hits a mine in the first move. 

536 

LEARNING 

Table 2:  Performance of various Mio settings used to learn rules about safe tiles (AL = Active Learning, GS = Greedy Search 
IDA*  = Iterative Deepening A*, M = Macros) 

Table 3:  Minesweeper rules learned by Mio 

Let  us  analyze  the  performance  of the  best  rule  set  (see 
Table 3).  In  1000 games, the player made  15481  moves from 
which 2762 where random guesses, 169 used Rule S-l, 10285 
used Rule S-2, 54 used Rule S-3, and 2211  used Rule M-l. 

In addition, we examined the effect of adding probabilistic 
reasoning. 
In  the  experiment,  we  instructed  the  player  us(cid:173)
ing  the  rules  shown  in  Table  3  to  select  a  tile  which  mini(cid:173)
that an undetermined tile Tu  is a 
mizes the probability 
mine when none of the rules can be applied. 
is equal 
is  a  determined  neighbour  of 
to 
returns  the  number  of mines  needed  by  Td  and 
returns the  number  of blank  neighbours  of Tj.  Every 
time  the  player has  to  guess,  it  selects  the  tile  which  mini(cid:173)
mizes 
.  This player wins 579 of 1000 random games. 

where 

5  Related  W o rk 
5.1  Minesweeper Playing Programs 
There  are  several  Minesweeper  programs  available  on  the 
web.  These programs are not learning programs but playing 
programs where the authors have embedded their own game 
playing strategy.  Among these programs, John D. Ramsdell's 
PGMS  is  quite  successful  winning  60%  of  10000  random 
games in a 8 x  8 board with 10 mines. 

PGMS  plays  using  the  Equation  Strategy  based  on  find(cid:173)
ing approximate solutions to derived integer linear equations, 
and probabilities.  As mentioned by Ramsdell  [2002], PGMS 
represents the information available on the board as a set of 
integer  linear  equations.  Associated  with  an  undetermined 
tile is a variable x that has the value 1  if the tile hides a mine, 
or 0 otherwise.  An equation is generated for each uncovered 
tile  with  an  adjacent  undetermined  tile.  Each  equation  has 
the  form 
,  where  5  is  a  set  of undetermined 
tiles, and c is the number of mines hidden among 5.  To sim(cid:173)
plify notation, this equation is written as < 
Since  the 
total number of hidden mines  is known,  an additional  equa(cid:173)
tion  simply  equates  this  number  with  the  sum  of all  of the 
undetermined tiles. 

Every time a tile t is determined safe or a mine, the board 
changes are propagated to all the equations containing t and a 
new equation for the undetermined neighbours of t  is added. 
In  addition, 
that So is a proper subset of 
So  is added.  To determine  whether a tile  is safe or a mine, 
PGMS  iteratively  applies  the  following  rules  until  none  are 
applicable7: 

re  two  equations  such 
, the equation 

a

i

f

LEARNING 

537 

References 
[Blocked and Raedt,  1998]  Hendrik  Blocked  and  Luc  De 
Raedt.  Top-down  induction of first order logical  decision 
trees.  Artificial Intelligence,  101(l-2):285-297,  1998. 

[Cohn et al.,  1994]  David Cohn, Les Atlas, and Richard Lad-
ner.  Improving generalization  with  active  learning.  Ma(cid:173)
chine Learning,  15(2):201-221,  1994. 

[Furnkranz,  1998]  Johannes Furnkranz.  Integrative window(cid:173)
Journal  of Artificial  Intelligence  Research,  8:129— 

ing. 
164, 1998. 

[Kaye, 2000]  Richard Kaye.  Minesweeper is NP-complete. 
The Mathematical Intelligencer,  22(2):9-15,  Spring 2000. 
Iterative-deepening  A*:  An 
optimal admissible tree search. In Proc. of the 9th IJCAI, 
pages 1034-1036, 1985. 

[Korf,  1985]  Richard  E.  Korf. 

[Morales,  1996]  Eduardo Morales.  Learning playing strate(cid:173)
gies  in  chess.  Computational  Intelligence,  12(l):65-87, 
1996. 

[Muggleton and Firth, 2001]  Stephen  Muggleton  and  John 
Firth. Relational rule induction with CProgol4.4: a tutorial 
introduction.  In  Relational Data  Mining,  pages  160-187. 
2001. 

[Muggleton,  1995]  Stephen  Muggleton.  Inverse  entailment 
and Progol.  New Generation Computing Journal,  13:245— 
286, 1995. 

[Nakano et al,  1998]  Tomofumi  Nakano,  Nobuhiro 

In-
uzuka, Hirohisa Seki, and Hidenori Itoh.  Inducing Shogi 
heuristics using inductive logic programming.  In Proc.  of 
the 8th Int.  Confi on ILP, pages  155-164,  1998. 

[Pena Castillo and Wrobel, 2002a]  Lourdes  Pena  Castillo 
and  Stefan  Wrobel.  Macro-operators  in  multirelational 
learning:  a search-space reduction technique.  In Proc.  of 
ECML'2002,  pages 357- 368, 2002. 

[Pena Castillo and Wrobel, 2002b]  Lourdes  Pena  Castillo 
and  Stefan  Wrobel.  On  the  stability  of example-driven 
learning systems:  a case study in multirelational learning. 
In  Proc.  ofMICAI'2002,  pages  321-330,  2002. 

[Quinlan and Cameron-Jones,  1995]  J.  Ross  Quinlan  and 
R. Michael Cameron-Jones.  Induction of logic programs: 
FOIL  and  related  systems.  New  Generation  Computing, 
Special issue on ILP,  13(3-4):287-312,  1995. 

[Ramon et al, 2001]  Jan Ramon, Tom Francis, and Hendrik 
Blocked.  Learning a tsume-go heuristic with  TILDE.  In 
Proc. of the 2nd Int. Conf. Computers and Games, pages 
151-169,2001. 

[Ramsdell, 2002]  John  D.  Ramsdell,  November  25,  2002. 

Personal communication. 

[Tesauro,  1995]  Gerald Tesauro. Temporal-difference learn(cid:173)
Communications  of  the  ACM, 

ing  and  td-gammon. 
38(3):58-68, 1995. 

We  were  surprised  to  notice  that although  Mio  was  only 
given  general  background  knowledge  about  Minesweeper, 
the  rules  it  learned  are  similar  to  the  rules  programmed  in 
PGMS.  For  example,  Mio's  Rule  S-l  and  Rule  S-2  corre(cid:173)
spond to the  first  and third rule  in PGMS, respectively;  and 
Mio's Rule M-l  is similar to PGMS second rule.  To compare 
PGMS performance with the performance of Mio's best play(cid:173)
ing strategy, we let our best player (i.e., the player using the 
rules in Table 3 and probabilities) play  10000 random games 
in a 8 x 8 board with 10 mines. Its winning rate is also 60%. 

5.2  M u l t i n a t i o n al  Learning  for  Games 
Other  work  has  been  done  which  applies  ILP  systems  to 
learn  heuristics  or  playing  strategies  for  games.  Ramon 
et  al.  [2001]  used  Tilde  [Blocked  and  Raedt,  1998]  to 
learn  a  theory  that  predicts  the  value  of  a  move  in  Go. 
Morales  [1996]  applied the  system  PAL  to  learn  chess  pat(cid:173)
terns  for  constructing  chess  playing  strategies.  Nakano  et 
al.  [1998]  presented  an  approach  to generate  an  evaluation 
function for Shogi mating problems using ILP. 

6  Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper we described how the use of new ILP techniques 
such  as macros,  greedy  search  with  macros,  and  active  in(cid:173)
ductive  learning  allow  Mio  to  learn  a  Minesweeper playing 
strategy.  This learning task proved itself to be a challenging 
testbed for general purpose multirelational learning systems. 
The  best rules obtained by Mio  win  52% of the games  in 
a 8  x  8 board with  10 mines, while on average a non-expert 
human  player wins  35%  of the  games.  The performance  of 
the playing program using these rules as playing strategy im(cid:173)
proves to 60% when adding the use of probabilities. 

By examining the games played using Mio's rules, we no(cid:173)
tice  that  there  are  still  situations  where  the  player  guesses 
without  need  (i.e.,  a  sure  move  can  be  deduced).  As  fu(cid:173)
ture  work,  we  want  to  use  other  ILP  systems  (e.g.,  Tilde), 
and other machine learning approaches to learn Minesweeper 
playing strategies and compare their performance. 

Acknowledgments 
We thank all the persons who participated as guinea pigs play(cid:173)
ing  Minesweeper,  the  anonymous  reviewers  for  their  com(cid:173)
ments, and Oscar Meruvia for proofreading.  The second au(cid:173)
thor was partially supported by DFG (German Science Foun(cid:173)
dation), projects WR40/1-3 and WR40/2-1. 

538 

LEARNING 

