Complexity of Determining Nonemptiness of the Core 

Vincent Conitzer  and  Thomas Sandholm 

Carnegie Mellon University 
Computer Science Department 

5000 Forbes Avenue 

Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 

{conitzer,sandholm} @cs.cmu.edu 

Abstract 

Coalition formation is a key problem in automated 
negotiation among self-interested agents, and other 
multiagent  applications.  A  coalition  of agents  can 
sometimes  accomplish  things  that  the  individual 
agents  cannot,  or  can  do  things  more  efficiently. 
However,  motivating  the  agents  to  abide  to  a  so(cid:173)
lution  requires  careful  analysis:  only  some  of the 
solutions  are  stable  in  the  sense  that  no  group  of 
agents  is  motivated  to  break  off and  form  a  new 
coalition.  This  constraint  has  been  studied  ex(cid:173)
tensively  in  cooperative  game  theory.  However, 
the computational questions around this constraint 
have  received  less  attention.  When  it  comes  to 
coalition  formation  among  software  agents  (that 
represent  real-world  parties),  these  questions  be(cid:173)
come  increasingly explicit. 
In this paper we define a concise general represen(cid:173)
tation  for  games  in  characteristic  form  that  relies 
on  superadditivity,  and  show  that  it  allows  for  ef(cid:173)
ficient  checking  of whether  a  given  outcome  is  in 
the core.  We then  show  that  determining  whether 
the  core  is  nonempty  is 
-complete  both  with 
and  without  transferable  utility.  We  demonstrate 
that  what makes the problem hard in both cases  is 
determining  the  collaborative  possibilities  (the  set 
of outcomes  possible  for  the  grand  coalition),  by 
showing  that  if  these  are  given,  the  problem  be(cid:173)
comes  tractable  in  both cases.  However,  we  then 
demonstrate  that  for a  hybrid  version  of the  prob(cid:173)
lem,  where  utility  transfer  is  possible  only  within 
the  grand  coalition,  the  problem  remains  , 
complete even  when  the  collaborative possibilities 
are given. 

Introduction 

1 
Coalition  formation  is  a  key  problem  in  automated negotia(cid:173)
tion  among  self-interested agents.  A  coalition  of agents can 

*Thc material in this paper is based upon work supported by the 
National Science Foundation under CAREER Award IRI-9703122, 
Grant 

, and  

sometimes accomplish things that the individual  agents can(cid:173)
not,  or  can  do  things  more  efficiently.  However,  motivat(cid:173)
ing  the  agents  to  abide  to  a solution  requires  careful  analy(cid:173)
sis:  only  some  of the  solutions  are  stable  in  the  sense  that 
no group of agents is motivated to break off and form a new 
coalition.  This constraint has been studied extensively in co-
operative game theory.  However, the computational questions 
around  this  constraint  have  received  less  attention.  When 
it comes  to coalition  formation  among  software  agents  (that 
represent real-world parties), these questions become increas(cid:173)
ingly  explicit. 

In  general,  computational  complexity  could  stem  from 
each potential coalition having some hard optimization prob(cid:173)
lem.  For  example,  when  the  agents  are  carrier  companies 
with their own trucks and delivery tasks, they can save costs 
by  forming  a  coalition  (pooling  their trucks  and  tasks),  but 
each  potential  coalition  faces  a  hard  optimization  problem: 
a  vehicle  routing  problem  defined  by  the  coalition's  trucks 
and  tasks.  The  effect  of  such  hard  optimization  problems 
on  coalition  formation  has  been  studied  by  Sandholm  and 
Lesser  [Sandholm  and  Lesser,  1997].  As  in  the  bulk of re(cid:173)
search on coalition formation, in this paper we do not address 
that  issue.  Rather,  we  assume  that  such  optimization  prob(cid:173)
lems  have  already  been  solved  (at  least  the  pertinent  ones), 
and given this, we characterize the stable feasible outcomes. 
This has been the focus of most of the work  in coalition for(cid:173)
mation.  The  contribution  of this  paper belongs  to  the  rela(cid:173)
tively  new,  small  set  of papers  that  study  the  complexity  of 
characterizing such solutions. 

The determination  of stable  solutions  has  electronic  com(cid:173)
merce  applications  beyond  automated  negotiation  as  well. 
For  example,  consider  a  large  number  of companies,  some 
subsets  of which  could  form profitable  virtual  organizations 
that can respond to larger or more diverse orders than the in(cid:173)
dividual companies can.  Determining stable  value divisions 
allows one to see which potential virtual organizations would 
be viable in the sense that the companies in the virtual orga(cid:173)
nization  would naturally  stay together.  As  another example, 
consider  a  future  online  service  that  determines  how  much 
each employee of a company should be paid so that the com(cid:173)
pany does not collapse as a result of employees being bought 
away  by  other companies.  The  input  to  this  service  would 
be how much subsets of the company's employees would be 
paid if they left collectively (for instance, a whole department 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

613 

could  be bought  away).  This  input could come  from salary 
databases or a manager's estimate.  The computational prob(cid:173)
lem  of determining  a  stable  renumeration  would  be  crucial 
for  such  a  service.  Both  of these  example  problems  fit  ex(cid:173)
actly under the model  that we study in this paper. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  In Section 2, 
we review the required concepts from cooperative game the(cid:173)
ory.  In Section 3, we define a concise general representation 
for games  in  characteristic  form  that  relies  on  superadditiv(cid:173)
ity,  and  show  that  it allows  for efficient checking of whether 
a given outcome  is  in  the core.  In  Section 4,  we  show that 
determining  whether the  core  is  nonempty is 
-complete 
both  with  and  without transferable  utility.  In  Section  5,  we 
demonstrate that what makes the problem hard in both cases 
is  determining  the  collaborative  possibilities  (the  set of out(cid:173)
comes  possible  for  the  grand  coalition),  by  showing  that  if 
these are given, the problem becomes tractable in both cases. 
In  Section  6,  we show that  for a hybrid version of the prob(cid:173)
lem,  where  utility  transfer is  possible  only  within  the  grand 
coalition, the problem remains 
-complete even when the 
collaborative possibilities are given. 

2  Definitions from cooperative game theory 
In  this section we review standard definitions  from coopera(cid:173)
tive game theory, which we will use throughout the paper.  In 
the  definitions,  we  follow  the  most prevalent  advanced  text-
book in microeconomics iMas-Colell et  al.,  1995]. 

In general,  how well agents in a coalition do may depend 
on  what nonmembers  of the coalition  do (e.g.  LBernheim et 
«/.,  1987; Chatterjee et ai,  1993; Evans,  1997; Milgrom and 
Roberts,  1996;  Moreno  and  Wooders,  1996;  Okada,  1996; 
Ray,  1996]).  However,  in  cooperative  game  theory,  coali(cid:173)
tion  formation  is  usually  studied  in  the  context  of  charac(cid:173)
teristic function  games  where  the  utilities  of  the  coalition 
members  do  not  depend  on  the  nonmembers1  actions  LKa-
han and Rapoport,  1984; van der Linden and Verbeek,  1985: 
Zlotkin and Rosenschein, 1994; Charnes and Kortanek, 1966; 
Shapley,  1967;  Wu,  1977].  (One  way  to  interpret this  is  to 
consider  the  coalition  members'  utilities  to  be  the  utilities 
they can guarantee themselves no matter what the nonmem(cid:173)
bers do LAumann, 1959; Tohme and Sandholm, 1999].) 
Definition 1  Given  a  set  of players  A,  a  utility  possibil(cid:173)
ity  vector 
is  a  vector 
representing  utilities  that  the  players  in  B 
can guarantee themselves by cooperating with each other.  A 
utility  possibility  set  is a  set  of utility possibility  vectors for a 
given set B. 
Definition 2 A game in characteristic form consists of a set of 
players  A  and a  utility possibility set 

for each  

Sometimes games in characteristic form have transferable 
utility,  which  means  agents in  a coalition  can  transfer utility 
among themselves. 
Definition 3  A  game  in  characteristic form  is  said  to  have 
transferable utility if for every 
(the value of B)  such  that 

there is a number  

It  is commonly  assumed  that  the joining of two coalitions 
does not prevent them from acting as well as they could have 
acted separately.  In other words, the composite coalition can 
coordinate  by  choosing  not  to  coordinate.  This  assumption 
is  known  as  superadditivity}  We  will  assume  superadditiv-
ity  throughout  the  paper.  This  actually  makes  our  hardness 
results stronger because even a restricted version of the prob(cid:173)
lem is hard. 
Definition 4  A  game  in  characteristic form  is said to be  su-
peradditive  if for  any 
with  B  and C  disjoint,  and 
for  any 

, we have  

and 

lent to  saving  that for any 

. (In the case of transferable utility, this is equiva(cid:173)
with  B  and  C  disjoint, 

We now need a solution concept.  In this paper,  we study 
only  the  best  known  solution  concept,  which  is  called  the 
core  [Mas-Colell  et  al,  1995;  Kahan  and  Rapoport,  1984; 
van der Linden and Verbeek,  1985]. It was first introduced by 
Gillies [Gillies, 19531. 
Definition 5  An  outcome 
blocked by  coalition 

_  if  there  exists 

is 

such  that for  all   

(In  the  case  of transferable  utility,  this  is  equiv(cid:173)

alent to saying  that the outcome  is blocked by  

An outcome is in the core if it is blocked by no coali(cid:173)

tion. 

In general, the core can be empty.  If the core is empty, the 
game is inherently unstable because no matter what outcome 
is chosen, some subset of agents is motivated to pull out and 
form  their own  coalition.  In  other  words,  requiring  that  no 
subset of agents  is  motivated to break off into  a coalition  of 
its own overconstrains the system. 

players 

An example of a game with an empty core is the one with 
, where we have the utility possibility vectors 
(and the 
ones  that can  be derived  from  this  through  superadditivity). 
The same example with transferable utility also has an empty 
core. 

, and 

In the rest of this paper, we will study the question of how 
complex it is to determine whether the core is nonempty, that 
is,  whether  there  is  a  solution  or  the  problem  is  overcon-
strained. 

3  Representing characteristic form games 

concisely 

In our representation of games in characteristic form, we dis(cid:173)
tinguish  between  games  without  transferable  utility,  where 
we  specify  some  utility  possibility  vectors  for  some  coali(cid:173)
tions,  and games with transferable utility,  where we specify 
the values of some coalitions. 

'When  superadditivity  holds,  it  is  always  best  for  the  grand 
coalition  of all  agents  to  form.  On  the  other hand,  without  su(cid:173)
peradditivity,  even  finding  the  optimal  coalition  structure  (parti(cid:173)
tion of agents into coalitions) can be hard [Sandholm et al.,  1999; 
Larson  and  Sandholm,  2000;  Shehory  and  Kraus,  1998;  1996; 
Ketchpel, 1994]. 

614 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

If the representation  of the game specifies 

explicitly for each coalition 
then the length of the 
representation is exponential in the number of agents.  In that 
case, any algorithm for evaluating nonemptiness of the core 
(as long as it reads all the input) requires time exponential in 
the number of agents. However, that run time is polynomial in 
the size of the input (this can be accomplished, for example, 
using the algorithms that we introduce in Section 5). 

Of course,  most characteristic  form  games  that represent 
real-world settings have some special structure. This usually 
allows  for  a  game  representation  that  is  significantly  more 
concise.  The complexity  of characterizing  the core  has  al­
ready been studied in certain very specific concisely express­
ible families of games before. For example, Faigle et al. study 
the  complexity  of testing  membership  in  the  core  in  mini­
mum  cost spanning  tree  games  [Faigle et al,  1994].  Deng 
and Papadimitriou study games where the players are nodes 
of a graph with weights on the edges, and the value of a coali­
tion is determined by the total weight of the edges contained 
in it [Deng and Papadimitriou, 1994J. Deng et al. study an in­
teger programming formulation which captures many games 
on  graphs  [Deng  et ai,  1997].  All  of those  results  depend 
heavily on  concise game  representations  which  are specific 
to the game  families under study.  Typically,  such a family 
of games is played on a combinatorial structure. Cooperative 
games on combinatorial structures have been systematically 
studied [Bilbao, 2000]. 

As a point of deviation, we study a natural representation 
that can capture any characteristic form game.2  Conciseness 
in our representation  stems only from the fact that  in many 
settings,  the  synergies  among coalitions  are  sparse.  When 
a coalition  introduces no new  synergy,  its utility possibility 
vectors can be derived using superadditivity.  Therefore, the 
input needs  to include only  the utility  possibility  vectors  of 
coalitions  that  introduce  synergy.  The following definitions 
make this precise. 
Definition 6  We  represent  a  game  in  characteristic form 
without  transferable  utility  by  a  set  of players  A,  and a 
set of utility possibility vectors 
(Here 
there may be multiple vectors for the same B, distinguished 
by  different  k  indices.)  The  utility  possibility  set  for  a 
given 

is then given by  

all the Dt are disjoint, and 

To avoid senseless cases that 

for all the 
have no outcomes,  we also require that 
all  
Definition 7 We represent a game in characteristic form with 
transferable utility by a set of players A, and a set of values 
is then 
all 

. The value for a given 

given by 

=  max 

for 

that 
elsewhere in W. 

whenever 

does not receive a value 

So, we only need to specify a basis of utility possibilities, 
from which we can then derive the others.  This representa­
tion integrates rather nicely with real-world problems where 
determining any coalition's value is complex. For example, in 
the multiagent vehicle routing problem, we solve the routing 
problem for every coalition that might introduce new syner­
gies.  When it is clear that there is no synergy between two 
coalitions (for example, if they operate in different cities and 
each one only has deliveries within its city), there is no need 
to solve the routing problem of the coalition that would result 
if the two coalitions were to merge. 

The following  lemmas indicate that  we can  also use this 
representation  effectively  for checking  whether an  outcome 
is in the core,  that is,  whether it satisfies the strategic con­
straints. 
Lemma 1  Without transferable utility,  an outcome uA  — 
is blocked by some coalition if and 
only if it is blocked by some coalition B through some utility 
vector uB, where  
Proof:  The  " if  part is  trivial.  For "only  i f, suppose 
blocked  by coalition  C  through some 

is 
, so that for every 
where 

We know 

But then, 

blocks 

through 

■ 

The proof for the same lemma in the case of transferable 

utility is only slightly more intricate. 
Lemma 2  With  transferable  utility,  an outcome  

is blocked by some coalition if and 
only if it is blocked by some coalition B through its value 

Proof:  The  " if  part is  trivial.  For "only  i f,  suppose uA  is 
blocked by coalition C through 

, so that  

We know that  

It follows that 

least one 

we have 

through 

■ 

md hence for at 

But then 

blocks 

4  Checking whether the core is nonempty is 

hard 

We now show that with this representation, it is hard to check 
whether the core is nonempty.  This holds both for the non­
transferable utility setting and for the transferable utility set­
ting. 
Definition 8 (CORE-NONEMPTY)  We are given a super-
additive game in characteristic form (with or without trans(cid:173)
ferable utility) in our representation language. We are asked 
whether the core is nonempty. 

We will demonstrate AfP-hardness of this problem by re­
ducing from the AfP-completc EXACT-COVER-BY-3-SETS 
problem [Garey and Johnson, 

the B% are disjoint, and for all the 
avoid senseless cases that have no outcomes, we also require 

To 

2Our hardness results are not implied by the earlier hardness re­

sults for specific game families because it is not possible to concisely 
represent those games in our input language. 

3Setting the utility to 0 in this case is without loss of generality, 

as we can simply normalize the utility function to obtain this. 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

615 

Definition 9 (EXACT-COVER-BY-3-SETS)  We  are  given 
a set S of size 'Sm and a collection of subsets 
ofS, 
each of size 3. We are asked if there is a cover of S consisting 
ofm of the subsets. 

We are now ready to state our results. 

Theorem  1  CORE-NONEMPTY without  transferable  utility 
is  MV-complete. 

For each 

A  = 
W.  Additionally,  let 

be an  element of 
, and 
be  elements  of W.  The only  other elements  of 
W are the required ones giving value 0 to singleton coalitions. 
We claim the two instances are equivalent. 

First  suppose  there  is  an  exact  cover  by  3-sets  consist­
Then  the  value  of  coalition  S  is  at 
Combining  this  with  the  coali­

ing  of 
least 

Proof:  To show that the problem  is in AfV, nondeterministi-
cally  choose  a  subset  of W,  and  check  if the  corresponding 
coalitions  constitute  a partition  of A.  If so,  check  if the  out­
come  corresponding  to this  partition  is  blocked  by  any ele­
ment  of  W. 

To  show A/"P-hardness,  we  reduce  an  arbitrary  EXACT-

For  each  St,  let 

COVER-BY-3-SETS instance to the following 
CORE-NONEMPTY  instance.  Let  the  set  of  players  be 
A  = 
be an el­
ement  of  W,  with  uSt  =  (2,2,2).  Also,  tor  each 
be  an  element  of  W,  with   
let 
(1,4).  Also,  let 
W,  with 
with 

be  an  element  of 

Finally, let  

with 

with 

be elements of W.  The 
only  other elements  of W  are  the  required  ones  giving  util­
ity 0 to singleton coalitions.  We claim the two instances are 
equivalent. 

of 

First suppose  there  is  an  exact  cover by  3-sets  consisting 
.  Then  the  following  outcome  is  possible: 
It  is 
easy to verify that this outcome  is not blocked by any coali­
tion. So the core is nonempty. 

with each 

the C1 disjoint.  Then one of the  must be 

Now  suppose  there  is  no  exact  cover by  3-sets.  Suppose 
the core is nonempty, that is, it contains some outcome  — 
an  element  of  W,  and 
for some 
for if this were not the case, there must be some s £  S 
that are equal to St cannot cover 
=  0, because the 
would  block  the  outcome.  Thus,  none 
.  Then  one  of the  Ct 

with 
5;  but  then 
of the  Cx  can  be equal  to 
must be one of 
would block the outcome.  By symmetry, we can without loss 
of generality  assume  it is 
will  block 
the outcome.  (Contradiction.) So the core is empty. 

, or else two  of   

.  But then 

■ 

We might  hope  that  the  convexity  introduced by transfer­
able utility makes the problem tractable through, for example, 
linear programming. This turns out not to be the case. 
Theorem  2  CORE-NONEMPTY  with  transferable  utility  is 
MV-complete. 

Proof:  To show that the problem  is  in MV,  nondeterministi-
cally  choose  a  subset  of W9  and  check  if the  corresponding 
coalitions  constitute  a partition  of A.  If so,  nondeterministi-
cally divide the sum of the coalitions' values over the players, 
and check if this outcome  is blocked by any element of W. 
To  show .A/T^-hardness,  we  reduce  an  arbitrary  EXACT-

COVER-BY-3-SETS  instance to the following 
CORE-NONEMPTY  instance.  Let  the  set  of  players  be 

tion 
which has value 6m, we conclude that the grand 
coalition  A  has  value  at  least  9m.  Hence,  the  outcome 
It  is  easy  to  verify  that 
this  outcome  is  not  blocked  by  any  coalition.  So  the  core 
is nonempty. 

is  possible. 

Now suppose  there  is no exact cover by 3-sets.  Then  the 
coalition S has value less than 3 771 (since there are no m dis­
joint Sx), and as a result the value of the grand coalition is less 
than 9m.  It follows that in any outcome, the total utility of at 
least one  of 
is less than Gra. So 
this coalition will block.  So the core is empty. 

and 

Our results  imply  that  it  is  computationally  hard  to  make 
any  strategic  assessment  of  a  game  in  characteristic  form 
when it is concisely represented. 
5  Specifying redundant information about the 

■ 

 

grand coalition makes the problem 
tractable 

Our proofs  that CORE-NONEMPTY  is  hard  relied  on  con­
structing instances where it is difficult to determine what the 
grand  coalition  can  accomplish.  So,  in  effect,  the  hardness 
derived  from the  fact that  even  collaborative optimization  is 
hard in these instances.  While this is indeed a real difficulty 
that  occurs  in  the  analysis  of characteristic  form  games,  we 
may nevertheless wonder to what extent computational com­
plexity issues are introduced by the purely strategic aspect of 
the games.  To analyze this, we investigate the computational 
complexity  of  CORE-NONEMPTY  when  V(A)  (or  v(A)) 
is explicitly  provided  as  (possibly  redundant)  input,  so  that 
determining what the grand coalition can accomplish can no 
longer be the source of any complexity.4  It indeed  turns out 
that the problem becomes easy both with and  without trans­
ferable utility. 
Theorem 3  When  V(A) 
NONEMPTY without  transferable  utility  is  in  V. 

is  explicitly  provided,  CORE-

Proof:  The following simple algorithm accomplishes this ef­
ficiently.  For  each  element  of  V(A),  check  whether  it  is 
blocked by any element of W.  m 

For the transferable utility case, we make use of linear pro­

gramming. 
Theorem 4  When  v(A) 
NONEMPTY with  transferable  utility  is  in  V. 

is  explicitly  provided,  CORE-

4Bilbao et al. have studied the complexity of the core in charac­
teristic form games with transferable utility when there is an oracle 
that can provide the value v(B) of any coalition B [Bilbao et al.% ]. 
Our amended input corresponds to asking one such query in addition 
to obtaining the unamended input. 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

Proof:  We decide how to allocate the v(A) among the agents 
by solving a linear program. The core is nonempty if and only 
if the following linear program has a solution: 

For any 

in 

 

The algorithms in the proofs also construct a solution that 

is in the core, if the core is nonempty. 

6  Hybrid games remain hard 
Not all complexity issues disappear through having the col­
laborative  optimization  problem  solution  available.  It  turns 
out that if we allow for hybrid games, where only some coali­
tions can transfer utility among themselves, the hardness re­
turns. In particular, we show hardness in the case where only 
the grand coalition can transfer utility. This is a natural model 
for example in settings where there is a market institution that 
enforces payments, but if a subset of the agents breaks off, the 
institution collapses so payments cannot be enforced. 

We demonstrate AfP-hardness of this problem by reducing 
from the AAP-complete NODE-COVER problem iGarey and 
Johnson, 19791. 
Definition 10 (NODE-COVER)  We are given a graph G = 
(V, E),  and a number k.  We are asked whether there is a 
subset ofV of size k such that each edge has at least one of 
its endpoints in the subset. 

We are now ready to state our result. 

Theorem 5  When only the grand coalition can transfer util(cid:173)
ity 
CORE-NONEMPTY is NV-complete, even when v(A) is ex(cid:173)
plicitly provided as input. 
Proof:  To show that the problem is  in NT,  nondeterministi-
cally divide v(A) over the players, and check if this outcome 
is blocked by any element of W. 

Jet 

, and let 

To  show  AfP-hardness,  we  reduce  an  arbitrary  NODE-
COVER  instance  to  the  following  CORE-NONEMPTY  in­
stance.  Let A — 
Furthermore, for each edge 
an  element  of  W,  with 

be 
Finally,  for any 
be an element 
of  W,  with 
The only other elements 
of W are the required ones giving utility 0 to singleton coali­
tions. This game does not violate the superadditivity assump­
tion, since without the explicit specification of t>(J4), super­
additivity can at most imply that 
We claim the two instances are equivalent. 

First suppose there is a node cover of size k.  Consider the 
following outcome:  all the vertices in the node cover receive 
utility  1,  all the other vertices receive utility 0,  and each of 
x,  y,  and  z  receives  utility 
Using the fact that all the 
edges are covered, it is easy to verify that this outcome is not 
blocked by any coalition. So the core is nonempty. 

in  the  core.  In 
receives  at  least 
(For  if 
and some 

each. 

Now suppose there  is  some outcome 

such  an  outcome,  either each  of 

,  or  two  of  them  receive  at  least 

not, there is some 

with 

with 

will block through 

and the coalition 
It follows 
that the combined utility of all the elements of V is at most k. 
Now, for each edge 
, at least one of its vertices must 
receive utility at least 1, or this edge would block. So the ver­
tices that receive at least 1 cover the edges.  But because the 
combined utility of all the elements of V is at most A:, there 
can be at most k such vertices. So there is a node cover. 
■ 
Hybrid  games,  where  only  some  coalitions  can  transfer 
utility,  are  quite  likely  to  appear  in  real-world  multiagent 
settings,  for example  because  only  some  of the  agents  use 
a  currency.  Our  result  shows  that  for  such  hybrid  games, 
even  when  the  collaborative  optimization  problem  has  al­
ready been solved,  it can be computationally hard to strate­
gically assess the game. 

7  Conclusions and future research 
Coalition formation is a key problem in automated negotia­
tion among self-interested agents,  and other multiagent ap­
plications.  A coalition of agents can  sometimes accomplish 
things that the individual agents cannot, or can do things more 
efficiently.  However, motivating the agents to abide to a so­
lution  requires careful  analysis:  only  some of the solutions 
are stable in the sense that no group of agents is motivated 
to break  off and  form  a  new  coalition.  This  constraint has 
been studied extensively in cooperative game theory.  How­
ever, the computational questions around this constraint have 
received  less  attention.  When  it comes  to coalition  forma­
tion  among  software  agents  (that  represent  real-world  par­
ties), these questions become increasingly explicit. 

In this paper we defined a concise general  representation 
for games in characteristic form that relies on superadditivity, 
and  showed  that  it  allows  for efficient  checking  of whether 
a given outcome is in the core.  We then showed that deter­
mining whether the core is nonempty is  NP-complete  both 
with  and without  transferable utility.  We demonstrated that 
what  makes  the problem  hard  in  both cases  is  determining 
the  collaborative  possibilities  (the  set  of outcomes  possible 
for the grand coalition), by showing that if these are given, the 
problem becomes tractable in both cases.  However, we then 
demonstrated that for a hybrid version of the problem, where 
utility transfer is possible only within the grand coalition, the 
problem remains A/'P-complete even when the collaborative 
possibilities are given. 

Future research can take a number of different directions. 
One  such  direction  is  to  investigate  the  complexity  of re­
stricted  families  of games  in  characteristic  form.5  Another 
direction is to evaluate other solution concepts in cooperative 
game theory from the perspective of computational complex­
ity  under  our  input  representation.  A  long-term  goal  is  to 
extend our framework for finding a strategically stable solu­
tion to take into account issues of computational complexity 

5One interesting restricted family is that of convex games. In a 

convex game (with transferable utility), for any  

and in such games the core is 
known to always be nonempty. How complex it is here to construct 
a solution in the core with our representation is an open question. 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

617 

in determining the synergies among coalitions (for example, 
when  routing problems  need  to be solved,  potentially only 
approximately, in order to determine the synergies). 

References 
[Aumann,  1959]  R Aumann.  Acceptable  points  in  general 
cooperative n-person games,  volume IV of Contributions 
to the Theory of Games. Princeton University Press, 1959. 
iBernheim etal,  1987]  B Douglas Bernheim, Bezalel Peleg, 
and Michael D Whinston. Coalition-proof Nash equilibria: 
I concepts. J. of Economic Theory, 42(1):1-12, June 1987. 
[Bilbao et al., ]  J.  M.  Bilbao,  J.  R.  Fernandez,  and  J.  J. 

Lopez.  Complexity in cooperative game theory. 

[Bilbao, 2000] J. M. Bilbao. Cooperative Games on Combi(cid:173)
natorial Structures. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000. 

[Charnes and Kortanek,  1966]  A Charnes and K O Kortanek. 
On balanced sets, cores, and linear programming. Techni(cid:173)
cal Report 12, Cornell Univ., Dept. of Industrial Eng. and 
Operations Res., Ithaca, NY, 1966. 

[Chatterjee et al,  1993]  K. Chatterjee, B. Dutta, D. Ray, and 
K. Sengupta.  A noncooperative theory of coalitional bar(cid:173)
gaining. Review of Economic Studies, 60:463-477, 1993. 
[Deng and Papadimitriou,  1994]  Xiaotie  Deng  and  Chris-
tos  H.  Papadimitriou.  On  the complexity  of cooperative 
solution concepts. Mathematics of Operations Research, 
pages 257-266, 1994. 

[Deng et al,  1997]  Xiaotie Deng, Toshihide Ibaraki, and Hi-
roshi Nagamochi.  Algorithms and complexity in combi(cid:173)
natorial optimization games.  SODA 1997. 

[Evans,  1997]  Robert  Evans.  Coalitional  bargaining  with 
competition to make offers. Games and Economic Behav(cid:173)
ior, 19:211-220, 1997. 

[Faigle etal,  1994]  U.  Faigle,  S.  Fekete,  W.  Hochstattler, 
and W.  Kern.  On  the complexity of testing  membership 
in the core of min-cost spanning trees.  Technical Report 
94.166, Universitat zu Koln, 1994. 

[Garey and Johnson, 1979]  Michael  R  Garey  and  David  S 
Johnson.  Computers and Intractability.  W. H. Freeman 
and Company, 1979. 

[Gillies, 1953] D Gillies. Some theorems on n-person games. 

PhD thesis, Princeton, Dept. of Mathematics, 1953. 

[Kahan and Rapoport,  1984]  James  P  Kahan  and  Amnon 
Rapoport.  Theories of Coalition  Formation.  Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 1984. 

[Ketchpel, 1994]  Steven Ketchpel. Forming coalitions in the 
face of uncertain rewards.  AAAI, pages 414—419, Seattle, 
WA, July 1994. 

[Larson and Sandholm, 2000]  Kate  Larson,  Tuomas  Sand-
holm. Anytime coalition structure generation: An average 
case study. J. of Experimental and Theoretical Al, 11:1-
20, 2000. Early version: AGENTS, pp. 40-47, 1999. 

[Mas-Colell et al,  1995]  Andreu  Mas-Colell,  Michael 
Whinston, and Jerry R. Green.  Microeconomic Theory. 
Oxford University Press, 1995. 

[Milgrom and Roberts,  1996]  Paul  Milgrom  and  John 
Roberts.  Coalition-proofness  and  correlation  with  arbi(cid:173)
trary communication possibilities.  Games and Economic 
Behavior, 17:113-128, 1996. 

[Moreno and Wooders,  1996]  Diego  Moreno  and  John 
Wooders.  Coalition-proof  equilibrium.  Games  and 
Economic Behavior, 17:80-112, 1996. 

[Okada,  19961  Akira  Okada.  A  noncooperative  coalitional 
bargaining game with random proposers. Games and Eco(cid:173)
nomic Behavior, 16:97-108, 1996. 

[Ray,  1996]  lndrajit  Ray.  Coalition-proof correlated  equi(cid:173)
librium:  A definition.  Games and Economic Behavior, 
17:56-79, 1996. 

[Sandholm and Lesser,  1997]  Tuomas  Sandholm  and  Vic(cid:173)
tor R Lesser.  Coalitions among computationally bounded 
agents.  Artificial Intelligence, 94(1):99-137,  1997.  Spe(cid:173)
cial issue on Economic Principles of Multiagent Systems. 
Early version: International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 662-669,  1995. 

[Sandholm et al,  1999]  Tuomas  Sandholm,  Kate  Larson, 
Martin  Andersson,  Onn  Shehory,  and  Fernando Tohme. 
Coalition structure generation with worst case guarantees. 
Artificial Intelligence, 11 l(l-2):209-238, 1999. Early ver(cid:173)
sion appeared at the National Conference on Artificial In(cid:173)
telligence (AAAI), pages 46-53,  1998. 

iShapley, 1967]  L. S. Shapley.  On balanced sets and cores. 

Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 14:453-460, 1967. 

[Shehory and Kraus,  1996]  Onn Shehory and Sarit Kraus. A 
kernel-oriented  model  for  coalition-formation  in  general 
In  Proceed(cid:173)
environments:  Implemetation  and  results. 
ings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(AAAI), pages 134-140, Portland, OR, August 1996. 

[Shehory and Kraus,  1998]  Onn  Shehory  and  Sarit  Kraus. 
Methods for task allocation via agent coalition formation. 
Artificial Intelligence, 101 (1-2): 165-200, 1998. 

[Tohme and Sandholm, 1999]  Fernando Tohm6 and Tuomas 
Sandholm.  Coalition  formation  processes  with  belief 
revision  among  bounded  rational  self-interested  agents. 
Journal of Logic and Computation, 9(97-63): 1-23, 1999. 
Early version:  IJCAI-97 Workshop on Social Interaction 
and Communityware, pp. 43-51, Nagoya, Japan. 

[van der Linden and Verbeek, 1985]  Wim J  van  der Linden 
and  Albert  Verbeek.  Coalition  formation:  A  game-
theoretic approach.  In Henk A M Wilke, editor, Coalition 
Formation, volume 24 of Advances in Psychology. North 
Holland, 1985. 

[Wu,  1977]  L.  S.  Wu.  A  dynamic  theory  for  the  class  of 
games  with  nonempty cores.  S1AM Journal of Applied 
Mathematics, 32:328-338, 1977. 

[Zlotkin and Rosenschein, 1994]  Gilad Zlotkin and Jeffrey S 
Rosenschein. 
Coalition,  cryptography  and  stability: 
Mechanisms  for coalition  formation  in  task oriented do(cid:173)
mains. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Ar(cid:173)
tificial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 432-437,  Seattle, WA, 
July 1994. 

618 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

