Dynamics of Coalition Formation in Combinatorial Trading 

Yiming Ye and Yuhai Tu 

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA 

yiming@watson.ibm.com and yuhai@us.ibm.com 

Abstract 

This  paper  studies  the  dynamics  of agent  medi(cid:173)
ated  combinatorial  trading  at  the  macroscopic 
level.  The combinatorial  marketplace  consists  of 
a  retailer  who  wishes  to  sell  bundles  of  items, 
and  a  large  number of agents  with  different  pur(cid:173)
chasing  goals.  These  agents  dynamically  form 
coalitions  to  exploit  the  benefits  of  grouping 
based  on  their  complementary  needs.  A  novel 
physics  based  dynamic  equation  is  proposed  to 
capture  the  essence  of the  movements  of agents 
among  different  sized  coalitions.  Simulation  ex(cid:173)
periments  are  performed  to  study  the  global  be(cid:173)
havior  of the  agents  and  the  effectiveness  of the 
agent mediated combinatorial trading. 

1  Introduction 
The pervasive  connectivity of the  Internet  and the powerful 
architecture of World  Wide Web are changing many market 
conventions. 
Tremendous  opportunities  for  conducting 
business on the Internet are emerging. Intelligent agents will 
play  a  crucial  role  in  electronic  commerce  where  dynamic 
and  heterogeneous  interactions  between  thousands  of  or(cid:173)
ganizations and  millions of individuals are involved. So far, 
we have already witnessed the involvements of e-commerce 
agents  in  traditional  business  settings.  Furthermore,  this 
involvement is re-shaping the way in which business is con(cid:173)
ducted in areas such as comparison shopping, dynamic pric(cid:173)
ing,  negotiation,  auction,  and  brokerages,  to  name  a  few. 
The  automation  brought  by  e-commercc  agents  will  dra(cid:173)
matically  reduce  certain  types  of frictional  costs  and  time 
incurred in the exchange of commodities. 

In e-commerce,  the virtual distance separating produc(cid:173)
ers,  wholesalers,  distributors,  retailers,  and  consumers 
has collapsed  to near zero.  All  of the parties involved are 
faced with rich choices, and it is natural  for them to util(cid:173)
ize  situations  to  their  best  advantage.  As  the  population 
of e-commerce  agents  increases,  automated  negotiations 
among  them  on  behalf of their  parties  will  be  prevalent. 
One  of  the  areas  in  which  agent  negotiations  will  be 
heavily involved  is combinatorial markets,  where  combi(cid:173)
nations  of goods  and  services  are  being  traded  and  effi(cid:173)
ciently  allocated.  For  example,  a  trading  agent  can  be 

constructed  to  perform  real-time  procurement  of bundles 
of complementary goods  and  services  on  multiple  simul(cid:173)
taneous  Internet auctions and  exchanges.  Alternatively, a 
travel service agent can be constructed to provide combi(cid:173)
nations  of hotel  and  flight arrangements  to  potential  cus(cid:173)
tomers.  Recently, research on combinatorial auctions has 
attracted  considerable  attention  (Fujishima  et  al  1999; 
Leyton-Brown et al 2000; Klcmperer  1999;  Sandholm  1999; 
Lehmann  1999;  Rassenti  1982; Rothkopf 1998; Yokoo et 
al  2001)  due  to the  sheer  interconnectedness of the Inter(cid:173)
net.  One way to  analyze combinatorial  auctions  is  to  use 
search  algorithms  such  as  branch  and  bound.  This  ap(cid:173)
proach  can  produce  optimal  solutions,  however,  it  is  ex(cid:173)
ponential  in  the  worst-case.  An  alternative  approach, 
which  uses  approximation  algorithms,  is  typically  poly(cid:173)
nomial  but the  quality  of the  solutions  cannot  be  guaran(cid:173)
teed. 

This paper addresses the issue in a combinatorial market 
where  the  retailer prefers  to  sell  bundles  of goods.  A  large 
number  of  buyer's  agents  dynamically  form  coalitions  to 
exploit  the benefits of grouping based on their complemen(cid:173)
tary  needs.  The  transaction  is  done  at  the  coalition  level 
such that the price  for each buyer's agent is cheaper than  if 
buying  independently.  Coalition  formation  has  been  ad(cid:173)
dressed by researchers  from both  the game  theory commu(cid:173)
nity  and  the  multi-agent  community.  Game  theory  empha(cid:173)
sizes  the  issues  of N-person  games  formation  under  differ(cid:173)
ent settings and the distribution of the benefits among play(cid:173)
ers  (Kraus et al  1991). 
It  concentrates on the stability and 
fairness  issues  for  given  coalitions.  Multi-agent  research 
emphasizes  the  special  properties  of a multi-agent environ(cid:173)
ment and  considers  the  effects  of communication costs  and 
limited computation time on the coalition formation process 
(Sandholm 1999a; Sandholm 1999b). 

We  use  a  physics-based  approach  to  study  the  dynamic 
behavior of agents in the combinatorial market where coali(cid:173)
tions  are  involved.  There  are  efforts  to  study  large-scale 
multi-agent  systems  using  a  physics-based  approach  (She-
hory et. al; Lerman et. al.  1999). For example, Lerman and 
Shehory (Lerman et.  al.  2000) propose a physics-motivated 
mechanism  for  coalition  formation  in  non-combinatorial 
markets.  The  problem  addressed  in  our  work  is  different 
because we study the issue where the retailer prefers to sell 
complementary  goods.  In  contrast,  the  formulation  of Ler-

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

625 

man and Shehory deals with the case where the retailer only 
has one category of goods. Thus, the agents in our study are 
heterogeneous  because  they  may  be  interested  in  different 
goods.  Agents  in  their study are homogeneous  in the sense 
that they are all interested in one category of goods. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The 
next  section  proposes  a combinatorial market model  and a 
physics-motivated dynamic equation for structured coalition 
formation.  Section  3  presents  simulation  experiments  to 
study  the  global  behavior  of the  system.  Section  4  briefly 
concludes the paper. 

2  Combinatorial  Market  Model 

Figure  1  shows  the  marketplace  to  be  discussed  in  this 
paper.  Suppose  that  the  retailer  has  two  types  of items  to 
sell: item of type  a  and item of type  b .  Suppose that there 
are  two categories  of agents  for buyers  in the Marketplace. 
An agent of category A is only interested in buying one item 
of type  a .  An agent of category B is only interested in buy(cid:173)
ing one  item  of type  b .  Each  agent represents  one  buyer 
and  receives  instructions  from  the  buyer  on  what  item  to 
buy.  Before  an  agent  enters  the  marketplace,  it  needs  to 
register  and obtain authorizations from the retailer. Then it 
can  interact  with  other agents  in the marketplace  and per(cid:173)
form purchase related activities. In the rest of this paper, we 
assume that  in the marketplace there arc in total  mA  of  A 
type agents and  mB  of B  type agents registered. 

Figure  1:  The combinatorial  market place discussed in this 
paper. The small circles represent agents. The character con(cid:173)
tained  in a circle represents  the  item  in which the agent is 
interested. 

There  are  many  ways  the  retailer  may  sell  its  items.  It 
might simply sell an item to a buyer's agent when the agent 
requests the item.  However, retailer can save resources  if it 
can  sell  items  in  bundles  composed  of  the  two  types  of 
items. The retailer can give a cheaper price for each item in 
the complementary bundle and at the same time still obtain 
a higher utility value.  In order for agents benefit from bun(cid:173)
dles,  they  need  to  form  coalitions.  We  assume  that  the 
agents  and  the  marketplace  are  fully  connected.  However, 
agents do not have a global  knowledge of the whole situa(cid:173)
tion,  and  their  decisions  are  based  solely  on  local  condi(cid:173)
tions. 

Now  we  discuss  the  dynamics  of the  changes  of coali(cid:173)
tions in the marketplace.  A single agent might join a coali(cid:173)

tion  in  order to  obtain  a  discounted price.  Since  the  agent 
cannot  have  a  global  view  of the  whole  marketplace  at  a 
given  time  instant,  the  coalition  chosen  might  not  be  the 
best one for the agent at that time. An agent may also leave 
a coalition to look for better opportunities.  We assume that 
the  retailer  is  able  to  monitor  the  coalitions  of the  whole 
marketplace and to decide when to perform the combinato(cid:173)
rial  transactions.  Our  goal  is  to  study  the  dynamics  of the 
coalition  formations  in  the  marketplace  and  the  effective(cid:173)
ness of the marketplace. 

We first define the price for a given item associated with 
a given coalition.  We consider a coalition formed by  nA  of 
type A  agent and  nB  of type B agent.  If all of the agents in 
this coalition voted to perform the coalition transaction (i.e., 
to buy their items in a bundle), then we use 
to 
denote the price the seller prefers to set for an item of type A 
and 
to denote the price the seller prefers to set 
for an item of type B.  Suppose that the retailer set the prices 
as follows: 

Here 

and 

are the base prices for item A  and 
item  B  respectively.  The  real  price  for  an  item  is  deter(cid:173)
mined hy the size of the coalition. 

are  the  price  reduction  rates  due  to 
grouping for item of type  A  and for item of type B respec(cid:173)
tively.  In a coalition, as the number of items of a given type 
increases,  the price per item of that type decreases. 

and 

of  the 

The  variable r0 gives  the  preferred  ratio 

two types of items in a bundle for the retailer. The term 
gives  the price penalty rate  for item of type  a if the ratio of 
the items in the coalition does not match the retailer's pre(cid:173)
ferred ratio. Similarly, the term 
gives the price penalty 
rate  for  item of type  b .  This  kind  of combinatorial  prefer(cid:173)
ence is fairly common in traditional commerce as well as in 
e-commerce. For example, a furniture retailer may prefer to 
sell a sofa and the accompanying coffee table as a set, rather 
than sell each piece separately.  In this case, the price for a 
complete  bundle  (one  coffee  table  and  a  sofa)  may  be 
cheaper than the sum of the prices for the components. The 
ratio  of the  number of coffee  tables  to the  number of  sofas 
is important, since the retailer might prefer the ratio to be  1 
if there is equal number of table-sofa pairs in the storage.  In 
any case,  buyers  who  are  interested  in separate pieces  can 
form coalitions to save money.  This kind of coalition form(cid:173)
ing  process  might  be  time  consuming  in  traditional  com(cid:173)
merce,  because  location  and  time  constraints  make  it diffi(cid:173)
cult to  find  complementary buyers.  However,  it  will  be  to(cid:173)
tally different in an agent-mediated e-commerce combinato(cid:173)
rial marketplace. The sheer interconnectedness of the World 
Wide  Web  will  enable  the  e-commerce  agents  to  work  at 
any time from anywhere in cyberspace. Furthermore, agents 
can negotiate instantly provided that the requirements of the 
task can be  clearly  specified,  and  the  interaction protocols 
can  be  clearly  defined  among  agents  and  between  agents 
and  the  corresponding  enterprise  system  (as  is  assumed  in 
this paper). 

626 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

In order to study the dynamics, we use 

to 
represent the number of coalitions composed by n A of type 
A  agents and  nB  of type  B  agents at time 
Different 
types of coalitions can be represented by a lattice as shown 
in  Figure  2.  Where 
the  value  of 

represent 

Figi4re 2.  The coalition lattice in a marketplace that con(cid:173)
tains 5 A type agents  and 5 B type agents. 

The  number  of different  types  of coalitions  will  change 
while  the  system  approaches  equilibrium.  Our  goal  is  to 
study  the  value  of 
and  other associated  indica(cid:173)
tors  of  the  effectiveness  ot  the  combinatorial  markets  as 
time evolves. 

We assume that for a given coalition, at most one agent 
can join or leave at a time. Thus,  the only translation in the 
coalition  lattice  is  between  neighbors  as  illustrated  by  the 
following: 

When  a  category  A  agent  joins  a  coalition  of  type 
,  this  coalition  becomes  a  coalition  of  type 
.  When a category A  agent  leaves a coalition 
this coalition becomes a coalition of type 
Similar  analysis  can  be  applied  to  type  B 

of type 

agent. 

Figure 3 shows the transitions that could happen with re(cid:173)
when  it  is  within the lat(cid:173)
spect to coalition type 
tice.  Please note that when 
is at the boundary of 
the  lattice, some of the transitions in Figure 3  will not hap(cid:173)
pen. The dynamics of the transition can be characterized by 
the  following equation  (for all the 
pairs, except 
(1,0) and (0,1)): 

Here,  Kt  and  Kt  are  rate  constants,  which  depend  on 
the price change  for each  transition. 
In  the above equa(cid:173)
tion,  the  total  number  of  agents  of  the  market  is  con(cid:173)
served during the dynamic process. The single agent pool 
serves as the source  sink of the system.  Please note that 

The  term 

for  a 

type  A  agent 

gives  the  rate 
joins  a  coalition  of  category 

The  term 

category 

gives  the  rate  when  a 
coalition  becomes  a  category 
coalition. In other words, it gives the rate for a 

type  A  agent leaves a 

The term 

_ 

coalition. 
gives the rate for a 
coalition.  In 

type  A  agent  joins  a  category 
other  words,  it  gives  the  rate  for  a  category 
coalition becomes a category 

coalition. 

The  term 

agent  leaves  a  category 
words, it gives the rate for a category 
becomes a category 

coalition. 

gives  the  rate  for  a  type A 
coalition.  In  other 
coalition 

Other  terms  in  the  above  equation  arc  related  to  type B 

agent and can be similarly explained. 

When the value  of 

is outside the boundary of 
the  lattice,  the  corresponding  term  in  the  above  equation 
will equal to  0 .  In other words, in the above equation, we 
set 
,  or 

Now, we need to study the rate constants involved in the 

dynamic equation. 

One simple model  would be to let all of the escape rates 
be the same (i.e., the rate at which an agent leaves a coali(cid:173)
tion, a.k.a., the opportunist's rates): 

Figure 3.  Coalition transitions 

We  assume  that  the  rate  an  agent  joins  a  coalition  is 
closely related to the changes in price for this coalition. Let 
the  change  in price  serves  as  energy  in Boltzman distribu(cid:173)
tion. 

K]  is a constant that  is  related to  the transition of a coali(cid:173)
tion from 
. Thus, this constant is 
only related to type A agent. 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

627 

At  point 
agent: 

we  have  the  price  for  a  type  A 

In the first set of experiments, we study the evolution of the 
coalitions in the market as a function of time. Table 1 shows 
the parameter values that are used. 

At point 

, we have the price for an A type agent: 

The price change is: 

Thus, we can set the transition rate as: 

Here, K0  is the base rate in the above equations. 
Similarly, we can set other rates: 

To  analysis  the  dynamics  of the  above  system,  we  can 
study,  under different values of parameters, the evolution of 
i  and other indicators of the marketplace as a 
function  of 
and  at  the  equilibrium  state.  Based  on  the 
calculated  derivatives,  we can  update  a coalition using the 
following formula (for all the 
pairs, except  (0,1) 
and (1,0)  ): 

During  the  update  process,  the  time  step 
should  be 
adaptively selected such that it is small enough and the up(cid:173)
dated results for any coalitions should not be less than 0 . 

Table 1 

Figure 4 (a), (b), (c), and (d) show the evolutions of coali(cid:173)
tions as a function of the iterations. Notice that at beginning, 
most of the agents are in coalitions that contain small num(cid:173)
ber  of type A  and  type  B  agents.  Then,  as  a  result  of dy(cid:173)
namic  movements  of agents,  the  number  of coalitions  with 
small size decreases and the number of coalitions with large 
size increases until equilibrium is reached. Further note that 
the  distribution  of A  type  agents  and  B  type  agents  is  not 
symmetric.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  ratio  r0  = 0.5, 
rather than  r0  = 1  .  Thus  coalitions with  twice as  many A 
agents as B agents receive the least price penalty. Although 
intuitively most of the agents should stay in large coalitions 
at equilibrium, Figure 5 shows that this is not the case. This 
result  is  different  from  that  of  (Lerman  et  al.,  2000)  in 
which most agents join the largest coalitions. One reason for 
this  difference  is  that  the  price  settings  in  combinatorial 
markets are quite different  from those in non-combinatorial 
markets.  Our situation is much more complex, and the coa(cid:173)
lition  size  is  only  one  of  the  factors  that  influence  the 
movements  of agents.  The  escape  rate  is  a  parameter  that 
has a bigger effect on the size distribution of coalitions. The 
greater the escape rale, the more the agents escape from the 
larger coalitions.  Compare Figures 6(a),  6(b), and 5(d), we 
can  notice  that  the  number of the  small  sized  coalitions  is 
bigger when the escape rate is larger. 

The  updated 

value 
and 
can be obtained from the following equa(cid:173)

of 

tion after all the other 

are updated: 

3  Simulation  Results 
We have conducted various experiments to test the market(cid:173)
equals 
place. At first, we set all the values of 
to  0,  except  that 
= 
In our experiments, we set 
Please note that 
and 
derivatives. 

have no  influence on the 

, and 

and 

(a) Iteration = 10 

(b)  Iteration -  10000 

628 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

Similarly,  the  entropy  for  type  B  agent  within  different  coali(cid:173)

tion sizes can be calculated as: 

We  can  notice  that  the  values  of both  entropies  increase 

with the iteration until the system reaches its equilibrium. 

(a) Coalitions 

(b) Type B Agents 

Figure  7.  The  entropies  for  (a)  coalitions  and  (b)  the num(cid:173)
ber of B type agents in coalitions. 

The  average price per type  A  item and  the average price 
per  type B  item  are principal  indicators  of the  effectiveness 
of the  proposed  combinatorial  marketplace.  These  average 
prices can be calculated with the following formulae respec(cid:173)
tively. 

Figure  8  and  Figure  9  show  the  evolution  of the  average 
prices  of a  type A  item  and  that  of a  type  B  item.  We  can 
notice that  the average prices keep decreasing until  the sys(cid:173)
tem reaches  the equilibrium.  This  demonstrates  the advan(cid:173)
tages of using agents in combinatorial  markets. 

Figure 8. The average price for a type A agent 

(c)  iteration^  100,000 
(d)  equilibrium state. 
Figure 4. Coalitions change as a function of iterations. 

(a)  Number  of  A  agents  (b) Number of B agents 

Figure 5.  Number of agents in different coalitions at equilib(cid:173)
riums state.  Parameters are  same  as  in Table  1, except that 
K 

,  =0.005,  AP,  =0.001. 

Figure 6. The influence of the escape rale. All the parame(cid:173)
ters are the same as in Table 1, except the escape rates. 

t

a

t

Figure  7  shows  the  value  of entropy  as  a  function  of the 
iterations. We use the same values for parameters as those in 
Table  1,  except 
set  the  initial  prices  as 
Please note that these initial prices are set to make sure that 
all  the  prices  are  positive  for  any  coalitions  at  any  given 
moment. 

 
and 

h

a

nd 

To  calculate  the  entropy  with  respect  to  the  number  of 
coalitions  of various  sizes,  we  first calculate  the probability 
that  a  given  sized  coalition  within  the  population  of all  the 
coalitions: 

The entropy with respect to coalition sizes is given by: 

Figure 9. The average price for a type B agent. 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

629 

4.  Conclusions 
In this paper, we propose a theoretical  framework for coali(cid:173)
tion  formation in combinatorial  transactions.  A novel phys(cid:173)
ics-based  dynamic  equation  is  proposed  to  capture  the  es(cid:173)
sence  of  the  movements  of  agents  among  different  sized 
coalitions  as driven by the price differences of these coali(cid:173)
tions  and  by  the  opportunities  of joining  better  coalitions. 
We  perform  simulation  experiments  to  evaluate  the  pro(cid:173)
posed  combinatorial  marketplace  and  the  results  show that 
the  marketplace  can  reduce  the  average  prices  for  the 
buyer's  agents  if opportunities  are  fully  explored.  Our  ap(cid:173)
proach towards combinatorial trading is different  from pre(cid:173)
vious  work  because  we  address  the  issue  from  a  macro(cid:173)
scopic point of view. 
Our framework  is generic, although we make many simpli(cid:173)
fying assumptions  in our current proof of concept model  so 
as  to  make  the  simulations  easier.  We  are  exploring  many 
more  issues  with  our  current  model  as  a  starting point.  In 
our model,  the rate at which an agent joins a coalition de(cid:173)
pends  only  on  the  price  reduction  for  that  agent.  Any  re(cid:173)
quest to join a coalition is accepted. Another way of model(cid:173)
ing  the  market  is  to  emphasize  the  coalition  an  agent  is 
about  to join.  For example,  the  rate  can be determined by 
considering  how  the  changes  in  coalition  size  change  the 
prices  for  the  "old"  members  of the  coalition,  or  the  total 
price for the "old" members of the coalition etc.  In our cur(cid:173)
rent model,  we simply assume that the escape rates are the 
same for all the agents. It is interesting to study the situation 
when  the  escape  rates  depend  on  different  types  of agents 
and  different  sizes  and  structures  of the  coalitions.  In  our 
current model, the ratio of the two types of agents within a 
coalition is an important factor in determining the price. 
It 
is  worth  studying the coalition market without perfect ratio 
of goods.  In  our current  model,  the  price  given  by the  re(cid:173)
tailer is  fixed.  It would be interesting to study the situation 
where the retailer can perform dynamic pricing according to 
its knowledge of the coalitions. Our model addresses a very 
simple combinatorial market where there is only one retailer 
and two different products.  It would be interesting to study 
the  dynamic  behaviors  in  a  marketplace  where  there  are  a 
large  number of retailer's  agents  that  might  form  coalitions 
to  offer  complementary  products  and  a  large  number  of 
buyer's  agents  that  might  form  coalitions  to  explore  the 
benefits  of grouping.  It  would  also  be  interesting  to  study 
the coalition dynamics of open combinatorial  markets when 
agents are allowed to flow in and out of the marketplace.  It 
is  important  to  study  the  qualitative  behaviors  of the  pro(cid:173)
posed model throughout in the parameter space. The simula(cid:173)
tion based on our current simple model already shows some 
interesting phenomena. We are convinced that the behaviors 
of the system will be quite rich when more complex models 
are used. 

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Eric Harley and the 1JCAI reviewers 
for their valuable comments. 

References 
[Fujishima et. al 1999] Yuzo Fujishima, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and 
Yoav Shoham. Taming the computation complexity of combinato(cid:173)
rial auctions: Optimal and approxi-mate approaches. In Proceed(cid:173)
ings of the Sixteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAI-99),pages 548-553, 1999. 
[Klemperer 1999] Paul Klempcrcr. Auction theory: A guide to the 
literature. Journal of Economics Surveys, 13(3):227-286, 1999. 
[Kraus et. al  1991] S. Kraus and J. Wilkenfeld. Negotiation over 
time  in  a  multi-agent  environment:  preliminary  report.  In  Proc. 
IJCAI'91, pages 56-61, Australia, 1991. 
[Lehmann ct. al  1999]  Daniel Lehmann, Liadan ItaCTCallaghan, 
and  Yoav  Shoham.  Truth  revelation  in  approximately  efficient 
combinatorial auction. In Pro-ccedings of the First ACM Confer(cid:173)
ence on Electronic Commerce (EC-99), pages 96  102, 1999. 
[Lerman et. al 2000] K. Lcrman and 0. Shehory, Coalition Forma(cid:173)
tion for Large-Scale Electronic Markets, in Proceedings of Interna(cid:173)
tional Conference on Multu-agent Systems, 2000. 
[Leyton-Brown et. al 2000] Kevin Leyton-Brown, Mark Pearson, 
and Yoav Shoham. Towards a universal test suite for combinatorial 
auction algorithms.  In  Proceedings of the  Second ACM Confer(cid:173)
ence on electronic Commerce (EC-00), pages 66-76, 2000. 
[Rassenti et. al 1982] Rasscnti, S. J.; Smith, V. L.; and Bulfin, R. 
L.  1982. A combinatorial auction mechanism for airport time slot 
al-location. Bell J. of Economics 13:402-417. 
[Rothkopf et. al 1998] Rothkopf, M. H.; Peke" c, A.; and Harstad, 
R. M. 1998. Computationally manageable combinatorial auc-tions. 
Management Science 44(8): 1131-1147. 
[Sandholm  1999a] Tuomas Sandholm. An algorithm for op-timal 
winner determination in combinatorial auction. In Proceedings of 
the Sixteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli(cid:173)
gence (IJCAI-99), pages 542-547, 1999. 
[Sandholm 1999b] T. Sandholm. Negotiation among sclf-intcrcstcd 
computationally limited agents. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Mas(cid:173)
sachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA, 1996. 
[Shehory et. al  1999a] O. Shehory and S. Kraus. Feasible forma(cid:173)
tion of coalitions among autonomous agents in non-super-additivc 
environments. Computational Intelligence, 15(3): 218-251, August 
1999. 
[Shehory  et.  al  1999b]  O.  Shehory,  S.  Kraus,  and  O.  Yadgar. 
Emergent coop-crativc goal satisfaction in large-scale automated-
agent systems. Artificial Intelligence, 1999. 
[Weiss 1999] G. Weiss eds. Multiagent Systems - A Modern Ap(cid:173)
proach to Distributed Artificial Intelligence, 1999 
[Yokoo et. al 2001] Makoto Yokoo, Yuko Sakurai, and Shi-
geo  Matsubara.  Bundle  Design  in  Rubust  Combinatorial 
Auction Protocol against False-name Bids,  17th International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (UCAI-2001). 

630 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

