Emergence of Cooperation in a Pursuit-Evasion Game 

Geoff Nitschke 

Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 

Department of Information Technology 
University of Zurich, Wintcrthurstr. 190 

Zurich, Switzerland 
nitschke@ifi.unizh.ch 

Abstract 

This  research  concerns  the  comparison  of  three 
different artificial evolution approaches to the design 
of  cooperative  behavior  in  a  group  of  simulated 
mobile  robots.  The  first  and  second  approaches, 
termed: single pool and plasticity, are characterized 
by  robots  that  share  a  single  genotype,  though  the 
plasticity  approach  includes  a  learning  mechanism. 
The  third  approach,  termed:  multiple  pools, 
is 
characterized  by  robots  that  use  different  genotypes. 
The application domain implements a pursuit-evasion 
game  in  which  teams  of  robots  of  various  sizes, 
termed: predators, collectively work to capture either 
one  or  two  others,  termed:  prey.  These  artificial 
evolution approaches are also compared with a static 
rule  based  cooperative  pursuit  strategy  specified  a 
priori.  Results 
indicate  that  the  multiple  pools 
approach 
is  superior  comparative  to  the  other 
approaches  in  terms  of  measures  defined  for  prey-
capture  strategy  performance.  That  is,  this  approach 
facilitated  specialization  of behavioral  roles  allowing 
it to be effective for all predator team sizes tested. 

Introduction 

1 
The use of evolutionary computation as a design process for 
control of robot reams has received much attention in both real 
world  [Quinn,  2000],  ISchultz  and  Grefenstette,  2000],  and 
simulated problem domains [Kitano,  1997].  Such attention is 
due to the difficulty in specifying a priori an effective means 
for  multiple  interacting  robot  controllers,  and  the  inherent 
adaptability  of  artificially  evolved  controllers.  The  use  of 
evolutionary  computation  to  exploit  emergent  cooperation 
remains a relatively unexplored area of research in the pursuit 
and evasion domain  [Benda et ai  1985] and related predator-
prey  systems  [Nishimura  and  Takashi,  1997]  using  multiple 
predators  and  prey.  Various  approaches  have  been  used  to 
study  the  pursuit  evasion  domain,  where  the  task  is  for 
multiple predators to capture a prey by surrounding  it  [Korf, 
1992], [Levy and Rosenschein, 1992], though few researchers 
have investigated emergent cooperation in these systems, with 
notable  exceptions  such  as  Denzinger  and  Fuchs  [1996], 
Haynes and Sen [1996] and Yong and Miikkulainen [2001]. 

for 

This  paper  describes  a  comparison  of  three  artificial 
evolution  approaches 
the  synthesis  of  cooperative 
behaviour evaluated within teams of simulated Khepera robots 
[Mondada  et al.  1993].  The three  approaches are  compared 
with  a  rule  based  pursuit  strategy  and  each  is  evaluated  in 
terms of predator fitness scored, and the time period for which 
a prey is immobilized.  For each of the four approaches teams 
of various  sizes are compared.  Cooperative  behavior is only 
evolved  for the predators,  and  each prey  is  able to  move 20 
percent faster than the predators. The behavior of each prey is 
not  evolved,  but  instead  uses  static  obstacle  avoidance 
behavior.  Functionally, each predator is the same in terms of 
movement and sensor capabilities. The collective task was for 
the  predators  to  immobilize  a  prey.  The  predator  team  was 
rewarded fitness proportional to how much it was able to slow 
down a prey, where maximum fitness was rewarded if a prey 
was  immobilized.  A  control  experiment  using  a  single 
predator, demonstrated that at least two predators are needed 
to  accomplish  this  task.  Experimental  results  support  a 
hypothesis that the multiple pools approach, which encourages 
behavioural 
superior 
performance in terms of the two measures defined to quantify 
evolved  prey-capture  strategy  performance  and  this  superior 
performance would prove consistent for all group sizes tested. 

specialization,  would 

yield 

a 

2  Artificial Evolution Approaches 
Four sets of experiments were run in order to test each of the 
three  artificial  evolution  approaches,  and  the  rule-based 
approach.  Ten  replications  of  each  experiment  were  made, 
where each ran for 500 generations.  The predator team 'lived' 
for 10 epochs, where each epoch consisted of 1000 cycles of 
simulation time.  Each epoch constituted a test scenario where 
all  predators  and  prey  were  tested  for  different,  randomly 
generated  orientations  and  starting  positions 
the 
environment.  Six  different  group  configurations of predators 
and  prey  were  tested  for  each  of the  four  approaches.  The 
group types were as follows. Group type 

in 

3 predators and 1 
prey; Group type 2: 3 predators and 3 prey; Group type 3: 5 
predators and  1  prey; Group type 4: 5 predators and 3 prey; 
Group  type  5:  8  predators  and  1  prey;  Group  type  6:  8 
predators and 3 prey. 

Single Pool Approach: As illustrated in figure 1 (left) this 
approach  generates  and  tests  n  copies  of a  single  genotype, 
meaning 
is  homogenous. 

the  predator 

team 

that 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

639 

this  behavior  with  a  simple  set  of  rules  designed  to 
encourage a cooperative encirclement pursuit strategy when 
at  least  two  predators  collectively  approach  a  single  prey. 
The rules cause a predator to move towards the right side of 
detected prey, and to push to the left against that side, while 
moving about the prey's periphery. If an obstacle is detected 
on  the  preys  right  side,  the  predator  will  attempt  to  keep 
moving  about  the  preys  periphery  until  a  Tree-space'  is 
found. 

in  this  case 

Evaluation  of Approaches 
In  order  to  quantify  the  effectiveness  of  emergent  prey 
capture  strategies,  two  different  measures  were  used  to 
evaluate  performance.  The  first  was  predator  team  fitness, 
where fitness awarded to the team was proportional to how 
much  a  prey  was  slowed  during  the  team's  lifetime.  The 
second was prey capture time, which was the time period for 
which a prey was immobilized by the collective efforts of at 
least two predators.  For both the single pool and plasticity 
approaches  a  single  genotype  specifies  the  entire  predator 
team.  That  is,  predators  are  clones  of  each  other,  so 
evaluation  of  team  performance 
is  not 
problematic.  The  performance  of a  predator  team  executed 
under either of these approaches  is simply measured as  the 
fitness  value  assigned  to  the  genotype  that  specifies  the 
team. For the rule-based approach, a pseudo fitness function 
that emulates the single pool and plasticity approaches was 
implemented. 
In  contrast  to  these  approaches  a  predator 
team  using  the  multiple  pools  approach  is  specified  by  n 
genotypes selected from n different populations. Hence, each 
genotype must be assigned an  individual  fitness score, and 
team  performance  evaluation  needs  to  be  computed  by 
estimating  the  fitness  contribution  of each  genotype  to  the 
team as a whole.  A method of evaluation widely known as: 
fitness sharing  [Bull  and  Holland,  1997]  was  implemented 
for the multiple pools approach, where an equal fitness score 
is  assigned  to  each  individual  genotype,  thereby  assuming 
that  each 
individual  contributed  to  team  performance 
equally.  The  advantage  of this  method  is  that  fitness  for 
individual  genotypes  is  easily  calculated  and  there  is  no 
disparity between team  fitness  and  the  fitness  of individual 
team members. 

Agents,  Environment and  Artificial  Evolution 
For  all  experiments  a  generational  evolutionary  algorithm 
using linear rank-based selection was used [Goldberg, 1989]. 
Each  population  contained  100  genotypes,  where  initial 
populations  consisted  of  randomly  generated  genotypes. 
Genotype  length  was  set  to  24  genes,  where  each  gene 
consisted  of  several  bits  encoding  each  neuron  type  and 
connection  weights.  At the  turn  of each  generation,  the  20 
genotypes  that  have  accumulated  the  highest  fitness  were 
allowed  to  reproduce.  The  total  fitness  of  an  individual 
genotype  was the  sum of all  its  fitness for all epochs of its 
life.  Reproduction  was  done  via  generating  five  copies  of 
each genotype in order to create the next generation. 

Figure  1.  Left:  Single  Pool 
Each  predator  phenotypc 
corresponds to a genotype selected from a population and copied 
n  times.  Right:  Plasticity  -  As  with  Single  Pool,  though 
phenotypes implement a recurrent neural network controller. 

Figure  2.  Multiple  Pools  Approach  -  Predator  phenotypes 
correspond  to  n  different  genotypes  selected from n  separate 
pools of genotypes. 

In this approach there is no plasticity so the predators cannot 
adapt  during  their  lifetime.  The  fitness  assigned  to  each 
predator  is  simply  the  fitness  calculated  for  the  single 
genotype that specifies the predator team. The main advantage 
of  this  approach  is  its  simplicity  in  terms  of  behavioral 
encoding and calculation of team fitness. 

Plasticity Approach: As illustrated in figure J  (right) this 
approach generates and tests n copies of a single genotype, so 
that  as  with  the single pool  approach,  the  predator  team  is 
homogenous. The difference is that individual phenotypes are 
able  to  adapt  during  their  lifetime  as  a  result  of a  recurrent 
neural  network 
learning  process.  The  advantage  of  the 
plasticity  approach  is  that  it  allows  for  specialization  of 
behaviour by  individual  predators  without being  affected  by 
the  problem  of  needing  to  estimate  fitness  contribution  of 
different predators to the team as a whole.  For both the single 
pool  and plasticity  approaches,  every  individual  genotype  in 
is  tested  against  n-\  randomly  selected 
the  population 
genotypes from the same population.  This process is repeated 
for all  10 epochs of a predator's lifetime. 

Multiple Pools Approach:  As illustrated in figure 2 this 
approach takes a single genotype  from every population of 
genotypes  where the  number of populations  corresponds  to 
the number of predators. Each genotype is then decoded into 
a  separate  phenotype,  where  this  set  of  phenotypes  then 
represents the team of predators.  In each generation, every 
individual  genotype  in  a  population  is  tested  against  n-\ 
other  genotypes,  randomly  selected  from  one  of the  other 
populations  of genotypes.  This process  is then repeated for 
every epoch.  The advantage of the multiple pools approach 
is that it encourages behavioural specialization in the group 
of predators, in that the artificial evolution setup provides for 
more genetic diversity. 

Rule Based Approach:  This  approach  takes  a  predator 
previously evolved for obstacle avoidance and then extends 

640 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

Figure 3.  Left: Each predator and prey is a simulated Khepera 
robot.  Predators  have  8  infrared  proximity  sensors,  and  8  light 
sensors. Prey have 8 infrared proximity sensors, and a light. Right: 
A feed forward neural network controller is used for the single pool 
and  multiple  pools  approaches,  and  a  recurrent  neural  network 
controller is used for the plasticity approach. 

During  this  copying  process  10  percent  of the  connection 
weights  were  mutated.  Mutation  added  a  random  value 
between  -1.0  and  +1.0  to  the  weights  current  value.  This 
process  was  repeated  for  the  500  generations  that  each 
simulation ran for. As illustrated in figure 3 (left), the body 
of each predator and prey is assumed to be a Khepera mobile 
robot [Mondada et al.  1993]. 

The  robots  used  as  predators  were  equipped  with  8 
infrared proximity sensors, and 8 light sensors positioned on 
the periphery of the Khepera. The robots used as prey were 
equipped with 8 infrared proximity sensors, as well as a light 
on its top. This light could be detected by the predator light 
sensors  and  was  used  so  as  each  predator  robot  could 
distinguish  fellow  predators  from  a prey.  Figure  3  (right) 
illustrates  the  feed-forward  neural  network  consisting of an 
input and output layer with no hidden units [Nolfi and Parisi, 
1997]  that  controlled  all  robots  executed  under  the  single 
pool and plasticity approaches.  In the case of the predators, 
the  input  layer  consisted  of  16  units  that  encoded  the 
activation level of the robots 16 sensors. These 16 input units 
were  connected  to  4  output  units.  Figure  3  (right)  also 
illustrates the recurrent neural network controller used in the 
plasticity  experiments,  where  the  activation  level  of  two 
additional  output units was copied back into two additional 
input units.  The  first  two  output  units  represented  the  two 
motors  of  the  robot  and  encoded  the  speed  of  the  two 
wheels. These motor units controlled the robots behavior in 
the environment. The next two output units represented two 
teaching units that encoded a teaching input for the first two 
output units. The two motor units used this teaching input in 
order  to 
learn  using  the  back  propagation  procedure 
[Rumelhart et al.  1986].  In  the plasticity experiments there 
were an additional  two output units that were the recurrent 
units and contained activation values for the motors from the 
previous cycle. For the robots that were the prey, a network 
connecting 8 sensory input units to 4 motor output units was 
trained  for  an  obstacle  avoidance  behavior  before  being 
placed in the environment. 

The  environment  corresponded  to  a  1000cm  x  1000cm 
arena with no obstacles.  When a predator robot was placed 
in the environment, sensory input was received via the input 
units,  and  activation  values  were  passed  to  the  two  motor 
units, and the teaching units. The activation value of the two 

motor units was used to move the robot, thus changing the 
sensor  input  for  the  next  simulation  cycle.  The  activation 
value  of  the  two  teaching  units  was  used  to  change  the 
weights  that  connected  the  input  units  to  the  motor  units 
using back propagation. This cycle was then repeated. 

3  Results 
Four sets  of experiments  were  executed  to test each  of the 
three  artificial  evolution  approaches  and  the  rule-based 
approach. Each set of experiments tested the six group types 
and ten replications of each experiment were made. 

Figure  4  illustrates  the  average  fitness  attained  for  all 
groups  of  predators  using  the  rule-based,  single  pool, 
plasticity  and multiple pools approaches.  Figure 5 presents 
the  average  prey  capture  time  attained  for  the  four 
approaches.  Prey capture refers  to  the  instance  when  the 
prey is immobilized for a time interval t0..th 

Evolved  Behavior 
Evolved  behavior  observed  for  each  of the  three  artificial 
evolution  approaches  is  described  in  this  section.  For  the 
rule-based approach, even though behavior was not evolved 
as  for  the  other  approaches,  a  single  cooperative  pursuit 
strategy  emerged  as  the  result  of  interaction  of  multiple 
predators following a simple set of rules. 

Single  Pool:  For  all  six  group  types  tested  only  two 
cooperative  prey-capture  strategies  consistently  emerged. 
These strategies, termed: encirclement and entrapment are 
briefly  described  in  the  following.  In  the  encirclement 
strategy at least three predators move to circle the prey, each 
moving in the same direction in close proximity to the prey, 
for  some  period  of time.  The  strategy  was  rarely  able  to 
immobilize  the  prey  and  was  only  effective  in  slowing  the 
prey for a short period of time, given that the predators were 
not  able  to  coordinate  their  movements  for  an  extended 
period. The entrapment strategy, illustrated in figure 6, also 
used  at  least  three  predators,  where  either  one  or  two 
predators  moved  to  each  side  of the  prey,  while  another, 
termed: a blocker, moved around the flanking predators, to 
approach the prey from the front, in order to trap the prey in 
a triangular formation.  In  the example depicted in figure 6, 
Pi  and  P2 are the  flanking predators and P3  is  the blocker. 
Note that at simulation time step w+/ when the prey moved 
to  escape,  the  flanking  predators  moved  also,  turning  one 
way  to  force  the  prey  in  a  specific  direction.  The  blocker 
then  moved around  in  order to affront the prey again.  This 
system  of  entrapment,  movement,  and  then  entrapment 
continued for several times before the prey was able to evade 
the predators. 

Rule-Based: A single cooperative strategy emerged using 
at  least two  and  at most  three predators.  The  strategy was 
similar to  the  encirclement  strategy  that  evolved  under  the 
single  pool  approach.  As  with  the  single  pool  version  of 
encirclement, 
rarely  successful  at 
immobilizing a prey due to the lack of coordination between 
predators as they collectively approached a prey. 

the  strategy  was 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

641 

Figure 4.  Average fitness presented, with standard error bars,  for 
all  group 
three  artificial  evolution 
approaches, and the rule-based approach. 

tested  under  the 

types 

Figure  5.  Average  prey-capture  time  presented,  with  standard 
error  bars,  for  all  group  types  tested  under  the  three  artificial 
approaches, and the rule-based approach. 

Plasticity:  In  these  experiments  one  emergent  cooperative 
prey  capture strategy  was  observed.  This strategy,  illustrated 
in  figure  7,  was  a  derivative  of the  entrapment  strategy  and 
termed:  role  switcher.  In  this  strategy  a  form  of behavioural 
specialization  emerged  during  the  lifetime  of the  predators. 
Specifically,  two different types of behavioral  roles  emerged, 
termed  knocker  and 
flanker.  A  flanking  predator  moved 
along  one  side  and just ahead  of the  prey  forcing  the prey  to 
turn  in  a  particular  direction,  where  as  a  knocking  predator 
'knocked'  into  the  side  of  the  prey  forcing  it  to  slow  its 
movement.  The  role-switcher  strategy  was  formed  by  a 
knocker predator  moving  along  side  a  flanking  predator  and 
role  of  a  flanker  and  knocker  switching  whenever  a  prey 
attempted  evasion.  Figure  7  depicts  predator  P3  formerly 
flanking  assumes  the  knocking  role  at  simulation  time  step 
n+k after  the  prey  moves  to  evade,  and  predator  ?\  formerly 
knocking  assumes  a  flanking  role.  This  dynamic  adoption 
and  switching  of  roles  coordinated  the  movements  of  the 
predators  and  thus  effectively  slow  a  prey's  movement. 
Also,  relative  to  the  entrapment  and  encirclement  strategies, 
role switcher was able to more frequently  immobilize a prey. 
Multiple  Pools:  As  with  the  plasticity  experiments  the 
role switcher  strategy  was  the  only  cooperative  prey-capture 
strategy 
though  a  specific 
difference  was  noted.  Namely,  different  predators  adopted 
different  roles 
lifetimes. 
Specifically,  particular  predators  always  assumed  the  role  of 
a  flanker,  while other predators  always assumed the role of a 
knocker.  Figure  8  depicts  predators  P2,  P3  and  P5  as 
maintaining  the  roles  of  flankers,  and  predators  P 1  and  P4 
maintaining the  roles  of knockers. 

that  consistently  emerged, 

the  beginning  of  their 

from 

Figure 6.  The cooperative entrapment pursuit  strategy,  illustrated 
for group  type  1:  3  predators  and  1  prey.  The  strategy  was  not 
successful at immobilizing an evader. 

n  S f p: n  + j  

Tim*  Step:  n  *  K  fk^-j  ) 

Figure  7.  The  role-switcher  pursuit  strategy,  illustrated  for group 
type 3: 5 predators and  1  prey. Note that a dynamic assumption of 
behavioral roles in the formation of the strategy is depicted here. 

Figure  8.  The  role-switcher pursuit  strategy,  illustrated  for group 
type 3: 5 predators and  1  prey.  Here the assumption of behavioral 
roles is set at the beginning of a predator's lifetime. 

Thus,  at  simulation  time  step  n\j predator  P4  does  not  move 
to assume the role of a knocker in  the strategy as  it is already 
taken  by predator P]  at this  stage.  This adoption of roles that 
was  maintained  throughout  the 
lifetime  of  the  predators 
served  to  increase  the  effectiveness  of  the  role  switcher 
strategy  in  terms  of  the  measures  defined  for  prey  capture 
strategy  performance.  Notably  the  strategy  was  consistently 
effective at immobilizing a prey,  for all group types tested. 

4  Analysis and Discussion 
This  discussion  compares  emergent  prey-capture  strategies 
with  the  rule-based  pursuit  strategy  and  relates  each  to  the 
group types tested and the two performance measures. 

Single  Pool:  Two  cooperative  prey-capture  strategics, 
each  using  at  least  three  predators,  consistently  emerged  for 
all  six  group  types  tested.  Though,  relative  to  the  plasticity 
and  multiple  pools  approaches  these  emergent  strategies 
performed  poorly  in  terms  of average  team fitness  and prey-
capture  time.  These  results  are  presented  in  figures  4  and  5 
respectively and as shown were consistent for all group types 
tested.  The 
time  of  the 
encirclement  and  entrapment  strategies  was  found  to  be  a 
result  of interference  that  occurred  as  two  or  more  predators 

fitness  and  prey-capture 

low 

642 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

collectively approached a prey.  This result was found to be 
due  to  confused  infrared  sensor  readings  of  predators  in 
close  proximity  to  each  other,  and  the  fact  that  individual 
predators  did  not  possess  any  memory,  explicit  form  of 
communication,  or  coordination  to  facilitate  a  successful 
cooperative prey capture strategy.  As illustrated in figures 4 
and  5,  this  result  is  especially  prevalent  for group  types  5 
and 6, which used eight predators. 

to 

type  being 

rule-based  approach,  similar 

Rule-Based:  From the  interactions of predators  following 
a  set  of rules,  an  encirclement  strategy  emerged,  though  as 
with  the  single  pool  version  of the  strategy  it  was  effective 
for  at  most  three  predators.  Also,  note  in figures  4  and  5, 
that similar to its  single pool  counterpart the strategy proved 
most effective for group types: 1  and 4.  Given that in these 
experiments  the  chance  of  predators  physically  interfering 
with  each  other  as  they  approached  the  prey  was  minimal. 
The 
the  single  pools 
approach,  also  performed  best  in  group  types  where  the 
predator to prey ratio was medium as in group types 1 and 4. 
Plasticity:  In  experiments  using  this  approach  the  role 
switcher  strategy  frequently  emerged  for  all  group  types 
tested.  In  the  role-switcher  strategy  a  form  of  dynamic 
behavioral specialization emerged in at least three predators. 
This  behavioral  specialization  was  in  the  form  of dynamic 
role  adoption  that emerged  during  the  lifetime  of a predator 
and  varied  from  predator  to  predator  depending  upon  the 
group 
tested.  This  dynamic  role  adoption 
facilitated  cooperation  between  the  predators  affording  the 
predator  team  a  high  average fitness  and prey-capture  time 
comparative  to  the  single  pool  and  rule-based  approaches, 
for all group types tested. This result is presented in figures 4 
and  5  respectively.  In  experiments  testing group types 7,  3 
and 5 at least three and at most six predators constituted the 
role-switcher  strategy,  where  a  maximum  of three  flanked 
cither side, and the role of a flanking and knocking predator 
switched whenever the prey turned to evade.  In experiments 
testing group types 7  and  6,  at least three and at most eight 
predators 
role-switcher  strategy,  where  a 
maximum  of two  predators  flanked  either side  of a  prey.  As 
with the experiments testing group types 7, 3, and 5 the role 
of the predator closest to the prey and the  knocking predator 
switched whenever the prey turned so  as to escape, though 
the  difference  of  experimental  results  from  testing  group 
types J and 6, was that two sub-groups of predators emerged, 
meaning  that  two  of the  prey  were  simultaneously  engaged 
by two predator sub-teams. 

formed 

the 

The  dynamic  assumption  of  roles  during  a  predators 
lifetime  allowed  for  the  formation  of  sub-groups  in  the 
predator  team,  and  thus  served  to  yield  a  higher  average 
team fitness and prey capture time.  As presented in figures 4 
and  5  respectively,  these  two  measures  were  relatively 
higher  in  experiments  testing  group  types  7,  4,  and  6,  and 
low 
In 
experiments testing group types 3 and 5, this result was due 
to  multiple  predators  attempting 
the  same 
behavioral  role  as  they  collectively  approached  the  single 
prey.  For  group  type  2,  the  1  predator  to  1  prey  ratio 

types  3  and  5. 

in  experiments 

testing  group 

to  assume 

It 

is 

theorized 

increased  the  chance  of  the  strategy  dispersing  given  an 
increased  probability  of distraction  from  a  passing  prey.  In 
the  other  group  types  tested  a  higher  predator to  prey  ratio 
reduced the number of predators that collectively approached 
the prey at any given  time,  thus increasing the  likelihood of 
unhindered  dynamic  adoption  of  a  behavioral  role  in  the 
role-switcher  strategy. 
that  behavioral 
specialization  for  role  switching  emerged  as  an  indirect 
result  of  interference  that  occurred  when  at  least  three 
predators  collectively  approached  a  prey.  Such  interference 
was  observed  in  the  single  pool  experiments  and  often 
caused  emergent  strategies  to 
fail  prematurely,  thereby 
making  it  more  difficult  for  such  strategies  using  at  least 
three  predators  to  be  selected  for  and  propagated  by  the 
evolutionary  process.  Where  as,  the  role-switcher  strategy 
was  able  to  achieve  a  high  team  fitness  and  prey-capture 
time,  it  was  at  best  only  able  to  slow  the  prey,  and  never 
completely  immobilizing  the  prey  in  experiments  testing 
group  types  2  through  to  5.  This  is  reflected  in  figure  5, 
which presents a relatively higher average prey capture time 
for  experiments  testing  group  types  7  and  6.  Thus,  the 
dynamic  adoption  of  roles  was  only  effective  where  the 
predator  to  prey  ratio  was  sufficiently  high,  though  not  so 
high  as  in  the  case  of group  type  5  where  an  excess  of 
physical  interference  between  predators  prevented  the  role-
switcher strategy  from regularly forming. 

Multiple  Pools:  In  experiments  using  the  multiple  pools 
approach  only  a  single  cooperative  prey-capture  strategy 
emerged.  This  strategy  was  classified  as  a derivative  of the 
role-switcher strategy  using  at  least  three predators that  was 
observed in the plasticity experiments. Though the multiple-
pools  role-switcher  used  a  genetic  based  specialization.  In 
the  plasticity  experiments 
the  adoption  of  specialized 
behaviour was dependent upon  the positions of the predators 
at a given time, where as in the multiple pools experiments, 
different predators  initially  behaved  differently  and assumed 
genetically  pre-determined  roles  prior  to  engaging  in  the 
multiple  pools  version  of  the  role-switcher  prey-capture 
strategy. That is, one predator always assumed the role of the 
knocker  while  the  others  always  assumed  the  role  of  a 
flanker,  or  that  of  an  idle  predator.  Idle  predators,  for 
example  predator  P4  in  figure  8,  served  the  purpose  of 
reducing  any  potential  interference  between  predators  as 
they  collectively  approach  a  prey. 
Idle  predators  also 
increased  the  chance  of success  of the  prey-capture  strategy 
via  limiting  the  number  of  predators  that  constituted  the 
strategy. 
The  fact  that  the  predators  were  genetically 
different  is  one  explanation  for  the  evolution  of specialized 
behavioural  roles  that  complemented  each  other  in  the 
emergence  of the  multiple  pools  role  switcher  strategy.  In 
the  experiments  testing  group  type  6y  two  specialized  sub(cid:173)
groups of predators, comprising two groups of four predators 
emerged. 

The  effectiveness  of these  two  specialized  sub-groups  is 
illustrated  in figures 4 and 5,  which present a relatively high 
average  fitness  and  prey-capture  time  for  all  group  types, 
comparative  to  the  single  pool,  rule-based  and  plasticity 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

643 

approaches.  Note  that  as  with  the  plasticity  approach,  the 
multiple  pools  approach  is  more  effective  at  exploiting  an 
environment  containing  at  least  two  prey  via  the  formation 
of two  specialized  predator  sub-groups.  Thus,  the  multiple 
pools  approach 
the  evolution  of  specialized 
predator  sub-groups  to  simultaneously  capture  two  prey, 
where  genetic  based  specialization  proved  to  be  more 
effective,  in  terms  of  measures  for  fitness  scored  and  prey 
capture  time.  This  comparison  was  made  with  the  dynamic 
assumption  of  behavioral  roles  as  done  by  predators  using 
the plasticity  approach. 

facilitated 

5  Conclusions 
This  paper  presented  a  set  of  experiments  testing  three 
different  artificial  evolution  approaches  and  a  rule-based 
approach  for the  synthesis  of cooperative behaviour  within  a 
team  of  predators,  where  the  task  was  to  cooperatively 
capture  at  least two prey.  Results compared the performance 
of  these  approaches  for  six  different  group  configurations. 
The  comparison  was  in  terms  of two  measures  designed  to 
quantify  the  efficacy  of  emergent  cooperative  prey  capture 
strategies.  These  measures  were  predator  fitness  and  prey-
capture  time.  Results  presented  indicated  the  multiple  pools 
approach  to  be  superior  in  terms  of these  two  measures  for 
all  group  types  tested.  The  superiority  of the  multiple  pools 
approach  was  found  to  be  a  result  of  a  genetic  form  of 
behavioral specialization that assigned behavioral roles at the 
beginning a predators  lifetime.  The  multiple pools approach 
also  facilitated  the  evolution  of two  specialized  sub-groups 
of predators  in  scenarios  using  at  least  two  prey.  Evolution 
of  these  sub-groups 
improved  the  effectiveness  of  these 
strategies  in  terms  of  higher  team  fitness  and prey  capture 
time,  comparative 
rule-based,  single  pool  and 
plasticity  approaches.  Specifically, 
the  specialized  sub(cid:173)
groups  aided  in  reducing  interference  between  predators  as 
they collectively approached a prey. 

the 

to 

A  comparison  with  other  evolution  of  cooperation 
approaches  in  the  pursuit-evasion  domain  [Denzinger  and 
Fuchs,  1996],  [Haynes  and  Sen,  1996]  and  [Yong  and 
Miikkulainen,  2001]  is  difficult  given  the  real  world  nature 
of  the  experiments  described  in  this  paper.  Though  the 
robots  were  simulated,  the  environment  was  a  continuous 
domain  and  the  simulation  incorporated  noise  in  sensory 
data,  namely  confused  infrared  sensor  readings  resulting 
from  two  or  more  Khepera's  being  in  close  proximity  to 
each  other.  This  noisy  sensor  data  was  a  key  reason  for 
interference  between  multiple  predators  as  they  collectively 
approached  a prey.  Also,  a continuous environment does not 
allow  for  the  selection  of  distinct  sets  of  situation/action 
values  that  are  possible 
implementations 
[Denzinger  and  Fuchs,  1996]  where  a  finite  set  of  actions 
and 
the 
emergence  of cooperation  is  simpler to  analyze  in  these  grid 
world 
own 
implementations,  so  the  study  of mechanisms  that  facilitate 
emergent  cooperation  such  as  behavioral  specialization  is 
limited to trivial situations. 

resultant  outcomes  can  be  defined.  While, 

in  grid  world 

domains, 

they 

are 

limited 

by 

their 

in  Multi-Agent  Environments:  Eusociality. 

References 
[Bcnda et al.  1985] Benda, M., Jagannanthan, V., and Dodhiawalla, 
R.  An  Optimal  Cooperation  of  Knowledge  Sources.  Technical 
BCS-G2010-28, Boeing AI Center, August  1985. 
[Bull  and  Holland,  1997]  Bull,  L.,  and  Holland,  0.  Evolutionary 
Computing 
In 
Proceedings  of  the  Second  Annual  Conference  on  Genetic 
Programming, pages 347-352. San Francisco, USA, July, 1997. 
[Denzinger  and  Fuchs,  1996]  Denzinger,  J.,  and  Fuchs,  M. 
Experiments in Learning Prototypical  Situations for Variants of the 
Pursuit Game.  In Proceedings of the Second ICMAS conference, 
pages 48-55, Kyoto, Japan, August, 1996. 
[Goldberg,  1989]  Goldberg,  D.  Genetic  Algorithms.  Addison 
Wesley, New York, USA.  1989. 
[Haynes  and  Sen,  1996]  Haynes,  T.,  and  Sen,  S.  Evolving 
behavioral  strategies  in  predators  and  prey.  Adaptation  and 
Learning in Multi-Agent Systems, Springcr-Verlag, Berlin, 1996. 
[Kitano et al.  1999]  Kitano,  H.,  Asada,  M.,  Noda,  I.,  and  Veloso, 
M.  (1999).  RoboCup:  Today  and  Tomorrow  -  What  we  have 
learned.  Artificial  Intelligence,  vol.  110(2):  193-214.  Elsevier 
Science Publishers, Amsterdam, Holland. 
[Korf,  1992]  Korf,  R.  E.  A  simple  solution  to  pursuit  games. 
Working Papers of the Eleventh International Workshop on DAI, 
pages 195-213. Geneva, Switzerland, February, 1992. 
[Levy and Rosenschein,  1992] Levy, R., and Rosenschein, J. S.  A 
Game Theoretic Approach to Distributed Artificial  Intelligence and 
In  Decentralized  AI  III,  pages  129-146, 
the  Pursuit  Problem. 
Kaiscrslautern, Germany, August, 1992. Springer-Verlag. 
[Mondada  et  al.  1993]  Mondada,  F.,  Franzi,  E.,  and  Ienne,  P. 
Mobile  Robot Miniaturization:  A  tool  for Investigation  in  Control 
Algorithms.  In  Proceedings of Third  International  Symposium  on 
Experimental  Robotics,  pages  501-513,  Kyoto,  Japan,  October, 
1993.  Springer-Verlag. 
[Nishimura  and  Ikegami,  1997]  Nishimura,  S.  I.,  and  Ikcgami,  T. 
Emergence  of  Collective  Strategies  in  a  Prey-Predator  Game 
Model.  Artificial Life, 3(1): 243-260.  July,  1997. 
[Nolfi and Pansi,  1997] Nolfi S. and Parisi D.  Learning to adapt to 
changing  environments  in  evolving  neural  networks.  Adaptive 
Behavior, 5(1): 75-98. July, 1997. 
[Quinn,  2000]  Quinn,  M.  Evolving  cooperative  homogeneous 
multi-robot teams. In Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 1798-1803, Takamatsu, 
Japan, October 2000, IEEE Press. 
[Rumelhart  et  al  1986]  Rumelhart,  D.  E.,  Hinton,  G.  E.,  and 
Williams,  R.  J.  Learning 
internal  representations  by  error 
propagation.  Parallel  Distributed  Processing,  Volume 
I: 
Foundations. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1986. 
[Schultz and Grefenstette, 2000] Schultz, A. C. and Grefenstette, J. 
J.  Continuous  and  Embedded  Learning  in  Autonomous  Vehicles: 
In  Unmanned  Ground  Vehicle 
Adapting  to  sensor  failures. 
Technology II, Proceedings of SPIE, vol. 4024(1): 55-62, American 
Association for Artificial Intelligence, 2000. 
[Yong and Miikkulainen, 2001] Yong, C. H., and Miikkulainen, R. 
Cooperative  Co-evolution  of  Multi-Agent  Systems.  Technical 
Report  AIO 1-287.  Department  of Computer  Science,  University  of 
Texas, July 2001. 

644 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

