When Evolving Populations is Better than Coevolving Individuals: The Blind Mice 

Problem 

Thomas Miconi 

34 Rue Desbordes-Valmore 

75016 Paris, France 

thomas.miconi @free.fr 

Abstract 

This  paper  is  about  the  evolutionary  design  of 
multi-agent  systems.  An  important  part  of  re(cid:173)
cent  research  in  this  domain  has  been  focusing 
on  collaborative revolutionary  methods.  We  ex(cid:173)
pose  possible  drawbacks  of  these  methods,  and 
show  that  for  a  non-trivial  problem  called  the 
"blind mice" problem, a classical  GA  approach in 
which  whole  populations  are  evaluated,  selected 
and crossed  together (with  a few tweaks)  finds  an 
elegant  and  non-intuitive  solution  more  efficiently 
than cooperative coevolution.  The difference in ef(cid:173)
ficiency  grows  with  the  number  of  agents  within 
the  simulation.  We  propose  an  explanation  for 
this  poorer  performance  of  cooperative  coevolu(cid:173)
tion,  based  on  the  intrinsic  fragility of the evalua(cid:173)
tion process.  This explanation is supported by the(cid:173)
oretical and experimental arguments. 

Introduction 

1 
Evolutionary algorithms are methods that apply the principles 
of darwinian  evolution  to  the  generation  and  adaptation  of 
artificial,  logical entities (function parameters, rulesets, pro(cid:173)
grams. ..). Their usability as a search technique has been sup(cid:173)
ported  both  analytically  (e.g.  the  Schema  Theorem  [Gold(cid:173)
berg,  1989]  for genetic  algorithms),  and  empirically  by un(cid:173)
countable applications.  However, the overwhelming majority 
of these applications are about the generation of individuals. 
Collective evolution, that is, the generation and/or adapta(cid:173)
tion of collaborating populations of agents, has attracted com(cid:173)
paratively less attention.  There has been significant research 
in this domain though, especially over the last decade.  This 
research  led to algorithms of ever-growing complexity.  This 
paper  will  first  describe  some  of the  work  in  that  field,  and 
more  particularily  the  principle  of cooperative  coevolution, 
which seems to be the most popular type of method today. 

We then expose what we feel are possible drawbacks of co(cid:173)
operative evolution, and propose a simpler way to adapt the 
canonical genetic algorithm to the generation of populations. 
We describe an experiment, based on the "blind mice" prob(cid:173)
lem, and show that while an adapted genetic algorithm works 
pretty  well  with  that  problem,  cooperative  coevolution  has 
more  difficulties.  Finally,  we  give  an  explanation  for these 

difficulties and  for the difference in  behaviour with  the sim(cid:173)
pler genetic algorithm. 

(Some of the) Related work 

2 
The simplest way to evolve a team of collaborating agents is 
to have all agents be identical, that is, to have homogeneous 
populations.  These  methods are not really different from in(cid:173)
dividual  evolution,  except at  evaluation  time:  to evaluate  a 
given genotype, N agents are created out of this genotype in(cid:173)
stead  of just  one,  and  the  resulting  population  is  evaluated. 
Then  start again with a different genotype, etc.  While being 
very rigidly constrained, this method makes perfect sense in 
situations where one does not need heterogeneity at all.  This 
method  was  used  by  [N.Zaera  et «/.,  1996)  to evolve  small 
groups  of  fish-like  animats,  controlled  by  neural  networks, 
to perform extremely  simple  tasks  (dispersion,  aggregation, 
etc.). 

A similar method was used by [Luke,  1998] to evolve com(cid:173)
petitive teams of soccer players for the Robocup competition 
[Kitano et a/.,  1995].  The author used an adapted version of 
Genetic  Programming [Koza,  19921.  There was  also an at(cid:173)
tempt at introducing a limited degree of heterogeneity by de(cid:173)
composing teams into small sub-teams (defenders, attackers, 
etc.)  and evolving different program trees for each such sub-
teams.  However, because of the enormous search space (and 
of the delays imposed by  the Robocup server software), this 
approach proved intractable in practice:  GP runs took days to 
produce meaningful results.  Lack of time thus prevented the 
semi-heterogeneous teams from outperforming homogeneous 
teams. 

A  way  to  obtain  some  degree  of heterogeneity  is  to  have 
only one population and make it change gradually over time, 
replacing  some  agents  by  others  based  on  some  evaluation 
method.  These new agents can  be obtained by crossover or 
by duplication with mutation.  If there is a way to evaluate the 
impact of one given individual, it is perfectly possible to per(cid:173)
form a simple genetic algorithm over the population. This is, 
in essence,  the idea behind classifier systems (iHolland and 
Reitman,  1978]), where a set of rules cooperate to control an 
animat, and where individuals are evaluated after the animates 
performance through a credit-sharing system. 

In  the same vein,  we proposed a simple  scheme in  (iMi-
coni, 2001]),  in which all agents were given an arbitrary in(cid:173)
dex, and agents of index K could only mate with agents whose 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

647 

indices fell within the  [K-r;  K+r]  range.  Evaluation occured 
simply by replacing one of the  two parents by the offspring, 
then the second parent, and keeping the best of these two pop(cid:173)
ulations  (with  the  possibility  of discarding  any  changes  if it 
decreased the performance of the system).  This simple algo(cid:173)
rithm led to the emergence of sub-species that appeared, grow 
and shrank according to the needs of the population. An inter(cid:173)
esting feature of this algorithm was its incrementality, which 
allowed for long-term, adaptive evolution of the system. 

Trying to obtain fully heterogeneous systems brings us to 
another level  of complexity,  right into the  realm of coopera(cid:173)
tive coevolution. While coevolution has been most frequently 
applied  in  a  competitive  way  (by  confronting  individuals  to 
each  other  and  using  the  result  of this  confrontation  as  an 
evaluation for individuals),  it can  also be  used in  a cooper(cid:173)
ative way, in order to evolve sets of collaborating agents. 

In  cooperative coevolutionary  iPotter  and  DeJong,  1994] 
methods, each agent within the system is actually taken from 
a  hidden  subpopulation,  or pool.  To  evaluate  a  given  indi(cid:173)
vidual,  it is  associated with  a set of collaborators (one from 
each other pool) and the resulting population is evaluated as a 
whole.  The resulting score is then attributed to the currently 
evaluated  individual.  Based on  this evaluation method,  the 
classical GA cycle (evaluate, select and reproduce) is applied 
to each pool in turn, as many times as needed. In the first ver(cid:173)
sion  of the  cooperative coevolutionary  algorithm  (CCGA-1) 
collaborators  are chosen  by  taking  the  best  individual  from 
every pool.  However,  in the CCGA-2 version, evaluation is 
refined by re-evalluating every agent with random collabora(cid:173)
tors, then taking the better score obtained between these two 
evaluations.  The number of collaborators, the way these col(cid:173)
laborators are chosen, the way the overall score is computed 
(averaging  the  different  scores,  or taking  the  best  score,  or 
taking  the  worst  score,  etc.)  are  important  parameters  that 
can  influence the performance of the algorithms.  The  influ(cid:173)
ence of these parameters has been studied to some extent by 
[Wiegand et ai,  2001],  but this  study applied only to simple 
function optimization problems with only two variables. 

As happens frequently with good ideas, cooperative coevo(cid:173)
lution has been (re-)discovered a number of times under dif(cid:173)
ferent names.  Enforced subpopulations (ESP), for example, 
are exactly like cooperative coevolution, in which each agent 
is evaluated with only one set of collaborators: the best agents 
from all other pools.  In other words, ESP is the CCGA-1  al(cid:173)
gorithm. While this method was initially devised for the evo(cid:173)
lution  of neural  networks  [Gomez  and Mikkulainen,  1997], 
it was successfully applied to multi-agent evolution by [Yong 
and Mikkulainen, 2001], who used it in a predator-prey sim(cid:173)
ulation.  The  algorithm  managed  to  find  efficient  strategies 
for predators, such as having two predators "chase" the prey 
while another one blocked it. 

For some reason, the idea of simply using the standard ge(cid:173)
netic  algorithm  to  whole  populations  seems  to  have  fallen 
slightly  out of fashion.  The  most probable  reason  is  that  it 
is  simply  too  obvious  to  be  talked about.  The  second  rea(cid:173)
son  is that it does have intrinsic drawbacks, such as a more 
massive search space.  The third one is that it requires a few 
modifications to  be  adapted to  the evolution  of populations. 
All these aspects are discussed in section 3.2. 

3  Two methods for evolving heterogeneous 

populations 

3.1  Cooperative coevolution 
Cooperative coevolution is quite an elaborate mechanism. In(cid:173)
tuition indicates (and evidence confirms) that by focusing on 
each and every agent, it requires a huge number of evaluations 
to converge towards a solution.  This algorithm concentrates 
on  optimizing each  individual  agent in  regard  with  the  rest 
of the population; it is rather different from the more holistic 
approach of traditional  GAs,  in  which full  genomes are  ma(cid:173)
nipulated, and the (co-)adaptation of genes emerges naturally 
from selection, crossover and mutation - at least, in theory. 

Why would it not be possible to simply use traditional GAs 
for  the  generation  of multi-agent  systems,  regarding  whole 
systems (not just each agent within them) as  individuals?  A 
simple answer is that this approach leads to very large geno(cid:173)
types, since the genotype for an "individual" has to code for 
several  agents  instead  of just  one,  and  the  resulting  search 
space might become intractable for GAs.  Cooperative coevo(cid:173)
lution can thus be seen as a simple way to decompose a big 
problem into several smaller ones, even though these smaller 
problems are still strongly interlaced with each other. 

However  cooperative  coevolutionary  algorithms  seem  to 
have  an  important  drawback:  they  basically  evaluate  each 
agent by assessing its impact on the performance of the whole 
system.  The  problem  is  that  when  the  number  of  agents 
within  the  system  grows,  the  influence  of one  single  agent 
over the system's performance tends to decrease, thus possi(cid:173)
bly  making  its  assessment  more difficult.  This  may  become 
troublesome when the problem has  a stochastic  component, 
as  is  the case  in  many  simulations.  In  this  case,  evaluating 
the  same  population  several  times  can  lead  to  different  re(cid:173)
sults.  The consequence of this may  be  more  important than 
one might think, as we will see below. 

But first, it might be interesting to see how classical genetic 
algorithms  can  be  adapted  to  the  evolution  of populations, 
and whether these population-oriented genetic algorithms can 
compete with cooperative coevolution. 

3.2  Population-oriented  genetic  algorithms 
Genetic algorithms work by evaluating individuals, selecting 
some of them according to their performance, crossing them 
together and mutating them, and starting over again. 
is pos(cid:173)
sible to apply exactly the same method to whole multi-agent 
systems.  We can evaluate populations,  cross them together 
(thus creating new populations that  inherit agents from both 
parents), mutate them by changing one of their agents, etc. 

However, the fact is that multi-agent systems are not simple 
individuals.  They do have an obvious level of decomposition 
(the agent), and this can be exploited in several ways. 

The most obvious idea is  that in order to cover the search 
space  efficiently,  one  must  not  only  make  new  populations 
out of existing agents,  one must also create new agents.  To 
do  this,  we  may  introduce  an  inner crossover  operator that 
allows us to cross two agents together. Thus, when creating a 
new population by importing agents from both parents, some 
of these imported agents would actually the result of an inner 
crossover between agents from the parents. 

648 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

Figure  1:  Normal  crossover (top)  can  be  "spiced  up"  with 
inner crossover between individual agents (bottom).  This al(cid:173)
lows  for  the  creation  of new  agents,  which  is  necessary  to 
cover the search space efficiently 

It  is  possible  to  make  an  analogy  with  traditional  GAs: 
from the viewpoint of the whole population, these "crossed" 
agents  have  some  similarity  with  bit-wise  mutations  in  the 
standard  genetic  algorithm.  They  are  part  of the  children's 
genotype,  yet  they  were  not  present  in  any  of the  parents' 
genotypes. However, these are not exactly random mutations, 
since the genetic material still comes from the parents' geno(cid:173)
types.  This suggests that at  first  sight, "inner crossover" rate 
should  be  slightly  higher than  the  usual  mutation  rate  in  a 
classical GA (usually about 2%-5% for each bit). 

Another possibility  is  to  enhance  traditional  crossover by 
occasionally  swapping  agents between  populations in  the  fi(cid:173)
nal offspring.  This, too, could allow for a better covering of 
the search space.  However, we will not explore that possibil(cid:173)
ity in the present paper. 

4  Application:  The  Blind  Mice  problem 
4.1  Description of the experiment 
The experiment presented here is based on the "blind mice" 
problem.  A flock of mice, controlled by simple feed-forward 
neural networks, have to escape a number of cats running af(cid:173)
ter them in a toroidal world. 

Now the "game" has three very simple rules: 
1.  The cats can see the mice and always run after the closest 

mouse around. 

2.  The mice run faster than the cats. 
3.  The mice can not see the cats. Neither can they see each 
other  (they  are  "blind").  Their  only  input  is  a  pair  of 
numbers:  the  X  and  Y  coordinates of the  center of the 
flock. 

When  a cat touches a  mouse,  the cat is teleported to an(cid:173)
other, random location, and the population's "catch counter" 
is  increased;  nothing else  is changed,  and  the simulation  is 
not interrupted in any way. 

Let us consider these rules:  they seem to make the  prob(cid:173)
lem  extremely  difficult  for  the  mice.  How  is  it  possible  to 
escape  predators  that  can  see  you,  but  that  you  can't  sec? 
Running around as fast as possible will just make them bump 
into  any  cat coming from the opposite direction.  The  same 
is true for random movement strategies.  Given the enormous 
asymmetry  of information  between  mice  and  cats,  the  sur(cid:173)
vival  chances  of the  poor  rodents  appear  to  be  desperately 
thin.  Even  for a  human  designer,  finding  a  solution  to  this 

Cat 
Mouse 

Figure 2:  The successful strategy.  Mouse D attracts the cats, 
mouse B plays a "balancing'* role,  and other mice move to(cid:173)
gether in a tight flock 

problem is not a trivial task.  Yet, as we will sec below, evo(cid:173)
lution managed to come up with an elaborate solution to this 
problem. 

In our experiments, the mice are controlled by simple feed(cid:173)
forward neural networks with 2 inputs, 2 outputs and 5 hidden 
neurons.  The two inputs are the coordinates of the center of 
gravity of the  flock,  that  is,  the sum of the X-  (resp.  Y-) co(cid:173)
ordinates  of all  mice,  divided  by  the  number of mice.  The 
two outputs  are  two  real  numbers  in  the  [-3.0;  +3.0]  range, 
indicating the horizontal and vertical speed of the mouse. All 
weights are real numbers in the [-1.0; +1.0] range.  All simu(cid:173)
lations use 4 cats. 
4.2  The evolved strategy 
There seems to be an optimal strategy for this problem.  This 
strategy emerged in all successful runs, sometimes with vari(cid:173)
ants. This strategy is described in Figure 2. No other strategy 
led to a really efficient behaviour. 

Let us explain this strategy:  as we can see, most mice are 
aggregated together and move in a tight flock. This minimizes 
the probability that a "stray" cat might touch them,  but  it  is 
not  sufficient  in  itself to  ensure  a  minimal  catch  rate.  The 
really  important  behaviour  is  that  of  the  mouse  labelled  D 
(the "Dancer"). 

This  mouse  has  a  strange  behaviour:  it  seems  to  revolve 
around the rest of the flock, but not in a strictly circular fash(cid:173)
ion.  Instead,  it constantly bounces around the  flock,  always 
staying at a respectable distance from it, and moving very fast 
along its path.  The purpose of this behaviour becomes obvi(cid:173)
ous when one sees the position of the cats:  they are all  fol(cid:173)
lowing this "dancing" mouse, because it is simply the closest 
to them, thus leaving the rest of the flock alone. 

In  other  words,  the  purpose  of this  dancing  behaviour  is 
simply to attract all  the cats.  The dancer moves very fast (so 
that it cannot be touched by cats),  but along a sinuous path, 
so that: 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

649 

-  It can  "drag" cats  more  efficiently  in  the  initial  stage, 

when cats and mice are at random position 

-  It never gets too far from the cats, which allows the cats 
to  follow  it  endlessly even  though  it  runs  much  faster 
than them. 

The  final  touch  of this  strategy  can  be  seen  in  the  be(cid:173)
haviour of the mouse labelled B (as "Balance"), even though 
it didn't appear in  all  successful  runs.  This mouse also re(cid:173)
volves around the flock, but much closer to it.  In some runs 
it moves around the flock in a circular fashion, in other runs 
it bounces around it, but it usually stays on the opposite side 
of the flock with  respect  to the dancer.  We  believe that this 
mouse has a ''balancing" role, in that it counterbalances the 
effect of the Dancer on the position of the center of gravity of 
the population, thus allowing the flock to be more stable. 

Many variants appeared, such as having several dancers, 
or no balancer.  But the essential  traits of the strategy were 
consistent: aggregation of most mice, except for one or a few 
to attract the cats away from the flock. 

Note that this strategy is very interdependent: each agent's 
performance is highly dependant on other agents' behaviour. 
This  is even  more  true  when  you  consider that  in  oider to 
behave that way, they must calculate their trajectories out of 
only  one  input:  the  position  of the  center of gravity  of the 
whole flock, which is based on the position of all other agents. 
This fact plays a significant role in the results described be(cid:173)
low. 

5  Experimental  results 
5.1  Experimental settings 
We  used two algorithms for this problem:  a simple genetic 
algorithm, adapted with an  inner crossover operator (as de(cid:173)
scribed above), and a full-featured cooperative revolution(cid:173)
ary algorithm.  Both methods were used with 7, then with 15 
mice.  We used  100 populations of 7 (resp.  15) mice for the 
first algorithm, and 7 (resp.  15) pools of 100 mice for the sec(cid:173)
ond one. Each algorithm was run several times with different 
random seeds. 

In the first algorithm, reproduction of populations occured 
through tournament selection and  1-point crossover at a rate 
of 60%.  Every time two populations were thus crossed to(cid:173)
gether,  an  inner crossover rate of  10%  was  applied,  mean(cid:173)
ing that each mouse in the offspring had a 10% chance to be 
the result of the crossing of the parents' corresponding mice. 
In the second algorithm, reproduction within each pool oc(cid:173)
cured by tournament selection and 1-point crossover at a rate 
of 30%,  which proved to be the most efficient.  In both al(cid:173)
gorithms,  mutation  appeared only  when crossing two  mice 
together, by choosing a new random value for a connection 
weight with a 5% probability. 

Note that in both method, we use a limited form of elitism, 
in that the best individual from a given generation was pre(cid:173)
served  in  the  next  generation.  This  ensured  better  perfor(cid:173)
mance - and made the obtained results even more puzzling, 
as explained below. 

Finally, cooperative coevolution specifies that each agent 
must be evaluated with a set of collaborators. Several sets of 

Figure 3:  Performance of a population-adapted genetic algo(cid:173)
rithm, with 7  mice (top) and  15  mice (bottom).  The y-axis 
indicates the number of mice catched during this evaluation 
round, while the x-axis indicates the number of evaluations. 
Both the fitness of the best population and the average fitness 
of all populations are shown. 

collaborators can be used in turn in order to refine the evalua(cid:173)
tion, and the final result can be calculated from these succes(cid:173)
sive evaluations in  various ways (average, best,  random...) 
However,  we  found  that  with  this  problem,  increasing  the 
number of collaborators (and thus  the number of evaluation 
rounds)  brought absolutely  nothing,  and  was  even  damag(cid:173)
ing  if the  final  score  was  anything  else  than  the  best  score 
found.  The most successful  method was simply to evaluate 
each mouse by joining it with the best individual from each 
pool,  exactly  as  in  the  enforced  subpopulations  algorithm. 
This is not a surprising result,  however, as  we will explain 
it below. 

5.2  Comparison  of results 
The first algorithm (simple genetic algorithm with two levels 
of crossover) proved remarkably efficient with this problem. 
All runs led to the strategy described in section 4.2, whatever 
the number of mice within the simulation, although of course 
it took more time with 15 mice than with 7. Two typical runs, 
with respectively 7 and 15 mice, are described in Figure 3. 

Cooperative  coevolution  led  to  different  results.  With  7 
mice, in some runs, the algorithm failed to evolve any com(cid:173)
petitive behaviour.  In other runs it managed to find the good 
strategy, but took more evaluations than with the previous al(cid:173)
gorithm. Many runs, however, achieved performance compa(cid:173)
rable with that of the simple genetic algorithm. With 15 mice, 
the success rate was much lower. Most runs did not converge 
after 10000 evaluations. Others converged, then suddenly di(cid:173)
verged quickly.  All the runs, with 7 or 15 mice, exhibited a 
intriguing pattern of oscillation. 

650 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

may not be selected again, because the rest of the population 
has co-adapted towards a different state.  However, it is pos(cid:173)
sible that the this agent is selected again, thus resulting in a 
sharp increase in performance - until the next "error" in the 
evolutionary process.  This seems to cause the up-and-down 
oscillations in the fitness curve. 

There is little we can do about this problem.  As we said, 
increasing the number of collaborators in a classical way (that 
is, by selecting random sets of collaborators) simply does not 
work, which is understandable: in this problem, the solution 
requires highly  interdependent behaviours.  An  agent's per(cid:173)
formance  can  only  be  good  if other  agents  play  their  role. 
Evaluating each agent by fitting it in a random population is 
not likely to help reach this state.  In a problem with many 
strongly interdependant agents, adding random collaborators 
doesn't seem to be a helpful solution. * 

We could devise more elaborate schemes (e.g.  using the 
second-best from each pool as a second set of evaluators) but 
that would not suppress the problem.  It seems that in prob(cid:173)
lems with a non-deterministic component, cooperative coevo(cid:173)
lution is essentially fragile, or at least, more so than the stan(cid:173)
dard genetic algorithm. 

6  Conclusion 
We have described possible pitfalls  in  cooperative coevolu(cid:173)
tion, and we have proposed a way to apply the canonical ge(cid:173)
netic  algorithm  to  populations of agents.  We  have  applied 
both algorithms to a non-trivial problem, the blind mice prob(cid:173)
lem, that is both conceptually simple and non-trivial to solve. 
For this problem, the populations-oriented genetic algorithm 
significantly outperformed cooperative coevolution. We pro(cid:173)
posed an explanation for the difference in results, based on 
the intrinsic fragility of cooperative coevolution in regard to 
excessive stochastic variations in the evaluation proces. 

As  a final note,  an  old  French proverb goes:  "Quand le 
chat n'est pas la, les souris dansent" (When the cat is away, 
the mice dance).  Artificial evolution has demonstrated that 
the opposite can be true as well. 

References 
[Goldberg, 1989] David E. Goldberg. Genetic Algorithms in 
Search,  Optimization and Machine Learning.  Addison-
Wesley, 1989. 

[Gomez and Mikkulainen, 1997]  F.  Gomez  and  R.  Mikku-
lainen.  Incremental evolution of complex general behav(cid:173)
ior. Adaptive Behavior, 5:317-342, 1997. 

[Holland and Reitman, 1978]  J.  H.  Holland and J.  S.  Reit-
man.  Cognitive systems based on adaptive algorithms.  In 

'Strangely enough, in [Potter and DeJong, 1994], random collab(cid:173)
orators were introduced precisely for problems with strongly inter(cid:173)
acting variables, such as the Roscnbrock function; however, for this 
kind of problem, this idea was only applied to two-variables func(cid:173)
tions. In this case, choosing a random collaborator in addition to the 
better one may allow the algorithm to escape a local minima. But as 
the number of agents grows, it seems that evaluating one agent with 
a set of totally random collaborators could hardly bring any valuable 
information. 

0  2000  4000  6000  8000  1000012000140001600C 

Figure 4:  Performance of the best run for a cooperative co-
evolutionary algorithm. The curves indicate the performance 
of the best individual in the currently evaluated pool, and the 
average fitness of individuals in this pool.  Notice the brutal 
variations in the curves. 

The fitness curve described in Figure 4 shows a good ex(cid:173)
ample of this pattern.  It  is the result of the most successful 
run with 15 mice. The population seems to converge towards 
a better behaviour, but then it suddenly diverges and seems to 
loose all that had been found.  The pattern starts again a few 
cycles later. 

This  is  not  what  one  could  expect. 

In  this  algorithm, 
the population remains quite stable,  being composed of the 
best individual from each pool.  Only one individual can be 
changed at each cycle, and only for a better one, since the best 
individual from previous generation is preserved. So how do 
we explain  these  brutal  changes  in  fitness  happening every 
now and then? 

Our explanation  is  that this  pattern  is  the result of coop(cid:173)
erative  revolution's  main  drawback:  when  the  number of 
agents grow, and when the result of evaluation undergoes im(cid:173)
portant stochastic variations, its performance is bound to de(cid:173)
crease. 

What happens is that at some point, the algorithm does find 
a  "good" population,  and  keeps  optimizing  it  by  replacing 
each agent by a better one in turn - as it should do. But then at 
some point, because of the stochastic variations in the evalu(cid:173)
ation process, one of these "good" agents is found to perform 
not as well  as  another,  non-optimal  one.  In  classical  evo(cid:173)
lutionary  algorithms,  these  occasional  mistakes  arc  blurred 
over  a  large  number of trials  and  errors,  and  besides,  one 
population's performance has no  impact on  another's.  But 
in cooperative coevolution, this exceptional case is sufficient 
to wreck the behaviour of the whole population,  because  it 
can  replace  an  essential  agent (say,  a Dancer) by  a poorly 
performing agent (say, a random wanderer). 

Then other agents from other pools are evaluated in turn, 
but  since  the  conditions  have  changed  dramatically,  other 
agents  are  selected  instead  of  the  previous,  quasi-optimal 
ones.  Thus,  an  error  in  the  selection  of one  agent  has  an 
influence  over  all  other  pools.  When  the  evaluation  cycle 
comes back to the first pool,  the previously essential  agent 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

651 

D. A. Waterman and F. Hayes-Roth, editors, Pattern Di(cid:173)
rected Inference Systems, pages 313-329. Academic Press, 
1978. 

[Kitanoe/a/.,  1995]  H.  Kitano,  M.  Asada,  Y.  Kuniyoshi, 
1. Noda, and E. Osawa.  Robocup:  The robot world cup 
initiative. In Proceedings of IJCAI-95 Workshop on Enter(cid:173)
tainment and AI/ALife y 1995. 

iKoza, 1992]  JohnKoza. Genetic Programming. MIT Press, 

1992. 

[Luke,  1998]  Sean  Luke.  Genetic  programming produced 
competitive soccer softbot teams for robocup97.  In John 
Koza,  editor,  Proceedings of the Third Annual Genetic 
Programming Conference (GP98), pages 204-222, 1998. 
[Miconi, 2001]  Thomas  Miconi.  A  collective  genetic  al(cid:173)
gorithm.  In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolution(cid:173)
ary Computation Conference (GECCO-200J), pages 876-
883. Morgan Kaufmann, 2001. 

[N.Zaerae/a/.,  1996]  N.Zaera,  D.Cliff,  and J.Bruten.  (not) 
evolving collective behaviours  in  synthetic  fish.  In  Pro(cid:173)
ceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Simu(cid:173)
lation of Adaptive Behavior (SAB96), pages 635-644. MIT 
Press, 1996. 

[Potter and DeJong,  1994]  M. A. Potter and K. A. DeJong. A 
cooperative revolutionary approach to function optimiza(cid:173)
tion. In Proceedings of The Third Parallel Problem Solving 
from Nature, pages 249-257. Springer-Verlag, 1994. 

[Wiegand etal, 2001]  R.  Paul  Wiegand,  William  C.  Liles, 
and Kenneth A. DeJong.  An empirical analysis of collab(cid:173)
oration methods in cooperative coevolutionary algorithms. 
In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computa(cid:173)
tion Conference (GECCO-2001), pages 1235-1242. Mor(cid:173)
gan Kaufmann, 2001. 

[Yong and Mikkulainen, 2001]  C.H.  Yong  and  R.  Mikku-
lainen.  Cooperative coevolution  of multi-agent systems. 
Technical Report AI01-287, University of Texas at Austin, 
2001. 

652 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

