Hidden Uncertainty in the Logical Representation of Desires 

Leendert van der Torre 

Emil  Weydert 

CWI 

Amsterdam 

The Netherlands 

University of Applied Sciences 

Luxembourg 
Luxembourg 

Jerome Lang 
IRIT / UPS 

31062 Toulouse Cedex 

France 

lang@irit.fr torre@cwi.nl emil.weydert@ist.lu 

Abstract 

In  this  paper  we  introduce  and  study  a  logic  of 
desires.  The  semantics  of our  logic  is  defined  by 
means  of two  ordering relations representing  pref(cid:173)
erence  and normality as  in  Boutilier's  logic  QDT. 
However,  the desires are  interpreted in  a different 
way:  "in  context  A,  I  desire  B"  is  interpreted  as 
"the best among the most normal 
worlds are 
preferred to the most normal 
worlds". We 
study the formal  properties of these  desires,  illus(cid:173)
trate  their  expressive  power  on  several  classes  of 
examples and position them with respect to previ(cid:173)
ous work in qualitative decision theory. 

Introduction 

1 
Autonomous agents reason frequently about preferences, de(cid:173)
sires  and goals.  For example,  Cohen  and  Levesque  [1990] 
explore  principles  governing  the  rational  balance  among 
an  agent's  beliefs,  goals,  actions  and  intentions,  Rao  and 
Georgeff 11991 ]  show how different types of rational agents 
can  be  modeled  by  imposing certain  conditions on  the  per(cid:173)
sistence  of  an  agent's  beliefs,  desires  or  intentions  (the 
BDI  model)  and  work  in  qualitative  decision  theory  [Pearl, 
1993; Boutilier,  1994; Bacchus and Grove,  1996; Doyle and 
Thomason,  1999; Thomason, 2000] illustrates how planning 
agents are provided with goals - defined  as desires together 
with commitments - and charged with the task of discovering 
and performing a sequence of actions to achieve these goals. 
In logical  formalizations of preferences, desires and goals 
serve  as  a  computationally  useful  partial  specification  or 
heuristic  approximation  of  the  relative  preference  over  the 
possible  results  of a plan  [Doyle,  1991].  In  this  paper,  we 
focus on  desires although our observations may  be  relevant 
for goals as well.  There are three different interpretations of 
sentences like "I  desire B" or "in  context A,  I desire B". 

First, desires may be formalized using only utility or pref(cid:173)
erence. However, this leads to the problem that even if a util(cid:173)
ity function or a preference relation over worlds is fixed, there 
is no unique way to extend it to formulas or, equivalently, sets 
of worlds.  This distinction between utilities and probabilities 
is the main reason why formalizing desires is more problem(cid:173)
atic than formalizing beliefs.  Moreover, it does not seem to 
correspond to the meaning of desire in natural language.  For 

instance, suppose that I exceptionally get sunburned when the 
weather is hot and sunny. Then, expressing "I desire a hot and 
sunny weather" intuitively means that the most normal or typ(cid:173)
ical  worlds satisfying  hot 
sunny are preferred to the most 
(hot A sunny), but it does not mean 
normal worlds verifying 
that I like exceptional effects of hot 
sunny such as sunburn. 
Secondly, desires may express a combination of utility and 
probability in a classical decision-theoretic context, assuming 
a probability distribution over worlds.  "In context A, 1 desire 
B" can then be interpreted as a raise of expected utility:  my 
expected utility given 
is higher than my expected util(cid:173)
ity  given 
.  A  further development  in  terms  of gain 
of expected  utility  is  proposed  in  [Brafman  and  Friedman, 
2001 ].  However, it is well-known that autonomous agents do 
not always have appropriate probabilistic information on the 
possible worlds.  The probabilistic approach asks  for costly, 
specific information and in practice often leads to an arbitrary 
choice of probability values. 

Thirdly, desires may implicitly refer to the relative plausi(cid:173)
bility or normality of worlds.  When  an  agent states  "I  desire 
B",  i.e., "I desire B  to be satisfied",  the agent often focuses 
on typical, normal worlds. The standard choice made in qual(cid:173)
itative decision theory, see  [Doyle and Thomason,  1999],  is 
that uncertainty is described by a (total) pre-order expressing, 
e.g., plausibility, normality, or typicality.  The main justifica(cid:173)
tion is that ordinal uncertainty is less committing, cognitively 
speaking, than numerical uncertainty. 

The research question of this paper is how we can formal(cid:173)
ize  desires  to provide a realistic  interaction  between  prefer(cid:173)
ence and normality, and such that realistic examples like ex(cid:173)
amples 2.4, 3.3, and 3.5 can be formalized. E.g., in the latter 
an  airline company desires  for an  overbooked plane that an 
individual passenger shows up, but at the same time it desires 
that not all passengers show up. We start with Boutilier's no(cid:173)
tion of so-called ideal goals [ 1994], but then we define condi(cid:173)
tional desires that refer to both preference and normality, and 
that turn out to be more satisfactory. 

The  layout of this  paper is  as  follows.  Section  2  recalls 
the basics of Boutilier's semantics and discusses the choices 
upon which it  is based;  we then explain how to extend  it to 
represent desires  in  a  more appropriate way.  The details  of 
this modified interpretation of desires are given in Section 3. 
We study several examples and in particular, we illustrate how 
our semantics  interprets sets  of desires  that  are usually con(cid:173)
sidered contradictory. 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

685 

2  Boutilier's qualitative decision theory logic 
A first class of solutions to combine preference and normal(cid:173)
ity makes use of a trade-off between qualitative utilities and 
probabilities as in [Pearl, 1993], but this is not well-suited to 
situations with non-extreme utilities.  A second approach is 
given in [Boutilier,  1994], which makes use of two ordering 
relations, one for preference and one for normality, represent(cid:173)
ing the ordinal counterparts of utility and probability.  How(cid:173)
ever, here we see - informally speaking - a lack of interaction 
between preference and normality. 

2.1  Definitions 
Boutilier [1994] interprets a desire in terms of ideal worlds: if 
A then ideally B, denoted by 
is a conditional desire 
expressing  on  the  semantic  level  that among all  ,4-worlds, 
the  most  preferred ones  also  satisfy  B.  Quoting  Boutilier, 
"from a practical point of view, 
means that if the agent 
(only) knows A, and the truth value of A is fixed (beyond its 
control), then the agent ought to ensure B (...) The statement 
can be roughly interpreted as if A, do J3." 

This definition enables the formalization of conditional de(cid:173)
which is based on his logic 
sires in the conditional logic 
CO. Roughly, the semantics of 
is the following: a QDT-
where W is a set of possi(cid:173)
model is 
ble worlds, val a valuation function and 
are two 
total  pre-orders over  W,  i.e.,  transitive connected relations, 
for  all 
where a relation is connected  iff 
is a 
(resp. 
means that w  is at least as preferred (resp.  as 

preference  order  and  a normality order: 

They are also called total weak orders.  ~ 

normal) as w'.  The conditional connectives 
have the following truth conditions.  The two modalities do 
not mix preference and normality;  in particular, conditional 
desires 

do not use the normality relation at all. 

and 

and 

or there exists a 

if and only if either 
such that 

with 

and for all 

presses the conditional preference "if A then ideally B". 
is replaced 
expresses the conditional default "if A 

except that 

by 
then normally B". 

In the rest of the paper we write 
for 

for 
where T denotes a tautology. 

and 

 

Boutilier also introduces ideal goals that combine prefer(cid:173)
ence and normality. However, they use only the upper cluster 
of the normality relation, nothing else. On the semantic level, 
if we assume that there are no infinite ascending chains, then 
the truth conditions for ideal goals are as follows, 
is true if the best of the most normal A worlds satisfy B. 

if and only if 

Therefore, Boutilier's interpretation of conditional desires re(cid:173)
lies on two strong assumptions,  which we discuss in  more 
detail below.  The first assumption is the optimistic interpre(cid:173)
tation of desires due to the ideality assumption.  The second 
assumption is the weak  interaction between preference and 
normality due to the focus on on the most normal worlds in a 
context. 

A A i?-worlds are preferred to the best 
if and only if the worst 

preferred to the worst 

preferred to the best 

preferred to the worst 

worlds. 
if and only if the worst 
worlds. 
if and only if the best 

worlds. 
implies  both 

if and only if the best 
worlds. 
worlds are 

worlds are 

worlds are 

2.2  Assumptions 
Ideality 
The ideality semantics consists  in comparing sets of worlds 
by looking only at the most preferred worlds of these  sets. 
It  corresponds  to  an  optimistic  point  of view  in  the  sense 
that less preferred worlds are ignored in this process.  What 
would be possible choices for comparing sets of worlds?  If 
we do not want to bring in  probabilistic information or as(cid:173)
sumptions such as equiprobability, then we are left with the 
following four basic alternatives, and variations or combina(cid:173)
tions thereof.  Let A and B be two formulas.  For the sake of 
simplicity  we  only consider the  non-degenerate case  where 
Mod 
Modi 
MM  (ideality semantics): 

are both non-empty. 

and 

We  have  that 

and  all  of them  imply 

and 
.  Note that 
only MM and mm are consistent with the semantics of con(cid:173)
ditional logics; for mm, just take the reverse preference rela(cid:173)
tion.  The Mm variant is extremely weak and therefore tells 
us next to nothing. It may be useful only when it is extended 
with a non-monotonic reasoning mechanism.  The mM vari(cid:173)
ant is extremely strong and hard to satisfy; it certainly does 
not reflect the usual intuitive understanding of desires. It may 
be useful only when paired with normality, e.g., by focusing 
on the most normal worlds. 

The mm variant has an underlying pessimistic semantics. 
It makes sense if "I desire B in context A" is interpreted as "in 
context A, given that I expect the worst outcomes to occur, I 
am happy to see B true".  However, this semantics also does 
not fit well the intuitions behind the specification of desires. 
Consider the following example of two desires. 
Example 2.1 (Game) Assume that an agent plays a game 
where two coins are tossed; he wins if both coins are heads 
(h) and loses otherwise.  His preference ordering can be: 

the normality ordering 
equally normal.  But,  surprisingly,  neither 

is the one where all worlds are 
(h\)  nor 

[h'2) are satisfied. 

The example supports that Boutilier's ideality semantics best 
suits  the  commonsense  intuitions  concerning  desired  out(cid:173)
comes of actions, and we therefore do not want to give it up. 
At a first glance, it may seem paradoxical to favor an op(cid:173)
timistic  interpretation of desires  while most papers  in qual(cid:173)
itative decision theory argue in favor of a pessimistic (max-
min) criterion for action selection [Brafman and Tennenholtz, 
1997; Dubois et al.,  1998].  The paradox is however only in 
appearence.  When specifying 
, for instance, an agent 
expresses that she has a preference for B, which is not at all 
the same as saying that she intends to take a decision making 
B true. This is illustrated by the following classical example. 

686 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

Example 2.2  [Boutilier,  J 994] Let DS  = 
where  u  and r  stand for umbrella and raining. 
presses that the agent prefers not carrying an umbrella. This 
does not imply that if the agent has the choice between the ac(cid:173)
tions take-umbrella and leave-umbrella (whose obvious out(cid:173)
comes are u and 
The example illustrates that the interpretation of desires and 
the action selection criterion are independent issues and we 
can  consistently  interpret  desires  in  Boutilier's  ideality  se(cid:173)
mantics while using a pessimistic criterion for action choice. 
This issue is discussed further in Section 4. 

she will choose leave-umbrella. 

Weak interaction between normality and preference 
This assumption is more problematic than the previous one. 
Boutilier's  interpretation of ideal  goals makes  a very rough 
use of the normality relation, since it consists in focusing first, 
and once for all, on the most normal worlds, independently of 
the desires expressed, and then in interpreting desires by the 
ideality semantics. 

This has unfortunate consequences.  Ideal goals are differ(cid:173)
ent from desires because we have the counterintuitive prop(cid:173)
erty  that  if normally p  then  p  is  an  ideal  goal.  Moreover, 
Boutilier's  semantics  makes  intuitively  coherent sets  of de(cid:173)
sires inconsistent, such as the dog and fence example of de(cid:173)
feasible deontic logic [van der Torre and Tan, 1997]. 

Example 2.3 (Dog and fence) 

1.  John does not want a fence around his cottage; 
2.  If John owns a dog, then he wants a fence; 
3.  John wants to own a dog. 

Here 

Example 2.3 is inconsistent, and would still be inconsistent if 
we would replace the 1 modality by IG. 
is  another  example  which 

in 
Boutilier's semantics.  Suppose that I am going to my travel 
agent just one day before Christmas vacation, when normally 
all flights are fully booked. 

inconsistent 

is 

Example 2.4 (Airplane ticket) 

/.  / desire to have an airplane ticket to Rome; 
2.  I desire to have an airplane ticket to Amsterdam; 
3.  1 do not desire to have both an airplane ticket to Rome 

and an airplane ticket to Amsterdam; 

4.  Normally, I will neither get an airplane ticket to Rome 

nor to Amsterdam. 

Example 2.4 is inconsistent, and would still be so if we re(cid:173)
placed the I modality by IG.  However, this set of desires has 
an intuitive interpretation: when 1 think of having a ticket to 
Rome, 1 think of the most normal world where 1 have a ticket 
to Rome, in which 1 do not have a ticket to Amsterdam, and 
vice versa, and I prefer this world to the mOvSt normal world 
where I do not have a ticket to Rome, in which I do not have a 
ticket to Amsterdam either.  See another interpretation of this 
set of desires in example 3.6. 

3  Hidden uncertainty 
Example 2.4 illustrates that, even if the intuitive expression of 
the desires does not mention normality or uncertainty issues, 
it implicitly refers to these.  This  is why we talk of hidden 
uncertainty in the specification of desires. 

3.1  Definitions 
We now introduce a notion of desires with hidden uncertainty 
that better fits the intuitive  meaning of desires.  To  simplify 
the definition, we assume - in contrast to Boutilier - the exis(cid:173)
tence of maxima. We may guarantee this by stipulating, e.g., 
that  there  are no  infinite  ascending chains. 
means 
worlds  which  are 
that  there  are  maximally  normal 
strictly preferred to all the most normal 
Definition 3.1  Truth conditions for desires are as follows, 

worlds. 

if and only if  
, Mod 

Max 

such that  

In other words,  "in context  A,  1  desire  B"  is interpreted as 
"the best among the most normal A A B worlds are preferred 
worlds". As usual, we write D(B) 
to the most normal 
instead of  

There  exists  also  a  probabilistic  interpretation  of desires 
which may help to clarify their meaning.  The basic  idea is 
to  use  the  £-semantics  for normality,  a  super-f-semantics -
e.g. replacing ( by cc - for utility, and the resulting concept of 
expected utility for interpreting desires. 

In a sense, our definition of desires is still  reminiscent of 
we only 

the ideality semantics, because for a desire 
consider the most normal 
worlds.  However, the  fact that we do not only consider the 
most normal  A  worlds  makes  a crucial  difference.  This  is 
illustrated by the properties and examples below. 

and the most normal.  

3.2  Properties 
The definition guarantees that the conditional desire always 
holds if the implication is strict, i.e., if 
is inconsistent. 
When all  worlds are equally normal, desires represent pure 
preference in the sense that both modalities D() and l() coin(cid:173)
cide.  However, in general none of the following implications 

~ 

and ~'" 
'" ~  holds.  Furthermore it avoids - as 
opposed to some of its variants - the validation of conditional 
desires of the form 

for consistent A. 

The following example illustrates that we have no longer 
right weakening (strictly speaking, left weakening, given our 
notation) for the desires, i.e. D(A) does not imply D(A V B). 
Example 3.1  Let M be the following model in which -7? is 
always more plausible than p, whereas p is always preferred 
to  - p. 

Then  M  satisfies  but not  
This  absence  of  right  weakening,  a  controversial  property 
when  reasoning  with  obligations  in  deontic  logics,  is  also 
very natural for desires:  take  = "the woman of my dreams 
falls in love with me" and q = "I receive my electricity bill" 
(needless to say where the most normal worlds are). 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

687 

The violation of right weakening also explains the distinc(cid:173)
tion between the two conflicts in the following example. The 
example also illustrates that the conjunction (or AND) rule is 
not valid for D. 
Example 3.2 

but 
is consistent when  q  is  exceptional, 

inconsistent, 

is 

as is witnessed by the following model: 

Interestingly, many rules valid for 
do no longer hold 
for 
as illustrated by the two examples above.  Or, 
more precisely, they hold only conditionally. The reason is a 
kind of context-dependence or "higher-order nonmonotonic-
ity".  For instance,  if  Mod 
increases or decreases, 
it does not follow that max 
increases or 
decreases as well.  One way to design proof rules is to en(cid:173)
sure with additional clauses that this implication holds, which 
has been done for decision-theoretic defaults [Brafman and 
Friedman,  2001].  However,  our logic  of desires  also  vali(cid:173)
dates inference rules which do not directly depend on such 
conditions. 

The  first  formula of the  following  proposition  illustrates 
that  the  conjunction rule  holds  under  normality  conditions 
and the latter two formulas hold 

without any conditions. 
Proposition 3.1 The following formulas are theorems of our 
logic: 

1.  
2.  
3.  

where 

Properties expressed in the dyadic modal logic are often hard 
to read. We therefore propose an alternative strategy for gen(cid:173)
erating proof rules. The idea is to express desires with a suit(cid:173)
B means that, taking 
able order modality 
into account normality and  adopting an optimistic perspec(cid:173)
tive,  A is less  desirable than  £?,  or inconsistent.  Formally 
speaking, we get the following truth condition for 
suming finitely many worlds). 
Definition 3.2 Truth condition of preference is as follows. 
,Mod(A)) 

B  if and  only  if 

Max 

Mod(B))  such that  

We have the following relationship between the conditional 
desires and preferences. 
Proposition 3.2 The following translation rules are valid be-
tween 

and E  

Similarly, we can introduce 
for expressing propositional 
normality comparisons.  Taken together, these modalities al(cid:173)
low us to formulate a number of features which are concep(cid:173)
tually easier to grasp and to handle than the corresponding 
conditional notions.  The following proposition lists several 
properties using this alternative representation. 

Proposition 3.3 The following formulas are theorems of the 
logic.  They are called left weakening (LI), right weakening 
(12), left strengthening (L3), left impossibility (L4), right pos(cid:173)
sibility (L5), asymmetry (L6), left disjunction (L7), right dis(cid:173)
junction (L8), transitivity (L9), left cautious transitivity (L10), 
right cautious transitivity (LII). 
LI  
L2  
L3  
L4  
L5  
L6  
L7  
L8  
L9  
L10  
L ll   
Due to lack of space we must omit proofs and discussion. 

3.3  Examples 
Let  us  consider Example  2.3  and  2.4  taking  hidden  uncer(cid:173)
tainty into account. 
Example 3.3 (Dog and fence, continued) 

is consistent. Here are four classes 
of models, which illustrate that for each normality ordering 
there are various preference ordehngs. 
class 1: dogs are exceptional (and nothing else) 

any complete preordering satisfying constraints 

class 2: not having a fence is exceptional (and nothing else) 

any complete preordering satisfying constraints 

class 3: dogs and not having a fence are both exceptional 

any complete preordering satisfying constraints 

class 4: neither dogs nor not having a fence is exceptional 

any complete preordering satisfying constraints 

Example 3.4 (Airplane ticket, continued) 
DS  = 
of models satisfying DS: 

Here is a set 

: any order where 
ferred than the other worlds. 

are strictly more pre(cid:173)

688 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

The following example is a reformulation of the lottery para(cid:173)
dox in terms of desires. 

(show-up(l) 

Example 3.5 (overbooking) 
The agent is an airline company which has sold 301 tick(cid:173)
ets for  a  flight  on  an  airplane  of 300  seats.  For  each 
seat occupied the company gains 100 utility units, but if all 
301 persons show up, then the company looses 1000 utility 
units. The agent may consistently express {D(show-up(l))t..., 
D(show-up(301)), 
show-up(301))}, 
because, individually, passenger showing up makes the ex(cid:173)
pected utility of the company increase (slightly), due to the 
fact that it is very unlikely that all passengers show up. 
3.4  Normality and update 
There are several perspectives on normality.  One consists in 
viewing normality as distance to the current situation. When 
an agent figures out a "normal ^4-world" he often figures out 
the closest >l-world to the actual world. This is in accordance 
with the principle used for evaluating counterfactuals. Update 
could come very intuitively into this framework. 

The normality ordering is then defined by the proximity to 
the current world, which is defined by a faithful proximity re(cid:173)
lation in the sense of [Katsuno and Mendelzon, 1991], i.e., a 
, where faithfulness 
collection of weak orders 
is the condition; 
means 
iff 
,  and the  set of most normal  worlds  (i.e.,  clos(cid:173)
est  worlds  to  w)  satisfying  A  is  the  update  of w,  denoted 
by 
The  simplest  and  most  frequent  choices  are: 

is closer to w than tv2.  We simply have 

for all 

Diff 
|, where 
of variables assigned a different value by 

and 

and 

 

 

is the set 

Let  us  consider example 2.4 but with  a slightly different 
interpretation.  We do not have to  suppose  here  that flights 
are normally fully booked. We just assume that in the current 
situation, the agent does not have any airplane ticket. 

Example 3.6 (Airplane ticket, continued) 
DS  =   

1.  1 desire to have an airplane ticket to Rome; 
2.  1 desire to have an airplane ticket to Amsterdam; 
3.  1 do not desire to have both an airplane ticket to Rome 

and an airplane ticket to Amsterdam; 

4.  In the current situation 1 do not have any airplane ticket. 

than  to 

If the proximity relation is such that (r, a) is closer to 
and 
and  equally  close  to  
and  ' 

\  then  we  get  the  following  normality  ordering: 
because the ini(cid:173)
Normality reflects proximity to the 

tial situation is 
initial situation. 

Of course,  this assumes that a preliminary step has been 
done so as to translate the proximity to the current world into 
a normality ordering; this issue has been considered several 
times in the literature. See for instance [Grahne, 1991] for the 
intertranslation between update and conditional logics,  and 
[Herzig,  1998] for a review of logics for belief update. 

Two tasks in  qualitative  decision  theory 

4  Related research 
4.1 
Qualitative decision theory aims  at developing mainly non-
numerical  -  and  therefore  non-probabilistic  -  normative 
frameworks for decision making under uncertainty, e.g. look(cid:173)
ing for minimal sets of minimal behavioral properties or ax(cid:173)
ioms of a rational agent that correspond to a given action se(cid:173)
lection criterion.  Most approaches, e.g., iBrafman and Ten-
nenholtz,  1996; Lehmann,  2001; Dubois et ah,  2002],  use 
ordinal structures for preference and uncertainty. 

In a decision-theoretic context we can distinguish at least 
the task of interpreting desires, which aims at reasoning about 
the mental state of the agent (what he likes and what he be(cid:173)
lieves) and the task of selecting an action that uses the pos(cid:173)
sible mental states induced by the upstream task, like quali(cid:173)
tative analogs of maximum expected utility.  Both tasks are 
complementary.  The logic developed in this paper does not 
investigate criteria for action selection and therefore it is not 
really a new approach to qualitative decision theory.  Our 
logic aims at interpreting desires as they can be expressed by 
agents, for instance in an interactive elicitation process.  Our 
logic can  infer some information about the normality order(cid:173)
ing or the preference ordering of an agent's mental state but 
cannot predict which action he will perform. 

There are several ways in which our logic can be extended 
with action  selection.  In example 2.2,  when  a model con(cid:173)
tains both r and ->r normal worlds, 
merely expresses 
that preferred  worlds  satisfy 
while  the  selection  of ac(cid:173)
tion take-umbrella may well reflect that the worst among the 
most normal effects of this action are preferred to the worst 
among the most normal effects of leave-umbrella. The latter 
criterion  is used by  [Brafman and Tennenholtz,  1997]  who 
model agents as pessimistic decision makers.  Noticeably, it 
is  similar to our interpretation  of desires,  except that  worst 
states have to be focused on instead of best states.  It would 
be  worth extending our logical  framework with  a modality 
PAf. | J: the preference of taking action a over action j3 would 
be expressed by PA 
expressing that 
the worst normal effects of action a are preferred to the worst 
.  This  modality  would  have  the 
normal  effects  of action 
modality, except that the prefer(cid:173)
same properties as the 
f and 
ence order has to be reversed:  if 
iff 

, 
then 

This extension is left for further research. 

4.2  Formalisms of desires 
There are several other formalisms that represent desires and 
pure preference, especially ceteris paribus constraints [Doyle 
and Wellman,  1991; Boutilier et  al,  1999].  However,  this 
framework deals with pure preference only and not with un(cid:173)
certainty and normality, except maybe a preliminary attempt 
in [Tan and Pearl,  1994]. The combination of ceteris paribus 
and normality is an issue for further research. 

Thomason's framework [Thomason, 2000] builds on Re-
iter's default logic and deals with both normality and prefer(cid:173)
ence defaults,  but with a procedural strategy which departs 
from our completely semantical interpretation: goals are de(cid:173)
rived  by  first  closing  the  facts  under  beliefs  defaults,  and 
thereafter under desire defaults. The same mechanism is used 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

689 

in BOID architectures [Broersen et al, 2002].  The goals are 
thus restricted to the most normal state. 

Finally,  decision-theoretic  defaults  [Brafman  and  Fried(cid:173)
man, 2001; Poole, 1992] also have a semantics based on nor(cid:173)
mality and preference.  For example, Brafman and Friedman 
give a detailed analysis of the use of expected utility, they ex(cid:173)
plain a drawback of straightforward expected utility, and they 
introduce defaults based on gain of utility G{A).  Moreover, 
they define  weak and strong notions of defaults,  where the 
first does not satisfy right  weakening,  because G(A)  is  not 
informative about the behavior on subsets of A.  This seems 
related to what we here called higher-order nonmonotonicity. 
5  Summary 
The research question of this paper is how desires can be for(cid:173)
malized with  a realistic  interaction  between preference and 
normality.  We start with Boutilier's logic for QDT, in which 
preference and normality have been combined in a notion of 
ideal goal. However, there is only weak interaction, such that 
the dog and fence example as well as the airplane ticket exam(cid:173)
ple cannot be represented in a consistent way.  We therefore 
interpret desires in  a different way:  "in context A,  I  desire 
B" is interpreted as "the best among the most normal A A B 
worlds are preferred to the most normal A A ->B worlds". 

We study various formal  properties of these desires.  We 
show  that  our  D(A\B)  docs  not  imply  Boutilier's  i(A\B)  or 
IGf A\B), nor vice versa. We show that they do not satisfy 
weakening nor the the conjunction rule.  We show that these 
properties and many others hold under conditions of normal(cid:173)
ity,  and we  show  that  some  properties  like  transitivity  and 
cumulativity hold unconditionally.  We illustrate the expres(cid:173)
sive power on several classes of examples including the dog 
and fence and airline ticket examples, and we illustrate how 
update can be introduced in the framework.  Finally we po(cid:173)
sition the desires with respect to previous work in qualitative 
decision theory, where we mention as subjects of further re(cid:173)
search an extension with an action selection criterion, and the 
introduction of normality in ceteris paribus preferences. 

References 
iBacchus and Grove, 1996]  F. Bacchus and A.J. Grove. Util(cid:173)
ity independence in a qualitative decision theory.  In Pro(cid:173)
ceedings of KR'96, pages 542-552, 1996. 

[Boutilier et a/.,  1999]  C.  Boutilier,  R.  Brafman,  H.  Hoos, 
and D. Poole. Reasoning with conditional ceteris paribus 
statements. In Proceedings of UAl '99, pages 71-80,1999. 
[Boutilier, 1994]  C. Boutilier. Towards a logic for qualitative 
decision theory.  In Proceedings of KR'94, pages 75-86, 
1994. 

[Brafman and Friedman, 2001]  R.I.  Brafman  and N.  Fried(cid:173)
man. On decision-theoretic foundations for defaults. Arti(cid:173)
ficial Intelligence, 133:1-33,2001. 

[Brafman and Tennenholtz, 1996]  R.  Brafman  and M.  Ten-
nenholtz.  On the foundations of qualitative decision the(cid:173)
ory. In Proceedings ofAAAl '96, pages 1291-1296,1996. 
[Brafman and Tennenholtz, 1997]  R.  Brafman  and  M.  Ten(cid:173)
nenholtz. Modeling agents as qualitative decision makers. 
Artificial Intelligence, 94:217-268,1997. 

[Broersen etal, 2002]  J.  Broersen,  M.  Dastani,  J.  Hulstijn, 
and L.  van  der Torre.  Goal  generation  in  the BOID  ar(cid:173)
chitecture. Cognitive Science Quarterly, 2(3-4):428-447, 
2002. 

[Cohen and H.Levesque, 1990]  Cohen and H.Levesque.  In(cid:173)
tention is choice with commitment. Artificial Intelligence, 
42:213-261,1990. 

[Doyle and Thomason, 1999]  J.  Doyle  and  R.  Thomason. 
Background to qualitative decision theory.  AI magazine, 
20:2:55-68,1999. 

[Doyle and Wellman, 19911  J.  Doyle  and  M.  P.  Wellman. 
Preferential semantics for goals.  In Proceedings ofAAAI-
9/, pages 698-703,1991. 

[Doyle, 19911  J. Doyle.  Rationality and its rules in reason(cid:173)
ing (extended abstract). In Proceedings ofAAAI'91, pages 
1093-1100,1991. 

[Dubois etal,  1998]  D. Dubois, H. Prade, and R. Sabbadin. 
Qualitative decision theory with Sugeno integrals.  In Pro(cid:173)
ceedings of UAI'98, pages 121-128, 1998. 

[Dubois et ai, 2002]  D. Dubois, H. Fargier, and P. Perny. On 
the limits of ordinality in decision making. In Proceedings 
of KR'02, pages 133-144,2002. 

[Grahne, 1991]  G. Grahne.  Updates and counterfactuals.  In 

Proceedings of KR'91, pages 269-276, 1991. 

[Herzig, 1998] A. Herzig. Handbook of defeasible reason(cid:173)
ing and uncertainty management, volume 3, chapter Log(cid:173)
ics for belief base updating, pages 189-231. Kluwer Aca(cid:173)
demic Publishers, 1998. 

[Katsuno and Mendelzon, 1991 ]  H. Katsuno and A. Mendel-
zon.  Propositional knowledge base revision and minimal 
change. Artificial Intelligence, 52:263-294,1991. 

[Lehmann, 2001]  D.  Lehmann.  Expected  qualitative  util(cid:173)
ity maximization.  Games and Economic Behavior, 35(1-
2):54-79,2001. 

[Pearl, 1993]  J. Pearl.  From conditional ought to qualitative 
decision theory. In Proceedings of the UAI'93, pages 12-
20,1993. 

[Poole, 1992]  D.Poole.  Decision-theoretic defaults.  In Pro(cid:173)
ceedings of the Ninth Biennial Canadian Artificial Intelli(cid:173)
gence Conference, pages 190-197, 1992. 

[Rao and Georgeff,  1991]  A. Rao and M. Georgeff.  Model(cid:173)
ing rational agents within a BDI architecture. In Proceed(cid:173)
ings ofKR'9I, pages 473-484, 1991. 

[Tan and Pearl, 1994]  S.W.  Tan  and J.  Pearl.  Specification 
and  evaluation  of preferences  for  planning  under  uncer(cid:173)
tainty. In Proceedings of KR'94, 1994. 

[Thomason, 2000]  R.  Thomason.  Desires  and  defaults:  a 
framework for planning with inferred goals.  In Proceed-
ings of KR'00, pages 702-713, 2000. 

[van der Torre and Tan, 1997]  L.  van der Torre and Y. Tan. 
The many faces of defeasibility in defeasible deontic logic. 
In D. Nute, editor, Defeasible Deontic Logic, volume 263 
of Synthese Library, pages 79-121. Kluwer, 1997. 

690 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

