Simultaneous Adversarial Multi-Robot Learning 

Michael Bowling and  Manuela Veloso 

Computer Science Department 
Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh PA, 15213-3891 

Abstract 

Multi-robot  learning faces  all  of the challenges  of 
robot  learning  with  all  of the  challenges  of mul(cid:173)
tiagent  learning.  There  has  been  a  great  deal  of 
recent research on multiagent reinforcement learn(cid:173)
ing in stochastic games, which is the intuitive ex(cid:173)
tension  of MDPs  to  multiple  agents.  This  recent 
work,  although general,  has only been applied to 
small  games with at most hundreds of states.  On 
the other hand robot tasks have continuous, and of(cid:173)
ten complex, state and action spaces.  Robot learn(cid:173)
ing  tasks  demand  approximation  and  generaliza(cid:173)
tion  techniques,  which  have  only  received exten(cid:173)
sive attention in single-agent learning. In this paper 
we  introduce  GraWoLF,  a  general-purpose,  scal(cid:173)
able,  multiagent  learning  algorithm. 
It  combines 
gradient-based policy learning techniques with the 
WoLF ("Win or Learn Fast") variable learning rate. 
We  apply  this  algorithm  to  an  adversarial  multi-
robot task with simultaneous learning. We show re(cid:173)
sults of learning both in simulation and on the real 
robots.  These  results  demonstrate  that GraWoLF 
can learn successful policies, overcoming the many 
challenges in multi-robot learning. 

Introduction 

1 
Multi-robot  learning  is  the  challenge  of learning  to  act  in 
an environment containing other robots.  These other robots, 
though, have their own goals and may be learning as well. 
Other adapting robots make the environment no longer sta(cid:173)
tionary, violating the Markov property that traditional single-
agent  behavior  learning  relies  upon.  Multi-robot  learning 
combines all of these multiagent learning challenges with the 
problems of learning in robots, such as continuous state and 
action spaces and minimal training data. 

A  great  deal  of  recent  work  on  multiagent 

learn(cid:173)
ing  has  looked  at  the  problem  of  learning  in  stochastic 
games  [Littman,  1994;  Singh  et  a/.,  2000;  Bowling  and 
Veloso, 2002a; Greenwald and Hall, 2002]. Stochastic games 
are a natural extension of Markov decision processes (MDPs) 
to multiple agents and have been well studied in the field of 
game theory.  The traditional solution concept for the prob(cid:173)
lem of simultaneously finding optimal policies is that of Nash 

equilibria.  An  equilibrium  is  simply a policy  for all  of the 
players where each is playing optimally with respect to the 
others.  This concept is a powerful solution for these games 
even in a learning context, since no agent could learn a better 
policy when all the agents are playing an equilibrium. 

Multiagent learning in stochastic games, thus far, has only 
been applied to small games with enumerable state and action 
spaces.  Robot learning  tasks though have continuous  state 
and action spaces, and typically with more than just a couple 
dimensions.  Discretizations of this space into an enumerable 
state set also do not typically perform well.  In addition, data 
is considerably more costly to gather, and millions of training 
runs to learn policies is not feasible. Typical solutions to this 
robot learning problem is to use approximation to make the 
learning tractable and generalization for more efficient use of 
training experience. 

In this  paper  we  introduce  a new  algorithm,  GraWoLF1, 
that combines  approximation  and generalization techniques 
with the WoLF multiagent learning technique. We show em(cid:173)
pirical results of applying this algorithm to a problem of si(cid:173)
multaneous learning in an adversarial robot task. In Section 2, 
we  give  a  brief overview  of key  concepts  from  multiagent 
learning along with the the formal model of stochastic games. 
In Section 3, we describe a particular adversarial robot task 
and its challenges for learning.  In Section 4, we present the 
main  components  of GraWoLF:  policy  gradient  ascent  and 
the  WoLF  variable  learning  rate.  In  Section  5,  we  present 
experimental results of applying this algorithm to our adver(cid:173)
sarial robot task, and then conclude. 

2  Multiagent Learning 
Multiagent learning has focused on the game theoretic frame-
work  of stochastic  games.  A  stochastic  game  is  a  tuple 
(n, S, A1...ni T, R1...n), where n is the number of agents, S is 
a set of states, A1 is the set of actions available to agent i (and 
A is the joint action space  A1  x  ...  x  ,4 n), T is a transition 
function S  x  AxS  -+  [0,1], and  R1  is a reward function for 
the ith agent S x A  —R.  This looks very similar to the MDP 
framework except we have multiple agents selecting actions 
and the next state and rewards depend on the joint action of 
the agents.  Another important difference is that each agent 

1 GraWoLF is short for "Gradient-based Win or Learn Fast", and 

the V has the same sound as in "gradient". 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

699 

has its own separate reward function. The goal for each agent 
is to select actions in order to maximize its discounted future 
rewards with discount factor  

Stochastic games are a very natural extension of MDPs to 
multiple agents.  They are also an extension of matrix games 
to multiple  states.  Each  state  in  a stochastic  game can  be 
viewed as a matrix game with the payoffs for each joint action 
determined by the matrices Rt{s, a).  After playing the matrix 
game and receiving their payoffs the players are transitioned 
to  another state  (or matrix  game)  determined by their joint 
action.  We can see that stochastic games then contain both 
MDPs and matrix games as subsets of the framework. 

Stochastic Policies.  Unlike in single-agent settings, deter(cid:173)
ministic policies in multiagent settings can often be exploited 
by the other agents. Consider the children's game rock-paper-
scissors.  If one  player were  to play  any  action  determinis-
tically,  the  other player  could  win  every  time  by  selecting 
the  action  that defeats  it.  This  fact requires the  considera(cid:173)
tion of mixed strategies and stochastic policies.  A stochastic 
policy, 
is a function that maps states to 
mixed strategies, which are probability distributions over the 
player's  actions.  We  later show that  stochastic policies  are 
also useful for gradient-based learning techniques. 

Nash Equilibria.  Even with the concept of stochastic poli(cid:173)
cies there are still no optimal policies that are independent of 
the other players' policies. We can, though, define a notion of 
best-response. A policy is a best-response to the other play(cid:173)
ers' policies if it is optimal given their policies. The major ad(cid:173)
vancement that has driven much of the development of matrix 
games, game theory, and even stochastic games is the notion 
of a best-response equilibrium,  or Nash equilibrium  [Nash, 
Jr., 1950]. 

A Nash equilibrium is a collection of strategies for each of 
the players such that each player's strategy is a best-response 
to the  other players'  strategies.  So,  no player can  do  bet(cid:173)
ter by  changing  strategies  given  that the  other players  also 
don't change strategies.  What makes the notion  of equilib(cid:173)
rium compelling is that all matrix games and stochastic games 
have such an equilibrium, possibly having multiple equilib(cid:173)
ria.  Zero-sum,  two-player games,  like the  adversarial  task 
explored in this paper, have a single Nash equilibrium.2 

Learning  in  Stochastic  Games.  Stochastic  games  have 
been the focus of recent research in the area of reinforcement 
learning. There are two different approaches being explored. 
The first is that of algorithms that explicitly learn equilibria 
through experience, independent of the other players' policy, 
e.g.,  [Littman,  1994; Greenwald and Hall, 2002].  These al(cid:173)
gorithms  iteratively estimate value functions,  and use them 
to compute an equilibrium for the game.  A second approach 
is that of best-response learners, e.g.,  [Claus and Boutilier, 
1998; Singh et ai, 2000; Bowling and Veloso, 2002a]. These 
learners explicitly optimize their reward with respect to the 

2There can actually be multiple equilibria, but they all have equal 

payoffs and are interchangeable. 

Figure 1: An adversarial robot task. The top robot is trying to 
get inside the circle while the bottom robot is trying to stop 
it.  The lines show the state and action representation, which 
is described in Section 4.3. 

other players' possibly changing policies. This approach, too, 
has a strong connection to equilibria. If these algorithms con(cid:173)
verge when playing each other, then they must do so to an 
equilibrium [Bowling and Veloso, 2002a]. 

Neither of these approaches, though, have been scaled be(cid:173)
yond games with a few hundred states.  Games with a very 
large number of states, or games with continuous state spaces, 
make  state  enumeration  intractable.  Since  previous  algo(cid:173)
rithms in their stated form require the enumeration of states 
either for policies or value functions, this is a major limita(cid:173)
tion. In this paper we examine learning in an adversarial robot 
task, which can be thought of as a continuous state stochas(cid:173)
tic game.  Specifically, we build on the idea of best-response 
learners using gradient techniques [Singh et ai, 2000; Bowl(cid:173)
ing and Veloso, 2002a].  We first describe our robot task and 
then describe our algorithm and results. 

3  An Adversarial Robot Task 
Consider the adversarial robot task shown in Figure  1.  The 
robot at the top of the figure, the attacker,  is trying to reach 
the circle in the center of the field, while the robot closer to 
the circle,  the defender,  is trying to prevent this  from hap(cid:173)
pening. 
If the  attacker  reaches  the  circle,  it  receives  a  re(cid:173)
ward of one and the defender receives a reward of negative 
one.  These are the only rewards in the task.  When the at(cid:173)
tacker reaches the circle or ten  seconds elapses,  the trial  is 
over and the robots reset to their initial positions, where the 
attacker is a meter from the circle and the defender half-way 
between. The robots simultaneously learn in this environment 
each seeking to maximize its own discounted future reward. 
For all  of our experiments the discount  factor used  was 0.8 
for each full second of delay. 

The  robots  themselves  are  part  of the  CMDragons  robot 
soccer  team,  which  competes  in  the  RoboCup  small-size 
league.  There are two details about the robot platform that 
are relevant to this learning task. First, the learning algorithm 
itself is  situated  within  a  large  and  complex  architecture of 

700 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

existing capability. The team employs a global vision system 
mounted over the  field.  This input is processed by an elab(cid:173)
orate  tracking module  that  provides  accurate  positions  and 
velocities of the robots.  These positions comprise the input 
state for the learning algorithm. The team also consists of ro(cid:173)
bust modules for obstacle avoidance and motion control. The 
actions for the learning algorithm then involve providing tar(cid:173)
get points for the obstacle avoidance module.  Situating the 
learning within the context of this larger architecture focuses 
the learning. Rather than having the robot learn to solve well 
understood problems  like  path planning  or object tracking, 
the learning is directed at the heart of the problem, the multi-
robot interaction. 

Second, the system control loop that is partially described 
above has inherent, though small, latency.  Specifically, after 
an observed change in the world 100ms will elapse before the 
robot's response  is executed.  This  latency is overcome  for 
each robot's own position and velocity by predicting through 
this latency using knowledge of the past, but not yet executed, 
actions.  Since  the  actions  of the  opponent  robots  are  not 
known, this prediction is not possible for other robots.  La(cid:173)
tency effectively  adds an  element of partial  observability to 
the problem, since the agents do not have the complete state 
of the world, and in fact have separate views of this state. No(cid:173)
tice, that this also adds a tactical element to successful poli(cid:173)
cies.  A robot can "fake" the opponent robot by changing its 
direction suddenly, knowing the other robot will not be able 
to respond to this change for a full latency period. 

This task involves numerous challenges for existing multi-
agent learning techniques. These challenges include continu(cid:173)
ous state and action spaces, elements of partial observability 
due to system latency, and violation of the Markov assump(cid:173)
tion since many of the system components have memory, e.g., 
the  tracking  and  the  obstacle  avoidance  modules. 
In  fact, 
these limitations may even make equilibria cease to exist alto(cid:173)
gether [Bowling and Vcloso, 2002b]. This is a further reason 
for exploring best-response learning techniques, which don't 
directly seek to learn an equilibrium.  We now present Gra-
WoLF, a best-response learning algorithm that can handle the 
challenges of multi-robot learning. 

4  GraWoLF 
GraWoLF, or Gradient-based WoLF, combines two key ideas 
from reinforcement learning: policy gradient learning and the 
WoLF  variable  learning  rate.  Policy gradient  learning  is  a 
technique  to  handle  intractable  or  continuous  state  spaces. 
WoLF  is  a  multiagent  learning  technique  that  encourages 
best-response learning algorithms to converge in situations of 
simultaneous learning.  We briefly describe these techniques 
and how they are combined. 

4.1  Policy  G  radicnt  Ascent 
We use the policy gradient technique presented by Sutton and 
colleagues [2000]. Specifically, we define a policy as a Gibbs 
distribution over a linear combination of features of a candi(cid:173)
date state and action pair.  Let 6 be a vector of the policy's 
parameters and let <j6.sa be an identically sized feature vector 
for state 6' and action a, then the Gibbs distribution defines a 

stochastic policy according to, 

Sutton and colleagues' main result was a convergence proof 
for the following policy iteration rule that updates a policy's 
parameters in a Gibbs distribution according to, 

is  an  independent  approximation  of  Qn°*(s,a) 
with parameters w, which is the expected value of taking ac(cid:173)
tion a  from state a  and then  following the policy 7r^fc.  For 
the Gibbs distribution, Sutton and colleagues showed that for 
convergence  this  approximation  should  have  the  following 
form, 

(2) 

As they point out, this amounts to /w being an approximation 
of the  advantage  function,  
is the value of following policy -K from  state 
where 
.s.  It is this advantage function that we estimate and use for 
gradient ascent. 

Using this basic formulation we derive an on-line version 
of the learning rule, where the policy's weights are updated 
with each state visited. The summation over states can be re(cid:173)
moved by updating proportionately to that state's contribution 
to the policy's overall value.  Since we are visiting states on-
policy then we only need to weight later states by the discount 
factor to account for their smaller contribution.  Iff time has 
passed since the trial start, this turns Equation 1 into, 

a 

Since the whole algorithm is on-line, we do the policy im(cid:173)
provement  step (updating 
,  simultaneously  with the value 
estimation step (updating w).  We do value estimation using 
gradient-descent Sarsa 
i LSutton and Barto,  1998] over the 
same feature space as the policy.  This requires maintaining 
an eligibility trace  vector,  e.  The  update rule  is then,  if at 
time k the system is in state s and takes action a transitioning 
to state s' in time t and then taking action a', we update the 
trace and the weight vector using, 

(4) 

(5) 

is an appropriately de(cid:173)
where  * is the Sarsa parameter and 
cayed learning rate.  The addition of raising 
to the power 
t  allows  for  actions  to  take  differing  amounts  of time  to 
execute,  as in semi-Markov decision processes [Sutton and 
Barto, 1998]. 

The policy improvement step then uses Equation 3 where 
s is the state of the system at time k and the action-value es(cid:173)
timates from Sarsa, 
, are used to compute the advantage 
term. We then get, 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

701 

This forms the crux of GraWoLF. What remains is the selec(cid:173)
tion of the learning rate, 
This is where the WoLF variable 
learning rate is used. 

4.2  W in  or Learn  Fast 
WoLF  ("Win  or  Learn  Fast")  is  a  method  by  Bowling  and 
Veloso  [2002a]  for changing  the  learning  rate to  encourage 
convergence in a multiagent reinforcement learning scenario. 
Notice  that the policy  gradient ascent algorithm above  does 
not account for a non-stationary environment that arises with 
simultaneous  learning  in  stochastic  games.  All  of the  other 
agents  actions  are  simply  assumed  to  be  part  of the  envi(cid:173)
ronment  and  unchanging.  WoLF provides  a  simple  way to 
account  for  other  agents  through  adjusting  how  quickly  or 
slowly the agent changes its policy. 

Since  only  the  rate  of  learning  is  changed,  algorithms 
that  are guaranteed to  find  (locally) optimal policies in non-
stationary  environments  retain  this  property  even  when  us(cid:173)
ing  WoLF.  In  stochastic  games  with  simultaneous  learning, 
WoLF  has  both  theoretical  evidence  (limited to  two-player, 
two-action  matrix  games),  and  empirical  evidence  (experi(cid:173)
ments  in  games  with  enumerated  state  spaces)  that  it  en(cid:173)
courages convergence in algorithms that don't otherwise con(cid:173)
verge.  The intuition for this technique is that a learner should 
adapt  quickly  when  it  is  doing  more  poorly  than  expected. 
When it is doing better than expected,  it should be cautious, 
since the other players are likely to change their policy.  This 
implicitly accounts for other players that are learning, rather 
than  other techniques  that  try  to  explicitly  reason  about the 
others' action choices. 

The  WoLF principle naturally  lends  itself to policy gradi(cid:173)

ent techniques where there is a well-defined learning rate, 
With  WoLF  we  replace  the  original  learning  rate  with  two 
learning rates 
;o  be  used  when  winning  or  los(cid:173)
ing,  respectively.  One  determination  of winning  and  losing 
that has been  successful  is  to  compare  the  value of the  cur(cid:173)
rent policv  V"[s)  to the value of the average policy over time 
then the algorithm is consid(cid:173)
ered winning, otherwise it is losing.  With the policy gradient 
technique above, we cannot easily compute the average pol(cid:173)
icy.  Instead  we  examine  the  approximate  value,  using  Qw, 
of the current weight vector 6 with the average weight vector 
over time 0.  Specifically, wc are "winning" if and only if, 

When winning in a particular state, we update the parameters 
for that state using 

otherwise 

 

4.3  O ur Task 
Returning  to  the  robot  task  shown  in  Figure  1,  in  order to 
apply GraWoLF we need to select a policy parameterization. 
Specifically we need to  find  a mapping from the continuous 
space of states and actions to a useful  feature vector,  i.e., to 
for a given s and a.  The filtered positions and ve(cid:173)
define 
locities of the two robots form the available state information, 
and the available actions are points on the field for navigation. 
By observing that the radial angle of the attacker with respect 
to the  circle  is  not  relevant to the  task  we  arrive  at  a  seven 

dimensional input space.  These seven dimensions are shown 
by the white overlaid lines in Figure  1. 

We chose to use tile coding [Sutton and Barto,  1998], also 
known as CMACS, to construct our feature vector.  Tile cod(cid:173)
ing  uses  a number of large  offset tilings  to  allow  for both  a 
fine discretization  and  large  amount  of generalization.  We 
use  16 tiles whose size was 800mm in distance dimensions 
and  1600mm/s in  velocity dimensions.  We simplify the ac(cid:173)
tion  space  by  requiring  the  attacker  to  select  its  navigation 
point  along  a perpendicular line  through  the  circle's  center. 
This is shown by the dark overlaid line in Figure 1. This line, 
whose length is three times the distance of the attacker to the 
circle, is then discretized into seven points evenly distributed. 
The defender uses the same points for its actions but then nav(cid:173)
igates to the point that bisects the line from the attacker to the 
selected action point.  The robot's action is also  included in 
the tiling as an eighth dimension with a tile size for that di(cid:173)
mension of the entire line,  so actions are distinguishable but 
there is also generalization.  Agents select actions every tenth 
of a  second,  or  after  every  three  frames,  unless  the  feature 
vector has not changed over that time.  This keeps the robots 
from oscillating too much during the initial parts of learning. 

5  Results 
Before presenting results on applying GraWoLF to this prob(cid:173)
lem we first consider some issues related to evaluation. 

5.1  Evaluation 
Evaluation of multi-robot learning algorithms present a num(cid:173)
ber of challenges.  The  first  is the  problem  of data  gathering 
on  a  real  robot platform.  Learning  often  requires  far more 
trials than is practical to execute in the physical world.  We 
believe and demonstrate that the GraWoLF technique is prac(cid:173)
tical  for the  time  constraints of real  robots.  Yet,  from  a re(cid:173)
search standpoint, we want thorough and statistically signifi(cid:173)
cant evaluation, which requires far more trials than just those 
used for learning. We solve this problem by using both a sim(cid:173)
ulator of our robot team as  well  as the robots themselves to 
show that the approach is both practical for robots while still 
providing an extensive analysis of the results. 

The second challenge is the problem of evaluating the suc(cid:173)
cess  of simultaneous  learning.  The  traditional  single-agent 
evaluation  that  shows  performance  over time  converging  to 
some  optimal  value  is  not  applicable.  Multiagent  domains 
have no single optimal value independent of the other agents' 
behavior.  The  optimal  value  is  changing  over  time  as  the 
other  agents  also  learn.  This  is  especially  true  of self-play 
experiments where both agents are using an  identical  learn(cid:173)
ing algorithm, and any performance success by one agent is 
necessarily a performance failure for the other. 

On the other hand we would still want learning robots, even 
in self-play, to improve their policy over time.  In this paper, 
our main evaluation compares the performance of the learned 
policy  with  the  the  performance  of the  initial  policy  before 
learning. The initial policy is a random selection of the avail(cid:173)
able actions, and by design of the available actions is actually 
a fairly capable policy for both agents.  We also use the eval(cid:173)
uation technique of challengers, which was first examined by 

702 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

Figure 2: The value of learned policies compared to a random 
opponent in  simulation.  Lines to  the right of the  bars  show 
standard deviations. 

Figure  3:  The  value  of learned  policies  playing  their  chal(cid:173)
lengers  in  simulation.  Lines  to  the  right  of the  bars  show 
standard deviations. 

Littman [1994], This technique trains a worst-case opponent, 
or challenger,  for a particular policy  to see the  generality  of 
the learned policy.  In this paper we present challenger results 
demonstrating that the learned policies are indeed robust, and 
that  the  WoLF  variable  learning  rate  plays  a  critical  role  in 
keeping the learning away from easily exploited policies. 

5.2  Experiments 
In  all  of  the  performance  graphs  in  this  section,  the  y-
axis shows the attacker's expected discounted reward, which 
roughly  corresponds to the expected time  it takes  for the at(cid:173)
tacker to reach the circle.  On the right of the graph the range 
is  shown  in  seconds.  All  measurements  of expected  dis(cid:173)
counted  reward  are  gathered  empirically  over the  course  of 
1000 trials.  All training occurred over 4000 trails, and takes 
approximately  6-7  hours  of training  time  on  the  robot  plat(cid:173)
form  or in simulation.  Unless  otherwise noted,  the training 
was  always  done  with  a  simultaneously  learning  opponent, 
both using Gra WoLF. The experiments in simulation were re(cid:173)
peated nine times and the averages are shown in the graphs. 
We  first  examine  the  performance  of the  policies  learned  in 
simulation, and then examine the performance of learning on 
the robot. 

Figure 2 shows the results of various learned policies when 
playing  against  an  opponent  following  the  random  policy, 
which  was  the  starting  point  for  learning.  The  middle  bar, 
"R v.  R", corresponds  to  the  expected  value of both players 
following  the  random  policy.  "L  v.  R"  corresponds  to  the 
value of the attacker following the policy learned in self-play 
against a random defender.  "R v.  L" corresponds to the value 
of a  random  attacker  against  the  defender policy  learned  in 
self-play. 

Notice that, as was desired, learning does improve perfor(cid:173)
mance  over the  starting policy.  The  learned attacker policy 
against random does far better than the random attacker pol(cid:173)
icy against the learned defender.  These experiments demon(cid:173)
strate  that  GraWoLF  improves  considerably  on  its  starting 
policy.  The next experiment explores how robust the learned 
policy is and the effect of the WoLF component. 

Figure  3  shows  results  of challenger  experiments.  Poli-
cies  are  trained  using simultaneous  learning.  The policy  is 
then  fixed  and a challenger policy is trained for 4000 trails, 

to specifically measure the policy's worst-case  performance. 
The  better  the  worst-case  performance,  the  less  exploitable 
and  more  robust  the  policy  is  to  unknown  opponents.  We 
trained  a  challenger against the  policies  learned  after  3000, 
3500, and 4000 trials, averaging together the results. We used 
this  experiment  to  investigate  the  robustness  of the  learned 
policy  and the  affect of the  WoLF  variable  learning  rate  on 
the GraWoLF algorithm.  The left side of the graph shows the 
worst-case  performance  of learned  defender  policies,  while 
the right side shows the worst-case performance  for attacker 
policies. 
"WoLF"  corresponds  to  the  described  GraWoLF 
algorithm,  "Slow"  does  not use  a  variable  learning rate  but 
rather always uses the WoLF's winning rate, while "Fast" al(cid:173)
ways uses its losing rate. 

First, notice that the distance between the worst-case per(cid:173)
formance of the defender and the  worst-case performance  of 
the attacker (the third and fourth column of Table 3, respec(cid:173)
tively) is quite small. This demonstrates that the learned poli(cid:173)
cies  are  quite  close  to  the  equilibrium  policy,  if one  exists. 
This also means that the learned policies are robust and diffi(cid:173)
cult to exploit. 

Second, notice that the WoLF learned defender policy per(cid:173)
forms better against  its  challenger,  i.e.,  keeps  its  challenger 
to  a  lower  reward,  than  either  of the  two  learning  rates  it 
switches  between.  For the  attacker,  the  learned  policy  per(cid:173)
forms better against its challenger than the fast learning rate, 
but  is  not  significantly different than  the  slow  learning  rate. 
There  are  a  couple  of possible  reasons  for this.  One  expla(cid:173)
nation is due to the  initialization of values.  Since  all values 
were intialized to zero for both sides, this amounts to an opti(cid:173)
mistic initialization for the defender, and a pessimistic one for 
the attacker (as all rewards are non-negative for the attacker.) 
This may mean the attacker considers itself winning far more 
often than the defender, causing the slower learning rate to be 
employed most of the  time.  There  is evidence  to this  effect 
when examining the percentage of updates that use 6W versus 
Si. During training, the attacker used the slower, winning rate 
for 92.3% of its updates, while the defender used the winning 
rate for only 84.2%.  The effect of value initialization on Gra(cid:173)
WoLF is  an  interesting top to be  explored further.  Overall, 
although the results are certainly not as dramatic as the unap-
proximated results [Bowling and Veloso, 2002a], WoLF still 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

703 

Acknowledgements 
This  research  was  sponsored  by  Grants  F30602-00-2-0549 
and  DABT63-99-1-0013.  The  content  of  this  publication 
does not necessarily reflect the position of the  funding agen-
cies and no official endorsement should be inferred.  The au-
thors also thank Brett Browning and James Bruce for the de-
velopment of the CMDragons'02 robots used in this work. 

References 
[Baxter and Bartlett, 2000]  Johnathan  Baxter  and  Peter  L. 
Bartlett.  Reinforcement  learning  in  POMDP's  via  direct 
gradient ascent. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Inter-
national  Conference  on  Machine Learning,  pages  41-48, 
Stanford University, June 2000. Morgan Kaufman. 
Bowling 

and 
Manuela  Veloso.  Multiagent  learning  using  a  vari(cid:173)
able  learning  rate.  Artificial  Intelligence,  136:215-250, 
2002. 

[Bowling and Veloso, 2002a]  Michael 

[Bowling and Veloso, 2002b]  Michael 

and 
Manuela  M.  Veloso.  Existence  of multiagent  equilibria 
with  limited  agents. 
Technical  report  CMU-CS-02-
104,  Computer  Science  Department,  Carnegie  Mellon 
University, 2002. 

Bowling 

[Claus and Boutilier,  1998]  Caroline  Claus  and  Craig 
Boutilier.  The  dynamics  of  reinforcement  learning  in 
In  Proceedings  of  the 
cooperative  multiagent  systems. 
Fifteenth  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence, 
Menlo Park, CA,  1998.AAAI  Press. 

[Greenwald and Hall, 2002]  Amy  Greenwald  and  Keith 
Hall.  Correlated  Q-learning.  In  Proceedings  of  the  AAA! 
Spring  Symposium  Workshop  on  Collaborative  Learning 
Agents, 2002. 

[Littman,  1994]  Michael  L.  Littman.  Markov  games  as  a 
framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning.  In Pro-
ceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, pages  157-163. Morgan Kaufman,  1994. 

[Nash, Jr.,  1950]  John F. Nash, Jr.  Equilibrium points  in 

person games. PNAS, 36:48-49, 1950. 

[Singh et al, 2000]  Satinder  Singh,  Michael  Kearns,  and 
Yishay  Mansour.  Nash  convergence  of gradient  dynam(cid:173)
ics in general-sum games. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth 
Conference on  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,  pages 
541-548. Morgan Kaufman, 2000. 

[Sutton and Barto,  1998]  Richard  S.  Sutton  and Andrew G. 

Barto.  Reinforcement Learning.  MIT Press,  1998. 

[Sutton et al, 2000]  Richard  S.  Sutton,  David  McAllester, 
Satinder  Singh,  and  Yishay  Mansour.  Policy  gradient 
methods for reinforcement learning with function approx(cid:173)
In  Advances  in  Neural  Information  Processing 
imation. 
Systems 12, pages 1057-1063. MIT Press, 2000. 

[Williams,  1992]  R.  Williams. 

Simple  statistical  gradi(cid:173)
ent following algorithms for connectionisht reinforcement 
learning.  Machine Learning,  8:229-256,  1992. 

Figure 4:  The  value  of learned  policies playing the  random 
policy  on  the  real  robots.  Training  was  done  with  the first 
half of the trials in simulation and the last half on the robots. 

seems to be providing a converging effect. 

Finally, we examine results of using GraWoLF on the real 
robots.  We took policies that were trained for 2000 trials  in 
simulation  and then  did an  additional  2000 trials of training 
on the robots.  We evaluated the resulting policies against the 
random  policy  as  we  did  with  the  simulator results  in  Fig(cid:173)
ure 2. These results are shown in Figure 4 

In the real  robots the attacker is nearly impossible to keep 
from reaching the circle.  The defender can at best only slow 
down its progress, and this is even true for a random attacker 
policy.  This  can  be  seen  in  Figure  4  by  the  much  higher 
rewards  as  compared to the  simulator results.  Despite this, 
these results are qualitatively identical to the results produced 
in  simulation.  Simultaneous  learning  improves  the  perfor(cid:173)
mance  for  both  the  attacker  and  defender  over  their  initial 
policies. 

Finally,  as  an  adversarial  environment  we  would  expect 
good policies  to  be  stochastic  in  nature.  This  is  true  of all 
of the  learned policies  in both simulation  and on the robots. 
For example, the most probable action in any given state has 
probability on average around 40%  in the attacker's  learned 
policy,  and 70% in the  defender's.  In  some  states,  though, 
the learned policies are nearly deterministic.  So, the learned 
policies are indeed stochastic to avoid exploitation, while still 
learning  optimal  actions  in  states  that  don't  depend  on  the 
other agent's behavior. 

6  Conclusion 

We have introduced, GraWoLF, a general-purpose multiagent 
learning  algorithm  capable  of learning  robot  tasks  in  multi-
robot,  and even  adversarial,  environments.  We  showed re(cid:173)
sults  of this  algorithm  learning  in  one  particular adversarial 
robot task, both  in simulation  and from actual robot experi(cid:173)
ence.  These  results  both  demonstrated  the  effectiveness  of 
the policy gradient learner,  and the importance of the  WoLF 
variable learning rate.  It should be noted that the use of Sut(cid:173)
ton and colleagues'  particular policy gradient formulation is 
not critical.  It would be  interesting to  combine  WoLF  with 
other policy  gradient  techniques,  such  as  [Williams,  1992; 
Baxter and Bartlett, 2000]. 

704 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

