Characterization of Strategy/False-name Proof Combinatorial Auction Protocols: 

Price-oriented, Rationing-free Protocol 

Makoto Yokoo 

NTT Communication Science Laboratories 

2-4 Hikaridai, Seika-cho 

Soraku-gun, Kyoto 619-0237 Japan 
email: yokoo@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp 

url: http://www.kecl.ntt.co.jp/csl/ccrg/members/yokoo 

Abstract 

This  paper  introduces  a  new  distinctive  class 
of  combinatorial  auction  protocols  called  price-
oriented,  rationing-free  (PORF)  protocols.  The 
outline  of a  PORF  protocol  is  as  follows:  (i)  for 
each bidder, the price of each bundle of goods is de(cid:173)
termined  independently  of his/her own  declaration 
(while  it  can  depend  on  the  declarations  of other 
bidders), (ii) we allocate each bidder a bundle that 
maximizes his/her utility independently of the allo(cid:173)
cations of other bidders (i.e., rationing-free). 
Although a  PORF protocol appears quite different 
from traditional protocol descriptions, surprisingly, 
it is a sufficient and necessary condition for a proto(cid:173)
col to be strategy-proof.  Furthermore, we show that 
a  PORF  protocol  satisfying  additional  conditions 
is  false-name-proof;  at  the  same  time,  any  false-
name-proof protocol can be described as a PORF 
protocol  that satisfies the additional  conditions.  A 
PORF  protocol  is  an  innovative  characterization 
of strategy-proof protocols  and  the  first  attempt  to 
characterize  false-name-proof  protocols.  Such  a 
characterization is not only theoretically significant 
but also  useful  in practice,  since  it  can  serve as  a 
guideline  for  developing  new  strategy/false-name 
proof protocols.  We  present  a  new  false-name-
proof protocol based on the concept of a PORF pro(cid:173)
tocol. 

1  Introduction 
Internet auctions have become  an  integral part of Electronic 
Commerce  and  a  promising  field  for applying  AI  technolo(cid:173)
gies.  Among  various  studies  related  to  Internet  auctions, 
those on combinatorial auctions have lately attracted consid(cid:173)
erable attention (an extensive survey is presented in  [de Vries 
and Vohra, 2003]). Although conventional auctions sell a sin(cid:173)
gle item at a time, combinatorial auctions sell multiple items 
with interdependent values simultaneously and allow the bid(cid:173)
ders to bid on any combination of items.  In a combinatorial 
auction,  a  bidder  can  express  complementary/substitutable 
preferences over multiple bids.  By taking into account com(cid:173)
plementary/substitutable  preferences,  we  can  increase  the 
participants' utilities and the revenue of the seller. 

One important characteristic  of an auction protocol  is that 
it  is  strategy-proof.  A  protocol  is  strategy-proof if,  for each 
bidder, declaring his/her true evaluation values is a dominant 
strategy,  i.e.,  an optimal  strategy regardless of the actions of 
other bidders.  In theory, the revelation principle states that in 
the design of an auction protocol, we can restrict our attention 
to  strategy-proof protocols  without  loss  of generality  [Myer-
son,  1981].  In other words, if a certain property (e.g., Pareto 
efficiency) can be achieved using some auction protocol in a 
dominant-strategy  equilibrium,  i.e.,  a  combination  of domi(cid:173)
nant strategies of bidders,  the property can  also be achieved 
using a strategy-proof auction protocol. 

Furthermore,  a  strategy-proof protocol  is  also  practically 
useful  for applying to  Internet  auctions.  For example,  if we 
use the  first-price  sealed-bid auction (which is  not  strategy-
proof),  the  bidding  prices  must  be  securely  concealed  until 
the auction is closed. On the other hand, if we use a strategy-
proof protocol, knowing the bidding prices of other bidders is 
useless; thus, such security issues become less critical. 

Also,  the  author pointed out the possibility  of a new type 
of fraud called false-name bids, which utilizes the anonymity 
available  in  the  Internet  [Yokoo  et  al,  forthcoming;  2001a; 
2000;  Sakurai  et  ai,  1999].  False-name bids  are  bids  sub(cid:173)
mitted under fictitious names, e.g., multiple e-mail addresses. 
Such a dishonest action is very difficult to detect, since identi(cid:173)
fying each participant on the Internet is virtually impossible. 
We  say  a protocol  is false-name-proof if,  for each bidder, 
declaring his/her true evaluation  values using a  single  iden(cid:173)
tifier  (although  the  bidder  can  use  multiple  identifiers)  is  a 
dominant strategy.  As  for strategy-proof protocols, the reve(cid:173)
lation principle  holds  for  false-name-proof protocols  [Yokoo 
et al% forthcoming; 2000]. Thus, we can restrict our attention 
to  false-name-proof protocols without  loss of generality. 

Given that  strategy/false-name  proof protocols  are  impor(cid:173)
tant both  in theory  and practice,  obvious questions  we need 
to answer are,  how can we  design  such protocols  and  what 
features  do  these  protocols  have  in  common,  i.e.,  charac(cid:173)
terization  of the  protocols.  Although  there  have  been  sev(cid:173)
eral  works  on  characterizing  strategy-proof protocols  (e.g., 
[Roberts,  1979;  Holmstrom,  1979]),  as  far as the  author is 
aware,  there  is  no  work  on  characterizing  false-name-proof 
protocols. 

In this paper,  we  introduce an  innovative characterization 
of strategy/false-name  proof protocols  by  introducing  a  new 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

733 

distinctive  class  of  combinatorial  auction  protocols  called 
price-oriented, rationing-free (PORF) protocols.  The outline 
of a PORF protocol is as follows. 

For  each  bidder,  the  price  of each  bundle  of goods  is 
determined  independently  of  his/her  own  declaration, 
while it can depend on the declarations of other bidders. 
We allocate each bidder a bundle that maximizes his/her 
utility  independently  of the  allocations  of other  bidders 
(i.e., rationing-free). 

A  PORF  protocol  looks  quite  different  from  traditional 
protocol  descriptions.  In  a  traditional  protocol,  the  alloca(cid:173)
tions of goods are usually determined first, and then the pay(cid:173)
ments of the winners are determined.  On the other hand,  in 
a  PROF  protocol,  the  prices  of bundles  for each  bidder  are 
determined  first,  and then the allocation is determined inde(cid:173)
pendently based on these prices. 

However, surprisingly, a PORF protocol captures all the es(cid:173)
sential features of a strategy-proof protocol, i.e., if a protocol 
can be described as a PORF protocol, it is strategy-proof, and 
vice versa.  Also,  if a protocol can be described as a PORF 
protocol that satisfies additional conditions, it is false-name-
proof, and vice versa. 

As  far as the author is aware,  a PORF protocol  is an in(cid:173)
novative  characterization of strategy-proof protocols  and  the 
first attempt to characterize false-name-proof protocols. Such 
a characterization is not only theoretically significant but also 
useful in practice, since it can serve as a guideline for devel(cid:173)
oping new strategy/false-name proof protocols. We present a 
new false-name-proof protocol based on the idea of a PORF 
protocol. 

, which determines his/her preferences.  We refer to 

2  Problem  Settings 
Assume  there are  a  set  of bidders  N  =  ~ 
and a 
set  of goods  M  =  { 1 , 2 , . . ., m }.  Each  bidder i  has  his/her 
preferences  over 
Formally,  we model this by sup(cid:173)
posing that bidder i privately observes a parameter, or signal, 
as the 
type of bidder i.  We assume 
is is drawn from a set  We 
assume a quasi-linear, private value model  with no allocative 
externality, defined as follows. 
Definition  1  (utility of a bidder) 
The utility of bidder i, when i obtains a bundle, i.e., a subset 
of goods 
— 
PBti. 
We assume evaluation value v is normalized by v(0,0{)  =  0. 
Also, we assume for all  , 
holds.  Further(cid:173)
more, we assume free disposal, i.e., 
for 
all  

, is represented as 

and pays 

In a traditional definition [Mas-Colell et al. 9 1995], an auc(cid:173)
tion protocol  is (dominant-strategy)  incentive compatible (or 
strategy-proof)  if declaring the true type/evaluation values  is 
a dominant strategy for each bidder, i.e., an optimal strategy 
regardless of the actions of other bidders. 

In this paper, we extend the traditional definition of incen(cid:173)
tive compatibility so that it can address false-name bid manip(cid:173)
ulations, i.e., we define that an auction protocol is (dominant-
strategy)  incentive  compatible  if declaring  the  true  type  by 

using a single identifier  is  a dominant strategy  for each bid(cid:173)
der.  To distinguish between the traditional and extended def(cid:173)
initions of incentive compatibility,  we refer to the traditional 
definition as strategy-proof and to the extended definition as 
false-name-proof 

An  auction  protocol  is  individually  rational  if no  partici(cid:173)
pant suffers any loss in a dominant-strategy equilibrium, i.e., 
the  payment  never  exceeds  the  evaluation  value  of the  ob(cid:173)
tained goods. In a private value auction, individual rationality 
is indispensable; no bidder wants to participate in an auction 
where  he/she  might be  charged  more money  than  he/she  is 
willing to pay.  Therefore, in this paper, we restrict our atten(cid:173)
tion to individually rational protocols.  Also,  we restrict our 
attention to deterministic protocols,  which always obtain the 
same outcome for the same input. 

We say an auction protocol is Pareto efficient when the sum 
of all participants'  utilities (including that of the auctioneer), 
i.e., the social  surplus,  is maximized  in a dominant-strategy 
equilibrium. The author has proved that there exists no false-
name-proof protocol that satisfies Pareto efficiency and indi(cid:173)
vidual rationality at the same time [Yokoo et al., forthcoming; 
Sakurai  et  al.,  1999].  Therefore,  we  need  to  sacrifice  effi(cid:173)
ciency to some extent when false-name bids are possible. 

3  Price-oriented, Rationing-Free (PORF) 

Protocol 

A PORF Protocol is defined as follows. 
Definition 2 (PORF Protocol) 

, 

pB, 

 

if 

a  bundle  B 

, which is not nec(cid:173)

Each  bidder  declares his/her type 
essarily the true type  
For  each  bidder  i, for  each  bundle 
the  price 
PB, I is defined.  This price must be determined indepen(cid:173)
dently  of  's declared type 
while it can be dependent 
on declared types of other bidders. 
We assume 
=  0  holds.  Also, 
PB',I  holds. 
For  bidder 
= 
arg max 
If 
there exist multiple bundles that maximize i 's utility, one 
of these bundles is allocated. 
The 
feasibility,  i.e.,  for  two  bidders 
cated to these bidders 

the  allocation  satisfies  allocation-
and  bundles  allo(cid:173)
holds. 
It is straightforward to show that a PORF protocol is strategy-
proof.  The  price  of bidder i  is  determined  independently  of 
Vs declared type, and he/she can obtain the bundle that maxi(cid:173)
mizes his/her utility independently of the allocations of other 
bidders, i.e., the protocol is rationing-free. 

is  allocated,  where 

Bidder  i  pays 

result  of 

and 

On  the  other hand,  in  a  PORF  protocol,  the  prices  must 
be determined appropriately to satisfy allocation-feasibility1. 
Since the price for each bidder can be different and the price 
of a bundle is not necessarily the sum of the prices of all goods in 
the bundle, there is no direct relation between the prices that achieve 
allocation-feasibility and equilibrium prices. 

734 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

The definition of a PORF protocol requires that if there exist 
multiple bundles that maximize z's utility,  then one  of these 
bundles  must  be  allocated,  but  it  does  not  specify  exactly 
which  bundle  should be  allocated.  Therefore,  if there  exist 
multiple  choices,  the  auctioneer can  adjust the  allocation  of 
multiple bidders in order to satisfy allocation-feasibility. 

Next,  we  provide  some  examples  of  PORF  protocols. 
Since  a  PORF  protocol  is  strategy-proof,  in  the  rest  of this 
paper, we assume each bidder i declares his/her true type 0i. 
Example 1 Let us consider the auction of a single unit of a 
single item. 

• The price of the only bundle B = M is defined as 

max  

= 

This  protocol  is  identical  to  the  Vickrey  auction  protocol 
[Vickrey,  1961]. 

More  specifically,  for the  bidder with  the  highest  evalua­
tion value, the price of the good is equal to the second highest 
evaluation  value.  On  the  other hand,  for other bidders,  the 
price is equal to the highest evaluation value, so nobody ex­
cept the bidder with the highest evaluation value is willing to 
buy the good. 
Example 2  Let us consider a combinatorial auction.  To sim(cid:173)
plify  the  protocol  description,  we  introduce  the  following  no(cid:173)
tation.  For  a  set  of  goods  B  and  a  set  of  bidders  X,  where 

is  a  set  of types  of bidders  in  X,  we define 

as the sum of the evaluation values ofX when B is allocated 
optimally  among  X. 

To be precise, for an feasible  allocation 

where 

and for  all 

 

{X, B)  is  defined as  max 

where 

is 

the type of bidder j. 

The price of bundle B for bidder i is defined as follows: 

This  protocol  is  identical  to  the  Vickrey-Clarke-Groves 
(VCG)  mechanism  LVickrey,  1961;  Clarke,  1971;  Groves, 
1973],  i.e.,  if B  is  allocated to i  in  a Pareto  efficient alloca­
tion, then 
is equal to the payment in the VCG; otherwise, 
PB,I  is larger than  

Let  us  describe  how  this  protocol  works.  Assume  there 
are two goods 1 and 2, and three bidders, bidder 1, 2, and 3, 
whose types are 
, respectively.  The evaluation 
value for a bundle 

is determined as follows. 

, and 

' ~ 

Accordingly, the prices of these bundles for each bidder is 

given as follows. 

bidder 1 
bidder 2 
bidder 3 

{1} 
3 
6 
8 

{2} 
8 
5 
2 

{1,2} 
8 
11 
8 

As a result, bidder 1 obtains good 1 with price 3, and bidder 3 
obtains good 2 with price 2. 

PORF 

4  Strategy-proof 
A PORF protocol looks quite different from traditional proto­
col descriptions, in which the allocation of the goods/winners 
are determined,  and then the payments of these winners  are 
determined.  In  a  PROF  protocol,  the  prices  of bundles  for 
each  bidder  is  determined  first,  and  then  the  allocation  is 
determined based  on these  prices.  In  a traditional  protocol 
description,  the payment of bidder i  must be  determined  in­
dependently  of ?''s type  to  make the protocol  strategy-proof 
This is similar to the fact that the price of bidder i in a PORF 
protocol  must  be  determined  independently  of z's  declared 
type.  The most distinctive characteristic of a PORF protocol 
is that it is rationing-free, i.e., each bidder can obtain the op­
timal bundle based on the prices, and the allocation for each 
bidder is done independently (except when a bidder is totally 
indifferent between multiple bundles). 

Surprisingly, a PORF protocol is not only a sufficient con­
dition that a protocol is strategy-proof, but it is also a neces­
sary condition, i.e., the following theorem holds. 
Theorem  1  If  a  protocol  is  strategy-proof  then  the  protocol 
can be described as a PORF protocol. 
The  argument  presented  in  this  section  is  very  general  and 
requires only the fact that a protocol  is deterministic and in­
dividually rational. 

The  outline  of the  proof in  the  remainder  of this  section 
can be summarized as follows. First, we show that if a bidder 
is single-minded (Definition 3), i.e., he/she is interested only 
in a particular bundle, any strategy-proof protocol can be de­
scribed as a PORF protocol (Lemma 3), i.e., the price of the 
bundle is determined and the bidder will obtain the bundle if 
his/her evaluation value is larger than the price.  An intuitive 
explanation for this result is that if such a price does not exist, 
a single-minded bidder can have an incentive to under/over-
declare his/her evaluation value for the bundle.  The only way 
to make the protocol strategy-proof is to set a fixed threshold 
based on other bidders' evaluation values, which determines 
whether the  single-minded  bidder  will  obtain  the  bundle  or 
not. 

Next, we show that this result can be extended to the case 
where a bidder is A>minded (Definition 5), i.e., a bidder is in­
terested in multiple bundles at the same time (Lemma 5).  An 
intuitive  explanation  for this  result  is  as  follows.  A  single-
minded  bidder  can  pretend  to  be  a  A-minded  bidder,  and 
vice  versa.  Therefore,  to  a  A-minded  bidder,  the  protocol 
must give the results that are basically equivalent to a single-
minded bidder 

Any bidder can be represented as a 

j-minded bid­
der, where m is the number of goods and 
is the number 
of all possible bundles (except an empty set).  Thus, we can 
show that any strategy-proof protocol can be represented as a 
PROF protocol. 

In the following, we show the detailed proof of Theorem 1. 
To derive the theorem, we introduce notions such as single-
minded bidder,  monotone  allocation  rule,  and  critical-value, 
which are used in [Lehmann et ai, 2002; Mu'alem and Nisan, 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

735 

,  i.e., for any bundle 

2002].  The proofs  of Lemma  1  and  2  are basically due to 
[Lehmann et al.y 2002; Mu'alem and Nisan, 2002]. 
Definition 3 (single-minded bidder) 
We say bidder i is single-minded ifi requires only one bundle 
. 
otherwise,  
If bidder z  is  single-minded,  i.e.,  the  declared type of z  can 
be considered to be single-minded, then a PORF protocol can 
be  described  as  follows,  assuming  the  set  of other bidders 
and their types are fixed. We denote this protocol as a PORF 
protocol for a single-minded bidder. 

then 

•  For  bidder 

, which is the price  of 
, then Bi (or a superset  of 

, is defined.  If 
is allocated 
to  bidder  z  and  i  pays pi. 
then no 
then either Bi  (or a 
good is allocated.  If 
superset of Bi)  is allocated and i  pays  pi  or no good  is 
allocated. 

If 

Definition 4 (monotone allocation rule) 
We say a protocol is monotone for a single-minded bidder i if 
the following condition is satisfied, assuming the set of other 
bidders and their types are fixed. 
If bundle  Bt  (or  a  superset  of Bi)  is  allocated  to  bidder  i 
when i 's evaluation value  for 
, then Bx (or a superset 
of B{)  is  also  allocated when  i 's  evaluation  value for  Bi  is 

The following lemma holds. 

If a  protocol  is  not  monotone,  there  exists  a  case 
(or a superset) is allocated to bidder z when z 's eval­
(or a superset) is not allo­

Lemma 1 If a protocol is strategy-proof then the protocol is 
monotone for a single-minded bidder. 
Proof: 
where 
uation value  for Bi  is  _, while 
cated to bidder z when z's evaluation value for Bi  is 
Since the protocol is individually rational, the payment when 
z's  evaluation  value  is  must  be  less  than  or equal  to  v%. 
Therefore, when z's true evaluation value is 
if z  truthfully 
declares his/her type,  z's utility  is  0,  since  neither 
nor a 
superset is allocated.  However, if z declares a false type as a 
single-minded bidder where the evaluation value for. 
z can obtain a positive utility. This contradicts the assumption 
that the protocol is strategy-proof. 

is 

Furthermore, the following lemma holds. 

if 

Lemma 2 If a protocol is monotone for a single-minded bid(cid:173)
der, then there exists critical-value c that satisfies the follow(cid:173)
ing  condition,  assuming  the  set  of other  bidders  and  their 
types  are fixed: 
Bi  (or  a  superset)  is  allocated 
to i,  while  if 
Proof:  Let us assume that no critical value exists.  Then, for 
an  arbitrary value 
,  either one  of the  following  two  cases 
holds. 
case i:  there exists 

where bidder  ' cannot obtain B1 

no good is allocated. 

when z's evaluation value is  

case ii:  there exists 

when z's evaluation value is  

where bidder z  can obtain Bi 

If we  set 
case ii cannot be true so case i must hold. 
Let us re-assign 
and repeat this procedure until case 
as 
ii  occurs  (if case  ii  never occurs,  then 
becomes a critical 
value).  In this case, bidder z cannot obtain 
when the eval­
uation value is  _  , while i can obtain Bi  when the evaluation 
value is 
This  contradicts  the  assumption  that the 
protocol is monotone. 

Next, we show that the following lemma holds. 

 

Lemma  3 
If a protocol  is  strategy-proof  then, for  a  single-
minded bidder, the protocol can be described as a PORF pro(cid:173)
tocol  for  a  single-minded  bidder,  i.e.,  if  i's  evaluation  value 
for Bi  is larger than  a given  value pi,  then  Bi  (or a superset) 
is  allocated  and  i  's  payment  is  pi  If  i's  evaluation  value  for 
Bi  is smaller than  pi  no good is allocated. 
Proof:  From Lemma 1  and 2, the protocol is monotone and 
there exists critical-value c, i.e., Bi (or a superset) is allocated 
when the evaluation value is larger than c, while no good is 
allocated  when  the  evaluation  value  is  smaller than  c.  The 
only thing we need to show is that the payment is equal to c 
when  B1  (or a superset) is allocated.  Let us assume that the 
payment is 

and derive a contradiction. 

' 

First, let us consider the case 

., when the evalua­
obtains  B1  (or a superset) but the 

Next, let us consider the case 

When the evaluation value of i  is   

tion  value  of i  is 
payment is 
if i  declares the  true type,  no good  is  allocated and the  ob­
tained utility is  0,  while  if z  declares a  false type where the 
can obtain B1 (or a superset) and the 
evaluation value is 
payment is c', thus the obtained utility becomes positive. This 
contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. 
when the evalu­
obtains B1  (or a superset) but the 
ation value of z is 
If i declares a false type where the evalu­
payment is 
can obtain  B1  (or a superset) because c 
ation value is 
is a critical value.  Since the protocol is individually rational, 
the payment must be less than or equal to 
which is less 
, i.e., the payment when i declares the true type.  This 
than 
contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. 
From the above, the protocol can be described as a PORF 

protocol for a single-minded bidder where  
Definition 5 (k-minded bidder) 
We say bidder i  is a  k-minded bidder ifi requires exactly one 
.  Let us repre(cid:173)
bundle from  k  bundles 
sent i 's evaluation value  for  ~ 
.  For notation simplic(cid:173)
ity, let us assume 
The evaluation value 
and 
of i for bundle B is defined as follows. 

=  max, 

, where  

From Lemma 3, if bidder z  is a single-minded bidder who 
requires  only 
,  then a strategy-proof protocol must be a 
PORF protocol for a single-minded bidder.  Let us represent 
the price for bidder z  of 

in this protocol as  

First, we show that the following lemma holds. 

Lemma  4  If  a  protocol  is  strategy-proof  then,  for  k-minded 
bidder  i,  the payment  when  i  obtains  B  is  given  b y= 
max 
Proof:  Let  us  assume  that 

=  argmax 

, where   

where 

We derive a contradiction assuming 

First, let us consider the case 

Assume that z is a 

736 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

only, and Vs evalua­
single-minded bidder who requires 
is  pi  ,.  In this case,  if i  declares the true 
tion value  for 
type, the obtained utility is 0.  On the other hand, if i declares 
his/her type  as  a fc-minded bidder,  i  can  obtain 
, thus i can obtain a positive 
and the payment is 
utility.  This  contradicts  the  assumption  that the  protocol  is 
strategy-proof. 

Next,  let  us  consider the case 

If  i  declares 

(or a superset) and the payment is 

its type as a single-minded bidder who requires only 
, which 
can obtain 
is less than 
i.e., the payment when he/she declares the 
true type. This contradicts the assumption that the protocol is 
strategy-proof.  

Finally, we show that the following lemma holds. 

Lemma 5  If  a  protocol  is  strategy-proof, 
then,  for  a  k-
minded bidder  i,  the protocol  can  be  described as  a  PORF 
protocol for a k-minded bidder, i.e., for each 
which 
is the price for bidder i, is defined, and the protocol assigns 
i. 

(or a superset), where 

=  argmax 

The payment is  
Proof:  We  derive a contradiction  assuming that a strategy-
for fc-minded bidder i.  Let 
proof protocol assigns 
From 
us choose 
the  definition of a fc-minded bidder, 
holds. 
Furthermore,  from  the  fact  that 

=  arg max 

, where 

holds.  

From Lemma 4, the payment when i obtains B is given by 

where 

Obviously, 

=- max 
holds. Thus,  

holds.  This formula represents the  fact that the utility when 
i declares the true type 
is less than the 
utility when i declares a false type, where i is a single-minded 
bidder that requires only 
. This contra­
dicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. D 

Any bidder can be represented as a 

-minded bid­
der, where m is the number of goods and 
is the number 
of all possible bundles (except an empty set). Since Lemma 5 
holds for all fc, from Lemma 5, we can derive Theorem 1. 

5  PORF with additional  conditions 

False-name-proof 

PORF  holds.  On the other hand,  PORF 

From  the  definition,  if a  protocol  is  false-name-proof,  it  is 
also strategy-proof.  Therefore, it is obvious that false-name-
proof 
false-
name-proof does not hold in general. For example, the VCG 
mechanism  is  strategy-proof,  so  it  can  be  described  as  a 
PORF  protocol,  but  it  is  not  false-name-proof,  as  shown  in 
[Yokoo et al.9 forthcoming; Sakurai et al., 1999]. 

In this section, we limit our attention to protocols that sat­

isfy the following condition. 
Definition 6 (weakly-anonymous pricing rule (WAP)) 
For  bidder  i,  the price  of bundle  B  is  given  as  a function 
of types of other bidders, i.e., the price can be described as 
p 
the set of types of bidders in X. 

where  X  is  the  set  of  bidders  except  i,  andis   

The above condition requires that if two bidders are facing the 
same types of opponents, their prices must be identical for all 
bundles.  The WAP condition is intuitively natural and virtu­
ally all well-known protocols, including the VCG, satisfy this 
condition. 

_ 

For a PORF protocol that satisfies the WAP condition, we 

define the following additional condition. 
Definition 7 (no super-additive price increase (NSA)) 
For  all subset  of bidders 

and for 
let us denote Bi as a bundle that maximizes i 's utility, 

and . 

then  
An intuitive meaning of this condition is that the price of buy­
ing a combination of bundles (the right side of the inequality) 
must  be  smaller than  or  equal  to  the  sum  of the  prices  for 
buying these bundles separately (the left side). 

The next theorem states that for a PORF protocol with the 
WAP,  the NSA  is a sufficient condition  for a protocol to be 
false-name-proof. 
Theorem 2  If a  PORF protocol  with  the  WAP satisfies  the 
NSA condition, then the protocol is false-name-proof. 
Proof:  The proof is  rather clear.  If a  bidder uses  a  set  of 
identifiers  5,  then  from  the  NSA  condition,  the  bidder  can 
obtain the same set of goods by using a single identifier, while 
the payment becomes smaller (or remains the same). □ 

We can show that for a PORF protocol with WAP, the NSA 
is not only a sufficient condition but also a necessary condi­
tion, i.e., the following theorem holds. 
Theorem 3  If a protocol  is  a  PORF protocol  with  the  WAP 
 
and is false-name-proof, then it satisfies the NSA condition. 
Proof:  Let us  assume  that  there  exists  a  false-name-proof 
protocol that can be described as a PORF protocol with the 
WAP  but  does  not  satisfy  the  NSA  condition.  More  pre­
cisely,  for  a  set  of  identifiers 
and  for 
is  the  bundle  that  maximizes  i's  utility,  but 

Let  us  assume  the  case  where  bidder  i'  is  facing  oppo­
Also,  let  us  assume bidder i'  is 
nents whose types are 
and the evaluation value 
single-minded  for bundle 
declares  his/her  true  type, 
is 
If bidder 
the obtained utility is 0 (since  if 
can obtain the bundle, the 
payment  is equal  to his/her evaluation  value).  On the other 
hand,  if i'  uses  a  set  of identifiers  5,  and  for  each 
he/she declares the type as 
obtained. 

then for each identifier z,  Bi  is 

. 

The  sum  of the  payment  is   

which  is  less  than  the  evaluation  value  of 

,  i.e., 
] 
can obtain positive  utility 
by utilizing false-name bids.  This contradicts the assumption 
that the protocol is  false-name-proof.   

Thus, bidder 

For the protocols that are strategy-proof (SP), false-name-
proof (FP), PORF, WAP, and NSA, the subset/superset rela­
tions can be illustrated as Figure 1. The VCG mechanism can 
be described as a PORF protocol with WAP, but it does not 
satisfy the  NSA  condition.  Therefore,  it  is  not  false-name-
proof.  One example of a false-name-proof protocol that does 
not use the WAP rule is a dictatorial protocol where all goods 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

737 

are allocated to one special bidder (the dictator) regardless of 
other bidders' evaluation values. 

{2} 
bidder 1 
110 
bidder 2  210  210 

{1} 
0 

{3} 
110 
60 

{1,2} 
110 
210 

{2,3} 
110 
210 

{1,3}  {1,2,3} 

110 
210 

110 
210 

As a result, bundle 
{3} is allocated to bidder 2. 

is allocated to bidder 1 and bundle 

that  maximize 

It  is  clear  that  this  protocol  satisfies  the  allocation-
and bun­
feasibility.  For each good /, let us choose bidder 
is 
and 
dle 
where 
minimal  for bidder j.  Then,  only  bidder  
is willing to ob­
tain a bundle that contains good I.  For all other bidders, the 
price of a bundle that contains  /  is higher than (or equal  to) 
his/her evaluation value. 

Furthermore,  it  is  clear  that  this  protocol  satisfies  the 

NSA  condition.  In this  pricing  scheme, 
max 
Therefore, the following formula holds. 

holds  for  all 

,  and   

Furthermore,  in  this pricing  scheme,  prices  increase  mono-
tonically  by  adding  opponents, 

for  all   

i.e., 

holds.  Therefore,  for  each  i,   

holds.  Therefore, 

the NSA condition, i.e.,   
holds. 

7  Discussions 
As far as the author is aware, a PORF protocol is an innova­
tive  characterization  of strategy-proof protocols  and the  first 
attempt to characterize false-name-proof protocols. Here, we 
discuss  several  previous  works  on  characterizing  strategy-
proof protocols. 

In  [Lehmann et  a/.,  2002;  Mu'alem and Nisan,  2002],  it 
is  shown  that  if there  exist  only  single-minded  bidders,  a 
strategy-proof protocol is monotonic and has a critical value. 
Since their motivation is to develop computationally efficient 
strategy-proof protocols  that can  achieve  semi-optimal  allo­
cations, they do not extend their results to more general cases 
such as k-minded bidders. 

In  [Roberts,  1979],  a  characterization  of  strategy-proof 
mechanisms is shown for general  social choice problems.  It 
is shown that any strategy-proof protocol can be described as 
a  variation  of the  Groves  mechanisms  [Groves,  1973].  On 
the other hand,  in the model  used in  this paper,  we  assume 
that the evaluation values of each bidder satisfy no allocative-
externality  condition.  Therefore,  the  results  described  in 
[Roberts,  1979]  cannot be applied,  i.e., a PORF protocol  is 
not necessarily to be a variation of the Groves mechanisms. 
In [Holmstrom,  1979], a characterization of strategy-proof 
mechanisms is described.  It is shown that with the assump­
tion that the preferences of each participant satisfy a condition 
called smoothly-connected,  any  strategy-proof protocol  that 
satisfies  Pareto efficiency must be an instance of the Groves 
mechanisms.  This result can be applied to the model used in 
this paper since the smoothly-connected condition still holds. 
Therefore, if we require that a protocol be Pareto efficient, it 

Figure  1:  Relations of Protocols 

Due to space limitations, we omit detailed descriptions, but 
all existing false-name-proof protocols developed so far, e.g., 
the LDS  [Yokoo et  al,  2001a], the IR  [Yokoo et al, 2001b], 
and the GAL protocol [Terada and Yokoo, 2003], can be de­
scribed as a PORF protocol that satisfies the NSA condition. 

6  New  False-name-proof Protocol 
In this section, we develop a new false-name-proof protocol 
based on the concept of the PORF protocol.  To simplify the 
protocol description, we introduce a concept called a minimal 
bundle. 
Definition 8 (minimal bundle)  Bundle  B  is  called minimal 
for  bidder  i  if  for  all 

and 

 

i holds. 

In  this  new  protocol,  the  price  of bundle  B  for  bidder  i  is 
defined as follows: 

; 

is  minimal  for bidder j. 

where 

" and 

In short, the price of bundle B is equal to the highest evalua­
tion value of a bundle, which is minimal and conflicting with 
bundle  B. 

Compared  with  the  LDS  protocol  [Yokoo  et  al.,  2001a], 
this protocol  is much  simpler and does  not require  any  pa­
rameters to be set by the auctioneer, while in the LDS proto-
col,  the  auctioneer must carefully determine the reservation 
price and the way of dividing goods into multiple bundles.  If 
all bidders are single-minded, this protocol is one example of 
greedy protocols described in  [Lehmann et  al,  2002]. 

Let us  describe how this protocol  works.  Let us  assume 
there are three goods  1,2,  and 3,  and two bidders, bidder  1 
and bidder 2, whose types are 
, respectively. The evalu­
ation value for a bundle 

is determined as follows. 

These evaluation values mean that bidder  1  is 2-minded foi 
bundles  {1,2} and {3}, while bidder 2 is 2-minded for bun-
dles  {2}  and  {3}.  These bundles are minimal bundles.  The 
prices of these bundles are given as follows. 

738 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

is likely that the pricing scheme described in Example 2 is the 
only way to make a PORF protocol Pareto efficient2. 

As  well  as  a  PORF  protocol  is  theoretically  significant, 
since  it  is  an  equivalent  class  of strategy-proof protocols,  it 
has practical importance since it can serve as a guideline for 
developing new strategy/false-name proof protocols. Design-
ing a strategy/false-name proof protocol  has been a difficult 
task.  As  shown  in  Section  6,  we  successfully  developed  a 
new false-name-proof protocol based on the idea of a PORF 
protocol.  The  simplicity  of this  newly  developed  protocol 
compared  with  the  LDS  protocol  illustrates  the  expressive 
power of a PORF protocol. Of course, we need to prove that a 
PORF protocol  satisfies  allocation-feasibility.  However,  this 
tends  to  be  much  easier than  directly  proving  a  protocol  is 
strategy/false-name proof,  since we can assume each bidder 
declares his/her true type by using a single identifier. 

As  for  the  computational  cost  of executing  a  protocol,  a 
naive  implementation  of a  PORF protocol  requires  calculat(cid:173)
ing prices  for all  bundles  of all  bidders.  However,  as  in  the 
case of the VCG, we can describe a protocol cither as a PORF 
protocol or in a traditional manner in which an allocation of 
goods  is  determined,  and  then  the  payments  are  calculated 
based on the allocation.  We can assume that the description 
of a  PORF  protocol  is not for actual  implementation  but for 
serving as a normative guideline in proving characteristics of 
a protocol. 

8  Conclusions 
In this paper, we introduced a new distinctive class of combi(cid:173)
natorial  auction protocols called PORF protocols.  Although 
a PORF protocol looks quite different from traditional proto(cid:173)
col descriptions, surprisingly,  it is a sufficient and necessary 
condition for a protocol to be strategy-proof. Furthermore, we 
showed that a PORF protocol satisfying additional conditions 
is false-name-proof;  at the same  time,  any false-name-proof 
protocol can be described as a PORF protocol that satisfies 
the additional conditions. 

A  PORF  protocol  is  not  only  theoretically  significant  but 
also  useful  in practice,  since  it can  serve as a guideline  for 
developing new strategy/false-name proof protocols. We suc(cid:173)
cessfully  developed  a  new  false-name-proof protocol  based 
on the idea of a PORF protocol.  We are currently extending 
the obtained results to combinatorial exchange. 
Acknowledgements 
The author wishes to thank Yoshikatsu Tatamitani, Kenji Ter-
ada,  Yuko Sakurai,  Atsushi  Iwasaki,  and Shigeo Matsubara 
for their helpful discussions. 

References 
[Clarke,  1971]  E.  H.  Clarke.  Multipart  pricing  of public 

goods.  Public Choice, 2:19-33,  1971. 

[deVries and Vohra, 2003]  S.  de  Vries  and  R.  V.  Vohra. 
Combinatorial  auctions:  A  survey.  INFORMS Journal on 
Computing,  15,2003. 
Since we require that the protocol also be individually rational, 

the Groves mechanisms would be reduced to the VCG. 

[Groves,  1973]  T. Groves.  Incentives in teams.  Economet-

rica, 41:617-631,  1973. 

[Holmstrom,  1979]  B.  Holmstrom.  Groves'  scheme on  re(cid:173)
stricted domains.  Econometrica, 47(5): 1137-1144,  1979. 
[Lehmann et al., 2002]  D.  Lehmann,  L.  I. O'Callaghan, and 
Y.  Shoham.  Truth  revelation  in  approximately  efficient 
combinatorial  auctions.  Journal  of the  ACM,  49(5):577-
602, 2002. 

[Mas-Colell et al., 1995]  A.  Mas-Colell,  M.  D.  Whinston, 
and  J.  R.  Green.  Microeconomic  Theory.  Oxford  Uni(cid:173)
versity Press,  1995. 

[Mu'alem and Nisan, 2002]  A.  Mu'alem  and  N.  Nisan. 
Truthful  approximation mechanisms for restricted combi(cid:173)
In  Proceedings  of the  Eighteenth  Na(cid:173)
natorial  auctions. 
tional  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (AAAI-2002), 
pages 379-384, 2002. 

[Myerson,  1981]  R.  B.  Myerson.  Optimal  auction  design. 

Mathematics of Operation Research, 6:58-73, 1981. 

[Roberts,  1979]  K.  Roberts.  The  characterization  of imple-
mentable  choice  rules.  In J.-J.  Laffont,  editor, Aggrega(cid:173)
tion and Revelation of Preferences, pages 321-350. North-
Holland Publishing Company,  1979. 

[Sakurai et al.,  1999]  Y  Sakurai,  M.  Yokoo,  and  S.  Matsu(cid:173)
bara.  A  limitation  of the  Generalized  Vickrey  Auction 
in  Electronic  Commerce:  Robustness  against  false-name 
bids. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence  (AAAI-99),  pages  86-92,  1999. 
[Terada and Yokoo, 2003]  K.  Terada and M.  Yokoo.  False-
name-proof multi-unit auction protocol utilizing greedy al(cid:173)
location based on approximate evaluation values.  In Pro(cid:173)
ceedings  of the  Second International  Conference  on  Au(cid:173)
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS-2003), 
2003. 

[Vickrey,  1961]  W.  Vickrey.  Counter speculation,  auctions, 
and competitive sealed tenders. Journal of Finance, 16:8— 
37,  1961. 

[Yokoo et  al,  2000]  M.  Yokoo,  Y.  Sakurai,  and  S.  Matsu(cid:173)
bara.  The effect of false-name declarations  in  mechanism 
design:  Towards collective decision making on the Inter(cid:173)
In  Proceedings  of the  Twentieth  International  Con(cid:173)
net. 
ference on Distributed Computing Systems  (ICDCS-2000), 
pages 146-153, 2000. 

[Yokoo et al, 2001a]  M.  Yokoo,  Y  Sakurai,  and  S.  Matsu(cid:173)
bara.  Robust combinatorial auction protocol against false-
name bids.  Artificial Intelligence,  130(2):  167-181  2001. 
[Yokoo et al, 2001b]  M.  Yokoo,  Y  Sakurai,  and  S.  Matsu(cid:173)
bara.  Robust  multi-unit  auction  protocol  against  false-
In  Proceedings  of 17th  International  Joint 
name  bids. 
Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (IJCAI-200I),  pages 
1089-1094,2001. 

[Yokoo et al, forthcoming]  M.  Yokoo,  Y  Sakurai,  and 
S. Matsubara.  The effect of false-name bids in combinato(cid:173)
rial auctions:  New fraud in internet auctions.  Games and 
Economic Behavior,  forthcoming. 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

739 

