ODISET: On-line Distributed Session Tracing using Agents * 

Salvador Mandujano (smv@itesm.mx)  Arturo Gal van (agalvan@itesm.mx) 

Center for Intelligent Systems 

Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey 

Monterrey, Mexico 

Abstract 

When  a  security  incident  occurs  it  is  sometimes 
necessary  to  identify  its  causes  for  legal  and 
cautionary  purposes. 
In  an  attempt  to  hide  the 
origin  of  her  connection,  a  malicious  user  may 
have jumped  from  a  source  host  h8  into  a  series 
of hosts  h1  €  H  = 
{h1,h2,...,  hn}  before  breaking 
into  final  target  ht.  This  connection  sequence 
describes  a  path  that  makes  it  difficult  to  find  h8 
given ht  due,  in  part,  to the  prohibitive amount of 
cooperation  and  synchronization  that  is  required 
in practice by administrators.  This paper describes 
a distributed rule-based model  that automates this 
tracing  process  on-line  with  a  0(\H\))  worst  case 
scenario.  Autonomous  agents  collaborate  on  the 
tracing and detection of the origin of an interactive 
connection using a loop unwinding technique and 
incorporating  public  key  cryptography  to  create 
ciphered channels that allow them for secure com(cid:173)
munication.  To  meet  the  challenges  of minimum 
system  workload  and  improved  robustness,  the 
prototype  features  lightweight  design  and  imple(cid:173)
mentation  as  well  as  a  dynamic  port-allocation 
scheme  to  prevent  sniffing  and  denial  of  service 
attempts.  We  describe  the  proposed  model  and 
present  the experimental  results  obtained with  the 
prototype system ODISET. 

Introduction 

1 
Unauthorized  access  to  computer  systems  is  increasing  in 
parallel  with  the  growth  of  the  Internet  (iRapalus,  2002]). 
For  purposes  of protection,  accountability  and  liability,  the 
need  for connection back-tracing  is  a  reality  in  the  areas  of 
cybernetic-law enforcement and computer security.  The au(cid:173)
thentication  structure  of our  networks  as  well  as  their  dis(cid:173)
tributed nature complicates the task of spotting the host from 

*This project was supported by the INSYS Computer Security 
Research Grant (Cdtedra INSYS de lnvestigacidn en Seguridad In-
formdtica)  of Instituto  Tecnol6gico  y  de  Estudios  Superiores  de 
Monterrey 

which a connection sequence stems.  If some sort of anoma(cid:173)
lous activity is observed from one of our users, it may be nec(cid:173)
essary to trace the origin of the session in order to identify the 
person behind it.  In most cases, this is not easy to accomplish 
[Yoda and Etoh, 2001]. 

Within the domain of a LAN, it is rather straightforward to 
perform this tracing given that system administrators usually 
have access to all the hosts within their LAN.  Unfortunately, 
not all  sessions come from the inside.  If a connection is re(cid:173)
ceived from the outside, we will have to contact the admin(cid:173)
istrator  of a  remote  host  hr  in  order to  discover the  identity 
of the  user or the next  link  of the  connection  path  or chain. 
Our  fellow  administrator  will  have  to  look  into  her  system 
to realize that, perhaps, it has been compromised as well.  It 
is  possible  that the  user we  arc looking for is  using hr  as  a 
step-stone to reach our server.  In  that case,  we will  have to 
contact some more system administrators within the country 
and/or abroad  [Cheswick and Bellovin,  1994]  [Stoll,  1987]. 
This has obvious implications time and cost-wise. 

Once a system has been compromised, the perpetrator may 
have left back-doors installed to facilitate future access to the 
system.  Using interactive sessions, she may visit the system 
again even when the software has been patched and her back-
door remains untouched. It is not necessary for the user to be 
logged on in order to be detected. Audit trail files can be used 
to do off-line tracing but this can be a tough task since audit 
logs may have been tampered with or deleted. 

In  the  case  of connections  to  web  servers  through  HTTP 
and HTTPS, for instance, the hosts that compose the connec(cid:173)
tion chain  between client and  server cannot be easily modi(cid:173)
fied. Some components of the routing system would have to 
be modified in order to force the packets to follow a particular 
path. In the case of interactive sessions, however, applications 
such  as  t e l n e t,  l o g i n,  r l o g in  and  ssh  allow  a  user 
with suitable access permissions to connect from host to host 
back and forth creating loops at will to scramble her connec(cid:173)
tion path a little.  This significantly complicates the structure 
of the  chain  and  the  amount  of effort  required  to  detect  the 
root host h8 from where she is actually starting everything up. 
In fact, the complexity of back-tracing a connection across a 
set H of n hosts maybe small for a small n and a small num(cid:173)
ber of connection hops, but it rapidly increases as n becomes 
larger due to the number of hosts that a chain may contain. 
One  of  the  challenges  of  intrusion  detection  is  to  accu-

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

749 

rately  identify  the main causes  of an  incident.  The ultimate 
goal is to catch intruders in real time and our objective is to 
help  intrusion detection  systems do  the part of session  trac(cid:173)
ing on-line. There are some intrusion detection and intrusion 
response  tools  [Yoda and  Eton,  2001]  [Asaka  et a/.,  1999] 
[Wang  et  al,  2001]  that  provide  some  sort  of off-line con(cid:173)
nection tracing that also performs data correlation with previ(cid:173)
ously recorded user activity information. 

This paper proposes an on-line approach that makes use of 
intelligent  agents  to  identify  the  origin  of a  live  session  by 
unwinding connection loops.  Instead of using historical  au(cid:173)
dit trails, this model relies on evidence captured on operating 
system tables that are continuously refreshed by the system. 
For  this  reason,  it  is  not  likely  that  these  tables  experience 
changes that go unnoticed.  The communication structure of 
the  agents  uses  RSA  public-key  cryptography  [Rivest  et al, 
1979]  [Schneier,  2001]  to  implement  an  encryption  model 
that protects all communications between agents.  One of the 
main  issues  of the  multi-agent approach  to  automatic  secu(cid:173)
rity monitoring is the overhead imposed by this sort of tools 
[Weiss,  1999] [Spafford and Zamboni, 2000].  Our prototype 
system ODISET was built from a lightweight design that does 
not represent a performance threat,  making it  ideal  for wide 
deployment through an  open  source  operating  system.  We 
present  the  design  ideas  behind the  model,  the  tracing  and 
communication  techniques,  the  loop-unwinding method,  as 
well  as  some  experimental results  of the  first  release  of the 
prototype. 

The  rest of this paper is  organized as  follows:  Section  2 
explains the problem of connection back-tracing.  Section  3 
discusses  relevant  related  work  in  the  area.  Section  4  is  a 
description of our solution approach and the implementation 
issues of the prototype.  Section 5  includes experimental re(cid:173)
sults and findings. Conclusions and future work are in section 
6 right before the listing of bibliography and references. 

2  The Problem of Connection Back-tracing 
Given  a  set of hosts H  =  {h1,  h2,...,  hn),  with 
a user 
could create a connection chain of m hops as follows:  from 
host hi  into 
 
and so on, until  finally  connecting to target host  ' 
The 
problem of connection back-tracing is:  given the set  H,  the 
target host 
the 
hosts that compose the connection chain and identify its root 
host  

and username  connected to 

from 

from 

into 

into 

find 

For a small 

this problem is straightforward. Just a 
few hosts need to be analyzed in order to identify the source 
of a connection sequence. However, as n becomes larger (e.g. 
n 
2),  the  complexity  of the  problem  increases  since  a 
larger number of hosts in H multiplies the possibilities of cre(cid:173)
ating a more confusing connection path. 

System  administrators have  limited access  to information 
on who is connecting to one of their servers.  On a LAN, ad(cid:173)
ministrators typically have login access to all servers, which 
makes  the  tracing process  easier;  however,  for connections 
coming from the outside of the LAN, they will be unable to 
freely  access  all  other servers  for scrutiny.  The visibility  of 
this  type  of connections  reduces  to  one  link  of the  connec-

tion chain. That is, an administrator can only see the terminal 
number  or  the  IP  address/host-name  of the  immediate  host 
from where the users are  logging on.  She  is unable to tell, 
however,  whether  that  host  is  in  fact  hi  (the  machine  from 
where the user is actually typing in  commands).  In order to 
find out whether that is the root host or not, she will  have to 
contact the administrator of the remote system who,  in  turn, 
will have to perform a similar checking. 

This job is cumbersome and requires time, communication, 
and trust from the parties involved.  For the case of a connec(cid:173)
tion that has been closed already, audit information will have 
to be examined in order to find the nodes of the chain that lead 
to  the  origin  of the  connection.  This  off-line  sort of tracing 
has an important flaw: it counts on the existence and integrity 
of audit log files. For clean systems this would not be a prob(cid:173)
lem but, for systems that have been compromised, and, in the 
case of a connection chain created to perpetrate an attack this 
could probably be the case, these files could have been tam(cid:173)
pered with during a previous break-in f Yoda and Etoh, 2001 ]. 
On the other hand, if a connection is still alive, i.e.  there is a 
flow  of packets between source and destination, information 
contained on system tables and network packets can be used 
to trace the user while she is on-line.  That is, precisely, our 
approach. 

3  Related Work 
There  are  some  projects  that  touch  on  the  problem  of con(cid:173)
nection  route tracing.  One  of them  is  the  method proposed 
in  [Yoda and Etoh,  2001].  This  model  implements network 
traffic monitors that perform session tracing once a server has 
been compromised.  A system that computes deviations from 
the traffic observed at two different hosts helps determine if 
these hosts  were used in  the  same connection chain.  Since 
checking network traffic at a node involves huge amounts of 
data, multiple packet monitors permanently  filter  and record 
specific  system  activity to  build  their own  logs.  These files 
are analyzed by a data correlator to identify the hosts of a con(cid:173)
nection chain.  It is important to notice that this system deals 
with the problem of deleted logs by creating its own records. 
These records, however, may be the target of the same type 
of attack. 

IDA  (Intrusion  Detection  Agent  system) 

[Asaka  et  al, 
1999]  is  another  system  that  detects  the  origin  of an  infor(cid:173)
mation exchange related to an incident.  It is primarily an in(cid:173)
trusion detection system that employs mobile agents to detect 
local attacks. From a main host, investigation agents are sent 
over  to  the  requester  that  needs  an  integrity  check.  These 
agents  use  the  MLSI  (Marks  Left  by  a  Suspected Intruder) 
strategy  to  reduce the amount of data needed to  flag  system 
activity as anomalous.  In order to collect further information 
on a break-in, IDA does passive route tracing using audit log 
data.  The structure of the tracing method is not specified by 
the  authors  but  its  agents  broadcast  connection  evidence  to 
their peers as a way of identifying possible hosts involved in 
the attack. 

The  TBAIR  system  (Tracing-based  Active  Intrusion  Re(cid:173)
sponse) [Wang et aL, 2001] is a network-based intrusion de(cid:173)
tection  tool  that,  unlike  most  traditionally-passive  intrusion 

750 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

detection systems, adds active response to security events us(cid:173)
ing a technique called Based on Sleepy Watermark Tracing. 
TBA1R  tries  to  attack  the  root  of the  vulnerability  exploit(cid:173)
ing  problem  by  locating  the  originators  of  the  incident  to 
hold them  accountable for their intrusions  and their method 
is based on the analysis of evidence collected from the net(cid:173)
work. 

Thumbprinting  [Staniford-Chen and Heberlein,  1995]  is a 
technique that places several processes across the network in 
order to  capture  activity  signatures  or  "thumbprints".  This 
method does not require to have processes on  all  hosts and, 
like in the case of [Yoda and Etoh, 2001], it replicates packet 
information  for future review.  This  system  is  based  on  the 
fact that the packet content of a session passing though a set 
of hosts is invariant and can be compared in order to identify a 
host in the chain. This system is capable of detecting the root 
of a  connection  but  it  is  not  designed  to  identify  the  exact 
hosts that are part of the chain. 

The approach that we present here through the implemen(cid:173)
tation  of  the  OD1SET  system  differs  from  these  previous 
projects  in  the  following manner.  It  performs on-line rather 
than off-line tracing (i.e., it does not use audit logs). The sys(cid:173)
tem  does  not  incorporate agent  mobility.  Instead,  it  uses  a 
distributed model using agents that communicate over secure 
channels for sharing information.  Unlike some other models, 
ODISET  is  able  to  not  only  identify  the  origin  of the  con(cid:173)
nection but also all  the hosts that are part of the connection 
chain. 

that  perfectly  fits  into  a  network  environment  [Huhns  and 
Singh,  1998]  in  order to  speed  up  connection  back-tracing 
using autonomous agents.  This approach eliminates the need 
for centralized data collection and analysis, a method that is 
still in use and that represents a design deficiency by putting 
the availability of a system  in  risk  (monolithic systems typi(cid:173)
cally suffer from having a single-point-of-attack). 

In  order  to  provide  the  agents  with  survivability  features 
that make them more resistant to  attack,  each agent owns a 
digital  certificate  to  create  private  communication  channels 
when interacting with its peers.  With the intention of reduc(cid:173)
ing the probability of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks targeted 
toward  the  agents,  a  port-allocation  scheme  is  used.  This 
scheme  dynamically  changes  the  socket  port  numbers  used 
by the agents in order to avoid being monitored or receiving 
unfinished-protocol requests. 

This  system  features  rule-based  agent  behavior  through 
which individual  agents are capable of detecting connection 
loops  in  a  chain.  The  approach  deals  with  the  problem  of 
deleted or damaged audit information by not using historical 
audit data.  Agents  look up  information on dynamic  session 
tables in order to extract data relevant to the tracing process. 
The process table, for instance, is not easily modifiable as au(cid:173)
dit logs are.  The system might go down due to inconsistency 
if changes  are  made  to  this  type  of  file,  which  would  make 
the change evident. 
4.1  Proposed  Model 

Tracing method and security 
The system is composed of a number of tracing agents (Fig(cid:173)
ure  1) that communicate with each other sharing information 
on user connections.  There is an agent running at each host 
hi and the ideal situation is having an agent running on every 
host of the network.  Every agent has client and server capa(cid:173)
bilities that enable it to request information from other agents 
and to supply information to them.  An agent is not useful by 
itself, it needs to collect information from the others in order 
to identify the links of a connection chain.  The agent at the 
target host will eventually collect information from a number 
of its  peers  and  will  inform to  the  local  administrator about 
the origin of the connection. 

The perceptions of a tracing agent are  received from  two 
main sources:  1) the state of the system regarding user ses(cid:173)
sions and connections, and 2) messages from other agents re(cid:173)
questing or providing information. 

The environment an  agent inhabits is highly dynamic and 
provides the communication channel necessary for an agent 
to stay  in  touch with  its peers over the network.  This envi(cid:173)
ronment can  also represent a  threat  to  the  tracing  system  if 
malicious users gain access to it. 

As  a  result  of the  changes  perceived  by  an  agent,  it  can 
perform a number of different actions:  a) send  messages  to 
an  agent,  b)  request  messages  from  an  agent,  c)  broadcast 
messages  to all  agents,  d)  generate encryption keys,  e)  en(cid:173)
crypt messages,  f)  decrypt messages,  g) identify connection 
loops,  h) retrieve system  status information, and h) save  its 
knowledge to a safe location. 

The knowledge of an agent is stored on a repository known 

Figure  1:  Basic  composition  of an  ODISET  tracing  agent: 
public and private encryption keys, client functionality, server 
functionality,  rule  base,  and  knowledge  base  (connection 
chain tree + user data). 

4  Solution Approach using Agents 
"We  require  systems  that  decide  for  themselves  what  they 
need  to do  in  order to  satisfy  their design  objectives.  Such 
computer systems are known as agents" [Weiss,  1999].  The 
use  of  agents  for  performing  system  assurance  activities 
[Spafford and Zamboni, 2000] that typically require the skills 
of  a  human  (e.g. 
inference,  learning  and  decision  mak(cid:173)
ing)  makes  possible  the  development of automatic  or  semi-
automatic tools that aid system administrators in their task of 
securing a system. 

The distributed nature of agents  allows  for more efficient, 
parallel  data processing.  We  take  advantage of this  feature 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

751 

as knowledge base (KB). This KB includes tracing host infor(cid:173)
mation and user data.  A tree structure stores the information 
on the hosts that are part of a connection chain.  Information 
regarding user names, login times and dates is stored on a sep(cid:173)
arate structure.  These two elements represent all the knowl-
edge an agent has about the state of its environment.  Should 
this knowledge be lost, the agent would lose track of previous 
events and would have to be updated by its peers. 

The actions an agent takes depend on the information of the 
state of the system and its perceptions  [Russell  and Norvig, 
1995]. Embodied into the agent are a set of rules that enable 
the agent to work autonomously deciding what to do.  As new 
knowledge is fed into the KB  more rules from the rule base 
need to be analyzed before making any conclusion and pro(cid:173)
ceeding  (the  rule  base  is  composed  of 23  rules).  The  type 
of perceptions and actions do not change but the state of the 
environment does  evolve  hereby  modifying  the  behavior of 
agents. The type of rules that make up the rule base are of the 
form: 
R 1: 

((HOW-CONNECTED(User)^Console)  AND 

IF 
( W H A T - D O I N G ( U s e r ) = S s h - t o ( T a r g e t ) )) 

TRACTNG-DONEO; 
R 2: 

(  (MESSAGE-TYPE  (Message) t r a c i n g-

(VALID-PUBLIC-KEY(P-

TF 
r e q u e s t)  AND 
k e y ) = F a l s e )) 

DENY-CONNECTIONO  AND  BROADCAST-

TREE ()  AND  ALERT() ; 

In order to protect their information exchanges, all  agents 
have an RSA key-pair that is used to negotiate symmetric ses(cid:173)
sion  keys  before  encrypting  their  messages.  Encryption  at 
this  level guarantees that the information will  not  be visible 
at  any  point  before  reaching  the  top  of the  IP  stack  of  the 
recipient party.  This will deter sniffing attacks that arc other(cid:173)
wise possible on plain text agent communications [Jansen et 
al., 2000]. 

The tracing process starts when a connection needs to be 
monitored.  Agents  at target host ht  receives local informa(cid:173)
tion  from the system and checks for remote connections.  If 
there is a connection from a remote machine hr, A  will con-
tact  agent B  at  host  hr  in  order to  research  the  connection. 
For this purpose, a private channel will be opened using the 
asymmetric encryption keys of the agents.  A  symmetric ses-
sion  key  will  be  agreed  upon  and  all  messages  will  be en(cid:173)
crypted  with  it  for that exchange.  The  same  procedure will 
be followed if there are relevant connections from outside of 
the host of hr coming into the server.  A set of secure channels 
will  be setup by the agents in order to share the information 
they have regarding connections and user activity. One hop at 
a time, the links composing a connection chain will be found. 
The tracing information obtained by an agent is shared with 
the rest of the agents through broadcast communication (i.e., 
an agent sends a message to all existing agents). This guaran(cid:173)
tees that the KB's of the agents are consistent with the state of 
the environment and that, in the event of a security incident, 
the knowledge acquired by an agent will not be lost as it has 
been replicated and enriched by other agents. 

Figure 2:  Loop unwinding.  If a user connects  from host h8 
into host ht doing a loop through hops  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 as 
shown above, agent A at ht  will start  the tracing process and 
will be able to identify the loop to reduce tracing time in the 
future. 

If we have a set H of n hosts, and a user creates a connec(cid:173)
tion  chain  C of m  hops, the  system will  behave well  with a 
O(n) worst case scenario.  Suppose  m  n.  If the number q 
(0 
q  m) of connections that go from host hx  into host hy 
- or vice versa -  form a  loop,  the  arrangement of the  agents 
will  find at most two relevant connections between the hosts 
hereby unwinding the  loop.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  an 
agent  is  capable  of identifying  repeated connections toward 
itself by storing information on what users are connected. For 
the case of loops passing through k hosts, the chain will be re(cid:173)
duced to at most 2k hops.  This makes a worst case scenario 
of O(n) with n  =   

Several methods exist (see [Wolf and Lam, 2000] for a ref(cid:173)
erence) for loop unwinding, mostly in the compilers and dis(cid:173)
crete  mathematics  areas.  In  our model,  we  utilize  a  simple 
technique  based  on  observed  activity.  An  agent  first  stores 
user name and host-name information on its KB. When a trac(cid:173)
ing process is started, an agent will engage in communication 
with  several  neighbor agents  in order to collect data  that al(cid:173)
low them  to  draw  conclusions.  Each time  agent A  receives 
new information, it checks its KB for loops.  This is done as 
follows (see Figure 2).  All tracing requests have an ID num(cid:173)
ber w.  Agent A initiates a tracing round.  If while waiting for 
news on  a particular w  the agent is being  asked by a coop(cid:173)
erating agent B for information to complete tracing round w 
as well, the agent knows it is part of a loop since it is receiv(cid:173)
ing information on a tracing round that it started (all agents, 
including initiators  have  this  property).  The  trace  is  stored 
on  its  KB  tree  T and,  if the user being traced repeats a loop 
that passes through the same host where agent A  is located, 
this  agent will  reduce the tracing time by omitting a further 
requests to follow a loop. 

Dynamic  port-allocation  protocol 
Network  service daemons usually  work on  a particular port 
listening for requests. Port-scan attacks try to reveal what are 
the services listening on the ports of a host. Once this is done, 
they look for vulnerabilities present on one of those services 
and, if they find one, they are in a position to exploit such a 

752 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

flaw on the port they have previously identified.  DoS attacks 
are started with port-scans to send a large number of request 
for service to a vulnerable port so that, at the end, there are so 
many requests pending to be  answered - usually  incomplete 
requests at protocol level - that the machine slows down and 
needs to be restarted.  Additionally, if the service on that port 
does not support encryption, the traffic going through it may 
be observed by a network sniffer. 

All  network  services  using  sockets  on  a  port  may  suffer 
from  this  sort of attacks.  We  propose  a  model  to  minimize 
the  likelihood of being a target.  As we mentioned, all  com(cid:173)
munications between agents is encrypted, so sniffing of plain 
text is impossible in practice.  In order to deter attacks at the 
service port, we propose a technique that can be used in real 
life with radio equipment: channel switching (this is currently 
being implemented on the prototype). Initially, all agents lis(cid:173)
ten  on  a well-know port p.  The requests  for service on  that 
port do not allocate significant system resources according to 
the  implementation.  This basic  port is  used just to agree on 
the  actual  communication  port q  for the exchange (q 
p). 
For  this,  the  receiver  proposes  a  valid  port  number  that  is 
sent  to  the  other party  over a  secure channel.  They  imme(cid:173)
diately  switch  to that port for exchanging information.  This 
port  switching  is  repeated during  the  session  within  a fixed 
short period of time.  In order to defeat this protection mecha(cid:173)
nism, a port scan will have to be run again and, by the time it 
succeeds, the communication may have moved to a different 
port.  Frequency of switching and encryption this mechanism 
possible. 

Implementation  of the  Model 

4.2 
As a proof of concept, the model was implemented on a pro(cid:173)
totype system named  ODISET  (On-line Distributed  SEssion 
Tracing).  Every agent is a stand-alone process implemented 
with  sockets  for providing client and server functionality.  It 
can  request  information  from  others  and  it  can  share  infor(cid:173)
mation  as  well.  A  1024-bit  RSA  key-pair  {Kp ub,Kpriv} 
is generated before the agent is launched.  Once the agent is 
started  up,  it  is  ready to collaborate  in  the  tracing of a ses(cid:173)
sion. When contacting a peer agent, it exchanges public keys 
and verifies the signature on the received key.  The certifica(cid:173)
tion  must come  from the ODISET master key  whose public-
key is accessible to all agents.  In order to speed up message 
encryption, and given that encryption with public-key meth(cid:173)
ods is much slower than the one using private-key algorithms 
[Schneier, 2001 ], the agent that is to send a message does the 
following:  1) it generates a session key  KDES  for symmetric 
encryption,  2)  it  then  encrypts  the  message M  using  KDES* 
3)  it  encrypts  KDES  using  the  public  key  of  the  recipient, 
and, finally, 4) it sends the encrypted session key and the en(cid:173)
crypted message to their destination.  The implementation of 
the RSA and DES  algorithms is based on version 2.0 of the 
RSAREF™cryptographic library by RSA Laboratories. 

The  first  release  of the  ODISET prototype was  developed 
on  a RedHat  Linux  8.0  box.  Although agent templates can 
be easily obtained from multiple agent-generator systems and 
for different compilers and interpreters, they typically put un(cid:173)
necessary  functionality  into  the  agent  that  produces  heavy 
agents.  For this reason,  and  with  the intention of providing 

the best performance possible, the implementation was made 
in C by minimizing the number of libraries to include.  Con(cid:173)
sidering that programs and data  files  may be damaged after 
a  security  incident  and  that  a  security  tool  can  not  rely  on 
them,  our agents do not use the output of programs such  as 
w,  who  and ps  to read  system  tables like  utmp  and  wtmp. 
They  incorporate this  functionality into  its own body, which 
gives  them extended  independence.  The  size  of each  agent 
is  around  20  Kbytes  to  which  we  add  two  encryption  keys 
that need to be uploaded at certain point (around 4 additional 
Kbytes) as well as the knowledge and rule bases that are never 
uploaded entirely into memory. 

The knowledge base of each agent includes a tree structure 
T where all connection chains are stored. Whenever a host has 
received all the information regarding a particular session, it 
stores the connection chain c  =  [hi 
hri]  into 
T and sends it to all available agents.  Every agent reads c and 
finds the hosts in c that match its own tree. It then creates new 
branches to keep its KB up-to-date. The rule base is encoded 
along with the body of the agent.  Being an static structure, it 
is not necessary to keep it as a separate entity. 

h2 

... 

{2,4,8,16,32}  using  n  hosts  where  n 

5  Experimental  Results 
In order to evaluate the efficiency of the method, multiple ex(cid:173)
periments  were  prepared.  After  some  implementation  cor(cid:173)
rections,  all  of  them  were  successful  after  the  unwinding 
technique was  incorporated.  The  testing  facility  is  a set  of 
seven Linux machines running kernels 2.1 and above on Red-
hat  7.2,  RedHat 7.3,  RedHat  8.0 and  Mandrake  8.0 operat(cid:173)
ing  system  installations.  The  general  structure  of  the  ex(cid:173)
periments  consists  of  creating  connection  chains  of  length 
m 
{3,5, 7}. 
This  maximum  number of machines  was  selected  since  our 
experience tells  it is highly improbable that,  for session per(cid:173)
formance purposes,  an  attacker uses  much  more  step-stone 
hosts.  All  cases  where  there  is  no  loop  in  the  chain,  that 
is,  where  m  =  n  are  easily  resolved  so  we  prepared  con(cid:173)
nections that include  a  series  of loops  along  the chain.  For 
instance, in the three-server setup, the connection goes in cir(cid:173)
cles from host hi  into h2< from host h2 into host h3, from host 
h3  back into host h3 and so on for a total number of m hops. 
The experiments show that the algorithm effectively unwinds 
the loops.  When an agent finds the same loop repeated sev(cid:173)
eral times,  it will  not try to solve it over and over again.  Its 
KB contains user and connection information that allows it to 
conclude that a user is creating a loop. 

Part  of the contribution  of this  method  is  the  fact  that  by 
using loop unwinding, the performance of the algorithm has 
an upper threshold that is,  at most,  linear on the number of 
hosts n  through which the user connects.  A  set of n  agents 
will  be  in  charge  of  tracing  the  connection  and  even  for  a 
very long chain,  an  agent  located on each hosts guarantees 
that loops will not delay the tracing process in any way. 

Table 1 includes tracing numbers with and without encryp(cid:173)
tion.  Both  columns  indicate  that  the  growth  of the  tracing 
time is below linear time with respect to the number of hops 
m (this makes us think this model should escalate well to large 
networks). The time difference from tracing with and without 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

753 

Table 1: Tracing time with and without encryption (RSA key 
exchange + DES chaining block ciphering) with seven hosts 
(/i=7); m corresponds to the number of connection hops. 

encryption is significant.  This only reminds us of the perfor(cid:173)
mance cost of using cryptographic algorithms to  protect our 
data. It is not likely that a connection chain extends over more 
than thirty hosts, for instance. It follows that, even with 1024-
bit keys, the use of encrypted communication is the way to go 
regarding agent communication for this problem. 

The  strengths  of this  model  are  its  unwinding  algorithm, 
the possibility of performing on-line tracing and the structure 
of an autonomous lightweight agent.  The proposed dynamic 
port-allocation  method  can  effectively  deter communication 
sniffing  and  promises  to  be  effective  for  the  case  of agent-
based  applications  as  well.  A  disadvantage  of the  system 
is  that  it  works  exclusively  with  alive  connections. 
If,  for 
one reason,  the user disconnects  the  session  from our host, 
the agents will go blind and will not be able to trace the in(cid:173)
truder.  The model, however, can be easily extended toward 
off-line tracing, but there are already other systems,  like the 
ones highlighted in Section 3, that cover that case.  Another 
improvement area is the fact that an agent will see only users 
that are connected to a host through an interactive session us(cid:173)
ing commands that update system  tables.  If an  intruder ex(cid:173)
ploits a vulnerability and gets to spawn a shell session at the 
host  without  having  to  run  a  remote  connection  command, 
she will not be seen.  That is because these connection com(cid:173)
mands like  r l o g in and  ssh  write system activity informa(cid:173)
tion to system tables.  If none of this programs is used by an 
intruder, the host will not record her presence and she will be 
able to go unnoticed. 

6  Conclusions and Future Work 
This model proves the feasibility of performing on-line con(cid:173)
nection back-tracing using lightweight autonomous agents in 
a  distributed  fashion. 
It  also  proposes  two  security  mech-
anisms  that  can  be  implemented  on  other  software  agents 
to  make  their  communication  structure  more  robust  (these 
mechanisms are random port-switching and encrypted agent 
communication  using  certificates).  We  conclude  that  the 
adoption of a tracing  system  like  this by  multiple operating 
systems through a sort of agent sand box per host would in(cid:173)
deed contribute to solve security incidents more rapidly. 

Future  work  includes  a)  the  integration  of  the  ODISET 
tracing  tool  into an  agent-based intrusion detection  system, 
b) the development of survivability methods for agents using 
replication,  mobility  and  zero-loss  mechanisms,  and  c)  the 
extension of the tracing space to include dial-up connections. 

References 
[Asaka et al,  1999]  M.  Asaka,  M.  Tsuchiya,  T.  Onabuta, 
S. Okasawa, and S. Goto. Local attack detection and intru(cid:173)
sion route tracing. IE1CE Trans. Commun. New Paradigms 
in Network Management, E82-B(l 1), November 1999. 

iCheswick and Bellovin,  1994]  W.R.  Cheswick  and  S.M. 
Bellovin.  Firewalls  and Internet  Security:  Repelling  the 
Wily Hacker.  Addison Wesley,  1994. 

[Huhns and Singh, 1998]  M.N.  Huhns  and  M.P.  Singh. 
Agents and multiagent systems: Themes, approaches, and 
challenges.  Readings  in  Agents,  pages  1-23,  Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA  1998. 

[Jansen etal, 2000]  W. Jansen, P. Mell, T. Karygiannis, and 
D.  Marks.  Mobile  agents  in  intrusion  detection  and  re(cid:173)
sponse. June 2000. 

[Rapalus, 2002]  P. Rapalus. Computer security survey 2002. 
Technical Report 1, Computer Security Institute, CSI, and 
the Federal Business of Investigations, FBI, April 2002. 
[Rivest et al,  1979]  R.L. Rivest, A. Shjamir, and L.M. Adle-
man.  On digital signatures and public key cryptosystems. 
MIT  Laboratory  for  Computer  Science,  (MIT/LCS/TR-
212, technical report), January 1979. 

[Russell and Norvig, 1995]  P.  Russell  and E.  Norvig.  Arti(cid:173)
ficial  Intelligence:  A  Modern  Approach.  Prentice  Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey,  1995. 

LSchneier, 2001]  B. Schneier.  Managed security monitoring: 
Network security for the 21st century.  Computer Security 
Journal, 77.2,2001. 

[Spafford and Zamboni, 2000]  E.  H.  Spafford  and D.  Zam-
boni.  Intrusion detection using autonomous agents.  Com(cid:173)
puter Networks,  34:547-570,2000. 

[Staniford-Chen and Heberlein,  1995]  S. 

Staniford-Chen 
and L.T. Heberlein.  Holding intruders accountable on the 
internet.  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 1995. 
[Stoll, 1987]  C. Stoll.  The Cukoo's Egg.  Double Day,  1987. 
iWang era/., 2001]  X.  Wang,  D.  Reeves,  and  S.  Wu. 
Tracing-based  intrusion  response.  Journal of Information 
Warfare, 1(1), September 2001. 

[Weiss,  1999]  G.  Weiss.  Multiagent  Systems:  A  modern 
Introduction  to  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence.  MIT 
Press, 1999. 

[Wolf and Lam, 2000]  M.E.  Wolf  and  M.S.  Lam.  A  loop 
transformation theory and an algorithm to maximize par(cid:173)
allelism, volume 2, pages 452-471, October 2000. 

[Yoda and Etoh, 2001 ]  K. Yoda and H. Etoh.  Finding a con(cid:173)
nection chain for tracing intruders.  6th European Sympo(cid:173)
sium on Research in Computer Security (ESORICS 2000), 
pp. 191-205, October 2001. 

754 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

