Local-Effect Games 

Kevin Leyton-Brown  and  Moshe Tennenholtz 

kevinlb@stanford.edu; Computer Science Department, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305, USA 

moshet@ie.technion.ac.il; Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel 

Abstract 

We  present  a  new  class  of  games,  local-effect 
games (LEGs),  which exploit structure in a differ(cid:173)
ent  way  from  other compact  game  representations 
studied in AI. We show both theoretically and em(cid:173)
pirically  that  these  games  often  (but  not  always) 
have pure-strategy Nash equilibria.  Finding a po(cid:173)
tential function is a good technique for finding such 
equilibria.  We  give  a  complete  characterization 
of which  LEGs  have  potential  functions  and  pro(cid:173)
vide  the  functions  in  each  case;  we  also  show  a 
general case where pure-strategy equilibria exist in 
the absence of potential  functions.  In experiments, 
we show that myopic best-response dynamics con(cid:173)
verge quickly  to  pure  strategy  equilibria  in  games 
not covered by our positive theoretical results. 

Introduction 

1 
Games  have long  been  studied  in AI as a model  of compet(cid:173)
itive multiagent interactions.  In particular, many  researchers 
in AI have been interested in finding Nash equilibria (c.f.  [5; 
2]; for an introduction to games and equilibrium concepts, see 
e.g.  [3]).  Recently, there has been a lot of work on compact 
representations  of games  with  large  numbers of players,  and 
games for which the computation of equilibria is tractable [8; 
15;  6;  7;  14;  9].  Much  work  in  this  vein  has  been  based 
on  the  exploitation  of  one  of  two  kinds  of  locality.  First, 
some  approaches  exploit  unconditional  independencies  be(cid:173)
tween players'  abilities to affect each other's payoffs  [8;  15; 
6;  1].  Second,  some  approaches  exploit  symmetry  in  util(cid:173)
ity  functions along  with context-specific  independencies  be(cid:173)
tween players' effects on each other; more precisely, games in 
which players' abilities to affect each other depend on the ac(cid:173)
tions they choose.  Here we study games in this second class, 
because we believe that this sort of context-specific indepen(cid:173)
dence is more common in real-world games. 

Although  compact  representation  has  not  been  a primary 
motivation for economists,  some work from economics does 
fall  into  the  framework  defined  above.  Most  influentially, 
Rosenthal  defined  congestion  games  [13]. 
In  these  games 
each  agent  i  selects  a subset  Si  from an  available  set  of re(cid:173)
sources  R;  where  nr  is  the  number  of  agents  who  choose 
and  Fr  are  arbitrary  functions  for  each  r, 
resource 
agent i pays: 

(1) 

Observe  that agent payoffs exhibit no  unconditional  inde(cid:173)
pendencies:  all  agents  are  given  the  same  action  choices, 
and  so  all  agents  can  affect  each  other's  payoffs.  On  the 
other  hand,  context-specific  independence  does  exist  when 
two agents choose non-intersecting resource subsets.  Rosen(cid:173)
thal's main  result in  [13]  was  that congestion  games always 
have pure-strategy Nash equilibria (PSNE). This is important 
because, although all games have mixed-strategy Nash equi(cid:173)
libria  [11],  there are few known classes of interesting games 
with pure strategy equilibria.  At the same time, pure strategy 
equilibria are attractive:  they  can  be  more  likely  to  arise  in 
play as they are more intuitive than mixed-strategy equilibria 
for many players; they can be easier for agents to coordinate 
to;  as there are a  finite  number of pure strategy profiles in a 
given game, they can be easier to compute than mixed strat(cid:173)
egy equilibria. 

Rosenthal's work was extended by Monderer and  Shapley 
[10], who showed that the class of congestion games is equiv(cid:173)
alent to the class of games with potential functions.  Potential 
functions map agents' joint actions to a real number, with the 
property  that  if X  and  Y  are  strategy  profiles  differing  only 
in  the  action  choice  of one  agent 
is equal 
to the difference in  i's payoff from selecting the two actions. 
This  result  is  useful  because  it  means  that  the  construction 
of a potential function is sufficient for showing the existence 
of a pure-strategy  equilibrium.  Potential  functions  can  also 
be used to compute equilibria:  the set of pure-strategy Nash 
equilibria is equivalent to the set of strategy profiles that max(cid:173)
imize  P. 

Recent  work  in  computer  science  and  AI  has  explored 
classes  of  games  inspired  by  and  extending  congestion 
games.  For  example,  Kearns  et  al.  examined  games  with 
bounded effects  [7],  and  Roughgarden  studied  a nonatomic 
variant [14].  In this paper we propose a new class, which we 
call local-effect games. 
2  Local-Effect Games 
In congestion games, whenever two agents affect each other's 
payoff,  they  each  do  so  by  the  same  amount.  Local-effect 
games (LEGs) model situations where agents' effects on each 
other are potentially asymmetric.  Generally, action A locally 
affects  action  B  if the  utility  of agents  taking  action  B  de(cid:173)
pends on some function FA,B  of the number of agents taking 
action  A,  but  the  utility  of agents  taking  action  A  depends 
on  a different  function  FB,A  of the  number of agents  taking 
action  B. 

There are many natural settings which are modeled by such 
locally-effecting actions.  One problem domain that has been 

772 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

studied  in  Economics  for  a  three  quarters  of  a  century  is 
the  location  problem  [4].  These  problems  model  situations 
where  agents  must  choose  a  location  to  operate  their  busi(cid:173)
ness  in  the  presence  of  other  competing  agents,  and  each 
agent's  profit depends  on  how  far she  is  from  her competi(cid:173)
tors.  The  canonical  example  concerns  ice  cream  vendors 
who must choose a spot on the beach to set up a kiosk, with 
agents'  utility depending on how many other ice cream sell(cid:173)
ers  have  located  themselves  in  the  same  or  adjacent  areas. 
Work from Economics on this problem has usually dealt with 
one-dimensional continuous spaces and has not modeled lo(cid:173)
cal effects explicitly; also, game theoretic analyses have typ(cid:173)
ically considered only a small (e.g.  2 or 3) number of agents 
(c.f.  [12]).  It  is  easy  to think  of many  variants  on the  loca(cid:173)
tion problem:  ice cream sellers arranging themselves around 
a  lake  (ring  structure);  vendors  opening  coffee  houses  in  a 
city  (grid  structure);  pairs  at  a cocktail  party  trying  to  pick 
a quiet room,  with noise proportional  to the number of peo(cid:173)
ple in the room, and noise also emanating from nearby rooms 
(arbitrary  structure). 

Another natural domain modeled by LEGs is a role forma(cid:173)
tion game, where agents can take on one of a set of partially-
substitutable  roles.  Agents  are  rewarded  according  to  the 
amount  of work they  do,  so their payoff is reduced  as other 
agents adopt the same or similar roles. 

Formally,  let 

be a local-effect game for re-
agents.  A is the set of actions available to each player in the 
game.  Let D denote the distribution of players across actions, 
and D(a) denote the number of players who chose action a 
A.  For  every  pair  of  actions 
is the cost function expressing the cost due to the local effect 
from action  a to action  a'\  and depending  on  the number of 
agents having chosen  action a.  From  this  we can build  the 
cost function of an agent a who chose action i 

A: 

We  assume  that  in  all  local-effect  games  F  is  strictly 
monotonic:  that 
either  increases 
strictly monotonically with x or is always 0.  Furthermore we 
assume  

It is useful to think of a directed graph representing the ac(cid:173)
tions and their local effects. We create a node for every action, 
and draw an edge from node i to node 
is 
false. We will sometimes denote functions of the form 
as node functions, and functions of the form 
as 
edge functions. Let neigh(i) denote the set of nodes to which 
there are directed edges originating at node i. 

We make one assumption about this graph's connectivity: 

That is, each pair of nodes in the graph are either both or 
neither neighbors of each other, though they might influence 
each other according to different local-effect functions. 
Definition  1  A  local-effect  game  is  a  bidirectional  local-
effect  game 

(B-LEG)  when 

 

For B-LEGs local-effect functions between pairs of actions 
are always the same in both directions; note however that for 
a given  distribution  of agents  the magnitude  of the  local  ef(cid:173)
fects between a pair of actions may be different.  The graph(cid:173)
ical  representation  of actions  and  local  effects  in B-LEGs  is 
undirected. 
Definition 2  A  local-effect  game  is  a  uniform  local-effect 
game  (U-LEG) when 
neigh  

neigh 

That is,  if action  A  has any effect on  nodes  B and C then 
the same function governs its effect on both. We define nota(cid:173)
tion for the uniform effect from node   

3  Theoretical  Results 
3.1  Nonexistence of Pure Strategy  Equilibria 
Rosenthal  was  able  to  show  that  congestion  games  always 
have  a PSNE.  For local-effect  games,  we can  find  counter-
examples  where  exhaustive  enumeration  of strategies shows 
the absence of any PSNE, demonstrating that such a sweep(cid:173)
ing  general  result  is  impossible.  One  example  (found  ex(cid:173)
perimentally,  and confirmed by exhaustive  search) is the B-

3.2  Pure Strategy Equilibria:  Potential Functions 
In this section we show that two interesting classes of local-
effect games have potential  functions,  meaning that they al(cid:173)
ways have pure-strategy Nash equilibria.  Although these re(cid:173)
sults  show  regions  of overlap  between  the  class  of conges(cid:173)
tion games and the class of local-effect games, the potential 
functions  themselves  are  interesting  as  their construction  is 
nontrivial.  Also, these results are useful because they make 
it possible for the games to be described in the more intuitive 
local-effect game framework. 
Theorem 1  Bidirectional local-effect games have pure strat(cid:173)
egy Nash equilibria  if   
Sketch  of Proof. 
potential function: 

Here  we  prove  the  result  by  giving  a 

The  first  term  is  the  standard  congestion  game  potential 
function.  A game with only functions of the form 
is a 
congestion game, and so must have the congestion game po(cid:173)
tential function. The relationship between each . 
func(cid:173)
tion  and the  agent's  cost  function  is  additive,  and  potential 
functions  are  only  used  for  taking  differences.  Thus  if we 
can  find  a  potential  function  P'  for a  game  with  only  local 
effects and all 
the potential function for a gen(cid:173)
eral B-LEG will be the sum of the congestion game potential 
function  and  P'. 

Thus  it  remains  to  argue  that  our  second  term  is  this  P1 
that it captures  changes  in  utility  arising  from  local  effects. 

MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 

773 

Consider the  sum  of the contribution  of local effects to each 
agent's utility: 
When 
a single agent a deviates, s increases by twice the amount of 
the  change  to  a's  utility,  because  all 
are  linear  and 
bidirectional.  That is,  there  is a change  both  in  the amount 
of local effect acting on agent a, and new local effect caused 
by agent a, and bidirectionality and linearity imply that these 
two amounts are the same. Thus the desired result is obtained 
by adding  s to the congestion game potential function.  _ 

Observe that Theorem  1  holds for B-LEGs with non-linear 
—what is required  is  linearity  of the  local-

functions 
effect functions. 
Theorem 2  Uniform  local-effect  games  have  pure  strategy 
Nash  equilibria  if the  local-effect graph  is a  clique. 
Sketch of Proof.  Again we provide a potential function: 

As argued in Theorem  1, to construct a potential function 
it is sufficient to add the standard congestion game potential 
function  with  a function  that accounts  for changes  in  utility 
due to local effects. This explains the first term. 

Let  distributions  X  and  Y  be 

identical  except 

and 

while 

and 

Assuming 

that 
 

 

. This is precisely the 
change  in  utility  for an  agent deviating  from  A  in  X  to B  in 
Y:  the agent will  be spared  the  local  effect 
since he 
moves to B and is no longer subject to its local effect;  how(cid:173)
ever, since he moves away from A and the graph is a clique, 
he is now subject to the local effect 
Because the 
graph is a clique, and because the game is a U-LEG, the ar(cid:173)
gument  holds  no  matter which  pair of nodes  is chosen  as  A 
and  B.   

3.3  LEGs  and  Potential  Functions 
Finding potential functions is an effective way of proving the 
existence of pure-strategy equilibria; however, there are many 
LEGs for which potential functions can be shown not to exist. 
In this section we give a complete characterization of the class 
of LEGs which have potential functions. 
Lemma  1  A  local-effect  game  has  a  potential function  if 

Sketch of Proof.  Trivially, a LEG without any local effects 
is a congestion game.  

Lemma 2  The  class  of potential  games  does  not  contain 
the  class  of  local-effect  games  for  which 
where 

neigh(C)  and  not  A  G  neigh(B)  and  not 

is  nonlinear). 

Sketch of Proof.  Assume for contradiction  that every  LEG 
in  the  class  has  a  potential  function  P.  We  will  consider 
three  distributions  of agents  in  order to  derive  properties  of 
P.  Without loss of generality,  we take A, B  and  C to be the 

first three actions in the game, and we take the total number of 
actions to be n.  For more compact notation in what follows, 
let 
Define the follow(cid:173)
ing three distributions:  

1,  D(A),...,  D(n)).  Without  making  any  assumptions  about 
the  local  effects  between  actions  A, B  and C and  any  of the 
other 

actions, and for 

let: 

That is, 

denotes the (negative) 

utility contributed to each agent taking action ; 
by those agents also taking action x, and by those agents tak(cid:173)
ing the 4th through nth actions.  For compactness we will ab(cid:173)
breviate 

below. 

If distribution X were the case and an agent playing action 
A  switched  to  action  B,  then  distribution  Y  would  be  the 
result. Thus: 

If X were the case and an  agent playing action C switched 

to action B, then Z would be the result.  Thus: 

(8) 
If Y were the case and an agent playing action C switched 

to action A, then Z would be the result.  Thus: 

From equations (7) and (8), we can infer: 

Intersect  equation  (10)  with  equation  (9)  and  rearrange. 
Observe  that 
all  cancel  out, 
demonstrating that this proof does not depend on what edges 
exist  between  A, B, C  and the  rest of the graph,  or on  node 
effects.  Define 
: the in(cid:173)
cremental cost on the local effect between a and a' of adding 
the xth agent to a.  We then get: 

and 

Clearly, equation (11) will not be satisfied for all  

(11) 
un(cid:173)
less 
is linear.  This contradicts our 
assumption  that a potential  function exists  for every LEG  in 
the class.  _ 

and 

774 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

ncigh(C)  and  A 

neigh(B)  and  not  A 
 

L e m ma  3  The  class  of  potential  games  does  not  contain  the 
class  of  local-effect  games  for  which 
where 
B 
and 
or  FA,B 
Sketch  of Proof. 
This  proof follows  the  proof of Lemma  2 
and  uses  the  same  setting  and  definitions,  except  that  (as 
stated  in  the  theorem)  A 
neigh(B).  Using  the  same  ar(cid:173)
guments  about  distributions  X,  Y  and  Z  we  can  derive: 

is  nonlinear  or 

is  nonlinear). 

 

Clearly,  equation  (12)  will  not  be  satisfied  for  all 

unless 

and  both 

and 

are  linear.  This  contradicts  our  assumption  that  a  po(cid:173)

tential  function  exists  for every  LEG  in  the  class. 

 

A,B,C 

and  A 
Bc 
or 

neigh(C) 
c,B 

neigh(B)  and  A 
is  nonlinear  or 

A^  is  nonlinear  or  .  'A  c 
A,c  or  B,A 

Lemma  4  The  class  of  potential  games  does  not  contain  the 
A  where 
class  of  local-effect  games  for  which 
B 
and 
,  B,A  or 
(  B,C  . 
is  nonlinear) 
, 
and{~A,B 
This  proof follows  the  proof of Lemmas 
Sketch  of  Proof. 
2 and  3  and  uses the  same setting and definitions,  except that 
(as stated in the theorem)  A 
ncigh(C). 
Using  the  same  arguments  about  distributions  X,  Y  and  Z  we 
can  derive: 

neigh(C) 
AH 

neigh(B)  and  A 

::A 
or 
B,c  or 

Ac 
'C,A  . 

C,B). 

Equation  (13) may  be rewritten  as: 

From  equation  (13)  we  can  see  that  the  contradiction  does 

not obtain for all  
and 
contradiction  does  not  obtain  for  all  

when 

 

,  From  equation  (14)  we  can  see  that  the 

, beta,  when 

 

and 

and 

are  all  linear. 

If  neither  condition  holds,  our  assump(cid:173)
tion  a  potential  function  exists  for  every  LEG  in  the  class  is 
contradicted.  

Theorem  3  The  class  of potential  games  contains  the  class 
of  local-effect  games for  which  any  of  the  following  hold: 

the  local-effect  graph  contains fewer  than  three  nodes 

J. 
2.  the  local-effect  graph  contains  no  edges 
3.  the  game 

is  a  bidirectional 

local-effect  game  and  all 

local-effect functions  are 

linear 

4. 

the  game  is  a  uniform  local-effect  game  and  the  local-
effect  graph  is  a  clique 

No  other  local-effect  games  have  potential  functions. 
Sketch  of  Proof. 
First,  it  is  clear  that  a  game  with  only 
a  single  action  has  a  potential  function.  A  LEG  with  only 
two  actions  is  trivially  a  U-LEG  and  has  a  local-effect  graph 
which is a clique,  so by Theorem 2 it has a potential  function. 
This proves statement  1  in the theorem, and leaves us to con(cid:173)
sider LEGs  which  have  3  or more  actions.  We  will  do  a case 
analysis  considering  all  possible  local-effect  graph  structures 
for these  LEGs.  Clearly,  all  graphs  with  3  or  more  nodes  are 
included  if we  consider all  graphs  with  no  edges,  all  cliques, 
and  all  graphs  containing  subgraphs  having  three  nodes  and 
either exactly  one  or exactly  two  edges. 

Lemma  1  proves  that  if the  local-effect  graph  has  no edges 

then  the LEG  is  a congestion  game,  proving statement  2. 

If  the  local-effect  graph  contains  a  subgraph  with  three 
nodes  and  exactly  one  edge,  and  is  not  a  B-LEG  with  linear 
functions,  Lemma  2  shows  that  it  does  not  have  a  potential 
function.  If  it  is  a  B-LEG  with  linear  functions,  Theorem  1 
shows  that it has  a potential  function,  proving  statement  3. 

If  the  local-effect  graph  contains  a  subgraph  with  three 
nodes  and  exactly  two edges,  and  is  not  a B-LEG  with  linear 
functions  (again,  statement  3),  Lemma  3  shows  that  it  does 
not have a potential  function. 

If the  local-effect  graph  is  a  clique,  it  contains  a  a  clique 
of  size  three  as  a  subgraph. 
If  the  graph  is  not  a  U-LEG, 
Lemma 4  shows  that  it  does  not  have  a  potential  function.  If 
it  is  a  U-LEG,  Theorem  2  shows  that  it does  have  a  potential 
function,  proving  statement 4.  G 

3.4  Other  Pure-Strategy  Equilibria 
We  are  also  able  to  prove  the  existence  of pure-strategy  Nash 
equilibria  for classes  of graphs,  and  node  and  edge  functions 
that  Theorem  3  shows  cannot  have  potential  functions.  The 
following  constructive  proof  has  classes  of  B-LEGs  and  U-
LEGs as special  cases: 
Theorem  4 

If a  local-effect  game  satisfies 

in  which 

there  exists  a  pure-strategy  Nash  equilibrium 

then 
agents  choose  nodes  that  constitute  an  independent  set. 
Sketch  of Proof. 
This  proof proceeds  by  induction,  build(cid:173)
ing up a Nash equilibrium one  agent at  a time,  and  with  each 
agent making a myopic best response to the previous distribu(cid:173)
tion.  In  the  case  of a single agent,  it  is clearly  an  equilibrium 
for  him  to  select  the  best  node.  Define  D t  as  the  distribution 
of agents  at  induction  step  i.  Assume  that  n  -  1  agents  have 
each  selected the  best node  in  turn,  resulting  in  a distribution 
D n _ i  which  is  a  Nash  equilibrium  and  also  an  independent 
set.  We  must  show  that  when  an  additional  agent  n  chooses 
the best  node  the resulting distribution  D n  is  still  an  indepen(cid:173)
dent set,  and still  a Nash equilibrium. 

First,  we  show  that  the  new  distribution  is  an  independent 
set.  Assume  for the  purposes  of contradiction  that  it  was  best 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

775 

for n to choose a node that does not belong to the independent 
set.  Then  it must  be  the case  that the  selected  node  has  at 
least  one  neighbor  which  has  been  chosen  by  one  or  more 
other  agents.  Let  the  node  selected  by  n  be  A,  and  let  B 
be some neighboring node.  From condition 2 in the theorem 
(linearity/sublinearity), we can infer that: 

From condition  1  in the theorem (functional dominance), 

we know that: 

Thus  we  can  use  equation  (16)  to  weaken  the  bound  in 

equation (15) to get: 

Define  the  utility  at  inductive  step  i  for  an  agent  taking 

action  X, and disregarding any local effect from action Y: 

At some step i in the induction,  D1{B)  —  0 and Dl(A)  — 
.  From the  fact that the distribution  of 
0, but 
agents resulted from myopic choices (stated in the induction 
hypothesis), we know that: 

We can use 

(18) 
in equation (18) because Dt (B)  =  0 
anyway.  From the monotonicity of local-effect functions, and 
the fact that 

we can write: 

(19) 
We can  use  equation  (19)  to  weaken  the  bound  given  in 

equation (18): 

(20) 
Finally,  we  can  use  equation  (20)  to  further  weaken  the 

bound given in equation (17). This gives us: 

Equation  (21)  contradicts  our  assumption  that  agent  n 
would  myopically  choose  A  over  B\  therefore  Dn  must  be 
an independent set. 

Now  we  show  that  D'  is  a  Nash  equilibrium.  Let  C  be 
the node that the new agent % selected in making his myopic 
response to the distribution  D.  From symmetry of cost func(cid:173)
tions we know that no agent can profitably deviate from node 
C:  if so,  i  would  have  chosen  a  different  node  in  the first 
place.  Consider an agent j who chose a node  V  C.  Agent 
j 's payoff does not change from distribution  D to distribution 
D'',  because  D'  is  an  independent  set,  and so 
=  0 
(there are no local effects between nodes C and V.  Since dis(cid:173)
tribution  D  was  a Nash equilibrium (inductive  hypothesis) j 
will  not deviate from  a new distribution  D'  that differs only 
in that node C is more costly.  — 

4  Empirical  Findings 
Section  3  shows  that  there  are  many  cases  in  which  local  -
effect  games  have  pure-strategy  Nash  equilibria.  Myopic-
best response  has  been  shown  to  be  an  effective  technique 
for computing pure strategy equilibria in a variety of settings 
[10].  In this section we show that this simple algorithm can 
compute  pure  strategy  equilibria  for  very  large  local-effect 
games  that  are  not  covered  by  any  of  the  positive  results 
in  section  3  and  that  do  not  have  potential  functions.  We 
present five different graph structures with similar local-effect 
functions,  and show sample equilibria.  We should note that 
we have been able to find equilibria experimentally  for most 
B-LEGs1  with  different  graph  structure  and  different  local-
effect functions that we have tried, and that convergence oc(cid:173)
curs within a second in  most cases.  As  with our theoretical 
results, we do not claim that these equilibria are unique;  in(cid:173)
deed,  because  agents'  cost  functions  are  symmetric,  a  new 
equilibrium can always be constructed from a given equilib(cid:173)
rium  by  swapping  action  choices  between  pairs  of  agents. 
Furthermore,  we  have  observed  many  cases  where  multiple 
structurally different equilibria exist  in  the  same  local-effect 
game. 
All 

B-LEGs  with 
We  use  one 
kn  for  all  node  functions  and  another  ke  for  all  edge 
and 
functions  (i.e., 
We  hold 
kc  =  1  throughout,  and  vary  kn  to  highlight  some  of  the 
more  interesting  equilibria.  These  equilibria  are  represen(cid:173)
tative  of  average  runs,  and  were  found  with  a  minimum 
of parameter  manipulation.  Each  node  is  labelled  with  the 
number  of  agents  choosing  the  node  in  equilibrium.  Fig. 
1  shows  a  T  structure  representative  of  a  simple  location 
problem.  Fig.  2,  which  we call  'arbitrary'  in  what follows, 

games 

shown 

here 

are 

So far, we have only experimented with B-LEGs because undi(cid:173)
rected local-effect graphs are easier to specify and generate, and be(cid:173)
cause we consider them to be among the most natural LEGs.  We 
expect to experiment with other classes of LEGs in our future work. 

776 

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

tion  is  a  good  technique  for  finding  equilibria;  we  identify 
all  the  local-effect  games  for  which  potential  functions  ex(cid:173)
ist,  and  provide  the  potential  function  in  each  case.  We  also 
give  a  positive  theoretical  result  for  a  broad  class  of  games 
that  do  not  have  potential  functions.  Furthermore,  we  can 
show  that  myopic  best  response  dynamics  converge  quickly 
in  other cases  which  do  not  have  potential  functions,  and  are 
also  not  covered  by  our  positive  theoretical  results. 

References 
[1] 

B. Blum, C. Shelton, and D. Roller. A continuation method for 
Nash equilibria in structured games.  In IJCAI, 2003. 
V. Conitzer and T. Sandholm.  Complexity Results about Nash 
Equilibria.  Technical Report CM-CS-02-135, CMU, 2002. 
D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole.  Game Theory. MIT Press, 1991. 
H.  Hotelling.  Stability  in  competition.  Economic  Journal, 
39:41-57, 1929. 
J. Hu and M.P. Well man. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: 
Theoretical  framework and an algorithm.  In ICML,  1998. 
M.  Kearns,  M.  Littman,  and  S.  Singh.  Graphical  models for 
game theory.  In UAI, 2001. 
M.  Kearns  and  Y.  Mansour.  Efficient  Nash  computation  in 
large population games with bounded influence.  In UAL 2002. 
D.  Roller  and  B.  Milch.  Multi-agent  influence  diagrams  for 
representing and solving games.  In IJCAI, 2001. 
Pierfrancesco  La  Mura.  Game  networks. 
335-342, 2000. 
D. Monderer and L.S. Shapley.  Potential games.  Games and 
Economic Behavior,  14:124-143,  1996. 
J.E Nash.  Equilibrium points in n-person games.  Proceedings 
of the  National Academy  of Sciences  of the  United States  of 
America, 36:48-49,  1950. 
M.J. Osborne and C. Pitchik. Equilibrium in Hotelling's model 
of competition.  Econometnca, 55:911-922,  1987. 
R.W.  Rosenthal.  A  class  of games  possessing  pure-strategy 
Nash  equilibria.  International Journal of Game  Theory,  2:65-
67, 1973. 
T  Roughgarden  and  E.  Tardos.  Bounding  the  inefficiency  of 
equilibria  in  nonalomic  congestion  games.  Technical  Report 
TR2002-1866, Cornell, June 2001. 
D.  Vickrey  and  D.  Roller.  Multi-agent  algorithms  for solving 
graphical games.  In AAAI, 2002. 

In  UAI-00,  pages 

[21 

[31 
[41 

[51 

[61 

[7] 

[81 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[121 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

Figure  6:  Steps  to  conver-  Figure  7:  Steps  to  conver(cid:173)
gence  for the  five  graphs 
gence  for the  arbitrary  graph 

is  interesting  because  there  are  2  nodes  with  2  neighbors,  2 
with  3  neighbors  and  2  with  4  neighbors.  This  setting  could 
represent  a  role  formation  game.  Fig.  3  shows  a  binary  tree 
structure;  observe  that  most  agents  select  leaf nodes  because 
they  have  only  one  neighbor,  and  thus  the  parents  of  leaves 
are  chosen  by  few  agents.  Fig.  4  shows  a  two-dimensional 
grid,  representative  of  our  coffee  house  location  problem. 
Observe  that  the  corners  are  most  desirable,  as  they  have 
only  two  neighbors;  nodes  neighboring  corners  are  thus 
under-populated,  leading  to  another  concentration  of  agents 
in  the  middle  of each  edge.  It  is  also  interesting  that  agents 
concentrate  in the central  node, even though it has four neigh(cid:173)
bors,  because  its  neighbors  are  relatively  under-populated. 
Fig.  5  shows  what  happens  to the  game  from Fig.  4 when  we 
remove  a  single  node  (consider  the  same  location  problem 
when  one  node  becomes  unavailable).  Observe  that  agents 
generally  cluster  around  the  missing  node,  except  for  one 
neighboring  node  that  is  entirely  unpopulated,  as  a  result  of 
the  large  local  effects  acting  upon  it. 

The  amount  of  time  it  took  to  reach  convergence  in  each 
graph  is  shown  in  Fig.  4,  starting  in  each  case  with  a  uni(cid:173)
form  distribution  of agents  across  the  actions.  Finally,  since 
the  'arbitrary'  graph  in  Fig.  2  took  the  longest  to  converge 
(34%  of the  agents  moved  before  convergence  occurred)  we 
examine  this  graph  in  more  detail  in  Fig.  4.  Observe  that  as 
we  vary  the  number  of  agents,  the  number  of  steps  required 
for  convergence  increases  roughly  linearly. 

5  Conclusion 
Local-effect  games  exploit context-specific  independence  be(cid:173)
tween  players'  payoff  functions.  Finding  a  potential  func(cid:173)

MULTIAGENT  SYSTEMS 

777 

