Outlier Detection Using Default Logic 

Angiulli Fabrizio 

ICAR-CNR c/o DEIS 
Univ.  della Calabria 

87030 Rende (CS), Italy 

angiulli@icar.cnr.it 

Rachel Ben-EIiyahu - Zohary 

Comm.  Systems Engineering Dept. 

Luigi  Palopoli 

DIMET 

Ben-Gurion Univ.  of the Negev 

Univ.  di Reggio Calabria 

Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel 
rachel@bgumail.bgu.ac.il 

Loc.  Feo di Vito 

89100 Reggio Calabria, Italy 

palopoli@ing.unirc.it 

Abstract 

Default  logic  is  used  to  describe  regular  behav(cid:173)
ior  and  normal  properties.  We  suggest  to  exploit 
the  framework  of  default  logic  for  detecting  out(cid:173)
liers  -  individuals  who  behave  in  an  unexpected 
way  or  feature  abnormal  properties.  The  ability 
to locate outliers can help to maintain knowledge(cid:173)
base  integrity  and to single  out  irregular individu(cid:173)
als.  We  first  formally define  the notion of an  out(cid:173)
lier and an outlier witness.  We then show that  find(cid:173)
ing outliers is quite complex. Indeed, we show that 
several  versions  of  the  outlier  detection  problem 
lie  over the second level  of the  polynomial hierar(cid:173)
chy.  For example, the question of establishing if at 
least one outlier can be detected in a given propo-
sitional  default  theory is 
-complete.  Although 
outlier  detection  involves  heavy  computation,  the 
queries  involved  can  frequently  be  executed  off(cid:173)
line, thus somewhat alleviating the difficulty of the 
problem.  In  addition,  we  show that outlier detec(cid:173)
tion  can  be  done  in  polynomial  time  for both  the 
class of acyclic normal unary defaults and the class 
of acyclic dual normal unary defaults. 

Introduction 

1 
Default logics were developed as a tool for reasoning with in(cid:173)
complete knowledge. By using default rules, we can describe 
how things work in general and then make some assumptions 
about individuals and draw conclusions about their properties 
and behavior. 

In  this  paper,  we  suggest  a  somewhat  different  usage  of 
default  logics.  The  basic  idea  is  as  follows.  Since  default 
rules are used for describing regular behavior, we can exploit 
them for detecting individuals or elements who do not behave 
normally  according  to  the  default  theory  at  hand.  We  call 
such  entities  outliers.  An  outlier  is  an  element  that  shows 
some properties that are contrary to those that can be logically 
justified. 

Outlier detection can be useful in several application con(cid:173)
texts,  e.g.,  to single out exceptional behaving individuals or 
system components. Note that according to our approach, ex(cid:173)
ceptions are not explicitly listed in the theory as uabnormals," 
as  is  often  done  in  logical-based  abduction  fPoole,  1989; 

Console  et  ai,  1991;  Eiter  and  Gottlob,  1995].  Rather, 
their  "abnormality"  is  singled  out  exactly  because  some  of 
the properties characterizing them do not have a justification 
within the theory at hand.  For example, suppose that it usu(cid:173)
ally  takes  about  two  seconds  to  download  a  one-megabyte 
file from  some  server.  Then,  one day,  the  system  is  slower 
- instead four seconds are needed to perform the same task. 
While  four  seconds  may  indicate  a  good  performance  it  is 
helpful to find the source of the delay  Another example might 
be that someone's car brakes are making a strange noise. Al(cid:173)
though they seem to be functioning properly, this is not nor(cid:173)
mal behavior and the car should be serviced. In this case, the 
car brakes are outliers and the noise is their witness. 

Outlier detection can also be used for examining database 
integrity. If an abnormal property is discovered in a database, 
the  source  who  reported  this  observation  would  have  to  be 
double-checked. 

Detecting  abnormal properties,  that  is,  detecting outliers, 
can also lead to an update of default rules.  Suppose we have 
the rule that birds fly, and we observe a bird, say Tweety, that 
does  not  fly.  We  report  this  occurence  of an  outlier  in  the 
theory  to  the  knowledge  engineer The  engineer investigates 
the case, finds out that Tweety is, for example, a penguin, and 
updates the knowledgebase with the default "penguins do not 
fly." 

In this  paper,  we formally state  the  ideas briefly sketched 
above  within  the context of Reiter's  default  logic.  For sim(cid:173)
plicity,  we concentrate on  the  propositional  fragment of de(cid:173)
fault  logic  although  the  generalization  of  such  ideas  to  the 
realm of first-order defaults also worth exploring.  So, when(cid:173)
ever we use a default theory with variables, as in some of the 
following examples, we relate to  it as  an  abbreviation of its 
grounded version. 

The  rest of the paper is  organized as  follows.  In  Section 
2,  we  give  preliminary definitions  as  well  as  a  formal  def(cid:173)
inition  of  the  concept  of  an  outlier. 
In  Section  3,  we  de(cid:173)
scribe  the complexity of finding outliers in  propositional de(cid:173)
fault  logic.  Section  4  analyzes  the  complexity  of detecting 
outliers  in  disjunction-free  propositional  default  logics,  and 
section 5 describes some tractable cases. Related work is dis(cid:173)
cussed in Section 6. Conclusions are given in Section 7. 

Because of space  limitations,  throughout the paper proofs 
of results are sketched or omitted.  Full proofs can be found 
in [Angiulli et a/., 2003J. 

NONMONOTONIC REASONING 

833 

2  Definitions 
In this section we provide preliminary definitions for concepts 
we will be using throughout the paper. 
2.1  Preliminaries 
The following definitions will be assumed. Let T be a propo-
sitional theory. Then 
denotes its logical closure.  If 5 is a 
set of literals,  then  ->S denotes the set of all  literals that are 
the negation of some literal  in S. 

(or, equivalently 

Default  logic  was  introduced by  Reiter  iReiter,  1980].  A 
is a pair (D, W) consisting of 
propositional  default  theory 
a set W of pmpositional formulas and a set D of default rules. 
A  default  rule  has the form 
and \  a re propositional  formulas, called,  respec(cid:173)
where 
tively, prerequisite, justification,  and  consequent  of S.  The 
prerequisite could be omitted, though justification and conse(cid:173)
the default rule is called normal. 
quent arc required.  If 
is the following:  if 
The informal  meaning of a default rule 
, then we con(cid:173)
.  An  extension is a maximal  set of conclusions that 
clude 
can  be drawn from  a theory.  An  extension E  of a proposi(cid:173)
=  (D, W)  can  be  finitely  character(cid:173)
tional default theory 
of generating  defaults  for  E  w.r.t. 
ized  through the set 

is known, and if it is consistent to assume 

,  i.e., the set 

Indeed,  

Let A be a default theory and I a literal. Then 

that / belongs to every extension  of 
literals 
every extension  of 
least one extension. 

means 
.  Similarly, for a set of 
belongs to 
.  A default theory is coherent if it has at 

means that every literal 

We review some basic definitions about complexity theory, 
particularly, the polynomial hierarchy.  The reader is referred 
to  iGarey  and  Johnson,  1979]  for  more  on  complexity  the(cid:173)
ory.  The classes 
= 

are defined as follows: 

and 

J and for all  

.  The class 

models computability by a nondeterministic polynomial-
time algorithm which may use an oracle, loosely speaking a 
subprogram that can  be run with no computational cost,  for 
solving  a  problem  in 
,  is de(cid:173)
fined as the class of problems that consists of the conjunction 
, respectively. 
of two independent problems from 
Note  that  for all 
A  problem 
A  is  complete  for the class  C  iff A  belongs  to  C  and  every 
problem in C  is reducible to A  by polynomial-time transfor(cid:173)
-complete problem is to decide the 
mations.  A well known 
validity of a formula  QBE 
, that is,  a formula of the form 
if k  is  odd 
if k is even,  X1,...,  Xk  are disjoint set of variables, 
and is 
and  f ( x 1 , . . .,  Xk)  is  a propositional  formula in  X\,...,  Xk-
that is a for(cid:173)
Analogously, the validity of a formula 
, where Q 
mula of the form 
is 
De(cid:173)
ciding the conjunction 
formula 
and 

if k is odd and is ~ if k is even, is complete for 

formula, is complete for  

,  where  Q  is 

where 

is a 

is a 

stand, we first look at an example. 

Example 2.1  Consider  the  following  default  theory  which 
represents the knowledge that birds fly and penguins are birds 
that do not fly, and the observations that Twcety and Pini arc 
birds and Tweety does not fly. 

This theory has two extensions.  One extension is the logical 
closure  of 
and the other is 
the logical closure of 
If we  look  carefully at  the  extensions,  we  note that  Tweety 
not  flying  is  quite  strange,  since  we  know  that  birds fly 
and  Tweety  is  a  bird.  Therefore,  there  is  no  apparent jus(cid:173)
tification  for  the  fact  that  Tweety  does  not  fly  (other  than 
the  fact  Fly (Tweety)  belonging  to  W).  Had  we  been 
told  that  Tweety  is  a  penguin,  we  could  have  explained 
why  Tweety  does  not  fly.  But,  as  the  theory  stands  now, 
we  are  not  able  to  explain  why  l\veety  docs  not  fly,  and, 
thus,  Tweety  is an exception.  Moreover, if we are trying to 
nail  down  what  makes  Tweety  an  exception,  we notice  that 
if  we  would  have  dropped  the  observation  -*Fly(Twcety) 
from  W,  we  would  have  concluded  the  exact  opposite, 
namely,  that  Tweety  does  fly.  Thus,  Fly (Tweety) 
"in-
duces" such an exceptionality (we will  call  witness a literal 
like  Fly (Tweety)).  Furthermore,  if we  drop  from  W  both 
Fly (Tweety)  and  Bird(Tweety),  we  are  no  longer  able  to 
conclude  that  Tweety  flies.  This  implies  that  Fly (Tweety) 
is  a consequence of the  fact that Tweety  is  a  bird,  and  thus 
Bird(Twcety)  is  the  property  of Tweety  that  behaves  excep(cid:173)
tionally  (or  the  outlier). 
From the above example, one could be induced to define an 
outlier as an individual, i.e., a constant, in our case Tweety, 
that  possesses  an  exceptional  property,  denoted by  a  literal 
having  the  individual  as  one  of  its  arguments,  in  our  case 
Bird(Tweety).  However,  for  a  conceptual  viewpoint,  it  is 
much more general and  flexible  to single out a property of an 
individual which is exceptional, rather than simply the indi(cid:173)
vidual.  That assumed, we also note that within the proposi(cid:173)
tional  context  we  deal  with  here,  we  do  not  explicitly have 
individuals distinct from  their properties  and,  therefore,  the 
choice is immaterial. 

Based  on  the  example  and  considerations  mentioned 

above, we can define the concept of an outlier as follows. 

Definition 2.2  Let 
theory  such  that  W  is  consistent and 
there exists a set of literals 

=  (D,W)  be  a  propositional  default 
is  a  literal.  If 

such that: 

2.2  Defining  outliers 
Next we  formalize the  notion  of an  outlier  in  default  logic. 
In order to motivate the definition and make it easy to under-

where 
/ is an outlier in 

and 

, then we say that 

and S is an outlier witness set for I in   

834 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

According to this definition, a literal I is an outlier if and only 
if there is an exceptional property, denoted by a set of literals 
5, holding in every extension of the theory. 

The exceptional property is the outlier witness for I.  Thus, 
according to this definition, in the default theory of Example 
2.1  above  we  should  conclude  that  Bird(Tweety)  denotes 
an outlier and 
is its witness.  Note that we 
have defined an outlier witness to be a set, not necessarily a 
single literal since in some theories taking a single literal does 
not suffice to form a witness for a given outlier being that all 
witnesses of such an outlier have a cardinality strictly larger 
than one. 
Example 2.3  Consider  the  default  theory 
where the set of default rules D conveys the following infor(cid:173)
mation about weather and traffic in a small town in southern 
California: 

1. 

-  that  is,  normally 
during a July weekend there are no traffic jams nor any 
rain. 

2. 

3. 

rains and sometimes it doesn't rain. 

- in January it sometimes 

If there is a traf(cid:173)
fic jam in the weekend then normally it must be raining 
or there would have been an accident. 

Suppose also that  
Rain}.  Then,  the  set 
is an 
outlier  witness  for  both  Weekend  and  July.  Moreover,  S 
is  a  minimal outlier witness  set  for either  Weekend or  July, 
since deleting one of the  members from S  will  render S not 
being a witness set. 
Here is another example. 
Example 2.4  Consider the following default theory A: 

This theory claims that normally adults who have a monthly 
income work, and students who take  flying  lessons are inter(cid:173)
ested in learning how to take off and navigate.  The observa(cid:173)
tions are that Johnny is an adult who has a monthly income, 
but he does not work.  He is also a student in a  flying  school 
but he is not interested in learning how to take-off.  Based on 
the  events of September  11,  2001,  we'd  like  our system  to 
conclude that Johnny is the argument of two outliers.  Indeed, 
the reader can verify that the following facts are true: 

Hence, 

Wcrks( Johnny) 

both 
I  nterestT  akeO 

and 
f  (Johnny)  are  outlier  witnesses, 
while  Adult (Johnny)  and  Flying S (Johnny)  are  outliers. 
Note  that  Income (Johnny)  is  also  an  outlier,  with  the 
witness 

Works(Johnny). 

f 

2.3  Defining outlier  detection  problems 
In  order  to  state  the  computational  complexity  of detecting 
outliers, in the rest of the work we refer to the following prob(cid:173)
lems (also referred to as queries) defined for an input default 
theory 

= ( D , W ): 

:  Given 
:  Given 
in 
for 
Given 
any outlier . in  '  ? 

, does there exist an outlier in 
and a literal 
? 
and a set of literals 

? 

, is there any outlier witness 

', is S a witness for 

:  Given 

S a witness for / in 

, a set of literals 
? 

and a literal 

, is 

3  General complexity results 
In this section we analyze the complexity associated with de(cid:173)
tecting outliers.  First,  we  give some preliminary definitions 
involving notation. 

Let L be a set of literals such that 

implies that  

L.  Then  we  denote  by 
the  truth  assignment on  the  set 
of  letters  occurring  in  L  such  that,  for  each  positive  literal 

~~  '  "  = true, and for each negative literal  

Let T be a truth assignment on the set 

of letters. 

.  is X{  if 

-complete. 

=  t r ue  and  is  -*Xi  if  T(xi)  — 

Then  we  denote  by  Lit(T)  the  set  of  literals 
such that 
false, for  
Theorem 3.1 
Proof:  (Membership)  Given  a  a  theory 
, we 
must show that there exists a literal / in W and a subset S  = 
{ s 1 , . . ., s n)  of  W  such  that  (D,  Ws) 
(query q') and 

(query q").  Query 
-complete LGottlob, 
1992; Stillman, 1992]. Thus, we can build a polynomial-time 
nondeterministic  Turing  machine  with a 
oracle,  solving 
as follows:  the machine guesses both the literal I 
query 
and  the  set  S  and  then  solves  queries  q'  and  q"  using  two 
calls to the oracle. 
(Hardness) Let 

-complete, while query 

be a quantified 

boolean  formula,  where X  = 
and Z  are disjoint set  of variables.  We associate with 
default theory 
set  \ 
from those  occurring in 

the 
is the 
>  consisting  of new  letters  distinct 

, where 

and 

 

 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

835 

and the 

s e t of

{.Si,...,s„} 

and 
W,  we  should  verify  that 
(statement  q')  and  there  ex(cid:173)

Proof:  (Membership)  Given  a  theory 
a  subset  S  = 
(D,Ws)  ' 
ists a literal /  e  W  such that (D,  W s,i) 
(statement q").  Solving q'  is  in 
.  As for statement  q'',  it 
can  be decided by a polynomial  time  nondeterministic Tur(cid:173)
ing machine, with an oracle in NP, that (a) guesses both the 
literal 
 generating defaults of 
an  extension E  of (D,  Wsi)  together with  an  order of these 
defaults;  (b)  checks  the  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions 
that DE  must satisfy to be a set of generating defaults for E 
(see  iZhang and  Marek,  19901  for a detailed  description of 
these conditions), by multiple calls to the oracle; and (c) ver(cid:173)
ifies  that 
by other calls  to the oracle. 
It can be shown that the total number of calls to the oracle is 
polynomially bounded.  Thus,  Q2  is  the  conjunction of two 
independent problems,  one  in 
(g"), i.e.  it is in  _ . 

(q1)  and  the  other  in 

-s1 

(Hardness)  Let 

W.l.o.g, we can assume that 

contain different letters, the letter si  occurs in 

be 
two  propositional  default theories  such  that W\  and  W2  are 
consistent, let .si, S2 be two letters, and let q be the statement 
and 
but not 
, and the 
). 
(q)  =  (D(q),  W(q)) 
and 
be  all  the  literals  belonging 

in Wi  (and, from the previous condition, not in 
letter  s2  occurs in  D2  but not in  W2  (and hence not in 
We associate with q the default theory 
defined as follows.  Let 
let 
to  W1,  then   

from those occurring in 
can  be shown that q is true  iff 
outlier  i n We  note  that  q  is  the  conjunction  of a 
hard and 
the hardness part. 

a n d a nd  from  s\  and  s 2-  It 
\  is a witness for some 

_  hard independent problems, thus this proves 

 

Theorem 3.4 

is 

-complete. 

= 

4  Disjunction-free theories 
Disjunction-free theories form a significant subset of proposi-
tional default theories because they are equivalent to extended 
logic  programs  under  stable  model  semantics  [Gelfond  and 
(D,W) 
Lifschitz,  1991].  A finite propositional theory 
is disjunction-free (DF in  short),  if W  is a set of literals,  and 
the  precondition, justification  and  consequence  of each  de(cid:173)
fault in D is a conjunction of literals.  As we see below, outlier 
detection for DF theories is still quite complex. 
Theorem 4.1  Qo  restricted  to  disjunction-free  theories  is 
Ep
Proof:  (Membership)  The  membership  proof  is  analogous 
to that of Theorem 3.1.  We note that when disjunction-free 
theories  are  considered,  q'  and  q"  are  co-NP-complete  and 
NP-complete, respectively. 

2-complete. 

(Hardness) 

be  a  quantified 
boolean  formula,  where  X  =  x 1 , . . . , x n  and  Y  — 

where also 
those occurring in 
can be built in polynomial time. We next show that  ~ is valid 
iff there exists an outlier in   

are new variables distinct from 

is consistent and  

Clearly, 

In  the  rest  of the  proof we  denote by 

I resp.) 
resp.)  the  lit(cid:173)
Letting  5  be  a  sub(cid:173)
resp.), 

the literal  Xi  (Si  resp.)  and by 
eral 
set  of 
we  denote  by   

i. 

As 

Suppose  that 

is  valid.  Then  we  can  show  that 
/  is  an  outlier  in 
is  valid,  then  there  exists 
a  truth  assignment  Tx  on  the  set  X  of  variables  such  that 
Tx  satisfies 
It 
can be shown that we can associate to each truth assignment 
Ty  on  the  set  Y  of  variables,  one  and  only  one  extension 
Ey  of 
Lit(Ty). 

and 
Furthermore,  since  there  is  no other extension 

In  particular,   

is  valid,  then 

As 

. 

of 

' 

Consider now the  theory 

.  We note that 
the literal / appears in the precondition of rule 
whose con(cid:173)
clusion  g  represents,  in  turn,  the  precondition  of the  rules 
,  and  that / 
in  the  set  Z)5,  rules  that  allow  to  conclude 
does not appear in the conclusion of any rule  of 
Thus 

Hence / is an outlier in  

(5) satisfies 

. It can then be shown that   

Suppose that there exists an outlier in 

. It can be 
shown that the outlier is /. Hence, there exists a nonempty set 
of  literals 
such that 5 is an outlier witness 
for  / in  
where s\ is either s, or 

, for i — 1 , . . ., n. Now we show that 
, i.e. that $ is valid. For each 
,  for j  = 
set 
is either 
1 , . . ., m,  there exists  one extension EL  of 
S)  such that 
in order for / to be an outlier in 
for each set 
f(X, Y, Z).  Hence,  we  can  conclude that 

Thus, 
, it must be the case that 
., that 
satisfies 

.  We note also that 

is valid.  

, where 

Theorem 3.2  Q\  is 
Proof:  The proof is analogous to that used in Theorem 3.1. 

-complete. 

Theorem 3.3  Q2 is 

-complete. 

836 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

in  which p or 

Definition 5.6  The atomic dependency graph of an NMU de(cid:173)
is a directed graph whose nodes are all atoms 
fault theory 
,  and such that there is an arc directed 
in  the  language  of 
from p to q  iff there is  a default in 
is a 
prerequisite and q or  q is a consequence. 
Definition 5.7  A  normal  (dual  normal) unary default  theory 
is acyclic iff its atomic dependency graph is acyclic. 
Theorem 5.8  Queries QO,  Ql,  Q2 and Q'X  restricted to the 
class  of acyclic  NU  or  acyclic  DNU  default  theories  can  be 
solved in polynomial time in the size of the input theory. 
Proof:  It  can  be  shown  that  for  any  acyclic  NMU  default 
=  (D, W)  such  that  W  is  consistent  and  for  any 
theory 
literal  I  in  W',  any  minimal  outlier witness  set  for /  in 
is 
at  most  1  in  size.  Theorem's  statement  then  follows  from 
Theorem 5.5.  

6  Related Work 
The research on logical-based abduction [Poole,  1989; Con(cid:173)
sole et «/.,  1991; Eiter and Gottlob,  1995]  is related to out(cid:173)
lier detection.  In the framework of logic-based abduction, the 
domain knowledge is described using  a  logical theory T.  A 
subset  X  of hypotheses  is  an  abduction explanation  to  a set 
of  manifestations 
is a consistent theory that en(cid:173)
tails M.  Abduction resembles outlier detection in that it deals 
with exceptional situations. 

The work most relevant to our study is perhaps the paper by 
Eiter, Gottlob, and Leone on abduction from default theories 
[Eiter et al,  19971. There, the authors have presented a basic 
model of abduction from default logic and analyzed the com(cid:173)
plexity of the main abductive reasoning tasks. They presented 
two modes of abductions:  one based on brave reasoning and 
the other on cautious reasoning.  According to these authors, 
a  default abduction  problem  (DAP)  is  a  tuple  (H, M, W, D) 
where  H  is  a  set  of ground  literals  called  hypotheses,  M  is 
a set of ground literals called observations, and  (D, W)  is  a 
default theory.  Their goal,  in  general,  was to explain some 
observations from M by using various hypotheses in the con(cid:173)
text of the default theory (D, W).  They suggest the following 
definition for an explanation: 
Definition  6.1  ([Eiter  etai,  1997])   
be a DAP and let 
for P iff 

Then, E is a skeptical explanation 

There  is  a  close  relationship between  outliers  and  skeptical 
explanations,  as the following theorem states.  The theorem 
also  holds  for  ordered  semi-normal  default  theories  [Ether-
ington, 1987]. 
be  a  normal default theory, 
Theorem 6.2  Let 
where W is consistent.  Let 
is an out(cid:173)
lier  witness  set fori  iff{1}  is  a  minimal  skeptical  explanation 
for  Sin  the  DAP P  =   
Hence, we can say that S is an outlier witness for /  if  _ 
/ is a skeptical explanation for 5, but still  S holds in every 
extension of the theory. 

x 

are new variables 
is consis(cid:173)
f  can be built  in  polynomial  time.  The rest of 

where also 
distinct  from those occurring in  $.  Clearly, 
tent and 
the proof is similar to that of Theorem 3.1.  
Theorem 4.2  Q\  restricted  to  disjunction-free  theories  is 
H2-complete. 
Theorem 4.3  Q2 and QZ restricted to disjunction-free theo(cid:173)
ries  are  Dp-complete. 

5  Tractable Cases 
In  this  section,  we  look  for some classes  of default theories 
for which outlier detection is computationally tractable. 
is  normal  mixed  unary 
Definition 5.1  A  default  theory 
(NMU  in  short)  iff W  is  a  set  of literals  and  D  is  a  set  of 
where y is either missing or a literal 
defaults of the  form 
and a: is a literal. 
Definition 5.2  An NMU default theory is normal unary (NU 
in  short)  iff the prerequisite of each default is either missing 
or  positive.  An  NMU  default  theory  is  dual  normal  unary 
(DNU  in  short)  iff the  prerequisite  of each  default  is  either 
missing or negative. 
Thus,  NMU,  NU,  and  DNU  theories  have  a  quite  simple 
structure.  In spite of that, the complexity of detecting outliers 
from these theories remain often quite high, as demonstrated 
by  the  following  results  (proofs  are  omitted  for the  sake  of 
brevity). 
Theorem 5.3  The following  hold  over  NMU  default  theo(cid:173)
ries: 

Theorem  5.4  The following  hold over NU  and DNU  default 
theories: 

Thus,  restricting our attention  to  NMU,  NU,  or DNU  theo(cid:173)
ries does not suffice to attain  tractability of the  most general 
queries QO and Q\.  Some further restriction is needed, which 
is considered next. 
Theorem 5.5 (IKautz and Selman, 1991] [Zohary, 2002]) 
is  a  normal  (dual  normal)  unary  default  theory. 
Suppose 
We can decide whether a literal belongs to every extension of 

in time 

, where n is the length of the theory. 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

837 

[Console et al,  1991]  Luca  Console,  Daniele  Theseider 
Dupre,  and Pietro Torasso.  On  the relationship between 
abduction  and deduction.  Journal of Logic and Computa-
tion,  1(5):661-690,1991. 

[Eiter and Gottlob,  1995]  Thomas  Eiter and  Georg  Gottlob. 
The complexity of logic-based abduction. J ACM, 42(1 ):3-
42, 1995. 

[Eiter ex al,  1997]  Thomas Eiter, Georg Gottlob, and Nicola 
Leone.  Semantics and complexity of abduction from de-
fault  theories.  Artificial  Intelligence,  90(1-2): 177-223, 
1997. 

[Etherington,  1987]  David  W.  Etherington. 

Formalizing 
nonmonotonic  reasoning  systems.  Artificial  Intelligence, 
31:41-85,1987. 

[Garey and Johnson, 1979]  M.  R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. 
CompuXers and intractability; a guide to the theory of NP-
completeness. W.H. Freeman, 1979. 
[Gelfond and Lifschitz,  1991 ]  Michael 

and 
Vladimir  Lifschitz.  Classical  negation  in  logic  pro(cid:173)
grams  and  disjunctive  databases. 
New  Generation 
Computing, 9:365-385, 1991. 

Gelfond 

[Gottlob,  1992]  George Gottlob. Complexity results for non-
J.  Logic  Computat.,  2(3):397-425, 

monotonic  logics. 
1992. 

[Kautz and Selman,  1991 ]  Henry A. Kautz and Bart Selman. 
Hard  problems  for simple  default  logics.  Artificial Intelli(cid:173)
gence, 49:243-279,1991. 

[McCarthy,  1980]  John  McCarthy.  Circumscription  -  a 
form  of non-monotonic  reasoning.  Artificial  Intelligence, 
13:27-39, 1980. 

[Pearl,  1990]  Judea Pearl.  System z:  a natural ordering of 
defaults  with  tractable applications  to  nonmonotonic rea(cid:173)
soning. In TARK-90, pages 121-135, Monterey, CA, 1990. 
[Poole,  1989]  David  Poole.  Normality  and  faults  in  logic-

based diagnosis.  In IJCA1-89, pages  1304-1310,1989. 

[Reiter,  1980]  Raymond  Reiter.  A  logic  for default  reason(cid:173)

ing.  Artificial Intelligence,  13:81-132,  1980. 

iStillman,  1992]  Jonathan  Stillman. 

The  complexity  of 
In  Proceedings  of the  10th 
propositional  default  logics. 
National  Conference  on Artificial Intelligence,  pages  794-
800, San Jose, CA, July 1992. 

[Zhang and Marek,  1990]  A.  Zhang and W.  Marek.  On the 
classification  and  existence  of structures  in  default  logic. 
FundamenXa Informaticae, 13(4):485-499,1990. 

[Zohary, 2002]  Rachel Ben-Eliyahu Zohary.  Yet some more 
complexity  results  for default  logic.  Artificial Intelligence, 
139(1): 1-20,2002. 

Table  1:  Complexity results for outlier detection 

Despite  the  close  relationship  between  outlier  detection 
and abduction demonstrated by the above theorem (especially 
for normal defaults) we believe that there is a significant dif(cid:173)
ference between the two concepts.  In abduction, we have to 
single out a set of manifestations and a set of potential expla(cid:173)
nations. Outlier detection, on the other hand, has much more 
to do with knowledge discovery. The task in outlier detection 
is to learn who the exceptionals (the outliers), or the suspects, 
if you wish, are, and to justify the suspicion (that is,  list the 
outlier witnesses). 

It  also  turns out that reducing outlier detection queries to 
abduction and vice versa is not straightforward, and therefore, 
when  analyzing  the  computational  complexities  involved  in 
answering outlier detection queries we have preferred to use 
the classical Boolean formula satisfiability problems. 

7  Conclusion 
Suppose you are walking down the street and you see a blind 
person walking in the opposite direction.  You  believe he  is 
blind because he is feeling his way with a walking stick. Sud(cid:173)
denly, something falls out of his bag, and to your surprise, he 
finds  it  immediately  without probing  about with  his  fingers, 
as you would expect for a blind person. This kind of behavior 
renders the "blind" person suspicious. 

The purpose of this paper has been to formally mimic this 
type of reasoning using default logic.  We have formally de(cid:173)
fined the  notion  of  an  outlier  and  an  outlier  witness,  and 
analyzed the complexities involved, pointing out some non-
trivial tractable subsets.  The complexity results are summa(cid:173)
rized  in  Table  1,  where  C-c  stands  for C-complete.  As  ex(cid:173)
plained in the introduction, outlier detection can also be used 
for maintaining database integrity and completeness. 

This work can be extended in several ways.  First, we can 
develop  the  concept  of outliers  in  other  frameworks  of de(cid:173)
fault databases, like System Z [Pearl, 1990] and Circumscrip(cid:173)
tion  [McCarthy,  1980].  Second,  we can look for intelligent 
heuristics  that will enable us  to perform the  involved heavy 
computational task more efficiently.  Third, we can study the 
problem from the perspective of default theories as a "seman(cid:173)
tic check toolkit" for relational databases. 

Acknowledgements.  The authors gratefully thank Michael 
Gelfond  for  some  fruitful  discussions  on  the  subject  of the 
paper. 

References 
[Angiulli  et  al,2003]  Fabrizio  Angiulli,  Rachel  Ben-
Eliyahu-Zohary,  and  Luigi  Palopoli.  Outlier  detection 
using default logic, 2003.  Full manuscript. 

838 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

