Weak Conditional Logics of Normality 

James P. Delgrande 

School of Computing Science, 

Simon Fraser University, 

Burnaby, B.C., Canada V5A 1S6 

jim@cs.sfu.ca 

Abstract 

A  default  conditional 
has  most often 
been informally interpreted as a defeasible ver(cid:173)
sion of a classical conditional, usually the mate(cid:173)
rial conditional. That is, the intuition is that a de(cid:173)
fault should behave (implicitly or explicitly) as its 
(say) material counterpart "by default" or unless 
explicitly overridden.  In this paper, we develop 
an alternative interpretation, in which a default is 
regarded more like a rule, leading from premises 
to conclusion.  To this end, a general semantic 
framework under a "rule-based" interpretation is 
developed, and a family of weak conditional log(cid:173)
ics is specified, along with associated proof theo(cid:173)
ries. Nonmonotonic inference is defined very eas(cid:173)
ily in these logics. One obtains a rich set of non(cid:173)
monotonic inferences concerning the incorpora(cid:173)
tion  of irrelevant properties  and  of property  in(cid:173)
heritance.  Moreover, this interpretation resolves 
problems that have been associated with previous 
approaches. 

Introduction 

1 
A  major approach in  nonmonotonic reasoning has been to 
represent a default as an object that one can reason about, ei(cid:173)
ther as a conditional as part of some object language, or as a 
nonmonotonic consequence operator.  Thus for example "an 
adult is (typically or normally) employed" might be repre(cid:173)
sented 
represents a default conditional, dis(cid:173)
tinct from the material conditional  Given a suitable proof 
theory and semantics, one can derive other defaults from a 
given set of defaults.  There has been widespread agreement 
concerning just what principles should constitute a minimal 
logic, a suggested "conservative core," of defaults. However, 
the resulting conditional is quite weak, at least compared with 
the material conditional, in that it does not (in fact, should 
not) fully support principles such as strengthening of the an(cid:173)
tecedent, transitivity, and modus ponens. 

Since one would want to obtain these latter properties "by 
default,"  such  logics  are  extended nonmonotonically by  a 
"closure" operation or step.  This closure operation has, for 
example,  been defined by selecting a (preferred) subset of 

the models of a theory;  in the resulting subset of the mod(cid:173)
els one obtains strengthening of the antecedent, transitivity, 
or (effectively) modus ponens, wherever feasible. Essentially 
then, there are two components to default reasoning within 
such a system.  First, there is a standard, monotonic logic 
of conditionals that expresses relations among defaults that 
are deemed to always hold. Second, there is a nonmonotonic 
mechanism for obtaining defaults (and default consequences) 
where justified.  Representative (but not even remotely ex(cid:173)
haustive) work in this area includes [Geffncr and Pearl, 1992; 
Pearl, 1990; Kraus et al, 1990]. In essence, these approaches 
treat the default conditional like its classical counterpart, the 
material conditional, where "feasible" or "by default". 

While this  work captures an  important notion of default 
entailment - perhaps  the  most  important notion -  it  is  not 
without difficulties.  As described in the next section, some 
principles of the "core" logic are not uncontentious; as well, 
there are examples of default reasoning in which one obtains 
undesired results.  Lastly, there are more recent approaches, 
notably addressing causality, in which one requires a weaker 
notion of default inference, rejecting, for example, contrapos-
itive default inferences. In response to these points, we sug(cid:173)
gest that there is a second, distinct, interpretation of default 
conditionals, in which a default is regarded more like a rule, 
with properties more in line with a rule of inference, than a 
weakened classical conditional. 

is more "normal" than 

In the  following sections we  describe our proposed ap(cid:173)
proach informally and formally.  We begin by proposing an 
exceptionally weak logic of conditionals;  from this basis a 
family of conditional logics is defined.  Given a default con(cid:173)
ditional 
the underlying intuition that is formalised 
is that 
supplies a context in which, all other things being 
equal,  normally holds or, more precisely, in the context of 
Notably, all of the 
logics that we consider are weaker than the aforementioned 
"conservative core".  It proves to be the case however that 
a nonmonotonic operation is very easily defined;  this non(cid:173)
monotonic step essentially specifics that a property is irrele(cid:173)
vant with respect to a default unless it is known to be rele(cid:173)
vant.  This nonmonotonic step easily admits inferences that 
in other approaches have taken significant formal machinery 
to obtain.  As well, we show that the aforementioned diffi(cid:173)
culties that arise in interpreting a default as a weak classical 
conditional do not arise here. 

This distinction between treating a default as a condi(cid:173)
tional or as a rule has been noted previously; see for example 
[Geffner and Pearl, 1992]. As well, work on inheritance net(cid:173)
works [Horty, 1994] can be viewed as investigating proof the(cid:173)
ories for the latter interpretation; and work on causality such 
as [McCain and Turner, 1997] falls in the rule-based frame(cid:173)
work. However a logic (that is, with both semantics and proof 
theory) capturing this interpretation has not (to our knowl(cid:173)
edge) been investigated previously, nor has a fully general 
nonmonotonic closure operator been developed under this in(cid:173)
terpretation. Last, we suggest in the conclusion that this alter(cid:173)
native interpretation may be widely applicable, extending to 
areas such as counterfactual reasoning, generally treated via 
the stronger interpretation. 
2  Background 
In recent years, much attention has been paid to conditional 
systems of default reasoning. Such systems deal with defeasi(cid:173)
ble conditionals based on notions of preference among worlds 
or interpretations. Thus, the default that a bird normally flics 
can be represented propositionally as 
These ap(cid:173)
proaches are typically expressed using a modal logic in which 
is a binary modal operator.  The intended 
the connective 
is approximately "in the least worlds (or 
meaning of 
most preferred worlds) in which 
is also true". 
Possible worlds (or, again, interpretations) are arranged in at 
least a partial preorder, reflecting a metric of "normality" or 
"preferredness" on the worlds. Given a set of defaults  de(cid:173)
fault entailment with respect to 
can be defined via: 

is true, 

If 

then 

There has been a remarkable convergence or agreement on 
what inferences ought to be common to all nonmonotonic 
systems;  space considerations preclude a full listing of ap(cid:173)
proaches and references. The resulting set of principles has 
been called the conservative core in [Pearl, 1989].  It was 
originally considered in [Adams, 1975], and has been studied 
extensively, as the system P, in [Kraus et at., 1990]. One ex(cid:173)
pression of the logic of conditionals is as follows. The logic 
includes classical prepositional logic and the following rules 
and axioms:2 

CA/Or: 
These principles are not uncontentious; for example, [Poole, 
1991 ] can be viewed as arguing against a derived principle 
CC/And 
obtained 
via RT and ASC). Likewise, [Neufeld, 1989] suggests against 
CA in some cases. 

Nonetheless, the resulting logic (and proposed strengthen(cid:173)
ings of the logic) are weak. A central difficulty is that seem(cid:173)
ingly irrelevant properties will block a desired inference. For 
example, given that a bird is asserted to fly by default, one 
cannot thereby conclude that a green bird flies by default. 
The problem, essentially,  is that there is nothing requiring 
preferred worlds in which birds fly to include among them 
green-bird worlds. Consequently, various means of strength(cid:173)
ening the logic to incorporate irrelevant properties in a prin(cid:173)
cipled fashion have been proposed. Thus for "birds fly," since 
being green  is presumably irrelevant with respect to flight, 
one would want to have, among the preferred worlds in which 
birds fly, a (preferred) subset in which there are green birds. 
Rational closure [Lehmann and Magidor, 1992], for exam(cid:173)
ple, assumes that a world is ranked as unexceptional as pos(cid:173)
sible.  In conditional entailment [Geffner and Pearl, 1992], 
a partial order on possible worlds is determined by ranking 
worlds based on the highest-ranked default that distinguishes 
between the worlds. In both cases, defaults are evaluated with 
respect to the resulting ranking. Thus, since there is no rea(cid:173)
son to suppose that greenness has any bearing on flight, one 
assumes that greenness has no effect on flight. 

However there are difficulties with both approaches.  Ra(cid:173)
tional closure employs a very strong minimization criterion; 
see [Geffner and Pearl, 1992] for a number of problematic ex(cid:173)
amples. As well, consider an elaboration of an example given 
by John Horty: 

(1) 
but one does 

(Normally one does not eat with the fingers 
when eating asparagus 
but not when one is out of napkins 
The rational closure 
of these conditionals gives that, if one is not out of napkins 

normally one uses a napkin 

one is not eating asparagus 

Clearly this  inter(cid:173)
action between unrelated defaults is undesirable.  As well, 
in  neither conditional  entailment nor rational  closure  does 
one obtain inheritance of properties (however see [Benferhat 
et ai,  1993]).  In addition, consider the following example 
[Geffner and Pearl, 1992]: 

1 An alternative is to treat the conditional as a nonmonotonic in(cid:173)
ference operator, 
In a certain sense these approaches can 
be considered equivalent; here, for simplicity, we remain within the 
conditional logic framework. 
2Two systems of nomenclature have arisen, one associated with 
conditional logic and one with nonmonotonic consequence opera(cid:173)
tors. We list both (when both exist) when first presenting an axiom 
or rule; for example the conditional logic rule for substitution of 
logical equivalents in the antecedent is called RCEA; its nonmono(cid:173)
tonic consequence operator, Left Logical Equivalence is abbreviated 
LLE. Hence we first list the rule as RCEA/LLE. 

(2) 
(That is, adults are normally employed, university students 
are normally adults but are not employed, and Frank Sina(cid:173)
tra fans are normally adults.)  In both conditional entailment 
and rational closure we obtain the default inference that Frank 
Sinatra fans are not university students. But this is a curious 
inference, since there is nothing in the example that would 
seem to relate Frank Sinatra fans to university students. 

We suggest that at least some of these examples do not nec(cid:173)
essarily reflect a problem with the approaches per se. Rather, 
our thesis is that there are (at least) two distinct interpreta(cid:173)
tions that can be given to a default. First, there is the intuition 

874 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

as 

that a default is essentially a weak version of the material 
conditional (or, in more recent approaches, necessary entail(cid:173)
ment), and should behave as such a conditional, except that 
it is defeasible.  This intuition is seen most clearly in the ex(cid:173)
pression of defaults by circumscriptive abnormality theories 
[McCarthy,  1986].  In this case a default 
is repre(cid:173)
sented as the formula 
The circumscription 
of A  asserts that A 
is false (roughly) if consistently pos(cid:173)
sible.  Obviously,  if A 
is asserted to be false, the result is 
exactly the material conditional. As well, conditional entail(cid:173)
is basically the 
ment adopts this intuition: the default 
same 
together 
with specificity information implicit in 
[Geffner and Pearl, 
1992, p. 232].  This interpretation also underlies approaches 
that assume that defaults are founded (formally or informally) 
on notions of probability.3 

(and so 

we specifically do not want to conclude 

The second interpretation regards a default more as an 
whose properties are closer to those of a 
(object-level) 
rule of inference.  Thus, given a conditional 
if  the 
antecedent a happens to be true, we conclude  by default. 
Given 
This 
latter interpretation covers an important class of defaults that 
have not been addressed as a logic of conditionals per se (al(cid:173)
though this distinction has been noted in [Geffner and Pearl, 
1992]; and inheritance networks [Horty, 1994] can be viewed 
as proof theoretic accounts of this interpretation).  A further 
motivation for exploring this interpretation is that there has 
been recent interest in conditional accounts of causality (for 
example [McCain and Turner, 1997]), in which reasoning via 
a default contrapositive is explicitly rejected.  Thus, from 
causes  we don't want to conclude 

causes 

3  Defaults as Rules 
The general approach is the same as those described in the 
previous section:  we begin by specifying a logic of defaults 
and subsequently provide a principled, nonmonotonic, means 
to extend the logic to account for irrelevant properties.  Our 
point of departure is that we informally treat defaults more 
like rules of inference; in particular, defaults are intended to 
be applied in a "forward'' direction only. Our interpretation, 
roughly, is that the antecedent of a default establishes a con(cid:173)
text in which the consequent (normally) holds, or holds all 
other things being equal.  Thus, for default 
our in(cid:173)
terpretation is roughly that, in the context established by a, it 
is the case that 
is more normal (typical, etc.) than  We 
express this semantically by 

(3) 
that  is,  the  proposition  (see  the  next  section)  is more 
normal (typical, etc.) than 
It seems reasonable 
that our binary relation of relative normality  be asymmetric 
and transitive, and so we generally assume that these condi(cid:173)
tions hold.  We note that the form of (3) has appeared regu(cid:173)
larly in the literature, going back at least to [Lewis, 1973].4 

The difference is that usually the interpretation of (3) is along 
the  lines  of  "the  least  worlds  where  is true are less nor(cid:173)
mal than the least 
worlds"; our interpretation refers to 
the proposition expressed by these formulas.  Consequently, 
our relation 
is not an accessibility relation in the normal 
sense, since it is a relation on sets of worlds. 

Filling in the (formal) details yields a weak logic of condi(cid:173)
tionals, significantly weaker than the so-called "conservative 
core".  We also consider various strengthenings of the logic, 
but these strengthenings are still weaker than this "core" set of 
defaults.  We subsequently define a notion of nonmonotonic 
inference with respect to these logics. It proves to be the case 
that this is very easy to do in our approach.  Basically, the 
(semantic) relation  X 
Y asserts that in the "context" (set 
of possible worlds) X  Y, partitioned by  X,Y,  we have that 
Y  is  more normal  than X.  Our nonmonotonic assumption 
is that this obtains in all "feasible" subcontexts.  That is, for 
proposition Z, unless there is reason to conclude otherwise, 
we assert that 
The next section develops the 
formal details. 

be the language of propositional logic defined, for 
of propo(cid:173)

4  The Approach 
4.1  The Base Logic 
Let 
simplicity, over a finite alphabet P 
sitional letters or atomic propositions, and employing the log(cid:173)
is taken to be 
ical symbols 
The 
some propositional tautology, and 
is  PC extended with the binary operator 
language 
as 
a weak conditional.  For convenience, arguments of 
are 
hence, we do not allow nested occurrences 
members of 
... and 
of 
sets of formulas by upper case Greek letters 
Sen(cid:173)
tences are interpreted with respect to a comparative condi(cid:173)
tional model M  = 

Formulas are denoted by the Greek letters 

is defined as 

The symbol 

where: 

and 

1. W is a set (of states or possible worlds); 
2. 
3.  P: 

with properties described below; 

We use the upper case letters X,  X1,  Y,  ...to denote sets 
of possible worlds.  P maps atomic sentences onto sets of 
worlds, being those worlds at which the sentence is true. The 
relation  associates with each world 
W a binary notion 
of relative normality between propositions; we write X 
Y  to assert informally that, according to world w, proposition 
Y  is more normal than X.  That is, given a partition 
of a context X  Y, the relation  X  Y asserts that Y is more 
normal (unexceptional, etc.) than X.  We assume that 
is a 
strict partial ordering on its last two arguments, that is for 
W, 
the incoherent proposition is maximally abnormal: 

is asymmetric and transitive. As well, we assume that 

(4) 
Truth of a formula at a world in a model is as for propositional 
logic, with an addition for 
"Y is more normal than X" by A'  Y rather than by Y  X. 

3 We note in passing that there are examples of defaults that have 

nothing to do with probability, for example (1). 

4We  use  in the opposite sense of Lewis and many other au(cid:173)

thors. For our interpretation, it seems to make more sense to express 

NONMONOTONIC REASONING 

875 

Definition 4.1 

4.2  Extensions to the Logic 
In the logic C most properties of the relation 
stem from 
its being a strict partial order (viz. asymmetric and transitive). 
We also look at strengthening 
by considering properties 
that seem reasonable for a notion of normality. Consider the 
following: 

is valid, written 

A formula 
just if it is true at every 
world in every model. We identify the proposition expressed 
by a sentence  with the set of worlds in which 
is true, 
denoted 

, that is, 

is true just if the proposition expressed by 

Thus 
is more normal than that expressed by 
true, 

is defined as 

is necessarily 

Consider  the  logic  closed  under  classical  propositional 
logic along with the following rules of inference and axioms: 
RCEA/LLE:  From 
RCECA: 

infer 

From 

Rl/SupraCI:  From 
WeakCEM: 
Trans: 
We call the smallest logic based on the above axiomatisation 
C. Theoremhood of a formula a is denoted, as usual, by 
This system is quite weak; however in the full paper we con(cid:173)
sider the even weaker logic  C-  consisting of propositional 
logic and RCEA, RCECA, and Rl. RCEA asserts that con(cid:173)
ditionals with the same consequent and equivalent (in propo(cid:173)
sitional logic) antecedents are equivalent.  RCECA asserts 
the same thing with respect to consequents, but is somewhat 
more general, in that the consequents need be equivalent just 
in the "context" given by the antecedent.  RI asserts that if 
then it is also normally implied. 
WeakCEM gives a weak version of the excluded middle for 
a weak conditional; in the semantics this is reflected by asym(cid:173)
metry  of 
in the 
semantics. We obtain the following basic results: 
Theorem 4.1 

Similarly Trans reflects transitivity  of 

is logically implied by 

For CD, if X is less normal than Y, then a stronger propo(cid:173)
sition  than  X  (viz.  X\Z)  is  also  less  normal  than  Y.  CD 
is a dual:  if X is less normal than Y, then a weaker propo(cid:173)
sition than Y (viz. Y  Z) is also more normal than X.  UD 
combines these conditions, and WDjU is a weak version of 
disjoint unions, described below.  Interestingly, the first two 
of these conditions have appeared in the belief revision lit(cid:173)
erature.  Our relation 
is what [Alchourron and Makinson, 
1985] call a (transitive) hierarchy; while  with CD and CU 
is a regular hierarchy. Their interpretation of  echoes ours 
for  X 
y,  that  "X  is  less  secure  or reliable  or plausible 
... than Y" [Giirdenfors and Rott, 1995, p. 75]. 

Consider next the following rules and formulas: 

Space considerations preclude a full discussion of these con(cid:173)
ditions.  WeakRCM  is  a  weaker version  of both  the  rule 
RCM  and  the  formula  ASC  in  conditional  logic.  CM 
("Conditionalisation"  in  nonmonotonic  consequence  rela(cid:173)
tions) gives a conditional version of one half of the deduc(cid:173)
tion  theorem.  Combining WeakRCM  and  CM yields the 
rule RCM, allowing weakening of the consequent of a con(cid:173)
ditional.  D supplies a certain "reasoning by cases" for the 
conditional. 

We obtain the following correspondence between semantic 

conditions and the axiomatisation: 
Theorem 4.3  C + CD (CU, UD, WDjU) is complete with 
respect to the class of comparative conditional models closed 
under WeakRCM (CM, RCM, D) 

As well, we obtain: 
Theorem 4.2 a is valid in the class of comparative condi(cid:173)
tional 

models 

C. 

We could go on and add other conditions in the semantics. 
Again space considerations dictate against a lengthy discus(cid:173)
sion, but two conditions are worth noting here: 

For  those  familiar  with  conditional  logic,  the  formulas 
RCM, RT, ASC, CC, and CA (and their nonmonotonic con(cid:173)
sequence operator counterparts: Right Weakening, Cut, Cau(cid:173)
tious Monotonity, And, and Or) are not valid in C. Nonethe(cid:173)
less, despite its (monotonic) inferential weakness, the logic 
already allows a rich set of nonmonotonic inferences, as cov(cid:173)
ered in the next section. However, before proceeding we first 
consider various extensions to the logic. 

Connectivity: 
Disjoint union has appeared frequently in the literature, for 
example [Savage, 1972; Fine, 1973; Dubois et al, 1994]. The 
addition of disjoint union requires that the notion of a model 
be altered slightly (from a relation 
the resultant se(cid:173)
mantic framework would correspond to the basic definition 

876 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

of a plausibility structure [Friedman and Halpern, 2001]. The 
a qualitative proba(cid:173)
addition of connectivity would make 
bility in the terminology of [Savage, 1972]. 
5  Nonmonotonic Reasoning 
We claimed at the outset that the logic C and its strengthen(cid:173)
ings would allow a simple approach to nonmonotonic infer(cid:173)
ence, having just the "right" properties for a rule-based in(cid:173)
terpretation of a conditional.  For the logics, the central idea 
was that, given a partition 
the relation X  Y asserts that Y is more normal (unexcep(cid:173)
tional, etc.)  than X.  To obtain nonmonotonic inference, we 
simply assume that this relation holds in any subcontext, that 
is 
wherever "reasonable".  More formally, 
we have the following: 
Definition 5.1  Let 
tional model in C. 

be a comparative condi(cid:173)

of a context 

5.1 
Theorem 
tional model then so is 

is a comparative condi(cid:173)

We define 

as validity in the class of augmented com(cid:173)
iff a is true at every 
parative conditional models; that is 
world  in  every augmented comparative conditional  model. 
Nonmonotonic inference is defined as follows: 

is a nonmonotonic inference from  with re(cid:173)
if 

is a nonmonotonic inference from 

or just 

is clear from the context of discussion. 

We  illustrate nonmonotonic inference first by a familiar 

We say that 
spect to 
the set 

example: 

(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
Thus birds fly and have wings, and penguins are (necessarily) 
birds that do not fly. We obtain the following: 

as do non-green flying penguins. As well 
and so pen(cid:173)
guins inherit the property of having wings by virtue of neces(cid:173)
sarily being birds. Note that if we replaced (7) by p 
6, we 
however we would obtain the 
would no longer obtain 
We justify this by noting that a normality 
weaker 
conditional 
does not imply a strict specificity relation 
between  and  whereas 

The next example further illustrates reasoning in the pres(cid:173)

does. 

ence of exceptions. 

(9) 
So  Quakers  are  pacifists  while  Republicans  are  not,  and 
Quakers are generous. We obtain 
Thus in the last case, while Quakers that are Republican are, 
informally,  exceptional  Quakers,  they  are  nonetheless still 
generous by default. 

Concerning our original motivating examples, in (1) we do 
and in (2) we 
not obtain the undesirable inference 
do not obtain 
Last, we note that while we obtain full 
incorporation of irrelevant properties, we do not obtain full 
default transitivity. Thus 

and 

6  Discussion 
We have argued that there are two interpretations of a default 
conditional: as a weak (typically material) implication, or as 
something akin to a rule of inference. The former interpreta(cid:173)
tion is explicit in, for example, circumscriptive abnormality 
theories, and implicit in an approach such as conditional en(cid:173)
tailment.  It is clear that there are many, and varied, applica(cid:173)
tions in which the first interpretation is appropriate. However 
we have also noted that there are various reasons to suppose 
that this is not the only such interpretation:  First, work such 
as [Poole, 1991] and [Neufeld, 1989] can be viewed as ar(cid:173)
guing against principles of the "core" logic underlying this 
first interpretation (the former arguing against the principle 
CC/And and the latter against CA/Or). Second, there are ex(cid:173)
amples of inferences in approaches such as rational closure 
or in conditional entailment that are either too weak or too 
strong. Last, there are emerging areas (such as causal reason(cid:173)
ing) in which a "weak material implication" interpretation is 
not appropriate.  While this distinction has been recognized 
previously, what is new here is the development of a  fam(cid:173)
ily of logics, with a novel semantic theory and proof theory, 
along with a specification of nonmonotonic inference, for the 
"rule-based" interpretation. 

All of the logics presented here are quite weak, at least 
compared  to  the  "conservative  core"  or,  equivalently,  the 
system  P  of [Kraus et  al,  1990].  We  argue however that 
such lack of inferential capability is characteristic of a "rule-
based" interpretation of a conditional. Moreover it proves to 

NONMONOTONIC REASONING 

877 

[Horty, 1994] J.F. Horty. Some direct theories of nonmono(cid:173)
tonic inheritance.  In D.M. Gabbay, C.J. Hogger, and J.A. 
Robinson, editors, Nonmonotonic Reasoning and Uncer(cid:173)
tain Reasoning, volume 3 of Handbook of Logic in Artifi-
cal Intelligence and Logic Programming, pages 111-187. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994. 

[Krause et al., 1990] S. Kraus, D. Lehmann, and M. Magi-
dor. Nonmonotonic reasoning, preferential models and cu(cid:173)
mulative logics. Artificial Intelligence, 44(1-2): 167-207, 
1990. 

[Lehmann and Magidor, 1992]  D.  Lehmann and  M.  Magi-
dor. What does a conditional knowledge base entail? Ar(cid:173)
tificial Intelligence, 55(1): 1-60, 1992. 

[Lewis, 1973] D.Lewis.  Counterfactuals.  Harvard Univer(cid:173)

sity Press, 1973. 

[McCain and Turner, 1997]  N.  McCain  and  H.  Turner. 
Causal theories of action and change.  In Proceedings of 
the AAAI National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
pages 460-465, Providence, Rl, 1997. 

[McCarthy, 1986] J. McCarthy. Applications of circumscrip(cid:173)
tion to formalizing common-sense knowledge.  Artificial 
Intelligence, 28:89-116, 1986. 

[Neufeld, 1989]  E. Neufeld.  Defaults and probabilities; ex(cid:173)
tensions and coherence. In Proceedings of the First In(cid:173)
ternational Conference on the Principles of Knowledge 
Representation and Reasoning, pages 312-323, Toronto, 
Canada, 1989. 

[Pearl, 1989]  J. Pearl. Probabilistic semantics for nonmono(cid:173)
tonic reasoning: A survey. In Proceedings of the First 
International Conference on the Principles of Knowledge 
Representation and Reasoning, pages 505-516, Toronto, 
May 1989. Morgan Kaufman. 

[Pearl, 1990]  J. Pearl.  System Z: A natural ordering of de(cid:173)
faults with tractable applications to nonmonotonic reason(cid:173)
ing. In R. Parikh, editor, Proc. of the Third Conference 
on Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning About Knowledge, 
pages 121-135, Pacific Grove, Ca.,  1990. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers. 

[Poole, 1991] D.L.Poole. The effect of knowledge on belief: 
Conditioning, specificity, and the lottery paradox in default 
reasoning. Artificial Intelligence, 49(l-3):281-307,1991. 
[Savage, 1972] L.J. Savage. The Foundations of Statistics. 
Dover Publications Inc., New York, second edition, 1972. 

be the case that nonmonotonic reasoning is defined very eas(cid:173)
ily in these logics, and allows a rich set of inferences concern(cid:173)
ing the incorporation of irrelevant properties and of property 
inheritance. 

An open question concerns how informal, commonsense 
defaults should be classified - whether as a defeasible classi(cid:173)
cal conditional or as a rule. Certainly past work has favoured 
the ''defeasible classical  conditional" interpretation.  How(cid:173)
ever, a case can be made that many examples formerly in(cid:173)
terpreted as belonging to the  first  category are better inter(cid:173)
preted as belonging to the "rule" category.  Consider Lewis' 
approach to counterfactuals [Lewis,  1973] in which the fol(cid:173)
lowing example, concerning a past party, is given:  "If John 
had gone it would have been a good party" and "If John and 
Mary had gone it would have not been a good party".  From 
this we deduce that "if John had gone, Mary would not have 
gone". This, to most readers, is a strange result: John's going 
and Mary's going are (presumably) independent events.  Ar(cid:173)
guably this result ought not to obtain, and so perhaps counter(cid:173)
factuals, as previously modelled by Lewis' sphere semantics, 
may be better interpreted via the "rule" interpretation. 
Acknowledgements 
1 thank the reviewers for their useful suggestions. This work 
was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Coun(cid:173)
cil of Canada Discovery Grant. 
References 
[Adams, 1975]  E. Adams.  The Logic of Conditionals.  D. 

Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland, 1975. 

[Alchourron and Makinson, 1985]  C.E.  Alchourron  and 
D.  Makinson.  On  the  logic  of theory  change:  Safe 
contraction. Studia Logica, 44:405-422,1985. 

[Benferhat el al., 1993]  S. Benferhat, C. Cayrol, D. Dubois, 
J. Lang, and H. Prade. Inconsistency management and pri(cid:173)
oritized syntax-based entailment. In Proceedings of the 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
pages 640-645, Chambery, Fr., 1993. 

[Dubois et ah, 1994] D. Dubois, J. Lang, and H. Prade. Pos-
sibilistic logic. In Dov M. Gabbay, C. J. Hogger, and J. A. 
Robinson, editors, Nonmonotonic Reasoning and Uncer(cid:173)
tain Reasoning, volume 3 of Handbook of Logic in Artifi-
cal Intelligence and Logic Programming, pages 439-513. 
Oxford, 1994. 

[Fine, 1973] T.L. Fine. Theories of Probability: An Exami(cid:173)

nation of Foundations. Academic Press, 1973. 

[Friedman and Halpern, 2001] N. Friedman and J. Halpern. 
JACM, 

Plausibility  measures  and  default  reasoning. 
48(4):649-685,2001. 

[GardenforsandRott, 1995]  P.  Gardenfors  and  H.  Rott. 
Handbook of logic in artificial intelligence and logic pro(cid:173)
gramming, volume 4 of Epistemic and Temporal Reason(cid:173)
ing. Oxford Science Publications, 1995. 

[Geffnerand Pearl, 1992]  H. Geffner and J. Pearl.  Condi(cid:173)
tional entailment: Bridging two approaches to default rea(cid:173)
soning. Artificial Intelligence, 53(2-3):209-244,1992. 

878 

NONMONOTONIC  REASONING 

