Tucking RCC in Cyc's Ontological Bed 

Pierre Grenon 

University of Leipzig 

Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science 

Haertelstrasse 16-18, D-04107, Leipzig, Germany 

pgrenon@ifomis.uni-leipzig.de 

Abstract 

Formalisms and axiomatic theories are designed to 
support reasoning, they are often intended with a 
preferred  interpretation  and  a  targeted  ontology. 
Questions of proper interpretations and of the pos(cid:173)
sible challenge of an  intended  interpretation  arise 
when integrating a particular theory in pre-existing 
formal and ontological settings. This paper reports 
on an instance of this general problem of ontologi(cid:173)
cal engineering. The case study is that of the inte(cid:173)
gration of the Region Connection Calculus for spa(cid:173)
tial reasoning in the Cyc knowledge base. We show 
that  given  the  assumptions  on  the  Cyc  ontology, 
RCC had to be interpreted within a substantivalist 
metaphysic of space as a Boolean algebra of spatial 
regions  which  are  distinct  from  their  occupants. 
The RCC literature suggests such an intended in(cid:173)
terpretation, and this paper intends to show that this 
was a necessary condition  of integration  in Cyc's 
ontology.  This  led  to  the  enrichment  of the  Cyc 
knowledge base, rather than to a radical modifica(cid:173)
tion of the upper-level ontology. 

1 Introduction 
Our standpoint is that of ontological engineers attempting to 
integrate a comparatively small and allegedly domain spe(cid:173)
cific theory within a larger, multipurpose formal framework. 
Bluntly put, our ontological interest is concerned with types 
of entities  admitted  by  the  respective  theories  (and  their 
domains of variables), the intended interpretations of these 
theories,  and  issues  of relative  coherence  and  soundness. 
We  consider  that  ontological  engineering  in  this  sense  is 
distinct from a work of implementation. Indeed, the power 
of  information  science  ontologies  lies  in  their  semantic 
aspects  and  their  ontological  foundations.  These  elements 
will guide, but ought to remain independent from, a work of 
implementation within a peculiar computing system. In this 
context,  it clearly appears  that  in  order to use an  existing 
axiomatic theory, it is important to know which are its pos(cid:173)
sible  interpretations  and,  especially,  if one  is  the  intended 
one. It is indeed crucial to evaluate how the theory has to be 
interpreted in order for it to fit within an existing ontology. 

Two main questions arise: (i) does the formal theory support 
an interpretation compatible with that intended for the em(cid:173)
bedding framework? (ii) is it possible to bend the theory and 
its intended interpretation such as to allow maximal integra(cid:173)
tion?  This  may  lead  either  to  non-trivial  changes  in  the 
embedding ontology or to the choice of a peculiar interpre(cid:173)
tation  for  the  theory to  be  integrated.  In  turn,  it  becomes 
necessary  to  check  whether  the  chosen  interpretation  is 
really allowed  by the  integrated  theory (given  its  axioms) 
and  that  it  does  not  generate  ontological  monsters,  so  to 
speak,  according  to  the  standards  of the  larger  ontology. 
When starting a work of integration, one tends to be maxi(cid:173)
mally  conservative  from  the  standpoint  of the  embedding 
framework (this is, at least, our experience), for the obvious 
reason that, a priori, it might be simpler and more efficient 
to  adapt  a  specific  theory  to  an  existing  larger  ontology 
rather than the converse. Changes in the embedding ontol(cid:173)
ogy  are  always  perilous  and  their  consequences  are  not 
always easily anticipated. Moreover, from the standpoint of 
an allegedly total or universal ontology, it is very tempting 
when integrating presumably specific theories to generalize 
their relevance by extending their domain of interpretation, 
and even relaxing not only the intended interpretation, but 
also the axiomatization. The present paper can be taken as a 
reminder  to  be  cautious  when  making  a  methodological 
maxim of this tendency. 

The  axiomatic  theory  of interest  is  the  so-called  Re(cid:173)
gion Connection Calculus (RCC as put forward in  [Ran-
dell et al.,  1992]), a theory prototypically applied to spa(cid:173)
tial  reasoning.  The  embedding  ontology  in  which  we 
introduced RCC is that  of the Cyc knowledge base (Cyc 
KB), as described by [Lenat and Guha, 1990], and which 
stands  as  a  larger  theory  of reality.  In  part  2,  we  give 
some elements regarding the background of Cyc's spatial 
ontology.  In  part  3,  we present RCC's  underlying meta(cid:173)
physics  as  informally  rendered  in  the  most  significant 
sources.  Part  4  exposes  how  we  were  led  to  question 
RCC's  ontological  significance  in  our  work  of integra(cid:173)
tion.  We present  in part  5  the resulting  ontological  set(cid:173)
tings  and  some  extensions  of the  basic  theory  that  we 
were able to introduce in a Cyc framework. 

894 

ONTOLOGIES AND  FOUNDATIONS 

2  Cyc's original spatial ontology 
The Cyc KB is intended to serve as an encyclopedic reposi(cid:173)
tory  of  all  human  knowledge,  primarily  common-sense 
knowledge.  It purports to provide a medium  for the repre(cid:173)
sentation of facts and the inscription of rules about all exist(cid:173)
ing and imaginable things. Cyc's knowledge is represented 
in  a  language  called  CycL,  described  in  [Cycorp,  2002], 
which here can be seen as a first order language. The Cyc 
KB  is  structured  and  compartmented  into  theories  (called 
microtheories), additional theories can be introduced a volo 
in order to account for the specificity of a given domain or 
context.  Since our objective was to produce an integration 
of RCC supporting spatial reasoning in the Cyc system, we 
will focus on Cyc spatial ontology. 

The relevant fragment of the KB is nonetheless extremely 
broad.  Cyc's  declared  goal  of  achieving  common-sense 
reasoning has, as an objective, carved up the ontology in a 
metaphysically determinate way. In particular, "spatial rea(cid:173)
soning" has been understood primarily as a type of reason(cid:173)
ing about  objects  in  space,  and not  primarily about  space 
itself.  Roughly,  this  view  can  be  outlined  by the position 
that in the world there are objects only, in particular physi(cid:173)
cal  ones,  delimitating  their  'place'.  In  this  context,  spatial 
reasoning as such refers to the relations that exist between 
such objects, say, in virtue of being in such and such relative 
positioning. We shall refer hereafter to this understanding as 
the 'relational' approach. Cyc's spatial ontology was primar(cid:173)
ily relational  in  this sense.  Its ontology's top  spatial  cate(cid:173)
gory, #$SpatialThing, is defined in [Cycorp, 1997] as that of 
entities "with  a  spatial  extent or location  relative to some 
other  [instance  of  SpatialThing]".  A  large  part  of the 
hierarchy  under 
SpatialThing  was  covered  by the cate(cid:173)
gory so-called  PartiallyTangible which is, in a word, that 
of objects  with  a  material  constituent,  concrete  things.  In 
addition,  SpatialThing  also  includes  certain  events.  But 
many specializations were geometrical or otherwise abstract 
in some sense (so-called #$Intangible). Meanwhile, Cyc had 
already  a  large  body  of spatial  and  topological  relations, 
most  of them  over  PartiallyTangible.  These  were  typi(cid:173)
cally documented  as  relations  holding  between  objects  in 
virtue of the relations between these objects' spatial extents. 
Indeed, many of the spatial entities in Cyc could be handled 
as  spatial  extents,  metonymically,  but  were  not  properly 
speaking  identical  with  their  extents.  This  is  notably  the 
case with geopolitical entities (on the other hand, Cyc has a 
microtheory in which  geopolitical entities are geographical 
regions, not merely located at such a region), but also with 
persons (which are examples of composite entities, with a 
tangible part, a body, and an intangible part), or even books 
(composed of a material support and an informational con(cid:173)
tent). However, spatial extents (intuitively, spatial regions) 
were not  'reified' nor mentioned in assertions. Their onto-
logical status was, so to speak, implicit and mostly intuitive. 
On the other hand, still in [Cycorp, 1997], Cyc had a notion 
of (pure) spatial region used essentially to define contextu-
ally empty space.  But then, for an entity, its being an in(cid:173)
stance of this collection was overtly and essentially context 
dependent.  The documentation discusses as an example a 

piece of atmosphere which can be seen as empty space in a 
particular context, not in another.  A substantivalist view of 
space considers  space and regions of space as  substances 
independent for their existence of what occupies them.  Un(cid:173)
der this view, it is not contextual for an entity to be a region 
of space, it is essential. In other words, regions of space as 
portions  of an  existentially independent  (spatial)  substance 
did not exist in Cyc. We will not delve further into the Cyc 
ontology.  For  our  purpose,  it  suffices  to  observe  that  at(cid:173)
tempting to integrate RCC in Cyc meant starting to look at 
RCC from an essentially relational spatial ontology. 
3 RCC and its canonical interpretation 
Was this approach allowed by RCC  itself? RCC is techni(cid:173)
cally referred to as a mereotopology, that is, a theory with 
both a mereological fragment (a theory of part and whole) 
and a  topological fragment articulated together.  The basic 
part of the theory, so-called RCC-8, has only one topologi(cid:173)
cal primitive: Connects-With (or C). We will assume famili(cid:173)
arity with the basics of RCC which can be gathered in [Ran-
dell  et  al.,  1992]  and,  informally,  in  the  introduction  of 
[Cohn  et  ai,  1997].  The calculus can be assimilated to a 
Boolean algebra, which, as we shall see, is not without onto-
logical  consequences.  Our  interest  here  is  mostly  in  the 
ontological significance of the theory. RCC is said to sup(cid:173)
port both a spatial and a temporal interpretation. Here, only 
a putative spatial interpretation is of interest, so regions will 
be spatial regions. RCC is, with respect to spatial reasoning, 
a  theory  of regions  of space  and  of their  relations,  not  a 
theory of physical objects nor of their relations to regions. It 
is already an other form of spatial reasoning than the one we 
encountered in Cyc. Characteristically, regions are consid(cid:173)
ered as extended (RCC is originally introduced in analogy to 
Allen's  interval  logic).  In  purely  model-theoretic  terms, 
intended models are regular open sets of Rn. For common-
sense reasoning, n is equal to either 1, 2 or 3. Going further 
in the specification of regions would be mostly irrelevant, as 
specializations  derive  straightforwardly  from  the  theory. 
However,  what  is  arguably  not  trivial  is  precisely  what 
regions are, or, in other words, what their ontological status 
is: are they dependent or independent ontologically, that is, 
for  their  existence,  on  other  entities  which  arc  not  them(cid:173)
selves  spatial  regions?  In  fact,  depending  on  whether  the 
term 'region' refers to a part of a substantival space or to a 
portion  of a  relational  space,  the answer  and  the  ensuing 
interpretation of the theory would be significantly different 
ontologically speaking.  In  other words,  the alleged reality 
that the theory intends to capture is not that evident. 

It  is  useful  to remark  that the relations  in  RCC  are re(cid:173)
quired  to  hold  between  regions  of  equal  dimensionality. 
This  indicates  the  possibility  of  treating  uni-dimensional 
and bi-dimensional regions of space, even  if the respective 
domains  are  independent.  This  means  an  acceptance  of 
objects of lower dimensionality than that of physical objects 
(which are uncontroversially tri-dimensional). Thus, if RCC 
is a fragment of a theory of reality, its underlying ontology 
probably is not restricted to physical objects and assimilated 
things, or, in Cyc's terms,  PartiallyTangible. However, so 

ONTOLOGIES AND  FOUNDATIONS 

895 

far it remains open whether one can conceive in a RCC-like 
framework objects of lower dimensions that are not spatial 
regions  or,  alternatively,  only regions of lower dimensions 
at-which material objects are somehow located. The rejec(cid:173)
tion  of  boundaries  from  RCC  after  [Randell  and  Cohn, 
1989] is yet another evidence that the theory is about rela(cid:173)
tions among regions of a given non-null dimension. 

More generally, in RCC, the distinction between regions 
and  their  putative  occupants  is  almost  systematic  in  the 
informal litterature, especially in [Randell and Cohn,  1989; 
Randell et al, 1992; Cohn et aL, 97]. These sources suggest 
the acceptance of a substantivalist view of space; that is, the 
view  that  space  consists  in  a  substance  in  its  own  rights 
distinct  from  the  objects  that  occupy  portions  of it.  For(cid:173)
mally, the issue is scarcely addressed before [Bennett, 2001] 
which  represents  a  dramatic  broadening  of the  scope  of 
application of the theory (in addition to the stronger geomet(cid:173)
rical  approach  it presents).  In  multi-sortal axiomatizations, 
the domain  is  always restricted  to  the sort  REGION  (and 
secondarily to the sort NULL), a sort PhysObj for occupants 
of regions is mentioned only to limit the scope of the theory. 
The  first  order  axiomatizations  are  seen  as  fragments  of 
more complete theories. It is not clear how much this is, or 
is not, an artifact of the sortal approach which  is itself an 
artefact of a putative implementation. Presumably, however, 
first-order  axioms  should  incorporate  quasi-sortal  restric(cid:173)
tions implicit in the multi-sortal settings. 
4 Path to Integration 
Cyc's general maxim for ontological integration is generali(cid:173)
zation. On the one hand, the foregoing considerations on the 
use of sorts in RCC provide a starting point for expanding 
the  RCC  schema  by  generalizing  over  sortal  restrictions. 
Overlooking  any  sortal  restriction,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
tantamount to claiming generalization of RCC to putatively 
all  entities, namely, 
Thing  in  Cyc.  This  is  clearly  not 
desirable:  the scope has to be at least restricted to spatial 
things. For Cyc, objects in space (and physical events) are 
primitives. If RCC is generalizable to  SpatialThing and if 
regions 
SpaceRegion) are but a subtype of spatial things, 
it would be redundant and sub-optimal to develop the theory 
on  regions  only.  Yet,  RCC  takes  regions  as  primitives. 
Pushed to the extreme, this latter position leads to defining 
spatial objects in terms of regions. There would be only one 
substance, space. An object would be no more than a quali(cid:173)
tative singularity in space.  Such an eliminatist view (doing 
away with  the primitivity  of entities  in  space)  is not  con(cid:173)
ceivable  for  Cyc's  upper-level  ontology.  The  compromise 
still  appears  to be straightforward  generalization  of RCC's 
notions  at  the  level  of  SpatialThing  in  Cyc.  After  all, 
there  seems  to  be  no prima facie  objection  to this  in  the 
RCC literature. Indeed, the intended interpretation for RCC 
is as a calculus of 'spatial regions'. But the sources are all 
starting from the introduction of regions as primitives. There 
seems to be no claim in the other sense, namely that RCC 
means, specifically and necessarily, spatial regions, and not, 
more generally, spatial things in the sense of the Cyc KB. 

Let us assume that generalization is possible. C is then to 
be interpreted as a relation between objects such that these 
spatially connect  along  the  RCC  lines  ([Cohn  and  Varzi, 
1996] situates RCC's C among a variety of interpretations). 
Modulo the  issues  with  openness  of regions  in  RCC,  Cyc 
had a relation of touching among  PartiallyTangible which 
intuitively was close enough to C to suggest the possibility 
of a  sound  generalization  at  the  level  of  SpatialThing. 
Most  RCC-8  relations  (the basic  set  of binary relations  in 
RCC)  had  proxies  in  Cyc  (with  exception  of inverses  for 
implementation  reasons).  More precisely,  there were rela(cid:173)
tions at the level of  PartiallyTangible which were holding 
true  in  virtue  of  their  relata's  putative  spatial  extents  in 
RCC-like  relations  themselves.  In  particular,  Cyc  already 
had  a  relation  of co-spatiality,  a  relation  holding  true  of 
things with identical spatial extents. Meanwhile, [Randell et 
al,  1992] defines  as identity between regions. However, 
in Cyc, co-spatiality was not identity. There were conceiv(cid:173)
able cases of entities with the same (spatial or geographical) 
extent and which were not identical as alluded to in Part 2. 
The question of whether a generalization of RCC's relations 
was possible could be rephrased as whether 
in RCC was 
indeed  identity  or  could  be  interpreted  as  a  co-spatiality 
relation on  SpatialThing.  If the  former,  we  would  have 
applied RCC straightforwardly to the Cyc ontology. We will 
see that the status of = in the RCC literature is something of 
a puzzle. 

In [Randell and Cohn,  1989; Randell et al,  92], we find 

the following axiom: 

where P is "Part-Of. That is, x is identical to y if and only 
if x is a part of y and y is a part of x. (1) simply states the 
anti-symmetry  of P,  i.e.,  if two  objects  of the  domain  are 
part of the other,  they are actually one and  the same. Ob(cid:173)
serve that given the definition of P: 

that is, x is a part of y if and only if everything that connects 
with x connects with y, we can infer the extensionality of C: 

There is however a progressive terminological and ideologi(cid:173)
cal shift in the RCC literature concerning the status of =. In 
[Gotts, 1994], 'EQ' is the privileged notation for the relation 
of identity and '=' is only mentioned as an alternative nota(cid:173)
tion.  With  [Bennett,  1995],  the  matter  becomes  allegedly 
more than a notational issue. [Bennett, 1995] argues in sec(cid:173)
tion  3  that an axiom  of extensionality for C  (and thus the 
anti-symmetry of P) is optional in RCC. The choice depends 
on the way we construe (1), either as an axiom or as a defi(cid:173)
nition. A similar claim is made with the note 2 of [Bennett, 
1996]: 

"[Randell  et  al,  1992]  define[s]  the  relation 
EQ(x,y)  as  equivalent to 
If  this 
definition  is  regarded  as  an  axiom  rather  than  a 
definition  and  if EQ  is treated as logical  equality 
then this axiom is equivalent to Cext." 

896 

ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS 

Cext is the right to left implication in (3), the use of 'EQ' 
for '=' is [Bennett,  1995]'s import. Using '=' is just a con(cid:173)
venient abuse of notation, this symbol is not really that for 
equality.  In order to follow the rationale, let us adopt mo(cid:173)
mentarily this shift of notation, and reserve '=' as a symbol 
for equality. The thesis is radically defended by [Stell, 2000] 
that because EQ is allegedly defined and not simply intro(cid:173)
duced as a logical primitive, EQ is not equality. EQ would 
simply be an  equivalence relation.  [Stell,  2000]  mentions 
the note 11 in [Cohn et al., 1997]: 

"For  notational  convenience  we  will  sometimes 
write x = y rather than EQ(x, y); technically the lat(cid:173)
ter is preferable, since EQ is a relation defined in 
terms of C rather than true logical equality." 

[Stell,  2000]  claims  that this  note provides  evidence  sup(cid:173)
porting intuitively his claim. In our opinion, this is a misdi(cid:173)
agnosis  and  the  note  warrants  a  better  interpretation. 
Namely,  it  is  an  indication  that  the  introduction  of  EQ 
(originally, =) by way of definition in RCC reflects a desire 
of reducing the number of primitive relations in the theory. 
The equality relation  is defined via  P, P is defined via C; 
thus far, there is only one primitive in the theory, C, instead 
of two, C and  =  Interestingly, although not addressing this 
point of detail,  [Smith,  1996]  stigmatizes this general ten(cid:173)
dency  in  RCC  as  inherited  from  the  classical  schools  of 
mereology. 

There  is  a  more  serious  rationale  than  such  footnotes 
exegesis for not endorsing the [Bennett,  1995; Stell, 2000] 
alternative.  It  seems  now  that  the  contentious  part  of the 
argument  rests  on  the  claim  that  EQ  is  capable  of taking 
different  interpretations  according  to  the  way  (1)  is  con(cid:173)
ceived. Let us assume that EQ is not = (logical identity) and 
rewrite (1), (2) and (3) with EQ in place of = (call the result(cid:173)
ing propositions (T), (2') and (3')). Let us see the possible 
consequences  for the ontology.  This choice apparently en(cid:173)
ables the generalization of the intended domain of interpre(cid:173)
tation  from  the domain  of pure space to that  of objects  in 
space.  EQ  is  merely  an  equivalence  relation,  "EQ(x,y)" 
means that x and y have the same region, the same spatial 
extent.  This corresponds (again,  abstracting away fine de(cid:173)
tails  of the  topology)  to  the  co-spatiality  relation  in  Cyc. 
Note how accommodating this interpretation might be. If we 
can still  include in  our ontology regions of space and pre(cid:173)
serve the ability to interpret on this restricted domain EQ as 
=, EQ gives the identity criterion for space regions (= entails 
EQ and, on regions,  EQ entails =). So, it seems that choos(cid:173)
ing a weak interpretation is rather positive and optimal for 
the resulting ontology. 

But there is a drawback. If EQ is but an equivalence rela(cid:173)
tion over a broader domain, then P, which is now a relation 
on objects (such that the extent of one is part of the other's 
extent), is no longer anti-symmetric. This means that RCC 
no longer warrants that two objects with the same (spatial) 
extents are one and the same thing. In particular, there could 
be several distinct entities which are all the sums of a given 
set of objects,  say three bricks.  Without (1) and only (1), 
the sum of brick 1 and of the sum of brick 2 and 3 is distin(cid:173)
guishable from the sum of brick 3 and of the sum of brick 1 

and 2. What is crucial in deciding of the possibility of gen(cid:173)
eralizing the full RCC calculus (RCC-8 and additional Boo(cid:173)
lean operators) is the behavior of operators in the absence of 
(1) or equivalently the extensionality of C. The operator for 
sum, for instance, is defined by [Randell et al, 1992] by: 
(4) sum(x,y) 
RCCs literature generates a new puzzle for interpreting (4). 
[Randell and Cohn,  1989; Randell et al  1992] suggest that 
while (4) uses the  iota operator of definite description,  its 
method of elimination is not necessarily, although possibly, 
to follow Russell's.  Rather,  it is intended to be eliminated 
such as to produce the following assertion: 

This has the effect of virtually allowing plural reference,  if 
EQ  is  to  be  interpreted  otherwise  than  as  equality (since 
without (1),  (1)  is not sufficient to rule out that there may 
be  more  than  one  entity  substitutable  to  the  sum  of two 
entities in  (5) and thus more than  one candidate for being 
such  a  sum).  The  trouble  with  operators  which  may lose 
their  intended  functionality,  goes  seemingly  unnoticed. 
Moreover, (5) does not even secure the existence of a value. 
By suggesting this transcription, the authors merely seek to 
ensure that the Boolean operators are totally defined on their 
domain.  For  this  purpose,  providing  for  a  conventional 
value in cases where the operators do not properly denote, 
the  introduction  of the  NULL  sort,  or,  in  other  words,  a 
notion of null region, is required. It is clear, even for these 
authors, that this move is not ontologically defendable (see 
also page 13 of [Simons, 1987] for its vehement dismissal). 
Rather, this is an algebraic desiderata and an implementa-
tional requirement (in short, codes have to return a value). 
In the context of a putative generalization, this is even more 
puzzling. What could possibly be the mereological product 
of two people? A null person (or null person's part)? Such a 
question  leads  to  nonsense  from  Cyc's  common-sense 
standpoint. Cyc's uneasiness with the ontological prodigality 
of RCCs Boolean operators goes further. If  Boolean opera(cid:173)
tors denote, they denote objects in space.  The sum of this 
cup and the spill of coffee on this desk is constructible in the 
theory as a spatial thing. Both the cup and the puddle are in 
space, that is consensual. The question is whether it is desir(cid:173)
able (and needed)  to consider that  there are sums of such 
arbitrarily  united  objects.  Ontologically  speaking,  there 
were no  incentives  to go after  a notion  of null  object and 
totally defined operators, although even in Cyc, the imple(cid:173)
mentation would eventually require an apparatus mimicking 
the function of the null region. 

So,  conversely,  what  was  the  meaning  of a  Russellian 
elimination of definite description? This would result in the 
following transcription of (4): 

Observe that (5) is indeed entailed by (6). But there is some(cid:173)
thing new in  (6).  Namely, = is indubitably logical  identity 
and we verify that (6) entails the uniqueness of sum. If EQ 
was not =, there could be two objects, a and b, in the domain 

ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS 

897 

such that EQ(a,b) but not a=b. However, by (3'), these two 
objects would connect the same objects. Since trivially any 
object is a sum, any object in the EQ relation with it con(cid:173)
nects its parts (by (3') and the first conjunct of (6)). But then 
a and b are identical (by the second conjunct of (6)). EQ is 
therefore -. This, in turn, entails the extensionality of C. 

So,  if the  iota  operator  is eliminated  a  la Russell,  C  is 
indubitably extensional, P is anti-symmetric, and EQ is =. 
We took this to be a reductio ad absurdum of the [Bennett, 
1995; Stell, 2000] thesis, and, in fine, as an indication that 
Cyc's co-spatiality was not an RCC relation. In other words, 
we had to interpret RCC as a calculus of regions of a sub(cid:173)
stantival  space at which entities of various kinds could be 
located, and not as a theory of these entities. The alternative 
would have been  either  going  forward with  a non  exten(cid:173)
sional  mereo(topo)logy  of  objects-in-space  departing  sig(cid:173)
nificantly from both RCC and Cyc or going back precisely 
to the more restricted domain of space regions. 
5 Extending Cyc's spatial ontology 
We thus chose to go for an interpretation according to which 
RCC  was  a  theory  of regions  of substantival  space.  We 
therefore developed an ontology of space as an entity with 
an  independent  existence,  choosing  to  rework  and  have 
#$SpatialRegion  for  domain  of RCC  relations.  In  order  to 
bridge the gap between spatial things and spatial regions, we 
developed  a  locative  apparatus  inspired  largely by  [Casati 
and Varzi, 1996]. This enabled us to formalize the meaning 
of object  level  spatial  categories  and  relations,  and  make 
explicit their metonymical character: spatial relations among 
objects  were holding in  virtue of similar relations between 
these objects' spatial extents. Originally, only spatial objects 
were in the ontology. We introduced (pure) spatial regions, 
RCC relations among some of these regions, and relations 
of location  between  spatial  objects  and regions.  We  used 
these  in  order  to  explicitly  define  spatial  relations.  This 
resulted in a spatial reasoning language with greater expres(cid:173)
sive power, clearer semantics, and an enriched ontology. It 
also  facilitated  spatial  reasoning  with  access  to  a  greater 
variety of data. We could use spatial regions for instance as 
handles when manipulating datasets for GIS based reason(cid:173)
ing.  There  is  unfortunately not enough room  here to give 
specifics. 

In a dedicated microtheory, we put some basic constraints 
on  our  calculus  following  RCC's  intended  interpretation, 
these motivated in particular further categorial distinctions. 
To begin with, RCC is region based: relationships are un(cid:173)
derstood as holding among extended regions,  i.e., neither 
points  or  scattered  sets  of points  are  in  the  domain.  We 
interpreted  the  regularity  of the  open  sets  in  the  alleged 
models of RCC as founding yet another category of spatial 
regions,  namely  regions  homogeneous  in  dimensionality. 
We wanted to apply RCC to regions of the three basic spa(cid:173)
tial  dimensionalities  (namely,  one,  two  and  three  dimen(cid:173)
sional  regions),  consistently  with  Cyc's  common-sense 
reasoning leanings. We chose to introduce dimensionality as 
primitive notions (at the topological level) and as instances 
of  Attribute Value (properties of entities as abstract par-

ticulars). This afforded us to define three specializations of 
extended  spatial  regions  which  were  homogeneous  in  di(cid:173)
mensionality,  i.e., regular  in  the intended  sense.  We were 
only requiring our relations to take as arguments homoge(cid:173)
neous  extended  regions  and  were  axiomatically enforcing 
constraints  on  co-dimensionality  of the  relata.  So,  in  the 
end,  we had a  single  set  of RCC  relations  and  operators 
which were applicable within each dimension independently 
of other dimensions. 

Anecdotally, we carried on in a specific microtheory an 
atomic extension of RCC along the lines suggested in [Ran-
dell et al,  1992] by imposing categorial restrictions on the 
relevant axioms. Despite RCC being a region based calcu(cid:173)
lus, a larger ontology such as Cyc could make use of point-
based reasoning and zero dimensional elements. We devel(cid:173)
oped a variant of RCC in a specific microtheory introducing 
the category of #$SpatialPoint as a primitive and a relation 
of incidence of points in a region as suggested by [Randell 
et  al.,  1992].  We  refined  this  elementary  treatment  with 
more  topologically  oriented  primitives  of  interior  and 
boundary point incidence. Additionally, we developed a set 
of trans-dimensional  relations  among  entities  of other  di(cid:173)
mensions.  If material objects are always located at a three 
dimensional region, they can be geographically located at a 
given parallel for instance. Moreover, their footprints (geo(cid:173)
graphical  projection)  are  two-dimensional  extents  with 
similar locational properties.  So, on  the one hand, we al(cid:173)
lowed partial location of entities at regions of lower dimen(cid:173)
sionality, possibly at points. On the other hand, we designed 
projective locations,  typically intended to account  for geo(cid:173)
graphical  positioning.  More  generally,  this  allowed  ap(cid:173)
proaching regional boundaries in terms of incidence. 
6 Concluding Remarks 
There  exist  alternatives  in  the  metaphysics  of space.  The 
main  distinction  being between  substantival  and  relational 
space. This paper intended to provide evidence that the RCC 
contributors are 'right' in putting forward certain ontological 
basics as a frame for using their theory, namely a substanti(cid:173)
val view of space. The reason why it could not be relational 
is that the distinction between co-spatial and identical ob(cid:173)
jects  would  be  lost,  while  co-spatiality  is  not  an  identity 
criterion of objects in space. Once the ontological independ(cid:173)
ence of spatial regions is endorsed, however, two solutions 
exist. On the one hand, objects are themselves independent 
from the regions they occupy or they are not. If they are, as 
in Cyc, RCC has to be interpreted as we put forward here. 
However, there might be a way in which we could mimic if 
not secure a relational formalism. RCC predicates could be 
predicated of objects and events in space, nonetheless,  the 
denotations of operators such as sum, for instance, provided 
they exist, would be spatial extents. In that context, the sum 
of two entities in the RCC sense would be the sum of their 
extents.  As the extensionality of C  would be preserved by 
this functionality of sum, this would be identical to the ex(cid:173)
tent of any of their putative sums (in a purely mereological 
sense).  One can then endorse the thesis that such extents are 

898 

ONTOLOGIES AND  FOUNDATIONS 

Qualitative Spatial Reasoning. Geolnformatica, 1:275-316, 
1997. 

[Cycorp,  1997]  http://www.cyc.com/cyc-2-l/toc.html,  Cy(cid:173)
corp, Inc. 

[Cycorp, 2002] http://www.cyc.com/cycl.html, Cycorp, Inc. 

[Gotts, 1994] N. M. Gotts. How far Can We 'C? Defining a 
'Doughnut' Using Connection Alone. In Proceedings of the 
Fourth International Conference on Knowledge Representa(cid:173)
tion, Morgan Kaufmann, pages 246-257, 1994. 

[Lenat and Guha, 1990] Douglas B. Lenat and R. V. Guha. 
Building Large Knowledge Based Systems. Reading, Massa(cid:173)
chusetts: Addison Wesley, 1990. 

[Randell and Cohn,  1989] David A.  Randell and Anthony 
G. Cohn. Modelling Topological and Metrical Properties in 
Physical Processes. Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on the Principles of Knowledge Representation 
and Reasoning, pages 55-66, Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, 
1989. 

[Randell  et  al,  1992]  David  A.  Randell,  Zhan  Cui,  and 
Anthony G. Cohn. A Spatial Logic Based on Regions and 
Connection. Proceedings of the Third International Confer(cid:173)
ence on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, pages 
165-176, Morgan Kaufrnann, San Mateo, 1992. 

[Simons,  1987] Peter Simons. Parts: a study in ontology. 
Oxford University Press, 1987. 

[Smith,  1996]  Barry  Smith.  Mereotopology:  A  theory  of 
parts and boundaries. In Data & Knowledge Engineering, 
20:287-303, 1996. 

[Stell, 2000] John G. Stell. Boolean Connection Algebras: A 
New Approach  to  the  Region-Connection  Calculus. Artifi(cid:173)
cial Intelligence, 122:11-136, 2000. 

parts of some kind (namely, spatial) of entities in space. Co-
spatiality becomes  a  form  of overlapping,  it  is  identity  of 
spatial parts.  However,  this solution  requires a broad and 
strong mereological treatment at the upper-level of the on(cid:173)
tology  which  goes  far  beyond  spatiality.  Such  a  solution 
which  was  not  affordable  in  the  terms  of Cyc's  ontology 
suggests  the  possibility  of  alternative  interpretations  for 
RCC provided it is to be embedded in an ontology with a 
more general and primitive mereological framework. 
Acknowledgements 
The redaction of this paper was supported by the Alexan(cid:173)
der  von  Humboldt  Foundation  under  the  auspices  of its 
Wolfgang Paul Program. This paper stems from research 
done while working at Cycorp.  Such  work,  in particular 
that  alluded  to  in  section  5,  could  never  have  been  ac(cid:173)
complished  without  the  participation  of James  Masters, 
many  thanks  go  to  him  for  the  many  discussions  and 
debates  we  had  there.  Additional  thanks  go  to  James 
Zaiss,  Pierluigi  Miraglia,  Michael  Pool,  Fritz  Lehmann 
and  William  Jarrold  for  helpful  comments  and  discus(cid:173)
sions during  this period.  Thanks go  to Brandon  Bennett 
for discussions during his visit at  IFOM1S, and to finish 
with  to  the  anonymous  reviewers  of IJCAI  for  their  in(cid:173)
sightful  comments.  They  are  not  responsible  for  any 
errors which remain. 
References 
[Bennett,  1995] Brandon Bennett. Carving up Space: exis(cid:173)
tential  axioms  for  logical  theories  of  spatial  regions.  In 
Proceedings of the 1995 International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence workshop on Spatial and Temporal 
Reasoning, Montreal, Canada, 1995. 

[Bennett,  1996] Brandon Bennett. Carving up Space: steps 
towards  construction  of an  absolutely  complete  theory  of 
spatial regions. In Proceedings ofJELIA '96, pages 337-353, 
1996. 

[Bennett, 2001] Brandon Bennett. Space, Time, Matter and 
Things, Proceedings of the Second International Confer(cid:173)
ence  on  Formal  Ontology  in  Information  Systems 
(FOIS'01), pages 105-116, 2001. 

[Casati  and  Varzi,  1996]  Roberto  Casati  and  Achille  C. 
Varzi. The structure of Spatial Localization. Philosophical 
Studies, 82, pages 205-239. 

[Cohn and Varzi,  1996] Anthony G.  Cohn and Achille C. 
Varzi. Modes of Connection. In Spatial Information Theory 
- Cognitive and Computational Foundations of Geographic 
Information Science (Lecture Notes in Computer  Science 
1661), pages 299-314, Springer-Vcrlag, 1999. 

[Cohn  et  ah,  1997]  Anthony  Cohn,  Brandon  Bennett,  J. 
Gooday, and N. M. Gotts. RCC: a calculus for Region based 

ONTOLOGIES AND  FOUNDATIONS 

899 

