An Extension of the ICP Algorithm for Modeling 

Nonrigid Objects with Mobile Robots 

Dirk Hahnel  , Sebastian Thrun  , Wolfram Burgard 

Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science, PA, USA, 
University of Freiburg, Department of Computer Science, Germany 

Abstract 

The  iterative  closest point  (ICP)  algorithm  [2]  is 
a popular method  for modeling  3D  objects  from 
range data.  The classical ICP algorithm rests on 
a  rigid  surface  assumption.  Building  on  recent 
work on nonrigid object models [5; 16; 9], this pa(cid:173)
per presents an ICP algorithm capable of model(cid:173)
ing nonrigid objects, where individual scans may be 
subject to local deformations. We describe an inte(cid:173)
grated mathematical framework for simultaneously 
registering scans and recovering the surface config(cid:173)
uration.  To tackle the resulting high-dimensional 
optimization problems, we introduce a hierarchi(cid:173)
cal method that first matches a coarse skeleton of 
scan points, then adapts local scan patches. The ap(cid:173)
proach is implemented for a mobile robot capable 
of acquiring 3D models of objects. 

Introduction 

1 
In recent years, there has been a flurry of work on acquir(cid:173)
ing 3D models  from range data.  The classical  setting in(cid:173)
volves a range sensor (e.g., a 3D range camera or a stereo 
vision system) used to acquire range images of the target ob(cid:173)
ject from multiple vantage points. The problem of integrating 
multiple range scans into a 3D model is commonly known 
as scan registration.  Most state-of-the-art implementations 
are based on the popular iterative closest point algorithm L2J. 
The topic has received significant attention in fields as di(cid:173)
verse as computer vision [12; 9] and medical imaging [7], 
large-scale urban modeling [14], and mobile robotics [10; 8; 
15]. 

ICP aligns range scans by alternating a step in which clos(cid:173)
est points are identified, and a step by which the optimal trans(cid:173)
lation and rotation of scans relative to each other is computed. 
In doing so, most of them are making a rigid object assump(cid:173)
tion: range scans, if aligned correctly, must be spatially con(cid:173)
sistent with each other. 

Many objects are deformable. For example, people change 
shape, as do trees, pillows, and so on.  A natural research 
goal is therefore to extend ICP to accommodate local object 
transformations.  Following recent work primarily found in 
the medical imaging literature [5; 16; 6; 3], we proposes an 
approach suited for scan registration and 3D modeling of non-
rigid objects that can efficiently deal with hundreds of thou-

Figure 1:  The essential idea:  Rather assuming that the relation 
of measurement coordinates are fixed relative to the location from 
which the measurement was taken, the approach proposed here con(cid:173)
straints the relation of measurement coordinates in a soft way. The 
exact configuration of a scan is calculated while scans are registered 
to each other. 
sands of variables.  To accommodate local deformations, our 
approach transforms scans into Markov random fields, where 
nearby measurements  arc  linked by a  (nonlinear) potential 
function.  All links are soft.  They can be bent, but bending 
them incurs a penalty.  Figure 1  illustrates this transforma(cid:173)
tion: rigid links between the measurement coordinates and the 
robot sensor are replaced by soft links between adjacent mea(cid:173)
surement points.  The resulting problem of scan registration 
under these soft constraints becomes a high-dimensional op(cid:173)
timization problem with orders of magnitude more variables 
involved than in regular ICP. We show how to solve this prob(cid:173)
lem via Taylor series expansion (linearization), and then pro(cid:173)
pose a coarse-to-fine hierarchical optimization technique for 
carrying out the optimization efficiently. 

Our new algorithm  is applied to the problem of learning 
3D models of non-stationary objects with a mobile robot. We 
describe an implemented robot system that utilizes a model 
differencing technique similar to the one described in [1] to 
segment scans. By acquiring views of the target objects from 
multiple sides, our approach enables a robot to acquire a 3D 
model of a non-stationary object. 
2  Scan Registration 
This section describes a variant of the well-known iterative 
closest point algorithm (ICP) [2] for rigid objects.  The al(cid:173)
gorithm alternates two phases, one in which nearest points is 
identified, and one in which the distance between all pairs of 
nearest points is minimized. 
2.1  Scans 
The input to the ICP algorithm is a set of 3D scans denoted 
(1) 

= 

d 

d i , d2, . .. 

PERCEPTION 

915 

(a) mobile robot with scanner 

(b) scene acquired by scanner 

(c) result of model differencing 

Figure 2: (a) 3D range scan acquired by mobile robot shown in (b). (c) Scene from which the scan in (a) is extracted through background 
differencing. 

Each such scan 
surements, arranged as a 3D "range image": 

consists of a collection of ID range mea(cid:173)

and the vertical one by 

(2) 
Figure 2c shows a typical scan acquired by a robot. Further 
below, we will denote the horizontal angle of the 
range 
measurement by 
In our experi(cid:173)
mental setup, scans are obtained by a SICK laser range finder 
mounted on a tilt unit shown in Figure 2a. 
The problem of scan registration can be formulated as the 
problem  of recovering  the  vantage  points  from  which  the 
scans were taken.  In our approach, scans are taken from a 
mobile robot; hence each vantage point is described by three 
variables: its 
location in Cartesian coordinates and its ori(cid:173)
entation 

denotes the vantage point from which scan 

(3) 
Here 
was 
acquired.  The set of all vantage points will be denoted x. 
Recovering the vantage points x is equivalent to registering 
the scans  if one vantage point is (arbitrarily) defined to be 

2.2  Measurement Model 
Scans are registered in world coordinates. To do so, measure(cid:173)
ments  must be mapped into 3D world coordinates.  This 
is achieved by a projective function  which takes as an ar(cid:173)
gument a range measurement and a vantage point and returns 
as its output the corresponding coordinate in 3D world coor(cid:173)
dinates: 

(4) 

Here  and 

relative to the sensor. The variable 

are the orientation of the range measurement 
is the generic height 
of the sensor which in our robot system is fixed, but is easily 
generalized to variable heights.  For brevity, we will some(cid:173)
times write 
probability representing the likelihood 
surement under a fixed (hypothetical) registration: 

We define the quality of a pairwise scan registration by the 
of a range mea(cid:173)

instead of 

This likelihood distinguishes two cases. The first case models 
the noise in range perception by a Gaussian with a sensor-
specific covariance 
(usually a diagonal matrix). The mea(cid:173)
surement error under this Gaussian is given by the distance 
between the point 
in scan d/ that maximizes this Gaussian.  As is easily to be 
minimizes the Mahalanobis distance to 
seen, this point 
in the scan 

under consideration, and the point 

is simply the point "nearest" to 

Thus, 

d/ under 

If 

However, finding the nearest point only makes sense if 

falls  within  the perceptual  range of scan d/. 
is oc(cid:173)
cluded, it might be perfectly well-explained by an object not 
This is captured by the 
detectable from the vantage point 
lies outside the 
second case in (5), which applies when 
free space of scan  The free space of scan 
is denoted 
It is defined as the region between the robot and the detected 
objects.  If 
lies outside this region, the measurement prob(cid:173)
ability is assumed to be uniform.  The value of this uniform 
depends on the range of occluded space, but it plays no role 
in the optimization to come; hence we leave it unspecified. 
2.3  Registration as Likelihood Maximization 
The  goal  of scan  registration  is  to  determine  the  vantage 
points x that maximize the joint likelihood of the scans d and 
x: 

(6) 
The first term of this product is obtained by calculating the 
product over all individual measurement likelihoods, assum(cid:173)
ing noise independence in each measurement: 

The term p(x)  in (6) is the prior on the individual  vantage 
points (and nence on the registration). The prior of the point 
and covariance 
matrix 

is expressed as a Gaussian with mean 

(7) 

(5) 

In our robot system, this prior is obtained from the robot's 2D 
localization routines, supplied by a public domain software 
package [11]. 

916 

PERCEPTION 

Figure 3: Illustration in 2D: (a) initial configurations of two scans in red and blue, (b) result of optimal registration, (c-f) result of recovering 
the object configuration by our new adjustable shape technique. 

The negative logarithm of the joint likelihood (6) is given 

by the following sum: 

Here j[n] is the Jacobian (gradient) of n at xj.  , which is di(cid:173)
rectly obtained from the definition of n in (4): 

Scans are registered by minimizing the sum, which is equiva(cid:173)
lent to maximizing the likelihood function. 

Unfortunately, minimizing G is not possible in closed form 
for the following three reasons: (1) the exact terms in the sum 
depend on the occlusion constraint which are a function of 
the vantage points x; (2) the result of the minimization over 
involves a discrete search for a nearest neighbor, whose out(cid:173)
come is again a function of x;  (3) the projection functions 
are nonlinear in the points x, and the resulting nonlinear 

optimization problem is hard. 
2,4  Optimization Procedure 
ICP-style algorithms minimize the negative log-likelihood by 
calculating a sequence of vantage points (registrations): 

(10) 
The first set of points are obtained from the prior (e.g., the 
robot odometry): 
th vantage points 
are computed from the 
-th ones by the following five step 
algorithm: 

Step 1.  The set of occluded points is determined for the 
This step involves the calculation of a rela(cid:173)
n-th points 
tive orientation of a point 
It furthermore 
involves a range comparison with the corresponding measure(cid:173)
ment in scan d/, to determine if 
ing the closest measurement 
point 

Step 2. The minimization in (9) is carried out by determin(cid:173)
in each scan relative to each 

is occluded relative to 

scan 

The 

to 

01) 

For  = const. • /, this calculation is equivalent to finding the 
closest points (hence the name of the algorithm). 
is linearized to obtain a 
quadratic objective function.  This is achieved by the Taylor 
series expansion: 

Step 3. The projection function 

(12) 

With  this approximation, 
function G in the n-th iteration) becomes quadratic in 
is of the form 

(the  negative  log-likelihood 
and 

(14) 
Here  A 
a vector, and x the vector of all 
vantage points (the unknowns).  The various sums in (9) are 
simply integrated into  A  and 
to 
the full space of all points x: 

, and  generalizes 

is a matrix, 

Step 4.  The 

values of the vantage points 

are 
now obtained through a closed-form solution of minimizing 
This solution is obtained by setting the first derivative of 
with respect to x to zero (derivation omitted, see [131): 

In the original ICP algorithm [2], this step is implemented by 
calculating the the "center of mass" of each scan and shifting 
the scans accordingly (which is computationally simpler); our 
approach also accommodates a prior  on x. 

Step 5.  Because of the linearization, only Cartesian co(cid:173)
ordinates are actually updated in Step 4; the orientation co(cid:173)
ordinates remain unmodified.  For this reason,  the original 
ICP literature introduced a separate step for calculating ori(cid:173)
entations. This is achieved by a singular value decomposition 
(SVD) step, in which the correlation between residual errors 
in the scan is determined, and each scan is rotated so as to 
minimize these error correlations. Details on this step can be 
found in the ICP literature [2]. 

All  steps  are  iterated  until  a  convergence  criterion  is 
reached. Satisfactory registrations are usually obtained within 
the first three to four iterations. If the total number of scans is 
small (e.g., less than 10), the computationally most expensive 

PERCEPTION 

917 

step is the determination of the closest points in Step 2. This 
step is usually implemented efficiently by representing scans 
through kd-trees [4]. 

Figure 3a-b illustrate the result of scan registration in 2D. 
The initial configuration in Figure 3a is transformed into the 
one shown in Figure 3b, which is the one that minimizes the 
squared distance (maximizes the likelihood).  Clearly, both 
scans are incompatible in shape. Pure registration techniques 
are unable to handle such shape deformations, but the tech(cid:173)
nique presented in the next section is. 
3  Recovering the Surface Configuration of 

Nonrigid Objects 

The key idea for extending ICP to nonrigid objects was al(cid:173)
ready discussed in the introduction to this paper, and is high(cid:173)
lighted  in Figure  1.  Technically,  it involves two modifica(cid:173)
tions:  First,  the static relationship between points 
and 
the corresponding vantage points 
is replaced by nonrigid 
links between adjacent points. These links can be bent (but at 
a probabilistic penalty), to accommodate nonrigid surfaces. 
Second, and as consequence of this, the optimization now in(cid:173)
volves the determination of the location of all points 
in 
addition to the robot poses 
This optimization problem is 
much higher dimensional, and we will discuss a hierarchical 
optimization technique for tackling it efficiently. A key char(cid:173)
acteristic of the approach proposed here is that it fits neatly 
into the ICP methodology above:  Again, under appropriate 
linearization the target function is quadratic, and estimates are 
obtained just as in (16). 

3.1  Links 
The definition of links between pairs of adjacent points makes 
it necessary to augment the notion of a measurement point. In 
particular, our approach associates an (imaginary) coordinate 
system with each node.  The origin of each coordinate sys(cid:173)
tem is the familiar coordinate 
and its orientation is speci(cid:173)
fied by three Euler angles (an alternative formulation may use 
quaternions): 

=  (0,0,0)T. 
The orientation is initialized arbitrarily; e.g. 
(The result of the optimization  is  invariant  with  respect to 
this  initialization.)  A link is now  given by the affine coor(cid:173)
dinate transformations among the coordinate systems of adja(cid:173)
cent measurements. Each link possesses six parameters, three 
for rotation (denoted 
and three for translation (de(cid:173)
noted 

They are calculated as follows: 

Here the R's are the rotation matrices around the three coor(cid:173)
dinate axes. Links enable us to recover a node's coordinates 
from any of its neighbors: 

To model nonrigid surfaces, our approach allows for violation 
of these link constraints.  This is obtained by introducing the 
following Gaussian potentials for each link 

Here  defines the strength of the link (the resulting structure 
is a Markov random field f 171). 
3.2  Target Function 
The negative logarithm of these potentials, summed over all 
links, is given by the following function // (constant omitted): 

As in the scan registration problem, all these terms are non(cid:173)
linear in the node coordinates 
To obtain a closed-form solution for the resulting equation 
system, the link function is linearized via a Taylor series ex(cid:173)
pansion: 

and the orientations 

where 

specify the coordinate system for the node 

in the 7i-th iteration of the optimization. The matrix 

is a Jacobian matrix of dimension six by six, which is obtained 
as the derivative of the functions (19). 
By the same logic by which G can be approximated by a 
quadratic function in the scan registration problem, substitut(cid:173)
ing our approximation back into the definition of H gives us a 
quadratic function in all variables 
This function 
can be written in the form 

and 

and f 

is the vector of all coordinate system origins, r the 
is a matrix and f  a vec(cid:173)
is involved but mathematically 

where 
vector of all Euler angles, and B 
tor. Calculating 
straightforward. 
3.3  Optimization Procedure 
Our new version of ICP now minimizes the combined target 
function G + H, which is again quadratic in all parameters 
(x, 
and r).  By doing so,  it simultaneously recovers the 
scan registration and the surface configuration of the object. 
The solutions for x and  are completely analogous to the one 
in (16): 

The global orientation is still optimized by a single global 
SVD as above.  Our new augmented optimization leads to 
relative adjustments between measurement points, in which 
the links play the role of soft constraints. 

This  is illustrated  in Figure 3c-f,  for different values for 
As the various diagrams illustrate, scans are deformed to 
improve their match. The degree of the deformation depends 
on the value of  which defines the rigidity of the surface. 
Figure 3c-f illustrates that our approach succeeds in locally 
rotating and even rescaling the model. 

918 

PERCEPTION 

Figure 4: Example of a thinned graph superimposed to the origi(cid:173)
nal scan left) and before and after adjustment (right).  Thinning is 
necessary to perform the optimization efficiently. 
3.4  Efficient Variable Resolution Optimization 
The main problem with the approach so far is its enormous 
complexity.  The number of variables  involved in the opti(cid:173)
mization is orders of magnitude larger than in scan registra(cid:173)
tion. This is because the target function H is a function of all 
measurement points n and orientations r, whereas G has only 
the vantage points x as its arguments. The matrix B 
in (23) 
is, thus, a (sparse) matrix with many thousand dimensions. 

To tackle such problems efficiently the optimization is re(cid:173)
duced to a sequence of nested optimization problems.  In a 
first step, scans arc analyzed for connected components (re(cid:173)
gions without large disparities); links exist only between con(cid:173)
nected components in each scan; hence H factors naturally 
into  different  subproblems  for  different  connected  compo(cid:173)
nents.  Next, the resulting scan patches are thinned.  Thin(cid:173)
ning proceeds by identifying a small number of representa(cid:173)
tive landmark measurements that are approximately equally 
spaced.  This computation is performed by stipulating a grid 
over the scan (in workspace coordinates), and selecting mea(cid:173)
surements closest to the center points of each grid cell. An all 
point shortest path search then associates remaining measure(cid:173)
ments with landmark measurements. The optimization is first 
performed for the thinned scan; after the landmark scans are 
localized (and the corresponding coordinate transformation 
are computed),  the remaining measurements are optimized 
locally, in groups corresponding to individual landmark mea(cid:173)
surements.  Smoothness is attained by using multiple land(cid:173)
mark measurements as boundary conditions in this optimiza(cid:173)
tion.  Figure 4 shows an examples of a thinned graph,  for 
which the optimization can be carried out in seconds. 
4  Setup and Experimental Results 
Our approach was implemented using a mobile robot, in an 
attempt to acquire 3D models of non-stationary objects.  In a 

moving arms 
scan 1 
scan 2 
stretched body 
scan 1 
scan 2 

start 

loop # 1 

loop #2 

loop #3 

2.3266 
2.5320 

1.9369 
2.5087 

0.8993 
0.8704 

1.2915 
1.2964 

0 7986 
0.8001 

1.2008 
1.2220 

-

1.1975 
1.2120 

Tabie 1: Average distance to the closest points to the matched model 
after scan registration. The decrease of this distance measures the 
improvement of the model through local surface deformations. 

technique adopted from [11], we first acquired a map of the 
environment (see Figure 5).  Non-stationary objects were de(cid:173)
tected through differencing of scans, using the robot's local(cid:173)
ization routines to get a rough estimate of this pose. Figure 2b 
illustrates the segmentation process.  Red scans are retained 
while the black scans are assumed to correspond to the back(cid:173)
ground and are henceforth discarded. 

Figure 6 illustrates one iteration of the algorithm in all es(cid:173)
sential steps, using data acquired by the robot.  Results for 
matching three scans with different postures are shown in Fig(cid:173)
ure 7(a-b). While the standard registration procedure leads to 
a model with six arms, our approach correctly deforms the 
scan to arrive at an improved model, with two arms. A sim(cid:173)
ilar result is shown in Figure 7(c-g), which shows three raw 
scans on the left, followed by the result of (rigid) scan reg(cid:173)
istration and the result of our approach.  Another example is 
the chair in Figure 8(a-d) scanned in different heights.  The 
standard registration will lead to multiple feet, our approach 
correctly aligns them. Table 1 shows the cumulative distance 
between points in the nearest neighbor calculation. The value 
marked as "start" is the result of an initial registration phase, 
reflecting the remaining distances under the rigid body as(cid:173)
sumption.  All other columns correspond to further iterations 
of our algorithm as it adjusts the shape of the scans. This re(cid:173)
sult illustrates numerically the integrity of the result is indeed 
improved by iterate the process. 

5  Discussion 
This paper proposed a technique for simultaneous scan reg(cid:173)
istration and scan deformation for modeling nonrigid objects. 
The deformation was made possible through the definition of 
(soft) links between neighboring scan points, whose config(cid:173)
uration was calculated during registration.  To tackle the re(cid:173)
sulting optimization problem efficiently, we described a hi(cid:173)
erarchical optimization techniques that operated on thinned 
graphs.  Experimental results obtained using a mobile robot 
illustrated the viability of this approach. 

There are many problems in object modeling that this pa(cid:173)
per does not address, but whose inclusion shall be the subject 
of future research. For example, the present segmentation ap(cid:173)
proach is somewhat simplistic:  It will  fail if more than one 
non-stationary object appears in the scene. The approach re(cid:173)
quires deformations to be small, and the target object may 
not move very far during acquisition.  Objects are not sub-
segmented.  This will cause difficulties when components of 
objects are adjacent to different other components, or missing 
entirely, which can happen if components are combined and 

PERCEPTION 

919 

Figure 6: (a) Thinning, (b) nearest neighbor search, (c) optimization (first iteration), (d) optimization (second iteration), (e) optimization of 
remaining nodes. 

Figure 7: (a) Optimal scan registration with rigid object assumption, (b) corresponding result for our approach, (c-e) three scans, (f) results 
of optimal scan registration and (g) our approach. 

Figure 8: Adjustable chair: Scans of the chair in high position (a), 
scan from the chair in low position (b), the resulting model of the 
chair with multiple feet (c), and the resulting model of the chair with 
the transformed scan (b). 

cannot be separated to find the corresponding part.  A final 
direction of future research involves the integration into ad(cid:173)
vanced techniques for between-object data association when 
modeling multiple objects in non-stationary environments [1]. 

References 
[1]  D.  Anguelov,  R.  Biswas,  D.  Koller,  B.  Limketkai, 
S.  Sanner,  and  S.  Thrun.  Learning hierarchical  ob(cid:173)
ject maps of non-stationary environments with  mobile 
robots. UA1-02. 

[2]  P. Besl and N. McKay.  A method for registration of 3d 

shapes. PAMI 14(2), 1992. 

[3]  M.  Bakircioglu,  S. C.  Joshi, M.  I. Miller.  Landmark 
matching on brain surfaces via large deformation dif-
fcomorphisms on the sphere.  SPIE Medical Imaging, 
1999. 

[4]  L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Ohlsen, and C. J. 

Stone. Classification and regression trees. 1984. 

[5]  H. Chui, A. Rangarajan.  A new point matching algo(cid:173)

rithm for non-rigid registration. CVPR, 2000. 

[6]  M.  K.  Chung,  K.  J.  Worsley,  S.  Robbins,  P.  Paus, 
J. Taylor,  J. N.  Giedd,  J.  L.  Rapoport,  A. C.  Evans. 
Deformation-Based Surface Morphometry with an Ap(cid:173)
plication to Gray Matter Deformation. Neurolmage, 18, 
2003. 

[7]  J. Feldmar, N. Ayache, and F. Betting.  3D-2D projec(cid:173)
tive registration of free-form curves and surfaces. CVIU, 
65(3), 1997. 

[8]  J.-S. Gutmann and K. Konolige.  Incremental mapping 

of large cyclic environments. CIRA-00, 2000. 

[9]  E.  G.  Huot,  H.  M.  Yahia,  I.  Cohen,  I.  Herlin.  Sur(cid:173)
face Matching with Large Deformations and Arbitrary 
Topology: A Geodesic Distance Evolution Scheme on a 
3-Manifold. ECCV, 2000. 

[10]  F.  Lu and E.  Milios.  Globally  consistent  range  scan 
alignment  for  environment  mapping.  Autonomous 
Robots, 4, 1997. 

[11]  M. Montemerlo, N. Roy, and S. Thrun. Carnegie mellon 

robot navigation toolkit, 2002. 

[12] S. Rusinkiewicz and M. Levoy. Efficient variants of the 

[14]  S. Teller, M. Antone, Z. Bodnar, M. Bosse, S. Coorg, 
M. Jethwa, and N. Master. Calibrated, registered images 
of an extended urban area. CVPR-01. 

[15]  S. Thrun. A probabilistic online mapping algorithm for 

teams of mobile robots. IJRR, 20(5), 2001. 

[16]  Y. Wang,  L. H. Staib.  Shape-Based 3D Surface Cor(cid:173)
respondence  Using  Geodesies  and  Local  Geometry. 
CVPR, 2000. 

[17] G. Winkler. Image Analysis, Random Fields, and Dy(cid:173)

namic Monte Carlo Methods. Springer, 1995. 

[13]  G Strang.  Introduction to Linear Algebra.  Wellesley-

ICP algorithm. 3DIM-01. 

Cambrigde Press, 1998. 

920 

PERCEPTION 

