People Tracking with Anonymous and ID-Sensors Using Rao-Blackwellised Particle 

Filters 

Dirk Schulz, Dieter Fox, and Jeffrey Hightower 

Dcpt. of Computer Science & Engineering 

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA 

Abstract 

Estimating the location of people using a network 
of sensors placed throughout an environment is a 
fundamental  challenge  in  smart environments  and 
ubiquitous computing.  Id-sensors such as infrared 
badges provide explicit object identity information 
but  coarse  location  information  while  anonymous 
sensors such as laser range-finders provide accurate 
location information only. Tracking using both sen(cid:173)
sor types simultaneously is an open research chal(cid:173)
lenge. We present a novel approach to tracking mul(cid:173)
tiple objects that combines the accuracy benefits of 
anonymous sensors and the identification certainty 
of id-sensors.  Rao-Blackwellised particle filters are 
used to estimate object locations. Each particle rep(cid:173)
resents the association history between Kalman fil(cid:173)
tered object tracks  and observations.  After using 
only anonymous sensors until id estimates are cer(cid:173)
tain enough, id assignments are sampled as well re(cid:173)
sulting  in  a  fully  Rao-Blackwellised  particle filter 
over both object tracks and id assignments. Our ap(cid:173)
proach was implemented and tested successfully us(cid:173)
ing data collected in an indoor environment. 

Introduction 

1 
Accurate and reliable tracking of people using sensors placed 
throughout an environment is a fundamental problem relevant 
to several research communities.  Knowing the locations of 
people is of critical importance for research investigating high-
level state estimation, plan recognition, and learning of human 
activity patterns for applications such as work flow enhance(cid:173)
ment and health monitoring. 

Over the years, many location estimation approaches have 
been introduced using sensors such as cameras, laser range-
finders, infrared  and  ultrasound  sensors,  and  wireless  net(cid:173)
working  infrastructure  [Hightower and Bordello,  2001].  A 
crucial  aspect  of these  sensors  is  whether they provide  ex(cid:173)
plicit  information  about  the  identity  of a  person.  Anony(cid:173)
mous sensors such as radar, reflective ultrasound transducers, 
and scanning laser range-finders provide accurate location and 
appearance information, but do not provide explicit identity 
information.  Id-sensors like infrared and ultrasound badge 
systems do provide explicit object identity information,  but 

with relatively coarse location information [Want et al, 1992; 
Priyantha et al., 2000].  Various techniques have been pro(cid:173)
posed for tracking with multiple anonymous sensors or multi(cid:173)
ple id-sensors, but the problem of integrating anonymous and 
id sensor information has not been addressed so far.  In this 
paper we present an approach that combines the accuracy ben(cid:173)
efits of anonymous sensors with the identification certainty of 
id-sensors. 

Our approach uses Rao-Blackwellised particle filters to ef(cid:173)
ficiently estimate the locations and identities of multiple ob(cid:173)
jects.  Each particle represents a history of associations be(cid:173)
tween object tracks and observations.  For each particle, the 
individual  objects  are  tracked  using  Kalman  filters.  Since 
the initial id uncertainty makes a sample-based representation 
of id  assignments  extremely  inefficient,  our approach  starts 
by tracking  objects  using  only  anonymous  sensors  and  ef(cid:173)
ficiently representing  estimates  over  object  id's  by  keeping 
track  of sufficient statistics.  Once the id estimates are cer(cid:173)
tain enough, the approach switches to sampling id assignments 
as well  resulting in a fully  Rao-Blackwellised particle filter 
over both object tracks and id assignments.  When applied to 
anonymous sensors only, our method results in a new Rao-
Blackwellised approach to multi-hypothesis tracking,  which 
has gained substantial attention in the target tracking commu(cid:173)
nity [Bar-Shalom and Li, 1995]. 

This paper is organized as follows:  Section 2 clarifies the 
problem. Section 3 then presents our Rao-Blackwellised par(cid:173)
ticle  filter  approach to tracking multiple  objects  using only 
anonymous sensor information and Section 4 extends the ap(cid:173)
proach to incorporate id-sensors. Our implementation and ex(cid:173)
perimental results are presented in Section 5, followed by a 
discussion. 

2  Problem Description 
Figure  1  illustrates the problem of tracking multiple people 
with anonymous and id-sensors.  The solid and dotted lines 
are the trajectories of person A and B,  respectively.  In the 
beginning, the identity of the two people is not known.  As 
they walk, the anonymous sensor observes their locations fre(cid:173)
quently. Since the people are far enough apart, their positions 
can be tracked reliably using the anonymous sensor.  How(cid:173)
ever, until they reach id-sensor areas 3 and 4, both trajectories 
have the same probability of belonging to either person A or B. 
Hence there are two different hypotheses for the id's of the two 

PERCEPTION 

921 

Figure 1: Example scenario: The shaded circles indicate areas cov(cid:173)
ered by id-sensors such as infrared receivers. When a person wearing 
a badge enters such an area, the corresponding sensor issues a read(cid:173)
ing indicating the id of the person.  Since these sensors provide no 
information about the person's location within the area, two people 
in the same area can not be distinguished. Not shown is an additional 
anonymous sensor such as a laser range-finder. This sensor provides 
accurate information at a high rate about the locations of people, but 
no information about their id's. 

trajectories.  After passing through the coverage of id-sensors 
3  and 4, the ambiguity  is resolved and both trajectories'  id's 
are determined.  Then, after the paths cross there is confusion 
about  the  continuation  of the  two  tracks.  When  the  people 
leave the light gray area the anonymous sensor can not deter(cid:173)
mine  which  observations  to  associate  with  which  trajectory. 
This problem is known as the data association problem in the 
multitarget tracking  community  [Bar-Shalom  and  Li,  1995]. 
Were  there  no  id-sensors,  it  would  be  impossible  to  resolve 
this ambiguity. In our scenario, the ambiguity can be resolved 
as soon as the people reach the areas covered by id-sensors 5 
and 6.  To do so, however, it is necessary to maintain the hy(cid:173)
potheses for both possible track continuations, A going down 
and B going up, or B going down and A going up. 

involving 

The use of a combination of anonymous and id-sensors re(cid:173)
quires  us  to  solve  two  types  of data  association  problems. 
The  first  problem  is  the  classic  multitarget tracking  problem 
of assigning  anonymous  observations  to  object  tracks.  This 
data  association  problem  has  to  be  solved  at  each  point  in 
time, resulting in 
possible associations for tracks of length 
people.  Fortunately,  the  probability  distribu(cid:173)
tions over these  anonymous  assignments  are typically  highly 
peaked, thereby allowing an efficient, sample-based represen(cid:173)
tation of assignments.  The  second problem  is the  one  of es(cid:173)
timating  the  id  of individual  objects/tracks.  As  with  anony(cid:173)
mous assignments there are 
possible assignments of id's to 
tracks.  Fortunately, the number of id assignments does not in(cid:173)
crease over time since the identity of objects does not change. 
However,  due to the  low spatial  resolution  of id-sensors,  the 
posterior over id assignments  is  almost uniform  during  early 
stages of the estimation process (see Figure 1). For such "flat" 
distributions, a sample-based representation requires in the or(cid:173)
der  of 
samples,  which is certainly not feasible  for online 
tracking. 

Figure 2 shows the graphical model  for this tracking prob(cid:173)
lem.  Here, time is indexed by subscripts and the current time 
is denoted by 
are the current po(cid:173)
sitions  of the 
people being tracked. Following standard no(cid:173)
tation in the tracking community, observations are denoted by 

Figure  2:  Graphical  model  for multi-object tracking with anony(cid:173)
mous and id-sensors. 
is the state vector describing the locations 
of the individual objects at time  Objects generate anonymous ob(cid:173)
servations 
. The assignments of individual 
observations to objects are given by the hidden nodes  and  Rao-
Blackwellised particle filters sample assignments and 
and solve 
the state updates analytically, using Kalman filters conditioned on the 
samples. 

and id observations 

and the complete sequence of observations up to time 

is 
given by 
(we use hat and tilde to distinguish anonymous 
from id observations).  The associations between object tracks 
and 
is one  if 
assigns anonymous ob(cid:173)
servation 
and zero otherwise.  The observa(cid:173)
tions only depend on the current object positions and assign(cid:173)
ments. 

and observations are given by assignment matrices 
For instance, 

to  object 

state 

The  goal  of tracking  is  to  estimate  the  posterior  over  the 
based on all sensor information available up to time 
A factored representation of this tracking problem allows us 
to use Rao-Blackwellised particle filters (RBPF) which sample 
assignments and track the objects using a bank of m Kalman 
filters  for  each  sample  [Doucet  et  ai,  2000].  However,  due 
to the large number of anonymous assignments and the "fiat" 
distributions over id assignments, a straightforward implemen(cid:173)
tation  of RBPFs  would require  a prohibitive  number of sam(cid:173)
ples.  In the next section we describe how to efficiently sample 
anonymous  assignments over time.  The  resulting algorithm, 
MHT-RBPF (multi-hypothesis tracking RBPF), can track mul(cid:173)
tiple objects  using anonymous  sensor information.  Then,  in 
section Section 4, we will describe how to extend MHT-RBPF 
to incorporate id-sensors. 
3  MHT-RBPF: Rao-Blackwellised Particle 

Filters for Multi-hypothesis Tracking 

Since 
the  assignments  between  observations  and  ob(cid:173)
jects/tracks  are  not given,  we  need to  estimate  the  posterior 
over both  object states 
This joint 
posterior can be factorized by conditioning the state Xk on the 
assignments 

and assignments 

(1) 
The key idea of Rao-Blackwellised particle filters is to com(cid:173)
and then 

pute (1) by sampling assignments from p 

922 

PERCEPTION 

computing the state xk conditioned on each sample.  More 
specifically, each sample represents a history of data associ(cid:173)
ations 
and is annotated with a bank  o f K a l m an fil(cid:173)
ters,  one  for each tracked person.  The Kalman  filters  arc 
conditioned on the data associations provided by the sample 
and thus can be updated efficiently using standard Kalman 
filter update  rules  for known  data  association  [Bar-Shalom 
and Li,  1995].  The Kalman filter estimates, or tracks, 

are represented by the mean and covariance 

of the persons' locations. 

RBPF generate assignments incrementally by maintaining 
sample  sets  containing  assignment  histories  distributed  ac(cid:173)
cording to the posterior given by the rightmost term in (1). 
More specifically, at time  a sample set 

contains TV weighted samples, where each sam(cid:173)
consists of a history of assignments and 
objects. The generic 
from the previous sample 
and an observation  by first generating new assign(cid:173)
distributed according to the posterior 

ple 
the current position estimates for the 
RBPF algorithm generates a set 
set, 
ments 
Each such assignment specifies which observations in 
long to which object track. The final step consists of updating 
the Kalman filter tracks of each sample using the observations 
assigned to them by the sample [Doucet et al, 2000]. 

be(cid:173)

Importance Sampling with Lookahead 

3.1 
The efficiency of RBPFs strongly depends on the number of 
samples needed to represent the posterior 
In 
this section we will devise an efficient algorithm for generat(cid:173)
ing such assignments/samples.  Due to the sequential nature 
of the estimation process, samples must be generated from the 
assignments of the previous time step. The posterior at time k 
is given by 

Here, (2) follows from Bayes rule, and (3) follows from (2) 
of the  objects  are  sufficient 
since the position tracks 
statistics for the previous observations 
and assignments 

Unfortunately, in most cases it is impossible to sample di(cid:173)
rectly from (3). The approach most commonly used in particle 
filters is to evaluate (3) from right to left in a three stage pro(cid:173)
cess [Doucet et al, 2001]:  First, draw samples 
from the 
previous sample set using the importance weights, then draw 
for each such sample a new sample from the predictive dis(cid:173)
tribution 
and  finally  weight these samples pro(cid:173)
portional to the observation likelihood 
The 
last step, importance sampling, adjusts tor the tact that sam(cid:173)
ples are not drawn from the actual target distribution.  This 
approach  has  two  main  sources  of inefficiency.  First,  the 
samples of the previous sample set are distributed according 

and not the desired 

to 
the  rightmost  term  of the  target  distribution  (3)  [Morales-
Menendez et al,  2002].  The  second  source of inefficiency 
is that sampling from the predictive distribution in the sec(cid:173)
ond sampling step can be very inefficient if the observation 
is highly peaked compared to the 
likelihood 
predictive distribution 
[Pitt and Shephard, 1999]. 
The second problem is extremely severe in our context since 
the predictive distribution for assignments is virtually uniform 
while the posterior is typically concentrated on a small set of 
assignments [Bar-Shalom and Li, 1995]. 
MCMC Sampling from the optimal distribution 
Let us first discuss how to address the second problem, i.e. 
the problem of drawing samples from the posterior distribu(cid:173)
tion (3), given the previous sample set. Conditioned on a spe(cid:173)
cific a s s i g n m e n t t he optimal sampling distribution fol(cid:173)
lows from (3) as 

It  is  possible  to  efficiently  generate  samples  from  this  dis(cid:173)
tribution  using Markov  Chain  Monte  Carlo  (MCMC)  tech(cid:173)
niques  [Gilks  et  al,  1996].  We  apply  a  version  of  the 
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm that has been adapted specif(cid:173)
ically to the data association problem [Dellaert et al, 2003]. 
Here, the idea of Metropolis-Hastings is to sample states from 
an ergodic Markov chain with the posterior as stationary distri(cid:173)
bution. Such a Markov chain is constructed by first choosing a 
candidate for the next state s' given the current state s accord(cid:173)
ing to a proposal distribution 
This state transition is 
accepted with probability 

(5) 

(s)  is  the  intended  stationary  distribution. 
and 

where 
In  our 
case the states are the possible assignments 
(.s)  is 
the optimal sampling distribution (4).  The efficiency of the 
Metropolis-Hastings method strongly depends on the choice 
of the proposal distribution  We use an efficient approach 
called smart chain flipping.  Smart chain flipping permutes 
the  assignments  of a  subset  of the  objects  on  each  transi(cid:173)
tion, where the actual choice already takes the individual as(cid:173)
signment likelihoods into account.  This approach has been 
shown to result in improved mixing rates on assignment prob(cid:173)
lems [Dellaert et al, 2003]. 
Assignment lookahead 
As  mentioned  above,  another  source  of inefficiency  is  the 
fact that the previous sample set does not consider the most 
recent  observation.  This  problem  can  be  greatly  reduced 
by using the most recent observation to re-weight the sam(cid:173)
ples  of the  previous  sample  set  [Pitt  and  Shephard,  1999; 
Morales-Menendez et al,  2002].  The  weight for a  sample 

is given by dividing the target distribution 
by the sampling distribution 

can be shown to result in 

which 

PERCEPTION 

923 

Table 1: MHT-RBPF algorithm. 

That is, the importance weight of a sample is given by the abil(cid:173)
ity of the tracks associated with the sample to predict the next 
observation.  Accurate computation of the right term  in (6) 
requires summation over all possible next assignments 
as 
done by [Morales-Menendez et al., 2002].  Since in our case 
the number of assignments can be prohibitively large, we esti(cid:173)
mate (6) using the samples generated in the MCMC step. Un(cid:173)
fortunately, computing 
is equivalent to comput(cid:173)
ing the normalization factor of a Markov chain, which is not 
possible in general [Gilks et al., 1996]. In our case, however, 
we do not need the absolute value of the normalization con(cid:173)
stant for each chain, but only the value relative to the normal(cid:173)
izes of the other Markov chains.  Since the distributions (4) 
have similar shapes for all chains (they are highly peaked), we 
can estimate the relative normalization constants by the aver(cid:173)
age probabilities of the samples in the different Markov chains. 
More  specifically,  let  M  samples  be  drawn  from  each 
th sample drawn from 
Then the up(cid:173)

Markov chain. Let 
the Markov chain associated with sample 
dated weight 

of this sample is given by 

denote the 

(7) 

where proportionality is such that all weights sum up to one. 

MHT-RBPF Algorithm 
The algorithm is summarized in Table 1. In step 4, new sam(cid:173)
ples are generated from the previous sample set.  The aver(cid:173)
age probability of these samples is used to estimate the looka-
head/predictive  weights  of each  sample  of the previous  set 
(step 6).  This step also involves a normalization so that the 
weights sum up to one. In step 8, a sample is drawn from the 
Then, for each sample drawn from 
previous sample set 
from the posterior re-using 
the samples generated in the Markov chains in step 4. Step 10 
updates the actual position estimates for the individual objects, 
using the corresponding assignment 

we draw an assignment 

4  Tracking with Anonymous and ID-Sensors 
In principle, MHT-RBPFs can be readily extended to include 
id-sensors. Instead of only sampling anonymous assignments, 
it is possible to sample both anonymous and id assignments. 
Such a straightforward extension, however, results in an infea-
sible increase in the number of samples needed during early 
stages of the estimation process. This has two reasons. First, 
each hypothesis (sample) of MHT-RBPF has 
possible as(cid:173)
signments of id's to object tracks. Second, due to the low spa(cid:173)
tial resolution of id-sensors, the posterior over id assignments 
is initially very uncertain and sample-based representations of 
such flat distributions are inherently inefficient. To overcome 
these difficulties we instead use a two-stage estimation pro(cid:173)
cess.  During the initial stage, only anonymous sensors are 
used for object tracking while the id-sensors are simply used to 
estimate the identity of the different objects.  Once these esti(cid:173)
mates are certain enough, the process moves into the full Rao-
Blackwellisation phase, during which both anonymous and id 
assignments are sampled. The two phases are discussed below. 
Identity estimation phase 
During this phase only anonymous sensors are used to track 
the objects.  The id-sensors are used to estimate the identity 
of the different objects. More specifically, for each hypothesis 
of the MHT-RBPF, there are 
of 
identities to tracks.  In order to avoid estimating distributions 
over this potentially too large number of assignments, we only 
keep track of sufficient statistics that allow us to recover distri(cid:173)
butions over assignments.  Such sufficient statistics are given 
by the 
to tracks 
The probabilities of these individual assignments can be 

individual assignments 

possible assignments 

of id's 

updated recursively using the most recent id observation: 

(8) 

is an id observation corresponding to person 

Here, 
To 
determine the assignment probabilities, we have to normalize 
these values by considering all possible assignments: 

(9) 

is  one  i f a s s i g ns  id 

Again, 
and zero otherwise.  The computational  complex computa(cid:173)
tion of (9) can be avoided by sampling id assignments using 
Metropolis-Hastings, based on the individual values 
This approach works identical to the method used to sample 
anonymous assignments in the MHT-RBPF algorithm. 

to  object  track 

To summarize, in the identity estimation phase, each sam(cid:173)

matrix 

consists of  Kalman filters and an 

ple 
representing the sufficient statistics 
) of the id assign(cid:173)
ments.  Whenever needed, the posterior over id assignments 
can be computed using MCMC sampling.  The id estimation 
stage is ended as soon as the posterior over id assignments 
is sufficiently peaked to allow an accurate representation with 
a reasonable number of samples.  Currently, we estimate this 
condition by determining the average number of hypotheses in 
the Markov chains run for id assignments. 
Full Rao-Blackwcllisation phase 
Once the id's are estimated accurately enough, we begin es(cid:173)
timating the joint posterior of both anonymous and id assign(cid:173)
ments. This posterior is given by: 

Note that id assignments are sampled only once during the 
complete estimation process, since after an id assignment is 
sampled, the identities of the attached object tracks arc fixed. 
From then on, id observations serve two purposes: First they 
provide  information  of object positions,  and,  second,  they 
provide  information  for  weighting  anonymous  hypotheses, 
thereby improving the object estimates considerably. 
5  Experiments 
To validate our approach we captured trace logs of six peo(cid:173)
ple simultaneously  walking around the cubical  areas of the 
office  environment outlined  in  Figure  3.  Each  person  was 
wearing  a  small  id-sensor track-pack  consisting  of two  in(cid:173)
frared badges and an ultrasound badge.  Infrared and ultra(cid:173)
sound receivers were installed throughout the ceiling.  The 
entire scene was continually observed by two wall-mounted 
laser range-finders scanning at chest height just above the cu(cid:173)
bical partitions. The duration of the log was 10 minutes, dur(cid:173)
ing which the individual people moved between 230 meter and 
410 meter. In this challenging data log, the paths of people fre(cid:173)
quently crossed each other and there were situations in which 
up to 4 people were occluded by others. To validate our track(cid:173)
ing algorithm quantitatively, we carried out a series of exper(cid:173)
iments based on this data log and on additional simulation 
runs 
tracking/ for visualizations). 
Tracking ability 
The path of the six people as estimated by our system is shown 
in Figure 3. This result was obtained with an MHT-RBPF us(cid:173)
ing 1000 samples and Markov chains of length 100. With this 
setting, the algorithm was able to reliably track the six people 
if no lookahead was used.  After determining these parame(cid:173)
ters, we carried out trial runs for different variants of our al(cid:173)
gorithm.  A run was considered successful if at the end the 

www.cs.washington.edu/robotics/people-

(see 

Figure 3: Outline of the Intel Research Lab Seattle. The environ(cid:173)
ment is equipped with ceiling mounted ultrasound and infrared re(cid:173)
ceivers.  Cubical partitions are half-height (about 1.3 meters high). 
The two laser range-finders scan at chest height just above the parti(cid:173)
tions. Also shown are the paths of the six people as estimated by our 
system. 

sample set contained at least one hypothesis with correct loca(cid:173)
tions and identities.  Each method was tested on 10 trial runs 
using the real data set. Without identity estimation phase, the 
algorithm was never able to successfully complete the data 
set.  Next, we tested the approach when not switching to the 
full Rao-Black well isation phase, i.e. the algorithm remained in 
the identity estimation phase.  Without lookahead, the update 
times of the approach were prohibitively large (more than 10 
times real time). The lookahead resulted in significant speedup 
and the results are shown in the first row of the table below. 
Finally, we tested our two-phase approach with and without 
lookahead. The algorithms were able to successfully track the 
complete data in most cases, as can be seen in the first col(cid:173)
umn. The other three columns give average time, standard de(cid:173)
viation, and maximum time per update in seconds. The results 
demonstrate that both the lookahead and the two-stage process 
improve the performance of the tracking algorithm. 

Method 
Id estimation w. look. 
Two-phase RBPF 
Two-phase RBPF w. look. 

Succ. 
10 
10 
9 

Avg. 
0.062 
0.154 
0.036 

Std. 
0.125 
0.170 
0.060 

Max. 
2.9 
1.5 
1.2 

In  another set of experiments,  we compared  our  MCMC 
based  assignment  generation  to  a  deterministic  sampling 
scheme,  as used in traditional MHT algorithms.  Here,  as(cid:173)
signments are enumerated in decreasing order wrt. their like(cid:173)
lihood [Cox and Hingorani,  1996].  Note that generating as(cid:173)
signments by decreasing likelihood results in estimates that 
are strongly biased towards more likely assignments. We per(cid:173)
formed extensive tests using real data and data simulating 20 
people and found that our approach is slightly more efficient 
while achieving the same robustness.  Since such results de(cid:173)
pend on implementational details, we did not consider them 
significant enough. However, the fact that smart chain flipping 
works at least as good as ranked assignments in practice is 
very encouraging, since the MCMC approach results in much 
less biased estimates. 

PERCEPTION 

925 

problem by clustering people into groups for which we do not 
attempt to estimate the individual  id's,  as already  introduced 
in a similar context by [Rosencrantz et ai, 2003].  Finally, the 
recovery  from  tracking failures  is another important  issue for 
future  research.  Especially  in  the  full  Rao-Blackwellisation 
phase,  the  current  approach  can  not  recover  from  losing  the 
correct id hypothesis, since id assignments do not change over 
time. 
Acknowledgments 
This  work  has  partly  been  supported  by 
the  National 
Science  Foundation  under  grant  number 
I1S-0093406, 
and  by  DARPA's  SDR  Programme 
(contract  number 
NBCHC020073).  We  are  also  very  grateful  for  the  help  of 
various people at the Intel Research Lab Seattle for collecting 
the data needed for our experimental evaluation. 
References 
[Bar-Shalom and Li, 19951  Y.  Bar-Shalom  and  X.-R.  Li. 
Multitarget-Multisensor Tracking: Principles and Techniques. 
Yaakov Bar-Shalom, 1995. 

[Cox and Hingorani, 1996J  I. J. Cox and S. L. Hingorani.  An effi(cid:173)
cient implementation of reids multiple hypothesis tracking algo(cid:173)
rithm and its evaluation for the purpose of visual tracking.  IEEE 
Transactions on PAMI, 18(2), 1996. 

[DellaerU'/a/.,2003]  F.  Dellacrt,  S.M.  Scitz,  C.  Thorpe,  and 
S. Thrun. EM, MCMC, and chain flipping for structure from mo(cid:173)
tion with unknown correspondence. Machine Learning, 50(1-2), 
2003. 

[Doucett et al., 2000] A. Doucet, J.F.G. de Freitas, K. Murphy, and 
S.  Russell.  Rao-Blackwellised  particle  filtering  for  dynamic 
bayesian networks. In Proc. of the Conference on Uncertainty 
in Artificial Intelligence (DAI), 2000. 

[Doucet et al, 2001]  A. Doucet, N. de Freitas, and N. Gordon, edi(cid:173)
tors. Sequential Monte Carlo in Practice. Springer-Verlag, New 
York, 2001. 

[Fox, 2002]  D.  Fox.  KLD-sampling:  Adaptive particle filters.  In 
T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani, editors, Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems 14 (NIPS), Cambridge, 
MA, 2002. MIT Press. 

[Gilks eta!., 1996]  W.R. Gilks, S. Richardson, and D.J. Spicgclhal-
ter, editors.  Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice.  Chapman 
and Hall/CRC, 1996. 

[Hightowcr and Borriello, 2001]  J. Hightowcr and G. Borriello. Lo(cid:173)
cation systems for ubiquitous computing. Computer, 34(8), 2001. 
IEEE Computer Society Press. 

[Morales-Menendez et ai, 2002]  R. Morales-Menendez, N. de Fre(cid:173)
itas, and D. Poole.  Real-time monitoring of complex industrial 
processes with particle filters. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 15, 2002. 

iPitt and Shephard, 1999]  M. K. Pitt and N. Shephard.  Filtering via 
simulation: auxiliary particle filters. Journal of the American Sta(cid:173)
tistical Association, 94(446), 1999. 

[Priyantha et ai, 2000]  N.B. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, and H. Bal-
akrishnan. The cricket location-support system. In Proceedings of 
MOBICOM 2000, Boston, MA, 2000. ACM Press. 

Figure 4: Optimal RBPF sample weights plotted against the sample 
weights computed using relative MCMC normalizers. 

MCMC  weight  estimation 
In Section 3.1, we introduced an apporach to using the most 
recent observation  in order to weight samples before drawing 
them for the next time step.  So far it is not clear whether this 
estimation  based  on  the  probabilities  of samples  drawn from 
the Markov chains is a valid approximation.  To test the qual(cid:173)
ity of this approximation, we computed the optimal predictive 
weights  by  enumerating  all  possible  assignments  of the  next 
time step.  Figure 4 shows the  MCMC  sample weights com(cid:173)
puted in (7) plotted against the optimal weights. The similarity 
to y  ~  x suggests that our method of estimating Markov chain 
normalizers results in accurate weight estimates. 

6  Conclusions and Future Work 
We have presented a solution to the problem of tracking mul(cid:173)
tiple  people  using  a  combination  of anonymous  and  id  sen(cid:173)
sors.  The  approach  inherits  the  advantages  of both  sensor 
types,  thereby  being  able  to  accurately  track  people  and  es(cid:173)
timate  their  identity.  Our technique  uses  Rao-Blackwellised 
particle  filters  to make the estimation problem tractable.  We 
introduced  several  improvements to the  vanilla particle  filter. 
First, the estimation process is separated into two stages, a first 
stage  of identity  estimation  and  a  second  stage  of full  Rao-
Blackwellisation.  A second improvement is in using the most 
recent observation before sampling  from  the previous sample 
set.  In contrast to  [Morales-Menendez et ai,  2002],  the  state 
space of our problem can become too large to allow an accu(cid:173)
rate  estimate of the predictive quality  of samples.  Therefore, 
we estimate this quality using Markov chains generating sam(cid:173)
ples  distributed  according  to  the  posterior.  We  demonstrate 
the robustness of our approach in a challenging experiment in(cid:173)
volving six people walking through a confined office environ(cid:173)
ment. We also show that our MCMC prediction is an accurate 
approximation of the optimal weighting function. 

The  approach  introduced  in this paper is just the  first  step 
towards  a  reliable  and  efficient  tracking  system.  Currently, 
the  transition  between  the  identity  estimation  stage  and  the 
full  Rao-Blackwellisation stage  is based on a simple heuris(cid:173)
tic, namely the average number of different assignments in the 
Markov chains.  We intend to replace this measure by a more 
fundamental  approach  such  as  the  overall  complexity  of the 
distribution [Fox, 2002]. Another source of potential improve(cid:173)
ment lies in the handling of hypotheses.  In our current system, 
the number of hypotheses grows extremely fast whenever sev(cid:173)
eral people are close to each other. We intend to overcome this 

[Rosencrantz etai, 2003]  M.  Rosencrantz,  G.  Gordon,  and 
S. Thrun.  Locating moving entities in dynamic indoor environ(cid:173)
In Second International 
ments with teams of mobile robots. 
Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 
2003. 

[Want et ai, 1992]  R. Want, A. Hopper, V. Falcao, and J. Gibbons. 
The active badge location system. ACM Transactions on Informa(cid:173)
tion Systems, 10(1), 1992. 

926 

PERCEPTION 

