Categorizing classes of signals  by means of fuzzy gradual  rules 

Sylvie Galichet, Didier Dubois, Henri Prade 

Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse (IRIT) 
118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 4, France 

{galichet, dubois, prade }@irit.fr 

What is supposed to be known, in a precise or in an imprecise 
way,  is  the  behaviour  of  the  function  at  some  reference 
points, the problem being to interpolate between these points. 
Figure 1 illustrates our purpose of building an imprecise mod(cid:173)
el in a case where the points on which interpolation is based 
are imprecise and modelled by rectangular areas. 

Abstract 

This paper presents an  approach  to the  approxi(cid:173)
mate  description  of univariate  real-valued  func(cid:173)
tions  in  terms  of precise  or  imprecise  reference 
points and  interpolation between these points.  It 
is achieved by means of gradual  rules  which ex(cid:173)
press that the closer the variable to the abscissa of 
a reference point, the closer the value of the func(cid:173)
tion to the ordinate of this reference point. Grad(cid:173)
ual  rules  enable  us  to  specify  sophisticated 
gauges, under the form of connected areas, inside 
of which the function belonging to the class under 
consideration  should  remain.  This  provides  a 
simple and efficient tool  for categorizing signals. 
This tool can be further improved by making the 
gauge  flexible  by  means  of fuzzy  gradual  rules. 
This is illustrated on a benchmark example. 

1 Introduction 
Signal functions, such as time series, medical ECG's, arc usu(cid:173)
ally viewed as analytical mappings. Then, a precise represen(cid:173)
tation is often used. Even when uncertainty is dealt with, it is 
supposed  to  pervade  parameters  of  the  analytical  models, 
leading  to  probabilistic  or  interval-based  processing.  The 
main objective of this paper is to propose an alternative to this 
classical  type of approaches by investigating the interest of a 
special kind of fuzzy « if., then » rules, named gradual rules 
[Dubois  and  Prade,  1992;  1994],  for  developing  imprecise 
representations. Actually, the proposed strategy relies on in-
terpolative  reasoning.  By  specifying the  interpolate repre(cid:173)
sentation  with  gradual  rules,  there  is  no  need  to  choose  an 
analytic  form for the interpolator and an  imprecise model  is 
directly obtained from the constraints expressed by the rules. 
The proposed rule-based approach is an alternative to works 
based  on  fuzzy  polynomials  [Lowen,  1990]  or  fuzzy  spline 
interpolation, e.g. [Kawaguchi and Miyakoshi,  1998], which 
rely on fuzzy-valued functions and still depend on the analyt(cid:173)
ical  form of the interpolant. 

figure 1: Imprecise interpolation 

So, we are no longer looking for a function, but for a relation 
linking  the  variable  to  the  possible  value  of the  function. 
Then, this relation is represented by its graphT defined on the 
Cartesian product X X Z (where X is the  input domain, and Z 
the  function  range).  A  similar  approach  used  in  automated 
control, recently proposed in [Sala and Albertos, 2001], also 
considers  the  building  of uncertain  fuzzy  models  in  the  set(cid:173)
ting  of the  approximation  of  multi-valued  functions  called 
"ambiguous functions". 

The paper, after some brief background on gradual rules, dis(cid:173)
cusses  the  design  of the  imprecise  interpolate  representa(cid:173)
tion  in  terms  of  gradual  rules,  constrained  by  precise  or 
imprecise  reference  points.  The  proposed  approach  is  then 
applied to the classification of time series. Moreover, a more 
powerful  representation  framework,  based  on  fuzzy  sets  of 
gradual  rules  (called  fuzzy  gradual  rules  for  short)  is  pro(cid:173)
posed.  It enables us to describe areas through which it is not 
completely possible that the function may go. 

QUALITATIVE  REASONING 

1039 

Similar relationships can  be  obtained  when  considering de(cid:173)
creasing reference points. These constraints can be related to 
consistency  requirements  between  gradual  rules  [Dubois  ct 
al., 1997], ensuring the non emptiness of the image of each in(cid:173)
put point via the  relation 
Figure  2  pictures  the  interpolation  graph  which  is  obtained 
with  three  interpolation  points,  and  thus  three  gradual  rules 
whose A fs and Bi's also appear in figure 2. The partitioning 
of X is  obtained  by  cutting  the  intervals 
into  three 

ed by the parameters which define the  fuzzy sets 
The ex(cid:173)
treme values 
are also predefined. Lastly, the other 
parameters  can  be  obtained  by  solving  the  system  of equa(cid:173)
tions derived from (3) and (4). 

and 

figure 2:  Piecewise quadrangle-shaped graph 

This  approach  straightforwardly  extends  to  imprecise  refer(cid:173)
ence  points  provided that  trapezoidal  membership  functions 
are used in place of triangular ones (see  figure  3). 

2 Interpolation and gradual rules 
The idea of imprecise interpolation suggested above is based 
on constraints to be satisfied. Namely the results of the inter(cid:173)
polation  should  agree  with  the reference  points.  These con(cid:173)
straints define the graph 
We  first  consider the  case  of precise  interpolation  points 
with coordinates 
satisfy: 

Then the relationT should 

of a relation on 

for 
the interpolation, we only have: 

Without any further constraint on the nature of 

Thus each interpolation point induces the constraint  "If 
then 

represented by the 

r u l e w h e re 

is material implication. The relation 

is thus obtained as 

the conjunction: 

(1) 
This  relation  is  extremely  imprecise  since  there  is  no  con(cid:173)
straint at  all  outside  the  reference  points.  Instead  of using  a 
precise  type  of  interpolation  function,  one  may  use  fuzzy 
rules in order to express constraints  in  the vicinity of the  in(cid:173)
terpolation  points.  The  idea  is to  use  rules  of the  form  "the 
closer* is to 
, the closer:: is to  "  The extension of equation 
(1) to gradual rules provides the following expression for the 
graph 

is close to 

a n dc I o sc t0  
"\ 

represents  Reschcr-Gaincs  implication 

where 
if 
of truth  of the  proposition 
We have just to define what is meant by "close to". Let  de(cid:173)
note  the  fuzzy  set  of values  close  to 
It  is  natural  to  set 
and to assume that the membership degree 
to 
decreases on each side of  with the distance to  How(cid:173)
ever  will not be necessarily symmetrical. The simplest so(cid:173)
lution  consists  in  choosing  triangular  fuzzy  sets  with  a 
support denoted by 
In a similar way, the closeness 
to  will be modelled by a triangular fuzzy set B, with modal 
value Zi and support 
Then the interpolation relation 
only depends on 4n parameters 
interpola(cid:173)
tion  points.  In  order to  simplify  their tuning,  we  further as(cid:173)
sume that at most two rules are simultaneously fired at each 
point  of the  input domain, 

(2) 
1 
is the degree 

for 

For  increasing  reference  points 

and 
it has been established in  [Galichet et 
al., 2002] that the interpolation graph is made of connected 4-
sided areas (as pictured in figure 2) when the following con(cid:173)
straints hold between the parameters: 

(3) 
(4) 

figure 3:  Imprecise reference points 

1040 

QUALITATIVE  REASONING 

3 Classification of time series 
Our purpose  is  now  to  illustrate  how  the  imprecise  intcrpola-
tive representation framework can be used to classify time se(cid:173)
ries,  see,  e.g.  [Kadous,  2002].  Supervised  classification  is 
assumed,  contrary  to  clustering  techniques  whose  recent  de(cid:173)
velopments  are  often  based  on  hidden  Markov  models  [Bis(cid:173)
was  et  al.,  1998;  L i,  2000].  The  proposed  experiment  deals 
with  the  
database,  freely  available  from  the 
UCI  Data  Archive  [UCI  K DD  Archive].  It  is  a  6-class  prob(cid:173)
lem,  with  100  examples  of each  class,  a  prototype  of  each 
class  being  presented  in  figure  4.  A  categorization  of process 
trends, based on types of variation,  is also adopted  in qualita(cid:173)
[Colomcr  et  al., 
tive  reasoning  and  model-based  diagnosis 
2002]. 

Imprecise 
reference 

points 

Normal  (class  0) 

Cyclic  (class  1) 
Increasing  trend 

(class  2) 

Decreasing  trend 

(class  3) 
Upward  shift 
(class  4) 

Downward  shift 

(class  5) 

60 

figure  5:  Imprecise  model  of class  5 

The  model  so  built can  be  further improved by truncating the 
upper  and  lower  parts  of  the  quadrangle-shaped  graph.  An 
easy  strategy  to  implement  the  graph  cutting  consists  in  add(cid:173)
ing  a  new  rule  that directly  translates  the  interval-based  con(cid:173)
and b2 
straint 
arc  defined  in  figure  5.  Such  an  approach  results  in  the  final 
graph given  in  figure  6. 

where 

figure  4:  One  example  of each  class 

Given  an  unlabeled  time  series,  the  aim  of the  classification 
is to decide to which class it belongs. The idea behind the pro(cid:173)
posed methodology consists in developing an imprecise mod(cid:173)
el  of  each  class.  Then,  the  time  scries  to  classify  will  be 
assigned  to  the  class  whose  model  presents the  maximal  ade(cid:173)
quacy with the temporal data under consideration. The impre(cid:173)
cise  models  are  specified  using gradual rules  as advocated  in 
the  previous  section. 
In  figure  5,  ten examples of class  5  are  plotted simultaneous(cid:173)
ly.  It clearly shows that the reference points arc no longer pre(cid:173)
cise.  In  this  context,  triangular  membership  functions  are 
replaced  by  trapezoidal  membership  functions  whose  cores 
delimit  the  rectangular  areas  associated  with  the  imprecise 
reference  points.  According  to  this  slight  modification,  the 
graph  plotted  in  figure  5  is  obtained  from  two  gradual  rules, 
i.e. 
It  can  be  shown  that  the  constraints 
on the graph shape expressed by equations (3) and (4) are still 
valid. 

figure  6:  Model  of class  5  (truncated  graph) 

Figure 7 and 8 present the implemented models for two others 
classes.  The  first  one  associated  with  class  3  is  based  on  ref(cid:173)
erence points whose imprecision  is only relative to the output. 
Using  strong  partitions  with  triangular  input  membership 
functions  and  trapezoidal  output  ones,  imprecise  linear inter(cid:173)
polation  is  obtained  by  means  of the  two  rules  

and 

QUALITATIVE  REASONING 

1041 

tegy to classify the 600 available examples, perfect classifica(cid:173)
tion  is  obtained,  i.e.  the  error  rate  is  null  for  the  training 
examples but also for the test time scries. This result is better 
than the one obtained with other approaches of the same pro(cid:173)
blem [Kcogh and Kasetty, 2002; Nanopoulos et al., 2001]. It 
is  however important to be cautious about this good perfor(cid:173)
mance. Indeed, the discrimation between some classes is not 
robust. This point is illustrated by figure 9 in the case of clas(cid:173)
ses 3 and 5 which are difficult to differentiate. The adequacy 
between the  100 time series of class 3  and models of classes 
3 and 5 is plotted. It can be stated that, for many time series, 
the difference between both obtained scores  is small,  which 
means that a slight modification of the models would proba(cid:173)
bly result in different final  decisions.  Actually,  an  important 
intersection between both models induces a loss of the discri(cid:173)
mination  power  of the  adequacy  index.  In  this  framework, 
one  may  think  of improving  the  robustness  of the  classifica(cid:173)
tion by refining the imprecise models. One possible strategy 
is then to introduce some membership degrees in the four si(cid:173)
ded areas while keeping their support unchanged. This can be 
made by using fuzzy sets of gradual rules as shown now. 

Number of points that belong to the models 

0 

Time series number 

100 

figure 9: Adequacy of class 3  examples with models 

of classes 3 and 5 

4  Interpolate fuzzy  graph 
According to the previous sections, it is clear that given a set 
of rules,  i.e.  a  set  of reference  points,  a  collection  of crisp 
graphs can be obtained by varying the support parameters of 
the 
and/or  t h e M o r e o v e r,  inclusion  properties  be(cid:173)
tween the built graphs can be exhibited for controlled varia(cid:173)
tions  of  the  supports  as  expressed  by 
following 
statements. 

the 

figure 7: Model for class 3 (decreasing trend) 

Concerning cyclic time  scries (figure  8),  the non-monotonic 
underlying behavior induces some  difficulties  in the  model(cid:173)
ling process. Actually, closeness on the right and on the left 
of the reference points must be handled in different ways.  It 
means that two distinct fuzzy subsets are required for correct(cid:173)
ly  dealing with each reference point.  In this framework, the 
imprecise models of figure 8 is composed of 9 gradual rules. 

(c) Cyclic 

figure 8: Model for class  l  (cyclic) 

Imprecise  models  are  built  for  the  six  classes  so  that  the 
graphs include  all  the points that compose  the training time 
series (10 for each class). The classification of a time-series, 
given as a collection of points 
is then 
carried out according to its adequacy with the class models. 
The latter is determined from the number of points of the time 
series  under  consideration  that belong  to  the  graph  of each 
model, that is: 

denotes the  model  graph  of the 

where 
class. The final 
decision is then to assign the time series, supposed unlabeled, 
to the class that maximizes 
..., 6. Applying this stra(cid:173)

1042 

QUALITATIVE  REASONING 

when 

and 

are built according to (6) 

and (7). 
An interpretation consists in viewing  as a fuzzy set of crisp 
graphs, that is as a level 2 fuzzy set, i.e. a fuzzy set of fuzzy 
sets. In this case, F is represented as: 

(9) 
according to Zadch's notation where the integral sign stands 
for the  union  of the  fuzzy  singletons 
A  single  fuzzy 
gradual rule is pictured in figure 11. 

a construction of nested graphs simply expresses that impli(cid:173)
cative graphs increase in the sense of inclusion when  under(cid:173)
lying constraints become more permissive. More permissive 
rules  are  obtained  cither by  restricting  input  conditions  fur(cid:173)
ther, or by enlarging output fuzzy sets. 
Using  a  convex  linear  combination  enables  the  automatic 
construction of such a collection of nested fuzzy subsets rang(cid:173)
ing from the lower bound of the family to the upper one. Ap(cid:173)
plying such a technique results in the following proposal: 

and. 

(6) 
are the lower and upper 
where 
such that 
bounds  of  the  family  and 
denotes the  extended  sum  of 
fuzzy numbers. In the same way, nested output fuzzy subsets 
can be built according to: 

Figure  12  plots  the  fuzzy  graph  obtained  when  the  lower 
graph r1  is precise and piecewise linear and the upper graph 
f° has the quadrangle-based shape of figure 2. 

and 

such that 

(7) 
are the upper and low(cid:173)
where 
er bounds of the family. It should be noted that the inclusion 
ordering  of the 
is the  converse  of the  one  of the 
due to opposite behaviors with respect to graph inclusion. 
Using the so-built fuzzy subset families (see figure 10) results 
in the following graph inclusions: 

using 

(8) 

figure  10: Nested fuzzy subsets 

One interesting point is that the 4-sided shape  introduced in 
section 2 is shared by all nested graphs provided that the low(cid:173)
er  and  upper graphs  are  themselves  4-sided  areas.  In  other 
when they hold 
words, equalities (3) and (4) hold for any 

as expressed by property P4. 

0.75 

0 

0.5 

figure 12: A graph based on 3 fuzzy gradual rules 

Using  fuzzy  gradual  rules  for  dealing  with  the  example  of 
section 3  still results in perfect classification. Moreover, the 
robustness of the classification  is improved as illustrated by 
figure  13,  where  histograms  of the  difference  N3  -  N5  are 
plotted for class 3 time series (see figure 9). It is clear that the 
number of examples for which the final decision is brittle, i.e. 
for the small values of N3 - N5  which are accounted for in the 
two first bars,  decreases when  fuzzy gradual  rules are used. 
These results have been obtained by using the same form of 
indices Nj given  by  equation  (5)  for crisp and  fuzzy  graphs 

QUALITATIVE  REASONING 

1043 

except  that 
in  the  fuzzy  case.  Further  im(cid:173)
provements could probably be obtained by defining more so(cid:173)
phisticated indices in the fuzzy case. 

figure  13:  Effect of fuzzy gradual rules on the discrimination 

5 Conclusion 
This  paper  has  proposed  a  modelling  framework  which  is 
faithful  to the  imprecision  of available  data.  In  the  intervals 
between interpolation points where it is difficult to specify an 
analytical model, imprecision is captured by means of 4-sided 
areas. The application of the modelling methodology for clas(cid:173)
sifying  time  series  has  exhibited  interesting  performance. 
Moreover,  the  discrimination  power of the  approach  is  im(cid:173)
proved by using fuzzy gradual rules as introduced in the pre(cid:173)
vious section.  Indeed, they enable us to distinguish between 
typical  members  of a  class  which  remain  in  subareas  with 
high membership degrees from borderline members which go 
through subareas with smaller membership degrees. Besides, 
one  may probably  take  further advanvage  of the  easy  inter(cid:173)
face  with  the  user,  provided by  the  use  of gradual  rule,  for 
specifying queries in data mining applications (see [Keogh et 
al., 2002] for an example of such possible use). Lastly, further 
research should deal with multidimensional spaces where the 
language of gradual rules may prove useful in the description 
of imprecise graphs. 

References 
[Biswas et al,  1998] G. Biswas, J. Weinberg and D.  Fisher. 
ITERATE: A conceptual clustering algorithm for data mi(cid:173)
ning.  IEEE  Trans,  on  Systems,  Man  and  Cybernetics  -
Part  C:  Applications  and reviews,  28(2),  219-230,  May 
1998. 

[Colomer et al, 2002] J. Colomer, J. Melendez, F.I. Gamero. 
Pattern recognition based on episodes and DTW. Appli(cid:173)
cation to diagnosis of a level control system. Proceedings 
of  the  16th  Int.  Workshop  on  Qualitative  Reasoning 
(QR'02), Barcelona, Spain, June 2002. 

[Dubois and Prade,  1992] D. Dubois and H. Prade. Gradual 
Information 

inference  rules  in  approximate  reasoning. 
Sciences, 61(1,2), 103-122, April 1992. 

[Dubois and Prade,  1994] D. Dubois and H. Prade. Basic is(cid:173)
sues on fuzzy rules and their application to fuzzy control. 
In  Fuzzy  Logic  and Fuzzy  Control,  D.  Driankov,  P.W. 

Eklund, A.L. Ralescu Eds, Lecture Notes in Artificial In(cid:173)
telligence, 833, Springer-Verlag, 3-14, 1994. 

[Dubois  et al,  1997]  D.  Dubois,  H.  Prade  and  L.  Ughetto. 
Checking  the  Coherence  and  Redundancy  of  Fuzzy 
Knowledge Bases.  IEEE Trans,  on Fuzzy Systems, 5(3), 
398-417, August.  1997. 

[Galichet  et al,  2002]  S.  Galichet,  D.  Dubois and H.  Prade. 
Imprecise specification of ill-known  functions using gra(cid:173)
dual rules. Proceedings of the 2nd Int. Workshop on Hy(cid:173)
brid  Methods  for  Adaptive  Systems  (EUNITE  2002), 
pages 512-520, Albufeira, Portugal, September 2002. 

[Kadous, 2002] M. W. Kadous. Temporal classification: ex(cid:173)
tending  the  classification  paradigm  to  multivariate  time 
series.  PhD thesis, The  University of New  South Wales, 
January 2002. 

[Keogh and Kasetty, 2002] E. Keogh and S. Kasetty. On the 
need  for  time  series  data  mining  benchmarks:  a  survey 
and  empirical  demonstration.  Proceedings  of  the  8th 
ACM SIGKDD  Int.  Conf  on  Knowledge  Discovery  and 
Data  Mining,  pages  102-111,  Edmonton,  Canada,  July 
2002. 

[Kawaguchi and Miyakoshi,  1998]  M.F.  Kawaguchi and M. 
Miyakoshi. Fuzzy spline interpolation in sparse fuzzy rule 
bases.  Proceedings  of the  5th  International  Conference 
on Soft Computing (IIZUKA '98), pages 664-667, Iizuka, 
Japan, October 1998. 

[Keogh et al, 2002] E. Keogh, H. Hochhciser and B.  Shnci-
derman.  An  augmented visual  query mechanism  for fin(cid:173)
ding patterns in time  series data.  Proceedings  of the 5th 
Int.  Conf  on  Flexible  Query Answering Systems  (FQAS 
2002),  pages  240-250,  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  October 
2002. 

[Li, 2000] C. Li. A bayesian approach to temporal data clus(cid:173)
tering using the hidden Markov model methodology. PhD 
thesis, Vanderbilt University, December 2000. 

[Lowen,  1990]  R.  Lowen.  A  fuzzy  Lagrange  interpolation 

theorem. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 34, 33-38, 1990. 

[Nanopoulos  et al,  2001]  A.  Nanopoulos,  R.  Alcock  and Y. 
Manolopoulos.  Feature-based  classification  of  time-se(cid:173)
ries  data. 
International  Journal  of Computer  Research, 
10(3), 2001. 

[Sala and Albertos, 2001] A. Sala and P. Albertos. Inference 
error minimisation:  fuzzy  modelling  of ambiguous  func(cid:173)
tions.  Fuzzy  Sets  and Systems,  121(  1),  95-111,  July 
2001. 

[UCI  KDD  Archive]  The  UCI  KDD  Archive  (http:// 
kdd.ics.uci.edu/),  Information  and  Computer  Science, 
University  of California,  Irvine. 

1044 

QUALITATIVE  REASONING 

