Belief, Awareness, and Two-Dimensional Logic" 

Hu Liu  and  Shier Ju  l 

Institute of Logic and Cognition 

Zhongshan University 

Guangzhou, China 

Abstract 

Belief  has  been  formally  modelled  using  doxas-
tic  logics  in  recent  decades.  The  possible  worlds 
model provides an intuitive semantics for these log­
ics.  But it also commits us to the problem of logical 
omniscience.  A  number of logics  have been intro­
duced to circumvent the problem.  Of particular in­
terest  is  the  logic  of awareness. 
In  this  paper  we 
present a new method to put awareness into doxas-
tic logic so as to get a  flexible  way to model actual 
belief.  The underlying logics are two-dimensional 
logics.  Two  two-dimensional  doxastic  logics  are 
given.  In the first logic, a quite limited concept of 
actual belief is presented.  In the second logic, two-
dimensional  and classical  semantics are combined 
into a hybrid system. 

Introduction 

1 
There has been a long story in philosophy to  find  a suitable 
semantics  for logics of knowledge and belief since the twen­
tieth  century.  The  subject  was  picked  up  by  researchers  in 
the  area of artificial  intelligence,  in  which  human reasoning 
or resource-bounded agents reasoning is considered. 

The  standard  approach  for  characterizing  knowledge  and 
belief is based  on  the  possible-worlds  model.  The  intuitive 
idea,  which  was  discovered  and  labelled  by  Hintikka  [Hin-
tikka, 1962], is that an agent considers a number of situations 
as possible.  Under this interpretation, an agent is said to be­
lieve a fact if it is true in all the states that the agent regards 
as possible.  Thus belief is modelled by means of accessibil­
ity  relations  as  they  are  present  in  possible  worlds  models. 
The model  is a structure  M  of the  form 
where S is the set of all worlds, 
every atom and every world, and 
binary relations in S. 

is the truth assignment for 
are the 

On  the  basis  of the  possible  worlds  model  a  logic  of be­
lief can be devised.  To this end,  introduce modal operators 
to be interpreted as "the agent i believes that", 

* Authors were supported in part by the logical structure of cogni­
tion in open worlds project grant under ministry of education, China 
grant 2000DXM720.40002. 

'Corresponding author. E-mail address: hssjse@zsu.edu.cn 

and give them formal semantics by a clause: 
and  only  if for  each  world  /  such  that 

if 
it  holds  that 
To complete the logic, assume that, besides propo-
sitional atoms,  formulas can also be composed by means of 
the usual propositional connectives 

In  order  to  be  sure  that  certain  properties  that  intuitively 
hold of belief are valid in this setting, some constraints should 
be  put  on  the  accessibility  relation 
The  standard  way 
to  do  that  is  requiring  that 
be serial, transitive, and Eu­
clidean.  From these constraints, three intuitive properties of 
belief can  be  captured:  consistency,  positive  introspection, 
and negative introspection (they are reflected as the below ax­
ioms A5, A3, and A4 respectively). 

This  notion  of belief  is  completely  characterized  by  the 
following  sound  and  complete  axiom  system,  traditionally 
called KD45. 

Modelling  knowledge  and  belief of this  kind  yields  what 
Hintikka  called  logical  omniscience.  Logical  omniscience 
presupposes  that an agent's  beliefs  are  closed  under  logical 
consequence.  Furthermore,  valid  sentences  are  always  be­
lieved.  It is clear that rational agents can never be so intelli­
gent that they become omniscient. 

To  avoid  these  undesired  properties,  something  non­
standard is needed. In the literature there appear quite a num­
ber of drastically  varying approaches.  Of these,  of particular 
interest to us is awareness logic. 

A number of ways  of modelling  awareness  and actual  be­
lief have  been  suggested  in  the  literature,  among  them  we 
would  like to refer to  [Rantala,  1982],  [Fagin and Halpern, 
1988], [Wansing, 1990] and [Thijsse, 1996]. 

The  main problem of logical  omniscience  is  that it forces 
an agent to believe too much. Fagin and Halpern suggested a 
variation of the  standard  Kripke  model  [Fagin  and  Halpern, 
1988],  named  the  logic  of  general  awareness  (abbreviated 

RESOURCE-BOUNDED  REASONING 

1113 

GAL). The underlying idea is to use awareness as a "sieve" to 
remove the undesired parts of the logic.  Though an agent im(cid:173)
plicitly believes  a fact,  the  agent may  not  believe  it explicitly 
if it  is  not  aware  of it.  GAL  distinguishes  between  implicit 
belief and  explicit belief by  the  following  equation: 

Explicit Belief =  Implicit  Belief   Awareness 

The  model  is  endowed  with  function 

a  kind  of  sieve, 
bulk  of  implicit  beliefs. 
the  form 

that  act  as 
filtering  out  explicit  beliefs  from  the 
The  model  is  a  tuple  M  of 
and 
have  their  usual  meanings.  For  each  possible 
(cs) is an arbitrary set of formulas of the language, 

world 
indicating the formulas that the agent 

is aware of in s. 

where 

The language contains operators. 

which reflect 

awareness, as well as the implicit belief operators 
and explicit belief operators 

The  semantics  of  the  language  is  as  usual,  except  for 
Note  that 

adding  two  clauses  for the  operators 
the one for 

is not expressed recursively. 

and 

The explicit beliefs are just those implicit beliefs that belong 
to the awareness set. The sentence 
A6 
is valid  in the model.  Fagin and Halpern showed in  [Fagin 
and Halpern,  1988] that by adding A6 to KD45, the resultant 
system completely characterize the semantics of GAL. 

GAL, despite its simplicity, is a very flexible and powerful 
tool.  Wansing exhibited in [Wansing,  1990] that a slight gen­
be any binary relation in S) can 
eralization  of GAL  (Let  
characterize every modal system that contains classical logic. 
GAL has also some disadvantages.  Useful information is 
neglected in this semantics.  There are two reasons that com­
mit an agent not to explicitly believe a sentence 
one is that 
the agent is not aware  of 
the other is that the agent does 
.  GAL cannot express these different 
not  implicitly believe 
situations.  Even  if we  know  the  fact that an  agent does  not 
explicitly believe  a  sentence,  we  still  do  not know  where  it 
comes from.  In our proposal, the difference between them is 
able to be distinguished. 

In GAL, it is possible for a sentence to be true even if the 
agent is not aware of some parts of the sentence. For example, 
consider the sentence "if an agent believes that it rains, it will 
take an umbrella."  (formalized as 
The sentence 
can  be  true  in  a  world  s  even  if the  agent  is  not  aware  of 
anything  about  "rain"  in  s. 
In  a  different opinion  of belief 
and awareness, it may be argue that the above sentence seems 
nonsensical to the agent if it does not know what the "rain" is. 
From that opinion, the sentence can never be simply true. We 
will introduce a method such that different opinions of belief 
and awareness can be easily modelled. 

It is  important to  distinguish  between  objective  truth  and 
subjective  truth. 
It  is  reasonable  for  the  above  sentence  to 
be objective true  (as  a truth of fact),  but not subjective true 
(from the point of view of the agent). We leave the item aside 
for the moment.  We will present two logics below.  The first 

logic only concern about subjective truth.  The notion will be 
picked up in the second logic. 

We use  a different way to  add awareness  sieve to  doxas-
tic  logics.  What we use  is two-dimensional  logics.  In two-
ranges over the 
dimensional logics, the value of a formula 
set 
Each  member  of the  set 
is called a truth-degree.  Every truth degree has two dimen­
sions.  Intuitively, the first dimension of a truth-degree, called 
a truth-value, represents the truth value  of  and the second, 
called  an  awareness-value,  keeps  track  of the  value  of the 
awareness condition (we will clarify the notion below)  of 
Though the logic looks  like a type of four-valued logic,  it is 
in fact two-valued.  Whichever way it is read, we are still left 
with two-values, with 1 as true and 0 as false. 

We  got  the  idea  of using  two-dimensional  logics  in  this 
way from theoretical linguistics, where two-dimensional log­
ics  are  used  to  give  the  semantic  concept  of presupposition 
exists''' is looked 
[Bergmann, 1991]. Usually, the sentence 
upon  as  the presupposition of the sentence 
We in­
terpret "an  agent  is  aware  of 
exists  in  the  agent's 
memory".  And then we treat the  sentence as the presuppo­
sition of the  sentence  "the  agent explicitly  believe 
Here 
the presupposition is  indeed the existence of a denotation of 
in the agent's memory.  We call  it the awareness condition. 
The  denotation  is  subjective.  It  denotes  things  in the  given 
memory, unlike  in the case of the sentence  "a exists", whose 
usual meaning is that a has an objective denotation.  Another 
difference between them is that the subjective denotation is a 
denotation of a sentence other than a denotation of a term. 

Two-dimensional  logics  allow  us  to  calculate  the  truth 
value  of  a  sentence  and  its  awareness  condition  indepen­
dently.  This  gives  us  flexibility  to  construct  different  mod­
els  of actual  belief. 
Intuitively,  the  awareness  condition  of 
a sentence should affect its truth value.  However,  it may be 
no agreement on what the effect should be.  By amending its 
matrices, two-dimensional logics are  flexible  enough to char­
acterize different concepts of actual belief. 

It  is  easy  to  see  that  GAL  can  be  represented  by  a  two-
dimensional logic.  The only thing we need to do is to make 
the  awareness  condition  of a  sentence  does  not  disturb  its 
truth value. 

We would like to emphasize again that what we present in 
this paper is not only a more rigorous concept of actual belief 
than  GAL's,  but  also  a  method  by  which  different  opinions 
to  actual  belief can be  modelled  readily.  We  will  give  two 
doxastic  logics  use  two-dimensional  logics in the rest of the 
paper.  The first logic can be viewed as an example of using 
our method,  in  which  a more  limited  concept  of actual  be­
lief is presented.  The second logic extend the first logic to a 
hybrid system. 

for 

To be concise,  we only consider one agent mode  and use 
respectively.  It is 

operators  B,L,A  substitute 
easy to extend the results of the paper to multi-agent mode. 
We think many-dimensional logics may play an important 
role in may topics.  The problems  in  many topics are  in  the 
following style:  There are several factors that affect the out­
come  event's  situation.  To  construct  a  logical  structure  of 
such problem, many-dimensional logics are preferred.  Each 
factor or outcome  is put in  a different dimension of the truth 

1114 

RESOURCE-BOUNDED REASONING 

degree. 
In  such  a  many-dimensional  semantics,  it  can  be 
clearly indicated that how the factors affect the outcome.  Of 
course, it is an "out of focus" topic in the present paper. 

By the way, we got some ideas of this paper from our work 
on "Open Worlds".  Interested readers may refer to [Shier and 
Hu, 2001]. 

2  Two-Dimensional Awareness Logics 
2.1  Semantics 
By awareness different people can understand in quite differ­
ent ways.  In this section, we present a logic in which a sen­
tence's awareness condition is considered as a very rigorous 
limitation  to  the  sentence:  If the  awareness  condition  is  not 
satisfied, then the sentence is nonsensical to the agent and is 
invariably false.  We call the resultant logic  two-dimensional 
awareness logic, abbreviated TDAL. 

The  language  of TDAL  is  the  same  as  GAL's.  A  TDAL 

model is a tuple M  = 

, where, 

•  S is a non-empty set of possible worlds; 
• 

is a truth degree assignment function from the set of 
atoms to 
per possible world.  By conven­
tion,  the  parentheses  and  commas  of truth  degrees  are 
dropped; 

• 

is a binary relation that is serial, transitive, 

and Euclidean; 

•  A  is  the  awareness  function,  assigning  each  possible 

world a set of formulas. 

The matrices are: 
A 
11 
01 
10 
00 

~A 
01 
11 
00 
00 

AVB 
11 
01 
10 
00 

11 01 10 00 
11 11 00 00 
11 01 00 00 
00 00 00 00 
00 00 00 00 

AAB 
11 
01 
10 
00 

1101  10 00 
11 01 00 00 
01 0100 00 
00 00 00 00 
00 00 00 00 

A — ►B 
11 
01 
10 
00 

11 01 10 00 
1101 00 00 
11 11 00 00 
00 00 00 00 
00 00 00 00 

Notice  that 

and 

can be  defined  from  ~ and 

The 

latter two connectives are considered as primary. 

The truth degree conditions for the modal operators are: 

is  satisfied  in  s  if and  only  if 

M, 5 
model M and every possible world s, denoted by 

is  valid  if and  only  if  M ,

f or

The semantics of TDAL needs some explanations. The as­
It  assigns  only 

is  indeed  two-valued. 

signment  function 

denoted by 
  every 

two values, 11 and 01, to each atom. The primary awareness-
value  is  always  assigned  as  1.  Only  an  occurrence  of the 
B operator can introduce falseness as awareness-value.  The 
reason  is  this:  The  awareness  condition  only  makes  sense 
when  explicit belief is  considered.  An  atom  has  no  aware­
ness  condition  at  all.  It  is  natural  to  assign  atoms  a trivial 
awareness-value,  i.e.  an always true value.  It is easy to see 
that this definition is sound:  an always true awareness-value 
does not disturb the calculation of truth value.  This also ex­
plains  the  semantic  definition  of A  and  L  operators,  where 
the awareness-value of each formula of the form 
is 
always true. 

Awareness-value  is  contagious:  the  awareness-value  of a 
sentence  governed  by  one  of the  binary  connectives  is  false 
if the awareness-value of one of its  immediate components  is 
false.  If the awareness-value is always true, the truth-value is 
calculated classically. 

Clearly,  TDAL is along skeptical  lines.  It characterizes a 
cautious agent:  the agent deems a sentence to be true only if 
every propositional part of it has no uncertainty. 

Note that the semantics of TDAL can be reduced to a three-
valued logic because the truth degree 10 can never result, nei­
ther from logical  connectives nor from modal  operators.  10 
can be dropped  safely from the matrices.  At  first  sight,  the 
resulting three-valued propositional  logic  looks the same as 
weak Kleene logic.  If we substitute the truth values 
for the truth degrees  11,01  and 00 respectively, then we get 
the matrices of weak Kleene  logic.  However, the two logics 
are quite different.  In TDAL, the assignment function is in­
deed two-valued, unlike Kleene's. 00 can only result from ap­
plication of the modal  operator B.  This characteristic  makes 
TDAL  very different than weak  Kleene  logic.  For example, 
there are no propositional tautologies in weak Kleene logics, 
but in TDAL, some of them are preserved. 

and 

2.2  Discussion  A nd  Formalization 
Definition  2.1  An  occurrence  of a  B  operator  in  a formula 
is  bound  if that  occurrence  is  in  the  scope  of one  of the 
modal operators; otherwise, such an occurrence ofB is free. 
A  formula 
is bound iff each occurrence in it of B is bound, 
and 

is free iff it is not bound. 

Some classical tautologies are not valid in TDAL. A limi­

tation is required in order to make them valid. 
Proposition 2.2 The following sentences are valid in TDAL. 
(A 7)  all bound classical tautologies. 
Proof  Trivial. 

The next proposition shows that the axioms with respect to 
the properties of implicit belief are all preserved in TDAL, as 
they should be. 
Proposition  2.3  A2-A5 are all valid in  TDAL. 
Proof  The proof is as usual. 

Intuitively,  the axiom A6,  which  characterize explicit be­
lief,  should  not  hold  in  TDAL  because  we  have  a  different 
view to awareness condition here.  It is just the case.  This is 
easy to see by taking a model that contains a worlds s such 
that the agent is not aware  of 
in s.  Instead of A6, we have 

RESOURCE-BOUNDED  REASONING 

1115 

RESOURCE-BOUNDED  REASONING 

3  Hybrid Two-Dimensional Awareness Logic 
3.1  Semantics 
Thijsse presented in  [Thijsse,  1996] a noteworthy method of 
modeling actual belief.  His so-called hybrid system consists 
of an  inner  partial  logic  (within  the  actual  belief operator) 
and an outer classical logic.  It is implemented by distinguish­
ing two kinds of truth relations:  a bivalent truth relation, re­
flecting objective truth and a trivalent truth relation, reflecting 
subjective truth. 

Our  proposal  is  to  take  TDAL  as  the  inner  logic,  unlike 
Thijsse's logic, where partial logic is adopted. There is a rea­
sonable motivation to proceed TDAL into a hybrid semantics. 
As has been shown, "truth" discussed in TDAL is indeed sub­
jective truth:  In TDAL, the meaning of a sentence being said 
to be true is that from the point of view of an agent it is true. 
The  semantics of TDAL  is  reasonable  only  if we  understand 
it in  this  way.  For example,  it is  intuitive that A6 should  be 
objectively true; however, from the point of view of an agent, 
it may not be (subjectively) true. 

We  call  the  resultant  logic  hybrid two-dimensional aware(cid:173)
ness logic, abbreviated HTAL. Formally, a HTAL model is a 

Proof. The proof is by induction on the structure of  Details 
are left to the reader 

It directly  follows  from  proposition  3.1(i)  that TDAL  is  a 
sub-logic  of HTAL.  All  provable  formulas  of system  T  are 
valid in HTAL. 

The necessity rule, R2, does not hold in general in HTAL. 

Instead, there is a limited version. 
R2':  from 
is bound. 
It is easy to verify that R2' is valid in HTAL. 

to infer 

where 

The system corresponding to the semantics of HTAL con­
sists of all axioms of KD45 and T, R1 and R2'. Call it the sys­
tem H. To prove the completeness of H, the following propo­
sition is needed. 
Proposition  3.2 

Notice  that  a  standard  canonical  model  of H  is  indeed  a 
classical Kripke model. So to prove the completeness of 11, a 
more complicated canonical model has to be considered. The 
model  is similar to the H-canonical model presented in [Thi­
jsse,  1996].  The set of worlds of the model  contains just one 
H-maximal  consistent set as  its  root,  all  other worlds are 
maximal consistent set.  The root is not accessible from other 
worlds.  Formally,  for  a  given  H-maximal  consistent set 

When checking the truth value of a formula, one starts with 
a two-valued evaluation and is dragged into the multi-valued 
mode  only  by  the  belief operators.  Within  the  belief opera­
tors, sentence's truth value is calculated by TDAL, reflecting 
subjective truth. Outside belief operators, it is calculated clas­
sically, reflecting objective truth. 

Except  adopting  different  logic  as  inner  logic,  there  is 
another  significant  difference  between  HTAL  and  Thijssc's 
logic.  In  the  latter,  partiality  is  specified by evaluation,  and 
does  not  come  from  the  limitation  to  actual  belief.  Its  "hy­
brid" character when taken by itself is irrelevant to an aware­
ness condition.  While in HTAL, the jumping-off point is  in­
deed two-valued, both for inner logic and outer logic.  Atoms 
are always assigned values classically.  The non-classical as­
pect appears only when a belief operator occurs. 

3.2  Discussion  A nd  Formalization 
In contrast to TDAL, where limited versions of A6 and classi­
cal tautologies are present, A6 and all classical tautologies are 
valid in HTAL.  This is reasonable because validity  in  HTAL 
is defined as over-all classical truth, which reflects objective 
truth. 

The two truth relations 

are closely related. 

RESOURCE-BOUNDED REASONING 

The  next  lemma  makes  clear  the  benefit  of  H-canonical 

model. 
Lemma 3.3  Let M be an  H-canonical model  of 
any  formula 

Then for 

1117 

Proof.  Since the sub-model of M  obtained by restricting it to 
ST  is just a canonical model of the system T, the proof of (i) 
has already been given in Theorem 2.7. 

The proof of (ii) is by induction on the structure  of  

The 
basic steps, 
are direct.  Because H 
contains all classical tautologies, the induction step for ~ and 
is carried  out by  the  standard techniques  of propositional 

is an atom and 

reasoning. 

Notice that the axioms A3-A5  are contained in all  worlds 

of the H-canonical model. So by proposition 3.1(i), 
for all worlds s in M, where 
. Thus the rela­
tion K defined in the  H-canonical model  is indeed transitive, 
Euclidean, and serial. 
Theorem 3.4 System H is sound and complete for the seman(cid:173)
tics  ofHTAL. 
Proof  The  soundness  is  easy to  check.  To  show  complete­
does  not  hold.  Then  there  exists  a  H-
ness, suppose 
maximal  consistent  set 
Construct  a  H-
canonical  model  of  with  designated  world 
By  lemma 
3.3, 

does not hold. 

such that 

4  Conclusion 
Many  doxastic  logics  have  been  suggested  in  the  literature, 
reflecting quite different concepts  of actual  belief.  One  may 
wonder why there are so many proposals.  Were all  of us to 
agree on what human belief is, an "unique right" model of be­
lief would be possible.  However, it is not the case, as can be 
seen  from philosophical  controversies  continuing  from  long 
ago.  Thus all of the logics have their own claim to "correct­
ness", if they have clear explanations. 

The method using two-dimensional logic to model aware­
ness and actual belief has, in our opinion, particular benefits. 
Processing awareness condition independently gives us more 
flexibility in controlling the model that is constructed.  Differ­
ent opinions about the relation between awareness and actual 
belief will be reflected in different models, which can be ob­
tained by amending the underlying two-dimensional logic.  Of 
course, there are other, maybe many, alternatives to the logics 
presented in this paper.  For example,  it is possible to give a 
doxastic  logic  with  the  two-dimensional  logic  presented  by 
Bergmann  in  [Bergmann,  1991],  in  which  the  logic  is  in­
tended to be  along Russellian  lines.  Examination  of this or 
other forms of doxastic  logics and the relations among them 
would call for further research. 

There has begun to be use of awareness logic for net pro­
tocol verification [Accorsi, 2001].  We think the method pre­

sented in this paper may be useful in that purpose.  This also 
calls for further research. 

5  Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Nuel Belnap  for his detailed reading 
of the  earlier  version  of this  paper  and  numerous  pertinent 
comments and criticisms. 

References 
[Accorsi, 2001]  R.  Accorsi,  D.  Basin,  and  L.  Vigano.  To­
wards an awareness-based semantics for security proto­
col analysis. In Post-CAV Workshop on Logical Aspects 
of Cryptographic  Protocol  Verification,  2001. 

[Bergmann,  1981]  Bergmann,  M.,  Only,  even,  and  clefts 
in  11th  Internat.  Symp. 
in  two-dimensional 
Multiple-valued  logic,  Oklahoma  1981,  Proceedings, 
IEEE, Long Bench, 117-123, 1981. 

logic, 

[Bergmann,  1991]  M.  Bergmann.  Presupposition  and  two-
dimensional logic. In Meaning and Truth:  The Essential 
Readings in Modern Semantics, eds. Jay L. Garfield and 
K. Murray, New York: Paragon House, 189-211, 1991. 
[Fagin and Halpern, 1988]  R.  Fagin  and  J.  Y.  Halpern.  Be­
lief,  awareness  and  limited  reasoning.  Artificial  Intelli(cid:173)
gence, 34, 39-76, 1988. 

[Fagin and Halpern,  1995]  R. Fagin, J. Y. Halpern, Y Moses 
and  M.  Y  Vardi.  Reasoning  about  Knowledge.  MIT 
press, 1995. 

[Gottward, 2001]  S.  Gottwald.  A  treatise  on  Many-valued 

Logic, research studies press, 2001. 

[Hintikka,  1962]  J. Hintikka. Knowledge and Belief. Cornell 

University Press,  1962. 

[Konolige,  1986]  K. Konolige. What awareness isn't:  a sen­
tential  view of implicit and  explicit  belief.  In Proceed(cid:173)
ings  of the  First  Conference  on  Theoretical Aspects  of 
Reasoning about knowledge, 241-250,  1986. 

[Levesque, 1984] H. Levesque. Logic of implicit and explicit 
belief,.  In  Proceeding  of the  Fourth  National  Confer(cid:173)
ence  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (AAA  184).  Menlo  Park, 
CA, 198-202, 1984. 

[Rantala, 1982]  V.  Rantala.  Quantified  modal  logic:  non-
normal worlds and propositional  attitudes.  Studia Log-
ica, 41,47-67,  1982. 

[Shier and Hu, 2001]  J. Shier, L. Hu. The logical structure of 
open  worlds.  .  Proceedings  of 863  plan  on  intelligent 
computer. Tsinghua University Press, 2001. 

[Thijsse,  1992]  E.  Thijsse.  Partial  Logic  and  Knowledge 

Representation. Eburon Publisher, 1992. 

[Thijsse, 1996]  E. Thijsse. Combining partial and classic se­
mantics:  a hybrid approach to belief and awareness.  In 
Partiality,  Modality,  and Nonmonotonicity,  Doher(eds.), 
223-249, 1996. 

[Wansing,  1990]  H.  Wansing.  A  general  possible  worlds 
framework  for  reasoning  about  knowledge  and  belief. 
Studia Logica, 49, 523-539,  1990. 

1118 

RESOURCE-BOUNDED REASONING 

