Exploring Unknown Environments with Mobile Robots using Coverage Maps 

Cyrill Stachniss 

Wolfram Burgard 

University of Freiburg 

Department of Computer Science 

D-79110 Freiburg, Germany * 

Abstract 

In this paper we introduce coverage maps as a new 
way  of  representing  the  environment  of  a  mobile 
robot. Coverage maps store for each cell of a given 
grid a posterior about the amount the corresponding 
cell is covered by an obstacle.  Using this represen(cid:173)
tation  a  mobile  robot can  more  accurately  reason 
about its uncertainty in the map of the environment 
than  with  standard  occupancy grids.  We  present 
a  model  for proximity  sensors  designed  to  update 
coverage  maps  upon  sensory  input.  We  also  de(cid:173)
scribe how coverage maps can be used to formulate 
a decision-theoretic approach for mobile robot ex(cid:173)
ploration.  We present experiments carried out with 
real  robots in  which  accurate  maps are build  from 
noisy ultrasound data.  Finally,  we  present a com(cid:173)
parison  of different view-point  selection  strategies 
for mobile robot exploration. 

Introduction 

1 
Generating  maps  is  one  of the  fundamental  tasks  of mobile 
robots and many researchers have focused on the problem of 
how to represent the environment as well  as  how to acquire 
models using this representation [5, 9,  10,  14,  17]. The map(cid:173)
ping problem itself has several aspects that have been studied 
intensively  in  the  past.  Some  of the  most  important aspects 
are the localization of the vehicle during mapping, appropri(cid:173)
ate  models  of the  environment  and  the  sensors,  as  well  as 
strategies for guiding the vehicle.  In  literature,  the localiza(cid:173)
tion problem plays an important role, since the quality of the 
resulting  map depends  strongly  on  the  accuracy of the  pose 
estimates  during  the  mapping  process.  However,  the  accu(cid:173)
racy  of the  map  also  depends  on  the  choice  of view-points 
during exploration.  Especially if noisy sensors are used,  the 
map will be quite inaccurate in areas which have been sensed 
a few times only or maybe even from disadvantageous view(cid:173)
points. 

Exploration is the task of guiding a vehicle in such a way 
that it covers the environment with  its  sensors.  Efficient ex(cid:173)
ploration  strategies  are  also  relevant  for  surface  inspection, 

*This work has partly been supported by the German Science 

Foundation (DFG) under contract number SFB/TR8-03. 

mine sweeping,  or surveillance  13,  12].  In the past,  several 
strategies  for exploration  have  been  developed.  One  group 
of approaches deals  with the problem of simultaneous  local(cid:173)
ization and mapping [1, 4], an aspect that we do not address 
in this paper.  A common technique for exploration strategies 
is to extract frontiers between known and unknown areas [2, 
7,  20]  and to  visit the  nearest unexplored place.  These  ap(cid:173)
proaches  only  distinguish  between  scanned  and  un-scanned 
areas and do not take into account the actual information gath(cid:173)
ered at each view-point. To overcome this limitation, Gonza(cid:173)
les et al.  [8] determine the amount of unseen area that might 
be visible to the robot from possible view-points. To incorpo(cid:173)
rate the uncertainty of the robot about the state of the environ(cid:173)
ment Moorehead et al. [13] as well as Bourgault et al. [ 1] use 
occupancy grids [14] and compute the entropy of each cell in 
the grid to determine the utility of scanning from a certain lo(cid:173)
cation.  Whaite and Ferrie [19] present an approach that also 
uses the entropy to measure the uncertainty in the geometric 
structure of objects that are scanned with a laser range sensor. 
In  contrast  to  the  work  described  here  they  use  a  paramet(cid:173)
ric representation of the objects to be scanned.  Edlinger and 
Puttkamer  [7]  developed  a  hierarchical  exploration  strategy 
for office environments.  Their approach first explores rooms 
and  then  traverses  through  doorways  to  explore  other  parts 
of the environment. Tailor and Kriegman [16] describe a sys(cid:173)
tem for visiting all landmarks in the environment of the robot. 
Their robot maintains a list of unvisited landmarks that are ap(cid:173)
proached and mapped by the robot.  Dudek et al. 16] propose 
a strategy for exploring an unknown graph-like environment. 
Their algorithm does not consider distance metrics and is de(cid:173)
signed  for  robots  with  very  limited  perceptual  capabilities. 
Recently  Koenig  has  shown,  that  a  strategy,  which  guides 
the vehicle to the closest point that has not been covered yet, 
keeps the traveled distance reasonably small  [11].  However, 
as  experiments  reported  in  this  paper  illustrate,  such  tech(cid:173)
niques  can  lead  to  a  serious  increase  of measurements  nec(cid:173)
essary  to  build  an  accurate  map  if  the  robot  is  not  able  to 
incorporate measurements on-the-fly while it is moving. This 
might be the case, for example, for robots extracting distance 
information from camera images. 

In this paper we introduce coverage maps as a new proba(cid:173)
bilistic way to represent the belief of the robot about the state 
of the  environment.  In  contrast to  occupancy  grids  [14],  in 
which each cell is considered as either occupied or free, cov-

ROBOTICS 

1127 

Figure  1:  Typical occupancy map obtained in situations in which 
cells are only partly occupied (left image) and a coverage map con(cid:173)
taining the corresponding coverage values (right image). 

erage maps represent in each cell of a given discretization a 
posterior about the amount this cell  is covered by an object. 
As an example consider the situation depicted in Figure 1  in 
which a cell is partly covered by an obstacle.  With the stan(cid:173)
dard occupancy algorithm the probability that this cell is oc(cid:173)
cupied will converge to 1 if the sensors of the robot repeatedly 
detect the obstacle.  The left picture of this  figure shows the 
resulting occupancy probabilities (black represents high like(cid:173)
lihood).  Since the object does only cover 20% of this cell, a 
coverage value of .2 (as shown in the right image of Figure  1) 
would be a better approximation of the true situation.  In ad(cid:173)
dition to the representation aspect,  we also present a sensor 
model that allows the robot to appropriately update a cover(cid:173)
age map upon sensory input and describe how coverage maps 
can be used to realize a decision-theoretic approach to explo(cid:173)
ration of unknown environments. 

This paper is organized as follows.  In the next section we 
introduce coverage maps.  In Section 3  we present a proba(cid:173)
bilistic technique to update a given coverage map upon sen(cid:173)
sory input.  In Section 4 we describe a decision-theoretic ap(cid:173)
proach to exploration based on coverage maps.  In Section 5 
we present experiments illustrating that our approach allows 
a mobile robot can learn accurate maps from noisy range sen(cid:173)
sors.  Additionally, we present experiments comparing differ(cid:173)
ent view-point selection strategies for exploration. 
2  Coverage Maps 
As already mentioned above, occupancy grids rest on the as(cid:173)
sumption that the environment has binary structure,  i.e. that 
each  grid  cell  is  either occupied  or free.  This  assumption, 
however,  is  not  always justified.  For  example,  if the  envi(cid:173)
ronment  contains  a  wall  that  is  not  parallel  to  the  x-  or  y-
axis of the grid there must be grid cells which are only partly 
covered.  In  occupancy grids  the  probability  that  such  cells 
are occupied will  inevitably converge to one (see Figure  1). 
Coverage maps overcome this limitation by storing a poste(cid:173)
rior about its coverage for each cell.  Coverage values range 
from 0 to  1.  Whereas a coverage of 1  means that the cell is 
fully occupied, an empty cell has a coverage of 0.  Since the 
robot usually does not know the true coverage of a grid cell, 
it maintains a probabilistic belief  p(cl)  about the coverage of 
the cell c/.  In principle, there are different ways of represent(cid:173)
ing  p(cl).  They range from parametric distributions such as 
(mixtures  of)  Gaussians  or  non-parametric variants  such  as 
histograms. Throughout this paper we assume that each 
is given by a histogram over possible coverage values.  More 
precisely,  we  store  a histogram for each grid cell,  in  which 
each bin contains the probability that the corresponding grid 
cell has the particular coverage. A typical example is depicted 
in Figure 2.  It shows the posterior for the cell containing the 
obstacle in the situation illustrated in Figure  1  obtained after 
30 measurements. 

coverage 

Figure 2: Coverage posterior for the cell containing the obstacle in 
the situation depicted in Figure 1. 
3  Updating Coverage Maps 
To  update  a coverage  map  based  on  sensory  input,  we  ap(cid:173)
ply  a  Bayesian  update  scheme  similar  to  that  of occupancy 
grids.  Throughout this paper we assume that our sensor pro(cid:173)
vides distance information.  Accordingly, we have to convert 
the distance information to coverage values.  What we need 
to know is the coverage map c that has the highest likelihood 
under all distance measurements 
If we use Bayes 
rule and assume that consecutive measurements are indepen(cid:173)
dent given that we know the map c, we obtain: 

Next we need to know how to determine the likelihood 

rule and obtain: 

of measuring  dt  given  the map 

Again we apply Bayes 

Equation (5) is obtained from Equation (4) by assuming that 
p(c) is constant and that 
is constant for every t.  The 
variables  and 
represent normalization constants ensuring 
that the left-hand side sums up to one over all  c.  Under the 
strong assumption that the individual cells of a coverage map 
are independent1 we finally obtain: 

1This independence is frequently assumed in the context of occu(cid:173)
pancy maps. We would like to refer to a recent work by Thrun [ 18] 
on how to better deal with the dependency between cells. 

1128 

ROBOTICS 

Thus,  to update a map  given  a  measurement 
we  simply 
have to multiply the current belief about the coverage of each 
cell 
.  by the belief about the coverage of this  cell  resulting 
from 
. Additionally the maximum likelihood coverage map 
is obtained by choosing the mode of the coverage histogram 
for each cell 

It remains to describe how we actually compute 

i.e. how we determine the distribution about the potential cov(cid:173)
erage values of a cell  with distance 
to the sensor given a 
In our current system,  we use a mixture of 
measurement 
a Gaussian 
to compute 
the probability 

and a uniform distribution 

that the coverage of 

(9) 
The  value of the  uniform distribution  is computed using  the 
which increases monotonously in dl  and d. 
function 
It reflects a typical behavior of proximity sensors like sonars, 
because  the  accuracy  of a  measurement  decreases  with  the 
distance to the obstacle. 

of the  Gaussian  is  computed  in  the 

The mean 

following way: 

(10) 

is shorter than 

and the distance 

where 
is the grid resolution of the map.  Note that we dis(cid:173)
tinguish three situations, depending on whether the measure(cid:173)
or not.  Suppose that the measurement does 
ment ends in 
not end in 
In this case 
we have 
In such a situation, the mean of the 
Gaussian  is  zero,  since  it  is  more  likely  that  a  cell  covered 
by a range measurement that does not end in it is completely 
empty. The second line of Equation (10) represents the situa(cid:173)
tion in which  ends within 
In this case the mean is inverse 
proportional to the amount the cell  is covered by d.  Finally, 
cells lying up to 
behind a cell, in which the measure(cid:173)
ment  ends,  are  most  likely  completely occupied  so  that  the 
mean is 1. 

The  value of the  standard deviation 

of the  Gaus(cid:173)

In this range 

sian also is  a function that is  monotonously increasing  in 
and d except when 
has a 
constant value that exceeds all values outside of this interval. 
To  obtain  the  optimal  parameters  for  the  functions  in 
our sensor model  we  apply  the  maximum  likelihood princi(cid:173)
ple.  We  first  apply  a highly  accurate scan-alignment proce(cid:173)
dure  [10] on laser range information.  Next we manually ex(cid:173)
tract  geometric  objects  from  the  corresponding  range  data. 
Given these geometric primitives we use straightforward ge(cid:173)
ometric projections to compute the ground truth information, 
i.e.,  the  exact  coverage  of  each  cell  of  a  given  discretiza(cid:173)
tion. We evaluate a particular setting for the parameters of our 
model by determining the likelihood of the ground truth given 
a coverage map obtained using this setting. To maximize the 
likelihood we apply local search techniques in the parameter 
space. Figure 
for a measured distance of 
obtained for ultrasound data recorded with our B21r 
robot Albert, which is depicted in picture (a) of Figure 4.  As 
the plot illustrates, for a measured distance of 
cells close 

Figure  3:  Sensor model 

for a measured distance 

to the robot are unoccupied with  high  likelihood.  However, 
cells  close  to  the  measured  distance  are  covered  with  high 
probability.  Figure  4  shows  two  coverage  maps  build  from 
real  sonar data obtained by a real robot.  Image (b) depicts a 
map of the Sieg Hall at the University of Washington and (c) 
a map of the office environment of our laboratory. 
4  Strategies for Choosing the Next View-Point 
One of the key problems during exploration is to choose ap(cid:173)
propriate  vantage  points.  At  the  selected  location  the  robot 
will  perform the next measurement to retrieve new  informa(cid:173)
tion  about  its  environment.  In  this  section  we  will  present 
four methods to choose an  appropriate position.  In  general 
there are two different aspects that are relevant for the view(cid:173)
point selection.  On the one hand, the uncertainty of the robot 
in the map should be as small as possible, and on the other 
hand, the number of measurements to be incorporated as well 
as the distance traveled should be minimized. 

To  determine  the  uncertainty  in  the  state  of  a  particular 
cell  we  consider  the  entropy  of  the  posterior  for  that  cell. 
Entropy  is  a  general  measure  for  the  uncertainty  of  a  be(cid:173)
lief.  The  entropy 
bins 

of a  histogram 

consisting  of 

is defined as: 

(11) 

H  is  maximal  in  case  of a  uniform  distribution.  The  mini(cid:173)
mal  value zero is obtained if the system  is absolutely certain 
about the state of the corresponding cell.  Thus, if we want to 
minimize the uncertainty in the current map,  all  we need to 
do is to reduce the entropy of the histograms in the coverage 
map.  Furthermore, we can specify, at which moment the ex(cid:173)
ploration task  has  been completed.  Suppose  the  size  of the 
environment is limited.  Then the goal of the exploration pro(cid:173)
cess for a coverage map c has been achieved  if 
for all cells 
corresponds to the histogram representing the coverage of 
Additionally, the system has to detect a situation in which the 
robot is unable to reduce the entropy of a cell  below 
to en(cid:173)
sure  the  termination  of the  exploration  task.  In  our  system 
this  is  achieved by  monitoring the change of entropy.  If this 
change is below .001 for five consecutive measurements, the 
cell is regarded as explored enough. 

that can be reached by the robot, 

ROBOTICS 

1129 

Figure 4: Picture (a) shows our B21r robot Albert equipped with a ring of 24 sonar sensors. Image (b) depicts a coverage map generated for 
data collected in the Sieg Hall building of the University of Washington. Picture (c) displays the coverage map of our laboratory environment. 

4.1  Closest  Location  (CL) 
A simple and frequently used strategy is to drive to the closest 
location at which the robot can gather information about a cell 
that has not been explored well enough.  This way the ques(cid:173)
tion  whether a cell  has  been explored well  enough depends 
on the actual measure used to quantify the uncertainty about 
individual grid cells.  In our approach this measure is the en(cid:173)
tropy.  A cell is regarded as been sensed accurately enough if 
the  entropy  of the  coverage belief does  not exceed  e  or if it 
does not change any  longer.  This strategy CL does not take 
into account how much information will be obtained at a par(cid:173)
ticular view-point.  Rather it seeks to minimize the distance to 
that location: 

(12) 

where L(c)  is the set of cells which have a grid cell with high 
entropy  in  its  visible  range and 
is  the  distance  be(cid:173)
given  the  current  map  of  the 
tween  the  locations  and 
environment. 
4.2  M a x i m um  Information  Gain  (IG)  and 

( I G - W I N) 

The  second  strategy  is  solely  governed  by  the  information 
gain that can be obtained about the environment at a specific 
view-point.  The  information  gain  is  defined  as  the  change 
of entropy introduced by  incorporating the measurement ob(cid:173)
tained at that location into the map.  If we integrate a single 
measurement d into a cell 
the information gain is defined 
as: 

is the histogram of cell 

(13) 
where 
after integrating mea(cid:173)
surement d according to our sensor model.  The information 
gain  of a  measurement  is  then  computed  as  the  sum  of the 
information gains for all  cells covered by  that measurement. 
Since  we  do  not  know  which  measurement we  will  receive 
if the robot measures at a certain position  we have to inte(cid:173)
grate over all possible measurements to compute the expected 
information gain for that view-point: 

(14) 

is the set of cells covered by measurement d. To 

Here 
efficiently compute the  likelihood of an  observation 
we apply a ray-tracing technique similar to Moravec and Elfes 

using the current maximum likelihood coverage map. 

Since  the  complexity of Equation  (14)  depends exponen(cid:173)
tially  on  the  number of dimensions  of the  measurement,  we 
consider all  measurements  independently.  For example,  for 
our robot  equipped  with  24  ultrasound  sensors  we  compute 
the average information gain over all 24 sensors. 

The next view-point is then defined as: 

(15) 

One of the disadvantages of this strategy is that it does not 
take into account the distance to be traveled by the robot.  To 
deal with this problem we also consider the strategy IG-WIN 
which  restricts  the  search  for potential  vantage  points  to  a 
local window until this has been explored. Once this has been 
done, there is no need for the robot to return to this area again. 
4.3  Combination of IG and CL (IG-CL) 
The  final  strategy  discussed  in  this  paper  tries  to  combine 
the  properties  of  the  strategies  CL  and  IG.  The  goal  is  to 
find an optimal tradeoff between the evaluation functions (12) 
and (15): 

By adapting the weight a the user can easily influence the be(cid:173)
havior of a robot and optimize  its  performance  for a special 
task.  A value close to zero results in a behavior similar to the 
strategy CL. For high values of a the strategy converges to the 
strategy IG.  Please note that  functions of this type have suc(cid:173)
cessfully  been  applied  in  the  past  for coordinating  multiple 
robots during exploration [2,  15]. 
5  Experiments 
We  implemented  the  models  and  exploration  strategies  de(cid:173)
scribed above and  performed a series of exploration runs  in 
different  environments.  The  goal  of  the  experiments  pre(cid:173)
sented  in  this  section  is  to  illustrate  that  a  robot  can  build 
accurate  maps  using our models.  Additionally we  describe 
experiments  in  which  we  analyze  the  properties  of the  four 
view-point selection techniques described above. 
5.1  Advantage over Scan  Counting 
The first experiment is designed to illustrate that an approach 
which considers the uncertainty in the belief about the cover(cid:173)
age of a cell to select view-points yields more accurate maps 
than techniques relying on  scan counting approaches.  Scan 

1130 

ROBOTICS 

Figure  5:  These  images  depict maps  and  trajectories of the  robot  obtained  in  the  corridor of our office  environment.  The  left  map  (a)  is 
a typical  occupancy grid map obtained when every cell needs to be covered just once.  Image (b) shows  a coverage  map obtained  with the 
strategy CL. The rightmost image (c) shows an occupancy map obtained using scan counting with a threshold of n  =  50. 

coverage maps 
counting 
ext. counting 

89.1m 
26.6m 
90.6m 

0% 
21% 
1.5% 

Table  1:  Data from the experiments  shown  in  Figure 5.  To com(cid:173)
pute the entropy for the scan counting results we generated coverage 
maps from the recorded sonar data. 

counting techniques count the  number of times  a cell  is  inter(cid:173)
cepted  by  a measurement.  Several  exploration techniques  [2, 
7,  20]  assume  that  a  place  is  explored  if it  has  been  scanned 
once.  This is problematic especially when the underlying sen(cid:173)
sors  are  noisy.  Figure  5  (a)  shows  a  typical  occupancy  grid 
map  of our  laboratory  environment  obtained  from  real  sonar 
data  when  using  the  scan  counting  technique.  Since  the  ex(cid:173)
ploration process is stopped as soon as all reachable locations 
were  covered  by  a  measurement,  many  cells  of the  resulting 
occupancy  map  have  a  high  uncertainty  (see  Table  1).  This 
is  due  to  the  high  amount  of  sensor  noise,  which  sonars  of(cid:173)
ten  produce.  On  the  other  hand,  if we  use  our  approach  and 
consider the  uncertainty  in  the  coverage  of individual  cells  to 
select  view-points,  the  resulting  maps  are  more  accurate  (see 
Figure  5(b)). 

Obviously,  a  straightforward  extension  of the  scan  count(cid:173)
ing  would  be  to  assume  that  each  cell  has  to  be  covered  n 
times  and  not  only  once.  An  occupancy  grid  obtained  by 
this extension  can  be  seen  in  Figure  5  (c).  In  this experiment 
we  additionally  discounted  longer  beams  in  order  to  account 
for  the  fact  that  range  sensors  provide  fewer  information  for 
distant  places.  Whereas  this  map  looks  similar  as  the  cor(cid:173)
responding  coverage  map,  the  robot's  uncertainty  about  the 
state  of the  environment  is  higher.  This  is  illustrated  by  the 
values  given  in  Table  1.  The  right  column  of this  table  con(cid:173)
tains  the  percentage  of  cells  in  c  for  which  the  entropy  ex(cid:173)
ceeds the given threshold.  Thus, even extended scan counting 
does  not guarantee  that  in  the  end  every  cell  is  explored  well 
enough.  Typically,  some  cells  will  be  measured  too  often, 
others  not  often enough. 

Figure  6  shows  the  result  of  a  series  of  50  simulation  ex(cid:173)
periments.  In  these  experiments we  forced  the  robot to  reach 
a  scan  count  of n  where  n  varied  between  1  and  130.2  We 
counted  the  number  of  cells  m  that  would  be  explored  well 
enough  given  the  entropy  criterion  for  coverage  maps  and 
plotted  the  length of the overall  path  against m.  The resulting 
graph  is  shown  in  Figure  6.  The  cross  on  the  right side  indi-

2In practice, a good candidate value of n would be the maximum 
number of measurements  necessary  to  obtain  a  coverage  map  that 
fulfills the entropy threshold criterion 

Figure 6:  Average path  length of the robot depending on the num(cid:173)
ber of sufficiently explored cells (left image) and the simulation en(cid:173)
vironment used during this experiment (right image). 

cates the path  length obtained when using the  strategy  
for 
coverage maps.  As  can  be  seen,  if more  than  85% of the map 
should  be  explored  well  enough,  a  decision-theoretic  explo(cid:173)
ration  strategy  yields  shorter  trajectories  than  extended  scan 
counting. 

5.2 

A  C o m p a r i s on  of  t he  V i e w - P o i nt  Selection 
Strategies 

Robots  performing  2-d  exploration  tasks  with  sonars  oder 
laser  scanners  normally  integrate  every  sensor  measurement 
because  the  amount  of  data  is  reasonably  small  and  easy  to 
integrate. 
In  this  section  we  consider  the  situation  that  an(cid:173)
alyzing  a  measurement  produces  high  costs.  This  might  by 
the case  if e.g.  the  distance  information  needs to  be  extracted 
from  stereo  images.  In  such  a  situation  the  number  of mea(cid:173)
surements  needed  for  the  exploration  task  is  a  value  of  in(cid:173)
terest.  As  mentioned  above,  one  of the  major  advantages  of 
our  coverage  maps  is  that  they  allow  the  integration  of  the 
uncertainty  into  the  selection  process  of the  next  view-point. 
The  experiments  in  this  section  are  designed  to  compare  the 
performance  of the  different  strategies.  To  carry  out  the  ex(cid:173)
periments,  we  varied the  size  of the  local  window when using 

and the  weight  

in the evaluation function  of 

show  the  value  of the  weight  

(see  Equation  (16)).  In  Figure  7  (a)  and  (b)  the  numbers  be(cid:173)
and  the  numbers 
hind 
behind 
indicate  the  radius  of a  circle  which  defines 
the  local  window.  The  results  have  been  obtained  using  20 
runs  per  strategy  in  the  environment  shown  in  Figure  7  (d). 
Please  note  that  further experiments carried  out  in  alternative 
environments  showed  similar  results  and  are  omitted  for  the 
sake  of  brevity.  The  maximum  allowed  entropy  during  all 
experiments described  in  this section  was  set  to  .6. 

Figure  7  (a)  shows  the  average  number  of  measurements 
necessary  to  complete  the  exploration  task  for  each  strategy. 
needs the min(cid:173)
As can be seen from the  figure,  the  strategy  
imum  amount  of  measurements.  The  strategy  
with 
needs  approximately  the  same  number  of  measure-

ROBOTICS 

1131 

Figure  7:  Figure  (a)  shows  the  average  number  of measurements  needed  by  different  strategics,  whereas  in  (b)  depicts  the  average  path 
length of the exploration  for each  strategy.  The  value behind 
shows  the size  of the  local  window  and  b e h i n d t he   value  of 
the  parameter a.  The  error-bars  show  the  .05  significance  interval.  The  images  (c)  and  (d)  show  the  paths  driven  during  the  exploration 
experiment.  Figure (c) shows a sample path of method 

and the (d) a path generated by 
References 
[11 

ments  as  The strategy 
requires the maximum number 
of measurements compared to all  other strategies considered 
here.  The  reason  is  that  it  only  seeks  to  minimize the  path 
length without considering the information gained at particu(cid:173)
lar locations. The error-bars correspond to the 5% confidence 
interval. 

In our experiments we found that a nearest neighbor view(cid:173)
point selection strategy like 
outperforms an approach con(cid:173)
sidering information gain if the  robot is allowed to  integrate 
measurements while it is moving (assuming that the acquisi(cid:173)
tion and integration of measurements can be done fast).  This 
can  be  seen  in  Figure  7  (b),  which  plots  the  average  path 
length  driven  by  the  robot  during  the  exploration  task  for 
all  different  strategies.  With  respect  to  the  path  length  the 
strategy 
shows the best behavior as the resulting trajec(cid:173)
tories  are  shorter  than  those  of all  other  techniques.  Thus, 
strategy efficiently  covers  the  terrain.  In  contrast to 
the 
that,  the 
strategy  ignores  the  distance  to  be  driven  and 
therefore  produces  an  extremely  long  path  which  results  in 
the  worst  behavior of all  strategies  (see  also  Figure 7 
& 
" appears to yield a good 
trade-off between number of measurements and overall path 
length.  According to the experiments it slightly outperforms 
the 
strategy. 
6  Conclusions 
In this paper we have introduced a new representation scheme 
for maps build with mobile robots from sensor data.  In con(cid:173)
trast  to  standard  occupancy  maps  our  coverage  maps  store 
a posterior for each cell  about its  coverage.  This  offers  the 
opportunity  to  more  accurately  compute  the  uncertainty  of 
the  robot  about  the  corresponding area  in  the  environment. 
Additionally, we have presented a sensor model designed to 
update these maps upon sensory input. Finally, we have com(cid:173)
pared decision-theoretic approaches to guide a vehicle during 
exploration. 

strategy with 

The technique has been implemented and evaluated in ex(cid:173)
tensive simulation runs and real world applications.  The ex(cid:173)
periments illustrate that by using coverage maps it is possible 
to build accurate maps even if noisy sensors are used.  Exper(cid:173)
iments analyzing different exploration strategies indicate that 
a  technique  combining  the  maximum  uncertainty  reduction 
and  the  distance  to be  traveled  yields  the  best trade-off be(cid:173)
tween the number of necessary measurements and the length 
of the resulting paths. 

Information  based  adaptive  robotic  exploration. 

F  Bourgoult, A. A. Makarenko, S.  B. Williams, B. Grocholsky, and  F Durrant-
In  Proc.  oj  the 
Whyte. 
IEEE/RSJ Int.  Conj.  on  Intelligent  Robots and Systems  (IROS),  2002. 
W. Burgard, M. Moors, and F. Schneider.  Collaborative exploration of unknown 
environments  with  teams of mobile robots.  In dagstuhl.  Springer Verlag,  2(K)2 
H.  Choset.  Coverage for robitics  -  a survey  of recent  results.  Annals  oj Mathe(cid:173)
matics  and Artifical  Intelligence,  31,  2001. 
H.  Choset.  Topological  simultaneous  localization and mapping (slam).  Toward 
exact  localization  without  explicit  localization 
IEEE Transat turns  on  Robotics 
and Automation,  17(2),  April  2001. 
G.  Dissanayake.  H.  Durrant-Whyte,  and T.  Bailey.  A computationally efficient 
solution  to  the  simultaneous  localisation  and  map  building  (SLAM)  problem 
Working  notes  of  ICRA'2(KX)  Workshop  W<4:  Mobile  Robot  Navigation  and 
Mapping, April 2000. 
G  Dudek,  M. Jenkin,  E.  Milios,  and  D.  Wilkes.  Robotic  exploration  as graph 
construction. 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Robotics  and  Automation,  7(6).859-865, 
1991. 
T. Edhnger and  E. von Puttkamer.  Exploration of an indoor-environment  by an 
In  I'roc.  oj  the  IEEFJRSJ  Int.  Conj.  on  Intelligent 
autonomous  mobile  robot. 
Robots and Systems (IROS),  1994. 
H.H.  Gonzalez-Banos  and  J.C  Latombc.  Navigation  strategies  for  exploring 
indoor  environments. 
J  -S.  Gutmann and  K.  Konolige.  Incremental  mapping of  large cyclic environ 
In  Proc.  of the  International  Symposium  on  Computational  Intelligent  e 
ments. 
in  Robotics  and  Automation  (CIRA),  2(XX). 

International  Journal  of Robotics  Research,  2(H) 1. 

12] 

131 

|4l 

f5] 

|6] 

[71 

[81 

[91 

[101  D. Hahnel, D. Schulz, and W. Burgard. Map building with mobile robots m pop(cid:173)
In  Proc.  of the  IEEE/RSJ Int.  Conj  on  Intelligent  Robots 

ulated  environments. 
and Systems (IROS),  2002. 
S. Koenig, C. Tovey, and W. Halliburton.  Greedy mapping of terrain.  In Proc  of 
the  IEEE Int.  Conf.  on  Robotics  &  Automation  (ICRA),  2001. 
N.  Massios, L.  Dorst, and F.  Voorbraak.  A strategy  for robot surveillancs using 
In  IJCAI  Workshop  "Reasoning 
the  geometrical  structure  of the  environment,. 
with  Uncertainty  m  Robotics ",  2001. 
S.J. Moorehead, R. Simmons, and W.L. Whittaker.  Autonomous exploration us(cid:173)
ing  multiple  sources of information.  In  Proc.  of the IEEE Int.  Conf  on  Robotics 
d  Automation  (ICRA),  2001. 

[ I ll 

1121 

[131 

114]  Hans P. Moravec and A.E.  Elfes.  High resolution maps from  wide angle sonar 

In  Proc.  IEEE Int.  Conf  Robotics  and Automation,  pages  116-121,  1985. 

[171 

[161 

[151  R.  Simmons,  D.  Apfclbaum.  W  Burgard,  D  Fox,  M.  Moors,  S.  Thrun,  and 
H.  Youncs.  Coordination for multi-robot exploration  and  mapping.  In  Proc  of 
the  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (AAA/),  2(XX). 
C J.  Tailor  and  D.J.  Kricgman.  Exloration  strategies  for  mobile  robots. 
In 
Proc.  of the  IEEE Int.  Conf  on  Robotics  cfc  Automation  (ICRA),  pages  248-253, 
1993. 
S.  Thrun.  An  online  mapping  algorithm  for  teams  of mobile  robots.  Interna(cid:173)
tional  Journal  of Robotics  Research,  2001. 
S. Thrun.  Learning occupancy grids with  forward  sensor models.  Autonomous 
Robots, 2002.  To appear. 
P.  Whaite  and  F.  P.  Ferrie.  Autonomous  exploration:  Driven  by  uncertainty. 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Pattern  Analysis  and  Machine  Intelligence,  19(3): 193-
205, 1997. 

[181 

[191 

[201 B. Yamauchi, A. 

tion for mobile robots. Adaptive Systems, 7(2), 1999. 

and W. Adams.  Integrating exploration and localiza(cid:173)

1132 

ROBOTICS 

