Phase Transitions of Bounded Satisfiability Problems* 

Delbert D. Bailey, Phokion G. Kolaitis 

Computer Science Department 

University of California, Santa Cruz 

Santa Cruz, CA 95064, U.S.A 

{ d b a i l e y , k o l a i t i s } @ c s e . u c s c . e du 

Abstract 

We  investigate  phase  transitions  for  the  family  of 
bounded satisfiability problems  3SAT(b),  recently 
introduced  by  Zhang,  that  ask:  given  a  3CNF-
formula, is there a truth assignment that violates no 
more  than 
of  its  clauses.  Zhang's  results  were 
experimental  and  for  a  fixed  number  of  variables 
(n  =  25),  and  suggested  that  the  locations  of the 
phase  transitions  for  3SAT(b)  are  separated  and 
move significantly as b increases. Analysis of these 
locations was posed as an open question. 
We analytically  show  that  the  phase  transitions  of 
all  3SAT(6)  problems must occur within a narrow 
region,  regardless  of how  large  the  value  of b  is. 
Moreover,  our  experiments  reveal  that  the  phase 
transitions for these problems occur in a remarkable 
way.  Specifically,  unlike  3SAT,  the  probability 
curves  for  3SAT(6)  do  not  have  a  quasi-common 
intersection  point about which  they  rotate  as  they 
become  steeper  with  increasing  n. 
Instead,  they 
move  rapidly  to  the  left  toward  the  narrow  region 
that the analysis predicts. 

Introduction and Summary of Results 

1 
A phase transition of a "system" can be described as an abrupt 
change in the behavior of the system that occurs when a cer(cid:173)
tain "control parameter" is at or near a certain critical value. 
Traditionally,  phase  transitions have been  studied by  physi(cid:173)
cists working in the area of statistical mechanics.  During the 
past decade, however, computer scientists have carried out an 
intensive  study  of phase  transitions of algorithmic problems, 
first  of NP-complete  decision  problems  and,  more  recently, 
of  decision  problems  that  are  complete  for  higher  compu(cid:173)
tational  complexity classes.  These  investigations have  shed 
new  light on  the  "structure"  of presumably  intractable deci(cid:173)
sion problems by examining them from a perspective that had 
been hitherto unexplored in computer science;  moreover, for 
certain fundamental algorithmic problems, the location of the 
phase transition has been correlated to the peak average cost 
of natural algorithms for solving these problems. 

* Research of the authors was partially supported by NSF Grant 

No. IIS-9907419 

is a 

1, where 

The  Boolean  satisfiability  problems 

3, con(cid:173)
stitute  the  most  thoroughly  investigated  collection  of  NP-
complete problems from the perspective of phase transitions. 
An instance  of 
formula; the "control param(cid:173)
eter"  of such  a formula is  the ratio of the number of clauses 
over the number of variables occurring in  the formula.  Each 
fixed  value r of this ratio gives rise to the family of probabil(cid:173)
ity spaces 
is the collection 
clauses generated by selecting 
of all  kCNF-formulas  with 
k  variables  from 
variables  without  replacement  and  then 
negating each variable with probability 1/2. Franco and Paul 
[Franco and Paul,  1983]  were the  first  to focus on this fixed 
clauses-to-variables ratio model and to initiate a study of the 
asymptotic behavior of the  probability 
that a random 
formula  in 
is  satisfiable.  During  the  past  decade, 
much  of the  work  in  this  area  has been  motivated  from  the 
conjecture of Chvatal and Reed [Chvatal and Reed,  1992] to 
the effect that, for every 
there is a positive real number 
rk  such that  if 
whereas 
if 

then lim   

then 

being  satisfiable,  as 

The  above  conjecture  asserts  that,  for  every 

3,  a 
of a  ran(cid:173)
phase  transition  occurs  in  the  probability 
dom  formula  in 
In 
spite of intensive efforts  by several  researchers,  this  conjec(cid:173)
ture has not been settled thus far.  Nonetheless, progress to(cid:173)
ward establishing this conjecture has  been made  in  two dif(cid:173)
ferent fronts.  On  the experimental front,  large-scale experi(cid:173)
ments with random Boolean formulas have provided evidence 
for the existence of a critical  ratio 
and have yielded esti(cid:173)
mates of its  actual  value.  In  particular, experiments by  Sel-
man, Mitchell and Levesque [Selman et  al.,  1996] with ran(cid:173)
dom  3CNF-formulas  and  analysis  of  these  experiments  by 
Kirkpatrick and Selman  [Kirkpatrick and Selman,  1994]  in(cid:173)
dicate  that 
is  about  4.2.  On  the  analytical  front,  there 
has  been  continuous  progress  toward  establishing  progres(cid:173)
sively  tighter  upper  and  lower  bounds  for  the  value  of  r3. 
The  best  analytical  results  obtained  to  date  assert  that  if r3  
[Kaporis  et  al.,  2002; 
exists,  then  3.42 
Dubois  et  al,  2000].  The  experiments  carried  out  by  Sel(cid:173)
man, Mitchell and Levesque [Selman et  al,  1996] for random 
3CNF-formulas  also  revealed  that  the  critical  ratio  4.2  ap(cid:173)
pears to be the location at which the average cost of the Davis-
Putnam-Logemann-Loveland (DPLL) procedure for Boolean 
satisfiability peaks. 

4.507 

SATISFIABILITY 

1187 

Many fundamental algorithmic problems are optimization 
problems  and  not  mere  decision  problems.  In  particular,  if 
a Boolean formula happens to be over-constrained and, thus, 
unsatisfiable,  it  is  natural  to  ask  for  the  maximum  number 
of clauses  in  the  formula  that  can  be  simultaneously  satis(cid:173)
fied. By focusing on 3CNF-formulas, we obtain the optimiza(cid:173)
tion problem M AX 3SAT: given a 3CNF-formula  
the 
that can be simultaneously 
maximum number of clauses  of 
satisfied.  M AX  3SAT  is a prototypical constraint optimiza(cid:173)
tion  problem  that  is  known  to  play  a  prominent role  in  the 
study  of  the  approximability  properties  of  NP-optimization 
problems. 
Indeed,  as  shown  by  Papadimitriou  and  Yan-
nakakis [Papadimitriou and Yannakakis, 1991], M AX SAT is 
a M AX  SNP-complete problem; this means that M AX  SAT 
is a constant-approximable optimization problem and that ev(cid:173)
ery NP-optimization problem in the class M AX SNP can be 
reduced  to  it  via  an  approximation-preserving polynomial-
time reduction (see also [Papadimitriou, 1994]). 

find 

Its importance in complexity and approximability notwith(cid:173)
standing,  M AX  3SAT  had  not  been  investigated  from  the 
perspective of phase transitions until recently. Zhang [Zhang, 
2001]  was the first to investigate phase transitions for M AX 
3SAT  by  carrying  out  an  initial  set  of experiments  for  the 
family  of bounded satisfiability  problems  3SAT(6),  where  b 
is a non-negative integer. An instance of 3SAT(b) is a 3CNF-
formula cp and the question is: does there exist a truth assign(cid:173)
ment that violates no more than b clauses  of 
Equivalently, 
3SAT(6)  asks  whether the optimum value of M AX  SAT  on 
is  at  least  m  -  B,  where  m  is  the  number of 
an instance 
clauses  of 
Thus, each 3SAT(b) is a decision problem ob(cid:173)
tained  from  M AX  SAT  by  imposing  a  "quality  bound"  on 
the optimum value.  The control  parameter of each  3SAT(6) 
is  the ratio of clauses  to variables,  that  is,  the  same control 
parameter as the one used for 3SAT. 

Zhang  [Zhang,  2001]  explored  phase  transitions  for  the 
bounded  satisfiability  problems  3SAT(6)  by  running exper(cid:173)
iments on random 3CNF-formulas with n  =  25 variables and 
for b =  5,10,15,20.  His  findings  suggest that there is a se(cid:173)
ries of separated phase transitions corresponding to different 
quality bounds. The location of each phase transition appears 
to increase with b (see Figure 7); moreover, the average cost 
for solving the optimization problem M AX  SAT  appears to 
be the envelope of the peak average cost for solving the deci(cid:173)
sion problems 3SAT(b), as b increases. Zhang [Zhang, 2001] 
did not report on the asymptotic behavior of 3SAT(b) as the 
number  of variables  increases,  because  he  ran  experiments 
for just  a  single  value  (n  =  25)  of the  number of variables. 
He posed the analysis of phase transitions for 3SAT(b) as an 
open problem and, in particular, raised the question of finding 
the exact location of the phase transitions for these decision 
problems. 

In  this  paper,  we  report  on  a  systematic  investigation  of 
phase transitions for the family of bounded satisfiability prob(cid:173)
lems  3SAT(6).  Our  investigation  has  produced  both  ana(cid:173)
lytical  and  experimental  results  that  yield  a  more  complete 
and, at the same time, rather surprising picture of these phase 
transitions.  As  stated  above,  Zhang's  [Zhang,  2001]  initial 
experiments suggest that the location of the  phase transition 
for  each  3SAT(b)  increases  with  b.  Here,  using  the first-

3. 

moment  method,  we  show  analytically  that  the  phase  tran(cid:173)
sitions  for  3SAT(b)  must  occur  (if they  occur at  all)  within 
a rather narrow  region,  regardless  of the  value  of b.  More(cid:173)
over, the same behavior is exhibited by the families kSAT(b) 
of decision  problems  underlying  the  optimization  problems 
M AX  kSAT,  k 
In  particular,  the  locations  of  the 
phase  transitions  for  3SAT(b)  are  bounded  from  above  by 
1/(3  -  lg(7)) 
5.19 and from below by the greatest known 
lower bound 3.42  for the  location  of the  phase transition  for 
3S AT. At the experimental front, we investigated the asymp(cid:173)
totic behavior of  3SAT(b)  for the  values  b  =  3,  4  and  5  by 
running experiments for several different values of the num(cid:173)
ber n  of variables  of random  3CNF-formulas  (n  =  10,  15, 
20, 25, 30, 35). Our most striking experimental finding is the 
discovery that,  as  n  increases,  the phase transition for each 
3SAT(b)  emerges  in  a  manner that  is  qualitatively different 
from that for 3SAT, as we describe next. 

In  the  case  of  3SAT,  the  experiments  in  [Selman  et  a/., 
1996] revealed that the family of curves for the probability of 
satisfiability  of a random 3CNF-formula (one curve  for each 
number n  of variables)  has  the  property  that  the  curves  be(cid:173)
come  progressively  steeper  and  every  two  of them  intersect 
at  a  single  point  whose  abscissa  is  near  the  location  of the 
phase transition for 3SAT (see Figure  1).  In contrast, our ex(cid:173)
periments reveal that, for each bounded satisfiability problem 
3SAT(b),  the  family of curves for the probability of a  "yes" 
answer of a random 3CNF-formula (one curve for each num(cid:173)
ber n  of variables)  become progressively steeper but they do 
not intersect;  instead,  they  are  separated  by  a  distance  that 
is getting smaller as n increases.  Figures 2,  3,  and 4 depict 
these findings for 3SAT(3), 3SAT(4)  and 3SAT(5), respec(cid:173)
tively.  This is  a  qualitatively different pattern  of emergence 
of a phase transition that does not seem to have been encoun(cid:173)
tered in earlier investigations of phase transitions of other NP-
complete problems in which the probability curves appear to 
have a quasi-common intersection point. 

find 

3,  M AX  kSAT  is the follow(cid:173)
the 

2  Bounded Satisfiability Problems 
For every positive integer k 
ing optimization problem: given a  kCNF-formula  
maximum  number of simultaneously  satisfied  clauses  of 
The  study  of phase  transitions  for  an  optimization  problem 
begins  by  focusing  on  one  or  more  decision  problems  that 
underlie that optimization problem.  The most natural way to 
derive a decision problem from an optimization problem is to 
consider as  input both an  instance of the optimization prob(cid:173)
lem  and  an  arbitrary quality bound,  and to  ask  whether the 
optimum value on this instance is bigger (or smaller) than the 
given quality bound.  In  the case  of M AX  kSAT,  this gives 
rise to the following NP-complete decision problem:  given a 
kCNF-formula 
and an integer c, is there a truth assignment 
to the variables  of 
It 
is  also possible to derive a  family of decision  problems that 
underlie M AX  kSAT  and are such that the inputs to each of 
them are kCNF-formulas only. For each non-negative integer 
6,  let  kS AT(b) be  the  following bounded satisfiability prob(cid:173)
lem:  given a  kCNF-formula 
is  there  a truth  assignment 
that violates no more than b clauses of 
to the variables  of 

that satisfies at least c clauses  of 

1188 

SATISFIABILITY 

case, however, bounding the expectation of a suitable random 
variable X  is not as trivial as it was for kSAT, but still quite 
straightforward. 

be a random variable on 

Let 
is a formula in  

such  that  if 
t h e n is  the number of 
truth assignments on n variables that violate no more than b 
clauses of  Clearly, 
thus our 
goal  now  is  to  bound  the  expectation  E(X^r,b). 

For every truth assignment a on n  variables, let 

be the 

Bernoulli random variable on  
if Q  violates no more  than  b clauses  of 
otherwise. 
in 

=  0, 
It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  number  of  formulas 
for which  a  violates  no  more than  b clauses  is 

such  t h a t=  1, 

and 

which implies that 

Since 

that 

the  linearity of expectation  implies 

Thus, 

(p?  Clearly,  A;SAT(0)  is  kSAT  itself;  moreover,  it  is  easy 
to  show that every bounded satisfiability  problem  A:SAT(6), 
where  A;  3 and b 
1, is NP-complete.  Since the input to 
kSAT(b)  is a kCNF-formula, phase transitions for the family 
kSAT(6)  can be studied using the ratio of clauses to variables 
as the control parameter, that is, the same control parameter 
as the one used in the study of phase transitions for kS AT. 

There  have  been  earlier  investigations  of  phase  transi(cid:173)
tions  for  other  fundamental  optimization  problems,  includ(cid:173)
and  Walsh, 
ing the T R A V E L I NG S A L E S M AN PROBLEM  
1996b]  and  N U M B ER  PARTITIONING 
and  Walsh, 
1996a].  It should be noted,  however,  that for each of these 
two  optimization  problems  a  single  decision  problem  was 
considered (instead of a family of decision problems) because 
the quality bound was part of the input to the decision prob(cid:173)
lem. Moreover, the control parameter for these problems was 
chosen  in  such  a  way  that  it  encoded  the  quality  bound  in 
some  direct  or  indirect  way,  and  this  choice  was  criticized 
in  subsequent  investigations  [Slaney  and  Thiebaux,  1998]. 
Clearly,  this  criticism  does  not  apply  to  the  bounded  satis(cid:173)
fiability  problems  kSAT(fc). 
3, n 

For every integers k 

1, and b 

0, let 

be  the  probability  that  a  random  formula 

in  the  space 
is  a  "yes"  instance  of  kSAT(b),  that is,  there  is  a 

truth  assignment that violates no  more than  b clauses  of 
We now have all the notation in place to formulate the follow(cid:173)
ing  conjecture concerning phase transitions for the bounded 
satisfiability  problems  kSAT(b). 
Conjecture 2.1: For every integer A: 
b 

0, there is a positive real number r k,b such that 

3 and every integer 

Note  that  Chvatal  and  Reed's  conjecture  [Chvatal  and 
Reed,  1992] concerning phase transitions for kSAT, k 
3, 
is the special case of Conjecture 2.1  in which 6 = 0. As men(cid:173)
tioned  in  Section  1,  Zhang  iZhang,  2001]  raised  the prob(cid:173)
lem  of  finding  the  exact  location  of the  phase  transition  for 
3SAT(6),  which,  in  terms  of the  notation  introduced  here, 
amounts to  first  establishing Conjecture  2.1  for A:  =  3  and 
then determining the critical ratio 
for each 6.  Although 
far from solving these problems,  the  next result yields  ana(cid:173)
in  particular,  it 
lytical  upper  bounds  for  the  values  of 
demonstrates that for each A: 
are 
bounded by a quantity that depends only on k. 
Proposition 2.2:  Fix two integers k 
3 and b 

3,  all  critical ratios 

0. 

Thus,  if 
=  0,  re(cid:173)
gardless of the  value of b.  Now  an  application  of Markov's 
inequality to 

gives the result.  

then lim 

Concerning  lower  bounds  for  r*^,  it  is  obvious  that  if  r 
formulas are satisfiable, 
=  1,  regardless of the  value  of b. 

is a ratio such that almost all 
then 
Consequently, if r* is the critical ratio for /cS AT, then   
r*,6,  regardless  of the  value  of  b.  Of course,  this  assumes 
that the critical ratios r* and r k,b actually exist. Until this is 
established, we can use the analytically derived lower bounds 
for r k as  lower bounds for every 
In particular, the best 
currently known such lower bound for r3 is 3.42 [Kaporis et 
al, 2002].  By combining these remarks with Proposition 2.2, 
we  obtain  the  following bounds for the  phase transitions  of 
the bounded satisfiability problems 3SAT(6). 

Proof:  If X  is  a random variable taking non-negative values 
and  having  finite  expectation  E{X),  then  Markov's  inequal(cid:173)
ity asserts that 
This inequality has been 
used in the past to obtain a coarse upper bound for the criti(cid:173)
cal ratio 
Here, we will 
apply the same method to obtain upper bounds for the criti(cid:173)
cal ratios 
In  this 

for the  phase transitions  of 

for the phase transition  of 

SATISFIABILITY 

1189 

3  Experimental  Results 
We ran experiments for random 3CNF-formulas drawn from 
n  =  10,  15,  20,  25,  30 and 35  variable spaces.  We  imple(cid:173)
mented a suitably modified version of the Davis-Logemann-
Loveland-Putnam (DPLL) procedure and tested each random 
formula drawn to determine whether it is a "yes" instance of 
the  bounded  satisfiability  problems  3SAT(b),  for b  =  3,  4 
and  5.  For each  (n,  b)-pair,  probability  curves  were  deter(cid:173)
mined by recording the average number of "yes" instances in 
samples of 1200 formulas, one sample for each possible ratio 
of clauses to variables up to a ratio of 15. 

The  probability curves  for  3SAT(6)  with  b  =  3,  4  and  5 

are depicted in Figures 2, 3 and 4, respectively. 

In these figures, we see that, as r increases, the probability 
curves start out in a region where the probability is 1 or close 
to 1 and then they transition to a region where the probability 
is 0 or close to 0.  To make the terminology more precise, let 
us  define  the  location  of the  transition  for the  probability of 
3S AT(b) to be the ratio r at which the probability is 0.5, and 
the width of the transition for the probability of 3SAT(6) to be 
the difference in the r values between the ratios at which the 
probability falls from 0.9 to 0.1. As n increases, the probabil(cid:173)
ity curves move from right to left; moreover, both the location 
and the width of the transition appear to change with different 
values of n.  For each fixed 6, the width becomes smaller with 
increasing n just as  is the case for the probability curves for 
3SAT in Figure 1; the location, however, moves dramatically 
to the left in sharp contrast with the behavior for 3SAT, where 
the  location moves very slightly and converges to a value in 
the transition region where all  the curves appear to intersect 
at  one  point.  The  magnitude  of the  leftward  movement  of 
the  transition  location  with  increasing  n  appears  to  become 
greater with  increasing  values  of b.  Thus,  the phase  transi(cid:173)
tions for the bounded satisfiability problems 3SAT(6) emerge 
in a pattern that is novel and qualitatively different from that 
of the phase transitions for other NP-complete problems. 

Figure  1:  The  probability  curves  for bounded  satisfiability  with 
b — 0.  There is a curve for each of six different values of n. They 
show the well known 3SAT behavior.  As n increases the transition 
regions of the curves become steeper and appear to have a common 
intersection point about which they rotate. The common hypothesis 
is that in the limit the curves approach a step function through this 
point and its ratio is the critical  phase  transition  value for 3SAT, 
approximately 4.2. 

We also recorded the average cost of the modified DPLL-
procedure for solving  3SAT(6), where b  =  3, 4, 5.  Each of 
these problems is much harder on average than 3SAT; more(cid:173)
over,  these  problems are getting harder on  average as b  in(cid:173)
creases.  As  a matter of fact,  the experiments for b  =  5  and 
for n  =  35 took several weeks to complete.  Figure 5 depicts 
the average cost of solving 3SAT, while Figures 6 depicts the 
average cost of solving 3S AT(5). 

In  Figure  6,  the  performance  curves  for  3SAT(5)  move 
from lower to higher with increasing n and, as has been ob(cid:173)
served with 3SAT, the peaks in cost appear to correspond to 
the location of the transitions.  The peaks move from right to 
left  in  synchrony  with  the  movement  of the  location  of the 
transition for 3SAT(6); this movement is more dramatic than 
in the case of 3SAT. 

4  Finite Size Scaling 
The  locations  of the  transition  in  the  probability  curves  for 
3SAT(6)  appear to approach a limiting critical ratio r 3,b that 
is within the analytically derived upper and lower bounds in 
Corollary  2.3.  Nonetheless,  it  is  not  clear  what  the  critical 
ratio r3,b actually is, nor can it be estimated by visual inspec-

Figure 2: These arc the probability curves for 3S AT(3). There is a 
curve for each of the same n values as in Figure 1. As 71 increases, 
the transition regions appear to steepen and distinctly move to the 
left.  The steepening is similar to 3SAT behavior but here there is 
no apparent common rotation point. The transitions appear to be ap(cid:173)
proaching a step function in the limit but it is not possible to visually 
determine the critical ratio. We used a form of finite size scaling to 
estimate it as approximately 4.4 

1190 

SATISFIABILITY 

Figure 3:  These are the probability curves for 3S AT(4). There is a 
curve for each of the same n values as in the previous figures. Again, 
as n increases, the transition regions appear to steepen and distinctly 
move to the left. The steepening is similar to 3SAT behavior but here 
there is no apparent common rotation point.  The transitions appear 
to be  approaching  a step function  in the limit but  it is  not  possible 
to visually determine the critical ratio.  We used a form of finite size 
scaling to estimate it as approximately 4.5 

Figure  5:  This set of curves plots the well known  performance be(cid:173)
havior of the DPLL procedure for 3SAT. This figure is here for com(cid:173)
parison with the following figure for 3S AT(5). 

Figure 4: These are the probability curves for 3S AT(5). There is a 
curve for each of the same n values as in the previous figures. Again, 
as n increases, the transition regions appear to steepen and distinctly 
move to the left. The steepening is similar to 3SAT behavior but here 
there is no apparent common rotation point.  The transitions appear 
to be approaching  a step function  in the limit but it is  not possible 
to visually determine the critical ratio. We used a form of finite size 
scaling to estimate it as approximately 4.8. Note the analytical upper 
bound is approximately 5.19. 

Figure  6:  This  set  of  curves  plots  the  algorithmic  costs  for 
3S AT(5). The behavior is similar to 3SAT in that cost increases with 
increasing n; moreover, cost exhibits the so-called "easy/hard/easy" 
pattern as the ratio increases.  As  would  be expected the costs for 
bounded  satisfiability  arc  much  higher than  for satisfiability.  Note 
that  the  movement  of the  peak  locations,  as  n  increases,  is  quite 
marked and corresponds to the leftward movement of the transition 
regions in the probability curves. 

SATISFIABILITY 

1191 

3SAT(b) for 25  Varlables 

b=  1,2,  3.  4  and  5 

Table 1: Finite-size Scaling Results 

b 
3 
4 5 

r 3 ,b 
4.40+ 
4.48+ 
4.84 

V3,b 
0.64+ 
0.68+ 
0.77 

The results of the finite-size scaling analysis for 3SAT(b), 
where b =  3, 4 and 5, are shown in Table  1.  Note that these 
results  are  consistent  with  the  analytical  upper  and  lower 
bounds for r 3,b in  Corollary  2.3,  that the r b,k are  in  the re(cid:173)
gion between r k for  k-SAT  and the Markov upper bound for 
k-SAT.  This consistency  is  the  most  that  can  be  reasonably 
concluded  from  the  finite-size  scaling  analysis.  The  tech(cid:173)
nique provides a more principled way to make the estimates 
than eyeballing, but no great accuracy should be attributed to 
the  estimates  in  spite  of their apparent precision.  Although 
the  finite-size  scaling results suggest that the locations of the 
phase transitions of 3SAT(b)  are different for different 6's,  it 
may still  be the case that they all coincide with the  location 
for 3SAT. 

5  Concluding Remarks 
The  results  reported  here  advance  the  understanding of the 
phase transitions for the family of bounded satisfiability prob(cid:173)
lems 3SAT(b), introduced by Zhang [Zhang, 2001 J. 

Our main analytical  finding  is that the phase transitions of 
all 3SAT(6) problems must occur within a narrow region, re(cid:173)
gardless of how large the value of b is.  Moreover, our exper(cid:173)
iments revealed that the phase transitions for these problems 
occur in  a  remarkable  way.  Specifically,  unlike  3SAT,  the 
probability curves for 3SAT(6)  do not have a quasi-common 
intersection  point  about  which  they  rotate  as  they  become 
steeper with  increasing n.  Instead,  they  move rapidly to the 
left toward the narrow region that the analysis predicts. 

Identifying the exact locations of the phase transitions for 
3SAT(b) remains an open problem, which is at least as hard 
as  identifying the  location of the  phase transition  for 3SAT. 
Equally  hard  appears  to  be  the  problem  of analytically  es(cid:173)
tablishing whether these locations are separated or coincide. 
Nonetheless, it may be possible to analytically obtain tighter 
bounds  for  these  locations  using  some  of the  sophisticated 
techniques that have been  quite successful  in  finding  tighter 
bounds for the phase transition of 3SAT. 

Acknowledgments:  We  are  grateful  to  Victor  Dalmau  for 
stimulating and insightful discussions. We also wish to thank 
the  reviewers  for  their  many  useful  comments  and  sugges(cid:173)
tions. 

References 
[Chvatal and Reed, 1992]  V. Chvatal and B. Reed. Mick gets some 
(the odds are on his side). In 33th Annual Symposium on Foun(cid:173)
dations of Computer Science, pages 620-627, 1992. 

[Dubois et al., 2000]  O. Dubois, Y. Boufkhad, and J. Mandler. Typ(cid:173)
ical random 3-SAT formulae and the satisfiability threshold.  In 

5 

10 

Ratio of  Number of Clauses  to Number of  Variables 

Figure 7:  This figure shows the apparently separate "phase transi(cid:173)
tions" for different values of b when looking at probability curves for 
a fixed n, in this case 25 variables. The transition region moves from 
left to right with increasing b. This type of behavior was previously 
reported for 6 = 5,10,15, and 20 [Zhang, 2001]. 

tion since no two probability curves for 3S AT(b) intersect.  A 
finite-size scaling analysis of the data, assuming a power law 
allowed us  to obtain estimates for 
of the  form 
both  the  critical  ratio 
and  for the  exponent 
where 
b =  3,4 and 5. 

In  [Kirkpatrick  and  Selman,  1994],  an  estimate  for  the 
value of the critical ratio  rK  was obtained by visually estimat(cid:173)
ing the point at which the probability curves for kSAT appear 
to intersect,  and then regression techniques were applied  to 
determine the  best  exponent V k in  the power law  for kSAT. 
This cannot be done with the bounded satisfiability problems 
3SAT(b),  since  the  probability  curves  do  not  intersect,  but 
appear to be moving to the  left as the number n of variables 
increases.  Nevertheless the  finite-size  scaling hypothesis can 
still be tested with a more elaborate procedure. Our goal was 
to test whether it is possible find values for r3,b and v3,b such 
that when the ratio r is rescaled with the above power law, the 
probability curves for the different values n  of the number of 
variables collapse  to  a  single  curve.  Using  routines  for in(cid:173)
terpolation and regression from Matlab, we stepped through 
small increments of putative r 3,b values and measured how 
well the curves collapsed to a single curve by calculating the 
sum  of their pairwise  squared  differences when  accordingly 
transformed.  The estimated r3,b was  taken  to  be  the  value 
that minimized this difference measure.  We found this tech(cid:173)
nique  to  be  well  behaved,  in  that  it  exhibited  a  clear  min(cid:173)
imum  and  gave  much  more  precision  than  visually judging 
how  well  the curves appeared to collapse to  a single curve. 
To further validate this technique, we checked it on the phase 
transition  of 2SAT,  which  has been  analytically determined 
to occur at the critical ratio r2  =  1  [Chvdtal and Reed,  1992; 
Fernandez de la Vega,  1992; Goerdt,  1996].  The agreement 
was very good, namely, the estimate for r2  was 0.98. 

1192 

SATISFIABILITY 

Proc.  Uth  Annual  ACM-SIAM  Symp.  on  Discrete  Algorithms, 
pages  126-127, 2000. 

[Fernandez de la Vega,  1992]  W. Fernandez de la Vega. On random 

2-SAT.  Manuscript,  1992. 

[Franco and Paul,  1983]  J.  V.  Franco  and  M.  Paul.  Probabilistic 
analysis  of the  Davis-Putnam  Procedure  for  solving  the  satisfi(cid:173)
ability  problem".  Discrete Applied Math.,  5:77-87,  1983. 

[Gent and Walsh,  1996a]  Ian Gent  and Toby Walsh.  Phase transi(cid:173)
tions and annealed  theories:  number partitioning.  Proc.  of 12th 
European  Conf.  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  ECAI-96,  pages  170-
174, 1996. 

[Gent and Walsh,  1996b]  Ian Gent and Toby Walsh. The TSP phase 

transition.  Artificial  Intelligence,  88(l-2):349-358,  1996. 

[Goerdt,  1996]  A. Goerdt.  A threshold for unsatisfiability.  J.  Com-

put. System Sci., 53(3):469-486,  1996. 

[Kaporis  et  al.,2002]  A.  C.  Kaporis,  L.  M.  Kirousis,  and  E.  G. 
Lalas.  The  probabilistic  analysis  of  a  greedy  satisfiability  al(cid:173)
In  R.  Mohring  and  R.  Ramen,  editors,  Algorithms-
gorithm. 
ESA2002,  Proceedings  of the  Tenth  Annual  European  Sympo(cid:173)
sium, LNCS 2461, pages 574-585. Springer-Vcrlag, 2002.' 

[Kirkpatrick and Selman,  1994]  S.  Kirkpatrick  and  B.  Sclman. 
Critical  behavior  in  the  satisfiability  of random  formulas.  Sci(cid:173)
ence, 264:1297-1301, 1994. 

[Papadimitriou and Yannakakis,  1991]  C. 

and 
M.  Yannakakis.  Optimization,  approximation,  and  complexity 
classes.  Journal  of  Computer and System Science,  43:425-440, 
1991. 

Papadimitriou 

[Papadimitriou,  1994]  C.  H.  Papadimitriou.  Computational  com(cid:173)

plexity.  Addison-Wesley,  1994. 

[Selman et  al,  1996]  B.  Sclman,  D.  G.  Mitchell,  and  H.  J. 
Levesquc.  Generating  hard  satisfiability  problems.  Artificial In(cid:173)
telligence, 81 (1 -2): 17-29, 1996. 

[Slancy and Thicbaux,  1998]  John Slaney and Sylvic Thiebaux.  On 
In  Henri 
the  hardness  of decision  and  optimisation  problems. 
Pradc,  editor,  13th  European  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelli(cid:173)
gence,  ECAI98, pages 224-248.  John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.,  1998. 
[Zhang, 2001]  Weixiong Zhang.  Phase  transitions  and  backbones 
In  T.  Walsh,  editor,  Princi(cid:173)
of  3-SAT  and  maximum  3-SAT, 
ples and Practice  of Constraint  Programming  -  CP 2001,  volume 
2239 of LNCS, pages  153-167. Springer-Vcrlag, 2001. 

SATISFIABILITY 

1193 

