Distributed Patient Scheduling in Hospitals 

T. O. Paulussen* 
Inf. Sys. Dept. 

N. R. Jennings 

K. S. Decker 

Elect. & Comp. Sci. Dept.  Comp.  & Inf. Sci. Dept. 

Univ.  of  Mannheim  Univ.  of  Southampton  Univ.  of Delaware 
Mannheim, Germany 

University of Mannheim 
Newark, Delaware, USA  Mannheim, Germany 

Southampton, UK 

paulussen@uni-mannheim.de nrj@ecs.soton.ac.uk decker@cis.udel.edu heinzl@uni-mannheim.de 

A. Heinzl* 
Inf. Sys. Dept. 

Abstract 

Patient scheduling in  hospitals is  a highly complex 
task.  Hospitals  have  a  distributed  organisational 
structure;  being  divided  into  several  autonomous 
wards  and  ancillary  units.  Moreover,  the  treat(cid:173)
ment  process  is  dynamic  (information  about  the 
patients'  diseases  often  varies  during  treatments, 
causing changes  in the  treatment process).  Current 
approaches  are  insufficient  because  they  either  fo(cid:173)
cus only on the single ancillary units, and therefore 
do  not  consider the  entire  treatment  process  of the 
patients,  or they do not account for the  distribution 
and  dynamics  of the  patient  scheduling  problem. 
Therefore, we propose an  agent based  approach in 
which the patients and hospital resources are mod(cid:173)
elled  as  autonomous  agents  with  their  own  goals, 
reflecting  the  decentralised  structures  in  hospitals. 
In this  multi-agent system,  the patient agents com(cid:173)
pete  over the  scarce  hospital  resources.  Moreover 
to improve the overall solution, the agents then ne(cid:173)
gotiate  with  one  another.  To  this  end,  a  market 
mechanism  is  described,  in  which  each  self inter(cid:173)
ested  agent  tries  to  improve  its  own  situation. 
In 
particular we  focus on how the agents can calculate 
demand and supply prices based upon their current 
schedule.  Further,  an  evaluation  of  first  results  of 
the proposed method is given. 

Introduction 

1 
Patient scheduling in hospitals  is  concerned  with the optimal 
assignment  of patients  to  hospital  resources.  Hospitals  are 
divided  into  several  autonomous  wards  and  ancillary  units, 
which  are  visited  by  the  patients  for  treatments  and  exami(cid:173)
nations during hospitalisation in accordance with their illness 
[Schliichtermann,  1990].  However, the pathways (the needed 
treatments  and  examinations)  and the  medical  priorities  (the 
health  condition  of the  patients)  are  likely  to  change  due  to 
new  findings  about the diseases of the patients during exami(cid:173)
nation.  Further,  complications and arrivals  of emergency pa(cid:173)
tients, which are in urgent need for treatment, result in sched-

* We would like to thank the DFG, Deutsche Forschungsgemein-

schaft for funding this work as part of SPP 1083. 

ule  disturbances1  [Schliichtermann,  1990].  Due  to  this,  pa(cid:173)
tient  scheduling  in  hospitals  requires  an  approach  which  is 
distributed,  in  order to  leave  the  authority  at  the  responsible 
hospital units, and  flexible,  to be able to react to plan changes 
in an  efficient manner. 

We  have  chosen to  adopt a multi-agent based approach to 
this problem, because  such  systems  allow the  representation 
of every  single  coordination  object,  i.e.  the  responsible  enti(cid:173)
ties, as single autonomous agents with their own goals  [Wein-
hardt and Gomber,  1996].  This,  in  turn,  reflects the existing 
decentralised  structures  in  hospitals  [Decker  and  Li,  2000]. 
Through  social  abilities,  the  agents  can  interact  with  each 
other to reach their own goals.  Moreover they  can react with 
the  needed  flexibility  to  changes  (as  new  information  about 
the  health  status  of a  patient  becomes  available)  and  distur(cid:173)
bances  (e.g.  emergencies  and  complications)  through proac-
tiveness and responsiveness  [Jennings, 2001]. 

This paper  advances the  state  of the  art  in  two  main  ways. 
First  is  the  design  of a  novel  procedure,  i.e.  a  patient  cen(cid:173)
tred  multi-agent  based  coordination  mechanism,  where  the 
patients are represented as autonomous agents,  trying to  im(cid:173)
prove their current scheduling state by negotiation  with  other 
agents.  Second is the derivation of health state dependent op(cid:173)
portunity cost  functions,  based  upon  which  the  agents  eval(cid:173)
uate their current schedule  and  compute the  gains and losses 
through plan  modifications. 

The  remainder  of the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Sec(cid:173)
tion 2 describes the domain of patient-scheduling in hospitals. 
Section 3  details the conceptual framework of our multi-agent 
system, the relevant coordination objects and the coordination 
mechanism.  The results  of the proposed mechanism are also 
evaluated.  The paper ends  with  conclusions  and  an  outlook 
to further work  in  section 4. 

2  The Patient Scheduling Problem 
In  addition  to  the  complexity  arising  from  the  distributed 
structure of hospitals, patient scheduling has to be performed 
in the face of a high degree of uncertainty about the treatment 
pathways of patients within the hospital. Thus patients arrive 

This  problem  can  be  ameliorated  by  the  provision  of addi(cid:173)
tional  (exclusive)  emergency  resources  (e.g.  separate  x-ray  facili(cid:173)
ties).  However,  for  economic  reasons,  hospitals  try  to  minimise 
these extra resources. 

1224 

SCHEDULING 

continuously at the hospital and the necessary medical treat(cid:173)
ments are often not able to be completely determined at the 
beginning of the  treatment process.  Moreover the  results  of 
a diagnostic examination might change the (medical) priority 
of the patients, invoke additional activities and/or make other 
medical actions obsolete. 

Due to this complexity, the application  of traditional  (op(cid:173)
erations research) methods from industrial scheduling to the 
patient scheduling problem is problematic  [SchlCichtermann, 
1990].  To be able to handle the process dynamics in  a dis(cid:173)
tributed environment, hospitals commonly use a very flexible 
approach  for patient  scheduling.  Typically,  the  wards  send 
treatment  and  examination  requests  to  the  ancillary  units. 
Based  upon these requests,  the ancillary units order the pa(cid:173)
tients from the wards. This allows the units to react very flex(cid:173)
ibly to changes with very low communication needs.  If,  for 
example, an emergency patient needs to be inserted, the next 
patient will simply be called from the ward later, leaving this 
patient available to other ancillary units. 

However, because there  is no inter-unit coordination, this 
procedure  cannot  resolve  resource  conflicts,  which  occur if 
the same patient is requested by more than one ancillary unit 
at the same time  [Decker and Li, 2000].  Because the ancil(cid:173)
lary units only have a local view, i.e. they do not - and cannot 
-  take  the  whole  pathway  of the  treated  patients  into  their 
scheduling consideration,  no  inter-unit process  optimisation 
can be undertaken (i.e. the medical tasks for the patients can(cid:173)
not  be  scheduled  and  coordinated  in  an  efficient  manner). 
This  causes undesired idle times  as  well  as  overtime hours 
for the hospital resources and extended patient stay times. 

3  Agent-Based Patient Scheduling 
In  this  section  the  conceptual  framework  of our multi-agent 
system  is  described.  Then,  the  relevant  coordination  ob(cid:173)
jects, i.e. the patients and hospital resources, are modelled as 
agents.  After this, a coordination mechanism is introduced. 
Finally, examples are given and the first results of the imple(cid:173)
mentation are presented. 
3.1  Conceptual Framework 
Using a multi-agent system, [Decker and Li, 2000] addressed 
the  problem  of resource  conflicts  in  the  patient  scheduling 
domain.  Specifically,  by  adding  a coordination mechanism 
to  handle  mutually exclusive  resources  (i.e.  the  patients)  to 
the Generalized Partial  Global  Planning (GPGP) approach2, 
they achieved significant scheduling improvements compared 
to  current patient  scheduling  without  coordination.  In  their 
work, they took a function-oriented approach, where only the 
units are represented as  autonomous agents.  The treatment 
pathway of the patients is captured by the nursing units. How(cid:173)
ever, the dynamics of the patient scheduling problem and the 
medical priorities of the patients were not considered. 

For  this  reason,  we  use  a  patient-centred  approach,  in 
which the patients are modelled as agents, too.  This allows 
the representation - and therefore consideration - of the hos(cid:173)
pital processes as a whole [Adam and Gorschliiter,  1999].  In 

2GPGP  is  a  domain  independent,  task  environment  centred, 

scheduling approach to coordination [Decker and Li, 2000]. 

contrast to the resource agents, who only see the patients as 
entities to be treated,  the  patient agents  only  see the  medi(cid:173)
cal actions as tasks that need to be performed.  Due to these 
opposing forces,  the patient agents  ensure that the  resource 
agents  also  consider  the  treatments  of the  patients  outside 
their unit (without any explicit knowledge of them) and  vice 
versa. 

To this end, the relevant coordination objects in the hospi(cid:173)
tal  (i.e. the entities to be coordinated), which will  be repre(cid:173)
sented as agents, can be identified as patients and resources 
(i.e. rooms, machines and personnel).  To reduce complexity, 
all  resources needed for a specific medical  action are repre(cid:173)
sented by the hospital unit responsible for this action, which 
will be implemented as the resource agents. 

If more than one patient agent now wants to use the iden(cid:173)
tical  resource  at the  same  time  interval,  a  resource  conflict 
occurs.  To solve these conflicts,  a coordination mechanism 
is  needed.  For this  inter-agent coordination,  we  decided to 
use  a  market  mechanism.  The  rationale  for  this  is  that  a 
market mechanism  is  a  distributed coordination mechanism 
which  facilitates  efficient  solutions with low  communication 
needs.  In particular, only prices  for specific goods are com(cid:173)
municated, keeping all other information private to the mar(cid:173)
ket participants [Wellman et al., 2001].  Additionally, a mar(cid:173)
ket facilitates a dynamic environment, where the market par(cid:173)
ticipants take actions according to their current (dynamically 
changing) situation based upon private information and pref(cid:173)
erences. In this market, the coordination objects are modelled 
as autonomous, self-interested market participants, trying to 
improve their local  schedule.  In  markets,  the price  mecha(cid:173)
nism leads to an efficient resource allocation because the re(cid:173)
sources are assigned to the agents that are willing to pay the 
highest price  (assuming that  the  agents  bid rationally,  these 
are the agents who gain the highest utility from this resource). 
A pareto optimal solution will be achieved, because no agent 
will accept a deal, which worsens its current state. Therefore, 
the agents will trade resources until no agent can improve its 
schedule without harming another agent  [Weigelt,  1994]. 

3.2  Coordination  Objects 
To  implement  a  coordination  mechanism,  the  above  men(cid:173)
tioned  coordination  objects  have  to  be  modelled. 
In  this 
work the main goal  for the patients  is to minimise their stay 
time and for the resources to minimise idle times.  This kind 
of scheduling problems represents a worth-oriented environ(cid:173)
ment  [Rosenschein  and  Zlotkin,  1994],  where  the  degree 
of goal  achievement  can  be  evaluated  by  a  utility  function 
(rather than a state or task oriented environment, where a sin(cid:173)
gle goal cannot be achieved partially).  The usage of contin(cid:173)
uous worth functions instead of single worth values assigned 
to  specific  goals enables the  agents to  relax  their goals,  i.e. 
to compromise in order to achieve a better solution  [Rosen(cid:173)
schein and Zlotkin,  1994].  For example,  if two agents want 
the same time slots at the same resource, the agents can agree 
upon a solution which does not fully satisfy their own goals, 
but reaches a better overall solution.  This situation  is  illus(cid:173)
trated in the figures 2(a) and 2(b). 

Because we adopt a patient-centred approach, the main fo(cid:173)
cus will be on the patient agents, which will be modelled in 

SCHEDULING 

1225 

the first subsection.  Within this part, we introduce the health 
state dependent cost-functions, which are needed for price ar(cid:173)
ticulation in the market mechanism. In the second subsection, 
the resource agents are described. 

Patient Agents 
Each  patient is represented by an agent.  The patient agents 
can  only  see  their  own  schedule,  containing  their  pathway 
through  the  hospital.  The pathway  of a  patient agent com(cid:173)
prises the needed treatments and examinations as well as the 
order constraints between those tasks.  The patient agents are 
also equipped with a private worth function to be able to ne(cid:173)
gotiate in  a  goal  driven manner.  This  worth  function is  re(cid:173)
alised as a cost function, which they try to minimise.  These 
cost  functions  increase over time,  setting  incentives  for the 
patient agents to schedule their treatments and examinations 
as early as possible in order to reduce costs. 

In contrast to commercial domains, the utility or cost func(cid:173)
tions  cannot  be  based  upon  monetary  values  in  hospitals. 
While  in e-commerce scenarios  the  human  principals reveal 
their  preferences  through  their  willingness  to  pay  (e.g.  by 
specifying maximum buy and minimum sell prices), patients 
do  not  -  and  should  not  -  reveal  thei;  preferences  through 
their willingness to pay for a specific treatment time slot.  The 
preferences rather have to be based upon medical priorities, 
i.e.  their health  state.  This  absence of normalised  monetary 
units  additionally  causes  the  problem  of  inter-agent  utility 
comparison.  To solve this  problem,  we operationalised the 
progress of the patients' health state.  In current hospital prac(cid:173)
tice,  numerous health states or patient priority measures and 
indices are in use (e.g.  APACHE IT (Acute Physiology And 
Chronic Health Evaluation)  [Knaus et al.,  1985] in  intensive 
care  units).  The choice of the measurement to  use  is  up  to 
the hospital.  However,  we propose, that it should support a 
cardinal measurement of the health state progress over time. 
The cardinal measurement is necessary for inter-agent util(cid:173)
ity  comparison  and  transfer  (as  we  have  to  calculate  with 
these units).  Because these health state (utility) units cannot 
be transferred between the actual patients in the hospital, the 
multi-agent system has to be separated from the actual patient 
world, where only the agents transfer utility units in order to 
reach  a better overall  solution  (minimisation of health  state 
adjusted patient stay time). 

The health state progress is important, because the priority 
of the patients should  not  be  based  upon  their current  state, 
but on their health state development. For example, a patient 
with  a  currently  reasonable  but  rapidly  deteriorating  health 
condition  should  have  a  higher  priority  than  a  patient  with 
a  (slightly)  lower current,  but continuously constant,  health 
state. 

For the necessary cardinal measurement of health, we rely 
on  the  concept  of years  of well  being  [Torrance,  1987]  be(cid:173)
cause it  handles the  health state  progress over time  (a good 
overview can be found in  [Pedroni  and Zweifel,  1990]).  In 
this  method,  the  question  is  what  time  period  xT  of  total 
health  (1)  equals  one  specific  time  period  IT  of  a  certain 
health state H, i.e. 

Through this, the health state of a patient can be described in 
time units. 

The primary goal of patients in hospitals is to increase their 
current health state through treatment, where a disease could 
be viewed as disutility (decrease in quality of life) for the pa(cid:173)
tient.  This  loss  of utility  adds  up  as  long  as  this  disease  is 
not cured.  Based on this assumption, the (opportunity) cost 
for not curing the patient right away equals the differ(cid:173)
ence between the achievable health state (through treatment) 
z and the patient's health state over the time H(t).  Formally, 
this can be expressed by 

In addition, it has to be considered that the health state and 
the achievable health state can change over time.  Therefore, 
the patient's opportunity costs  are influenced  by  his  current 
health  state a,  the development of his health  state over time 
H(t),  and  the  maximal  reachable  health  state  through  treat(cid:173)
ment  z. 
If the  health  state  does  not  change  over  time,  i.e. 
H(t)  =  a,  the opportunity costs  are 

If the  health  state  of a  patient  worsens  over  time,  assump(cid:173)
tions about the course of the health state have to be made by 
a physician.  If we assume - for clarity - a linear reduction by 
b of the health state, i.e. H(t)  =  a —  bt, we get 

However,  this  approach  works  with  any  health  decrease 
rate, as the health state of a patient normally does not decrease 
linearly. Nevertheless, a linear approximation of the decrease 
in health can be justified by practical reasons.  Instead of try(cid:173)
ing to estimate the exact shape of the curve, a physician could 
rather specify two or more specific points in time and in be(cid:173)
tween a linear reduction could be estimated.  Figure 1  shows 
an exemplary course of an illness with linear reduction of the 
health state, resulting in a quadratic opportunity cost curve. 

Figure 1:  Linear reduction of health state. 

Finally, if the maximal reachable health state decreases, the 
patient must be treated immediately to prevent lifelong dam(cid:173)
age to his health. 

1226 

SCHEDULING 

With these cost functions in place, the agents can now eval(cid:173)
uate their current state,  i.e.  the  degree of goal  achievement. 
Further, based on these functions, the agents are able to com(cid:173)
pute  supply  and demand prices  for time  slots  which  corre(cid:173)
spond to the losses or benefits caused by plan changes, which 
is  essential  for a market mechanism.  How  these prices  are 
computed will be explained later in the context of the descrip(cid:173)
tion of the coordination mechanism (section 3.3). 

Resource Agents 
In contrast to the patients, the hospital resources are directly 
comparable  with  the  resources  in  industrial  scheduling  do(cid:173)
mains. Their main goal can be described as maximising their 
utilisation or, equivalently, minimising idle time. 

To reach  this goal,  cost-functions can  also  be  articulated 
for  the  resource  agents.  These  cost  functions  represent  the 
reserve prices (i.e. the price that will be charged for an empty 
slot)  for  the  possible  appointments  [Wellman  et  al,  2001]. 
Through  this,  priorities  between  different  resources  can  be 
established that allow penalisation of undesired appointment 
times (e.g. evening shift or overtime hours).  Here, the basis 
for the  resource agents'  cost  functions comes  from  cost ac(cid:173)
counting. 

However,  for  inter-agent  utility  comparison  (i.e.  between 
patient and resource agents) these measurements have to be 
equalised,  which  can  be  a  very  difficult  task,  because  the 
health  state  of a  patient  has  to  be  compared with  monetary 
values from cost accounting. A good way out of this problem 
are trade-off considerations, e.g.  what amount of idle time of 
a specific resource equals one hour waiting time for a patient 
with a specific health state. 

The  Coordination  Mechanism 

3.3 
The main goal of the coordination mechanism is to minimise 
the  health  state  adjusted  stay  time  of the  patients,  which  is 
equivalent to an overall minimisation of suffering for the pa(cid:173)
tients.  The basic idea of our coordination mechanism is that 
the patient agents  try  to buy  into  resource time  slots  for the 
needed treatments and examinations.  However, the usage of 
(central) auction mechanisms is obstructed by the dynamics 
of the patient scheduling problem described in section 2. 

To  ensure  feasible  (i.e.  conflict  free)  initial  task  appoint(cid:173)
ments for the patients,  all  new treatments and examinations 
are scheduled on a  first-come  first-served  (fefs) basis.  To do 
this, the patient agents who want to add a task to their path(cid:173)
way contact the responsible unit for the execution of this task 
in order to obtain the  earliest time  slot which is available at 
the unit as well  as in their own schedule.  To  illustrate this, 
figure 2(a) shows a possible initial resource allocation. These 
initial appointments determine the budget (or better the initial 
opportunity costs) of the agents.  This is  important because a 
hypothetical price system is used (as per section 3.2). 

Based upon this initial schedule, the agents try to improve 
their schedule in order to reduce their opportunity costs.  The 
price p they  are  willing  to  pay  for a  specific  time  slot  (ex(cid:173)
pected gain) or they charge for a time slot (expected loss) is 
the  difference  between  the  cost-value  of the  current  alloca(cid:173)
tion told and the cost-value for the wanted appointment tnew, 
according  to  their  individual  cost  function  described  in  the 

previous section, i.e. 

Because in this approach the (opportunity) costs of an ap(cid:173)
pointment increase over time for the patient agents, they must 
try to schedule their treatments and examinations as early as 
possible.  If a demanded time slot is already occupied by an(cid:173)
other patient agent,  the  initial  demander must try  to buy the 
time slot from the current owner.  With respect to the proper(cid:173)
ties of a market mechanism, the agents act in a rational, self-
interested  manner.  Therefore,  the  owners  of the  time  slots 
will  only release them,  if the price  offered equals the  losses 
invoked through rescheduling.  Since they only charge for the 
costs invoked through rescheduling they can be viewed as act(cid:173)
ing in a partially cooperative manner. 

The detailed negotiation process goes as follows: 
1. A patient agent  initiates a  negotiation for rescheduling, 
if the  pathway  (additional  or  obsolete  medical  actions) 
or the health state of its patient has changed. 

2.  The initiating agent selects the task with the highest pos(cid:173)
sible  improvement (difference  between the  costs  of the 
current owned and the best reachable time slot) and con(cid:173)
tacts the resource agent that is responsible for the execu(cid:173)
tion of this task. 

3.  The resource agent reserves that time slot, and contacts 
all  affected patient agents,  i.e.  the agents that currently 
own this interval, and informs them about the proposal 
of the  initiator. 

4.  The affected patient agents (sellers) try to reschedule to 
the  first  nonreserved time  slots  (see  step  3)  and  notify 
the  initiator  about  their  costs  due  to  rescheduling.  To 
prevent cycles,  reserved  intervals  cannot  be  demanded 
by other agents. 

5.  If the  alternative  time  slots  for  the  sellers  are  already 
occupied, they again become demanders for those time 
slots and accumulate the invoked costs. Here, order con(cid:173)
straints  can  invoke  additional  rescheduling in  other re(cid:173)
sources. 

6.  After all prices  are computed and submitted to the  ini(cid:173)
tiator,  the  initiator  compares  its  expected  gains  from 
rescheduling to the total price asked for this interval.  If 
the gains exceed the costs it accepts or rejects otherwise, 
and the negotiation for this time slot terminates. 

The former initiator continues its rescheduling activities by 
opening  new  negotiations  for  the  next  task  with  the  (now) 
highest possible improvement until it cannot improve any task 
any further.  Previously rejected time slots will not be consid(cid:173)
ered unless these time slots are released by their owners.  For 
concurrency issues only one (randomly chosen) agent can ini(cid:173)
tiate a negotiation at a time. 

In this coordination mechanism only the patient agents are 
active components.  However, as described earlier, cost func(cid:173)
tions can be implemented into the resource agents, allowing 
prioritisation between the resources. The resource price for a 
time slot is charged when a patient agent buys a time slot, and 
reimbursed when the patient agent releases this time slot. 

SCHEDULING 

1227 

agent A  would only ask 
for its slot (agent A  moves to 
slot 1 and gains $3.15, and agent B moves to slot 3 and looses 

We have applied the described coordination mechanism to 
the  first  Taillard 5 
5  open shop problem  [Taillard,  1993] 
to  analyse  the  behaviour  for  tasks  with  different  durations. 
Figure  3  shows  the  resulting  Gantt  chart with  a  solution  of 
349. The optimal solution is 300. To analyse the convergence 
of the mechanism, we logged the changes of the latest task for 
each agent.  Figure 4  shows the  corresponding convergence 
behaviour, which indicate a fast convergence in the first third 
of the graph. 

As  described  earlier,  the  pathway  of the  patients  through 
the hospital is likely to change during the treatment process, 
that  is,  additional  treatments  and/or  examinations  may  be(cid:173)
come  necessary  while  other tasks  may become obsolete.  In 
bur coordination mechanism, additional tasks (as well as ad(cid:173)
ditional patients) can be added at any time using the fcfs rule 
explained above. If a treatment becomes obsolete, the respon(cid:173)
sible  patient  agent  notifies  the  affected  resource  agent  that, 
again, informs the other patient agents in its schedule. 

3.4  Example  Scenarios 
Figure 2(a) and 2(b) illustrate the  functioning of our coordi(cid:173)
nation mechanism. Figure 2(a) shows an initial schedule with 
three patients (A,B,C). For illustration purposes, we start with 
identical cost-functions with an assumed initial health state a 
of 0.7, an achievable health state z of 1.0, a decrease rate b of 
0.001  and equal possible starting times for all patients.  The 
used cost  function resolves  as  0.3t  + 0.0005*  .  Further,  in 
this example, all task durations are set to lOt. We will use the 
$-sign to indicate utility units. 

Figure  3:  Gantt of the results of the  Taillard  5x5  open  shop 
problem. 

(i.e. a difference  of 

Based upon this  initial  schedule,  agent C  negotiates  with 
agent  B  in  unit  2  in  order  to  improve  its  current  situa(cid:173)
tion.  Agent C's current opportunity costs  in unit 2 are 
(0.3  x  40 + 0.0005  x  4(r).  Its opportunity costs for the  first 
time slot would be 
For the 
calculation  of the  offer  price,  agent  B  has  to  determine  its 
additional rescheduling costs.  Therefore agent B has to ne(cid:173)
gotiate with agent A  in unit 2 for the next best time slot and 
in unit  I, because the patients are exclusive resources which 
can only perform one task  at a time.  Agent A  looses 
in unit 2 and another 
in unit  1.  Agent B  looses   
in unit 2 but gains $3.15 in unit  1.  Agent B  is charged with 
and adds this to its supply price 
the losses of Agent A 
for agent 
Because the total 
supply price 
agent 
C  accepts the deal  (because it can compensate the  losses of 
the other agents) and the plan is changed. No more deals are 
possible and figure 2(b) shows the result of this negotiation. 
In  this  example,  patient  agent  A  accepted  a  schedule  of 
lower quality in favour of patient agent C.  However, only pa(cid:173)
tient agent A - not the real patient - has received a compen(cid:173)
sation from patient agent C. This illustrates the necessary dis(cid:173)
junction between the real patients and the multi-agent system 
in the hospital domain as described earlier (section 3.2). 

is less than agent C 's gains 

Figure 4:  Converge of the Taillard 5x5 open shop problem. 

The  number  of negotiation  rounds  counts  each  improve(cid:173)
ment attempt (successful or not) of the agents. The same pro(cid:173)
cedure was executed for the 
open shop problems with 
equal task durations.  For these problems the optimal solution 
will be always achieved.  The resulting Gantt chart is shown 
in  figure  5.  Figure 6 shows the corresponding convergence, 
illustrating the  simplicity of this  problem type  in  contrast to 
the used Taillard benchmark. 

However, a better agent-based solution to this problem can 
be achieved through the usage of (central) appointment auc(cid:173)
tions. 
Implementing  an  auction  based  approach  using  the 
same  cost  functions  resulted  in  a  solution  at  308.  How(cid:173)
ever, these auctions cannot handle the dynamics of the patient 
scheduling problem, because the auction process would have 

In the next  step,  we  relax the assumption, that all  agents 
have the same  cost  functions.  If agent C  would have had a 
lower health state (e.g.  =  0.35) it could have even improved 
its appointment in unit 1 because it would have gained $3.75 
from moving to the second slot (agent A in figure 2(b)) while 

1228 

SCHEDULING 

triebswirtschaftslehre  (ZfB),  Erganzungsheft 5:  Kranken-
hausmanagement, 1999. 

[Decker and Li, 2000]  K.  Decker  and  J.  Li.  Coordinating 
mutually exclusive resources using GPGP.  Autonomous 
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 3(2): 133-157,2000. 

[Jennings, 2001]  N.  R.  Jennings.  An  agent-based approach 
for building complex software systems.  Communications 
of the ACM, 44(4):35-41, April 2001. 

[Knaus et ai,  1985]  W. A. Knaus, E. A.  Draper, D.  P. Wag(cid:173)
ner,  and  J.  E.  Zimmermann.  Apache  ii:  a  severity  of 
disease  classification  system.  Critical  Care  Medicine, 
13(10):818~829,1985. 

[Pedroni and Zweifel, 1990]  G. Pedroni and P. Zweifel.  Wie 
misst man Gesundheit? Pharma-Information, Basel, 1990. 
LRosenschein and Zlotkin, 1994]  J.  S.  Rosenschein  and 
G. Zlotkin.  Rules of Encounter.  MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA,  1994. 

[Schluchtermann, 1990]  J. Schluchtcrmann. Patientensteue-
rung.  Verlag  Josef Eul,  Bergisch  Gladbach,  Germany, 
1990. 

[Sycara et al,  1990]  K. Sycara, S. Roth, N. Sadeh, and M. S. 
Fox.  An  investigation into distributed  constraint-directed 
factory scheduling. In Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE Con-
ference on AI Applications (CAIA-90), Santa Barbara, CA, 
1990. 

[Taillard, 1993]  E. Taillard.  Benchmarks for basic schedul(cid:173)
ing problems. European Journal of Operations Research, 
64:278-285, 1993. 

[Torrance, 1987]  G.  W.  Torrance.  Utility approach to mea(cid:173)
suring  health-related  quality  of life.  Journal  of Chronic 
Diseases, 1987. 

[Weigelt,  1994]  M.  Weigelt.  Dezentrale  Produktionssteue-
rung mit Agenten-Systemen: Entwicklung neuer Verfahren 
und  Vergleich  mit  zentraler  Lenkung.  Dt.  Univ.-Verl., 
Wiesbaden, 1994. 

[Weinhardt and Gomber,  1996]  Ch. 

and 
P.  Gomber. 
Domanenunabhangigc  Koordinations-
mechanismen  fur  die  dezentrale  betriebliche  Planung. 
Information Management, pages 6  16,  1996. 

Weinhardt 

[Wellmane/a/.,2001]  M.  Wellman, W.  Walsh, P. Wurman, 
and J.  MacKie-Mason.  Auction protocols for decentral(cid:173)
ized scheduling. Games and Economic Behavior, 35:271-
303,2001. 

Figure 5: Gantt of the results of the easy 5x5 open shop prob(cid:173)
lem. 

Figure 6: Converge of the easy 5x5 open shop problem. 

to restart again after severe changes in the pathway occurred. 

4  Conclusions and Future Work 
In  this  paper,  we  presented  a  patient-centred  coordination 
mechanism  for  inter-unit  patient  scheduling  in  hospitals. 
Therefore, health state dependent cost functions were devel(cid:173)
oped.  We  described  the  implemented  coordination mecha-
nism and evaluated first results, showing the different conver(cid:173)
gence for problems with equal and different task durations. 
In the next step,  we  will  run our approach on  real hospi(cid:173)
tal data, already retrieved out of a field study in five hospitals. 
Based upon these results, our coordination mechanism will be 
enhanced in future work, where the main focus is on the de(cid:173)
velopment of a flexible auction mechanism in order to handle 
the dynamics of the patient scheduling problem.  In this con(cid:173)
text, we will analyse how the usage of texture measurements 
(here: criticality and goodness measures) [Sycara et  al,  1990] 
can facilitate our coordination mechanism in order to reduce 
backtracking.  Additionally,  our  agent  based  approach  will 
be benchmarked with  a genetic and evolutionary algorithm, 
which is under development in the context of this work.  Fur(cid:173)
ther, a decision theoretic approach facilitating stochastic task 
duration will be presented in the near future. 

References 
[Adam and Gorschluter, 1999]  D. Adam and P. Gorschlutcr. 
Qualitatsmanagement  im  Krankenhaus.  Zeitschriftfur Be-

SCHEDULING 

1229 

