Layered Mereotopology 

Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science 

Maureen Donnelly 

University of Leipzig, Germany 

maureen.donnelly@ifomis.uni-leipzig.de 

Abstract 

In  fields  such as medicine, geography, and me(cid:173)
chanics,  spatial  reasoning  involves  reasoning 
about  entities—for  example  cavities  and invad(cid:173)
ing  particles—that  may  coincide  without  over(cid:173)
lapping.  The purpose of this paper is to develop 
a mereotopology for domains that  include coin(cid:173)
cident  entities,  such  as  material  objects,  holes, 
geopolitical entities and spatial regions. In addi(cid:173)
tion,  I  construct  mathematical  models  of  this 
mereotopology  in  which  nontrivial  coincidence 
relations are defined. 

Introduction 

1 
Two  objects coincide when  they occupy overlapping re(cid:173)
gions  of space.1  My hand  and my body (partially)  coin(cid:173)
cide.  The  Mississippi  River  and  Minnesota  (partially) 
coincide.  Note  that  the  objects  in  both  pairs  actually 
stand in a stronger relation than coincidence. The objects 
in each pair overlap (i.e. share parts). My hand is a part 
of both itself and my body. The first ten kilometers of the 
Mississippi River are part of both the river and the state. 
Any two overlapping entities are, trivially,  coincident— 
their locations are identical at their common parts. 

It is an assumption of this paper that the relation of co(cid:173)
incidence is broader than that of overlap. In other words, 
I assume that there are pairs of coincident objects which 
do  not  share  parts.  The food  that  is currently being di(cid:173)
gested in my stomach cavity coincides with, but does not 
overlap,  my stomach  cavity.  The U.S.  Embassy in Paris 
coincides with, but does not overlap, France. Any object 
coincides with, but does not overlap, the spatial region at 
which it is located at a given point of time. 

A  mereotopology  is  a  formal  theory  of parthood  and 
connection  relations.  It  has  long  been  recognized  that 
mereotopology  forms  an  essential  part  of formal  ontol(cid:173)
ogy.  Several  different  mereotopologies  have  been  pro(cid:173)
posed  in  recent  literature,  including  [Asher  and  Vieu, 

1 Note that with this usage, coincident objects need only oc(cid:173)
cupy overlapping spatial regions. I will use the term "com(cid:173)
plete coincidence" for the stronger relation that holds between 
objects that occupy identical spatial regions. 

1995;  Borgo  et  al,  1996;  Gotts  et  al.,  1996;  Smith, 
1996]. These theories are ultimately intended for reason(cid:173)
ing about spatial relations among material objects. How(cid:173)
ever, it is assumed in nearly all of this work that the im(cid:173)
mediate  domains  of application  are restricted  to  spatial 
regions.2  When  material  objects  are  introduced,  as  in 
[Cohn,  2001],  mereotopological  relations  are  still  re(cid:173)
stricted  to  regions.  Each  object's  spatial  properties  are 
determined by those of the region  at which  it is located. 
Thus,  distinctive  coincidence  relations  are  not  usually 
introduced into standard mereotopologies: on domains of 
regions, coincidence is just overlap. 

Likewise, mathematical models for these theories typi(cid:173)
cally use  domains  consisting  of subsets  of a  topological 
space. See, for example, [Biacino and Gerla, 1991; Asher 
and Vieu,  1995;  Cohn  and  Varzi,  1998].  On these do(cid:173)
mains, there is no natural way of defining a coincidence 
relation that is distinct from overlap. 

The goal  of this paper is to construct a mereotopology 
for domains that include coincident but non-overlapping 
entities. In particular, domains for the theory may include 
both  material  objects and the regions at  which  they are 
located,  in  addition  to  other  types  of entities,  such  as 
holes  or  geopolitical  entities,  which  may coincide  with 
material  objects.  My theory allows mereotopological  re(cid:173)
lations to apply directly to all entities within the domain, 
be  they  regions,  material  objects,  holes,  or  what  have 
you.  It  also  extends  mereotopology  by  adding  coinci(cid:173)
dence  relations  and  by making  explicit  the relation  be(cid:173)
tween an object and the region at which it is located. To 
guide  the  development  of the  formal  theory,  I  construct 
mathematical  models  in  which  a  coincidence  relation 
distinct from overlap is defined. 

The  formal  theory  presented  in  this  paper  borrows 
much  from  the  theory of location  of [Casati  and  Varzi, 
1999].  It differs in  that it divides the domain into differ-

Here and throughout this paper the term "region" designates 
any part of an immaterial space in which objects are located. 1 
leave open the question of whether these parts may be of 
mixed dimensionalities. This contrasts with the usage in, for 
example [Gotts et al., 1996], where the term "region" does not 
apply to lower-dimensional entities, such as boundaries or 
points. 

SPATIAL REASONING 

1269 

ent  layers,  each  of  which  is  mereotopologically  inde(cid:173)
pendent of the others, and also in providing mathematical 
models  that  allow  distinct  members  of the  domain  to  be 
located  at  the  same  region.  Additional  work  on  combin(cid:173)
ing  either  coincidence  or  location  relations  with  other 
spatial relations can be found in [Bennett, 2001; Borgo et 
al.,  1997; Cohn, 2001;  Schulz and Hahn, 2001]. 

Layered  Models 

2 
I  introduce  a  class  of mathematical  structures  in  which 
members  of  the  domain  can  coincide  without  overlap(cid:173)
ping.  I  call  these  structures Layered Models because  their 
domains  are  partitioned  into  equivalence  classes,  called 
layers.  Members  of  the  same  layer  coincide  only  when 
they  overlap.  Members  of different  layers  never  overlap 
and  cannot  be  parts  of the  same  object,  though  they may 
coincide.  Examples  of types  of entities  assigned  to  dis(cid:173)
tinct layers are:  1.  spatial regions, 2.  material objects, 3. 
holes  within  these  material  objects.  All  regions are parts 
of a special  layer that covers the entire space. 

Layered  Models  are  the  target  models  of  Layered 

Mereotopology,  the  formal  theory developed  in   
Layered  Models  are  defined  as  follows.  Let   

be  a  topological  space,  where  X  is  the  set  of points 
and cl  is the closure operator.  Let /be either, N, the set of 
all  natural  numbers  or  an  initial  segment  of N.  The  ele(cid:173)
ments  of the  domain,  D,  of a  Layered  Model  are ordered 
pairs, 
(I  will  generally 
use the abbreviation, 
All  variables  referring 
to  objects  in  Layered  Models  appear  in  Arial  font  to  dis(cid:173)
tinguish  them  from  the  variables  of the  formal  theory.) 
The  second  component  of each  ordered  pair  determines 
the  layer  to which  the pair  belongs.  All  pairs  of the  form 
belong to a special  layer, called the region 

where 

and 

for 

layer. 

then  it  follows  that  only  objects  which  are  parts  of the 
same  layer  can  overlap:  0 ( x„  yj)  iff x  n  y  
and  i  = j. 

If underlap,  U,  is  defined  in  the usual  way, 

then  it  follows  that,  since  all  objects  are  parts  of  their 
layer,  objects  underlap  if and  only  if they  are  parts  of the 
same  layer:  U(Xj,  yj)  iff i  = j. 

A connection  relation,  C,  is  defined on  D  as: 

As with parthood,  only objects residing on the same layer 
can be connected to each  other. 

Other  mereotopological  relations,  such  as  external 
connection  and  tangential  parthood,  can  be  defined  in 
terms  of P  and  C  in  the  usual  way.  For  example,  an  ex(cid:173)
ternal connection relation, EC, can be defined as follows: 

and 

 
In  contrast  to parthood and  connection relations,  coin(cid:173)
cidence  relations  can  hold between  objects  from  different 
layers.  Three  different  coincidence  relations  are  defined 
on  D. 

E 

(coincidence) 
(complete  coincidence) 
(covering) 

Another relation  that  can  hold  among  objects from dif(cid:173)

ferent  layers  is  abutment,  A. 

Finally,  I  add  the  function,  r,  from  D to Layer 0 which 
assigns  each  member  of the  domain  to  its  representative 
on  the  region  layer: 

r(x0)  =  x0 

Notice  that,  when  restricted  to  Layer  0,  r  is  the  identity 
function:  for  any 
Also notice  that  two 
objects  abut  if  and  only  if  their  regions  are  externally 
connected. 

I  will  give  a  simple  example  of a  Layered  Model  de(cid:173)
signed  to  illustrate  the  way  in  which  the  models  can  be 
used  to  represent  spatial  relations  among  regions,  mate(cid:173)
rial  objects,  and  immaterial  entities  such  as  holes.  The 
background  topological  space  for  this  model  is  K 3  with 
its  standard  topology.  The region  layer  in  this model  has 
as parts  the members  of the set   

Suppose  that  we  wish  to  represent  relations  holding 
among  a  vase,  a  portion  of water  in  the  vase,  a  flower 
standing  in  the  vase,  and  the  interior  of  the  vase.  The 
vase,  water,  and  flower  are  represented,  respectively,  by 
parts, V1, W1, and  f1,  of Layer  1  where  the  subsets,  v,  w, 
and f,  of 
are disjoint.  The  interior  of the vase,  a  hole, 
is  represented  by  h2  on  Layer  2  where  h  and  v  are  dis(cid:173)
joint,  but  connected,  w  is  a  proper  subset  of h 
and  h  and  f  have  a  nonempty  intersection 
According  to  this  representation,  the  water  is  not  part of 
the  hole,  but  the  fact  that  the  water  is  contained  in  the 
interior  of the  vase  is  represented  in  the  model  by  the 
covering  relation,  Cov(W 1,  h2),  holding  between W 1 and 
h2.  Similarly,  the  flower  does  not  overlap  the  interior  of 
the vase,  but the fact that the flower is partially contained 
in  the  interior  of the  vase  is  represented  by  the  coinci(cid:173)
dence relation:  Coin(f 1,  h2).  The vase  and  its  interior do 

1270 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

not coincide. Nor are they connected.  But the fact that the 
vase  touches  its  interior  is  represented  by  the  abutment 
relation:  A(v 1,  h2).  Finally,  every  object  is  exactly  co-
located with  its  spatial  region.  This  is represented in  the 
model  by  the  complete  coincidence  of the  object  and  its 
region.  For example,  CCoin   

Layered  Mereology 

3 
A  mereology  is  a  formal  theory  of the  binary  parthood 
relation.  My  aim  in  this  section  is  to  develop  a  mereol(cid:173)
ogy,  called  Layered  Mereology,  that  is  satisfied  by  the 
parthood  relation,  P,  defined  on  Layered  Models.  Lay(cid:173)
ered  Mereology  is  extended  in 
to  Layered 
Mereotopology,  a  theory  that  also  includes  coincidence 
and  connection  relations. 

and 

Layered  Mereology  (and  also  its  extension,  Layered 
Mereotopology)  is  formulated  in  first-order  logic.  Rela(cid:173)
tions  and  functions  are  represented  in  the  formal  theory 
with  plain  text  letters  to  distinguish  them  from  the  rela(cid:173)
tions  and  functions  defined  in  Layered  Models.  Layered 
Mereology assumes  one  primitive,  the  binary relation  P, 
which,  on 
represents 
parthood. 

interpretation, 

intended 

the 

The  following  relations  are  defined  in  the  formal  the(cid:173)

ory  in  terms  of P: 

It  is  trivial  to  see  that,  if P  is  interpreted  as  P  in  Lay(cid:173)
ered Models,  the defined relations O and U will be inter(cid:173)
preted as  U and O,  respectively. 

The  axioms  of  Layered  Mereology  will  be  somewhat 
nonstandard.  For  example,  they  cannot  require  that  any 
pair  of objects,  x  and  y,  have  a  mereological  sum.  My 
goal  is  to  axiomatize  P  in  such  a  way  that,  when  re(cid:173)
stricted  to  a  single  layer,  it  satisfies  the  axioms  (and 
axiom  schema)  of  General  Extensional  Mereology 

The 

in  (GEM5)  stands  for  any  first-order  formula  in 
which  z  does  not  occur  free.  (GEM5)  states  that  if any 
then  there 
member  of the  domain  satisfies  the  formula  
must  be  a  sum  of all  objects  satisfying  
in  the  domain. 
(GEM5)  must  be  altered  for  Layered  Mereology because 
Layered  Models  only include  the  sums  of objects  that  arc 
parts  of the  same  layer. 

I  will  discuss  summation  in  Layered  Models  in  more 
detail  shortly.  For now,  notice that the relation  P in  Lay(cid:173)
ered  Models  satisfies  each  of  the  first  four  axioms  of 

GEM.  They are  therefore  used  in  their  original  forms  as 
axioms  for  Layered  Mereology. 4 

The first three axioms require that  P is a partial order(cid:173)
ing.  (PI) says that P is reflexive.  (P2) says that P is anti(cid:173)
symmetric.  (P3)  says  that  P  is  transitive.  That  (P1)-(P3) 
are  satisfied  by  P  in  Layered  Models  follows  immedi(cid:173)
ately  from  the  fact  that  P  is just  the  subset  relation  re(cid:173)
stricted to the separate layers. 

(P4)  says  that,  if x  is not  a part  of y,  then  there is some 
part,  z,  of x  that  does  not  overlap  y.  (P4)  is  satisfied  in 
Layered Models  by virtue of condition  3  of   

It  follows  from  (PI)  -  (P4)  that  overlap,  O,  is  exten(cid:173)
sional.  This  means  that  any two  members  of the  domain 
that overlap the same objects are identical. 

(*) 

Because O is extensional,  for any formula 

in  which z 
does not  occur free,  if we can  assign  z to a member of the 
domain  that  satisfies 

with 

even  if some  member  of the  domain  satisfies 

However, 
there need not be an object satis(cid:173)

then  this  object  is  the unique  sum  of all  
for any such  formula 
fying 
For  example,  let  be x  =  x  and  let  D be the domain  of a 
Layered  Model.  Then  every member of D satisfies  <|).  But 
then  no member  of D sat(cid:173)
if there  are 
This  is  because  such  an  object  would  have  to 
isfies 
overlap  every  member  of D  and  there  can  be  no  member 
of D  that  overlaps  both 

Thus,  we  need  a restricted  version  of (GEM5)  that  re(cid:173)
quires  sums  to  exist  only  if all  summands  are  part  of the 
same layer.  Such an axiom schema will be satisfied in  all 
Layered  Models  by  virtue  of  condition  2  of  
Given 
that  two objects  in  a Layered Model  are parts of the same 
layer  if and  only  if they underlap,  the  restricted  summa(cid:173)
tion  axiom schema can read as  follows: 

and 

for 

 

Here, 
is  the  formula  with  all  free  instances  of x 
replaced  by  y  (and  where  variable  substitution  is  per(cid:173)
formed  as necessary so y is free  in 
where x  is  free  in 

(P5)  says  that  if there  is  some  object  that  satisfies 

and  any two  objects  that  satisfy  underlap,  then there is 
a  sum of all  objects  satisfying   

For  convenience,  when 

is  any  formula  in  which  z 

does  not  occur  free,  I  will  use  the  abbreviation 
for  the  substitution  instance of the  formula   

We would  like to be able to say more things about  lay(cid:173)
ers  within  the  mereology.  So  far,  we  can  only  say  that 
two  objects  are  on  the  same  layer.  We  would  like  to  be 
able  to  say that  a  certain  object  is  a  layer  or  is  the  layer 
of  a  particular  object.  (D4)  defines  a  relation  holding 
between  y  and  z  when  z  is  the  sum  of all  objects  that  y 
underlaps  (i.e.  y's  layer). 

3 Throughout this paper, initial universal quantifiers arc sup(cid:173)
pressed unless they are needed for clarity. 

4 All axioms of Layered Mereology are labeled with a "P". 
"PT" is used for theorems of Layered Mereology. 

SPATIAL REASONING 

1271 

It is easy to see that when  P is interpreted as  P in Lay(cid:173)
ered Models, 
holds  if and  only  if   =  Layer  i.  How(cid:173)
ever,  axioms  (P1)-(P5)  do  not  allow  us  to  infer  that  for 
any  object,  y,  there  is  some  object  that  is  the  sum  of all 
objects that underlap y.  In  other words, our axioms so far 
do not allow us to infer that every object has a layer.  This 
would  follow  from  (P5)  if we  knew  that  any  two  objects 
that  underlap  y  must  underlap  each  other  (i.e.  that  U  is 
transitive).  Notice  that  the  underlap  relation  for  Layered 
Models, U,  is an equivalence relation (reflexive, symmet(cid:173)
ric,  and  transitive)  and  that  the  sets  consisting  of all  ob(cid:173)
jects  from  a  single  layer  are  the  equivalence  classes  de(cid:173)
termined  by the U relation.  It follows  from (P1)-(P5) that 
U is  reflexive  and symmetric,  but not that U is transitive. 
I,  therefore,  add a  final  axiom  to Layered Mereology: 

(underlap  is  transitive) 

It  follows  immediately that  every object  has  a  layer: 
(PT2) 

(every object  has a  layer) 

Thus  the  relation,  L,  is  a  function.  I  will  use  the  func(cid:173)
tional  term  l(x)  to  stand  for  the  layer  of x. 

The following theorems can  also be derived: 

(every object  is  part  of its  layer) 

(PT3)  Pxl(x) 
(PT4)  Uxy <-> l(x)  =  l(y) 

(two  objects  underlap  iff they have  the  same  layer) 

(PT5)  Uxy <-> Pyl(x) 

(x  underlaps  y  iff y  is  part  of x's  layer) 

The  unary  predicate,  LY,  distinguishes  certain  mem(cid:173)

bers of the domain  as  layers. 
(D5)  LYz  =:  

Lxz 

(z is a layer) 

It  follows  easily from  (PT3),  (PT4),  and  (D5)  that: 
(PT6)  LYz 

Lzz  (z  is  a  layer  iff z  is  its  own  layer) 

(PT6)  tells  us  that  layers  are  those  members  of the  do(cid:173)
main  which  are  the  mereological  sums  of all  objects  that 
they underlap. 

When  P  is  interpreted  as P in  Layered Models,  LYXj  if 

and  only  if Xi =  Layer  i. 

We  can  use  the  formula  schema  zSMx[>]  to  introduce 
more useful relations.  (D6) - (D8) are the standard defini(cid:173)
tions  of the  sum,  product,  and  difference  relations.  (D9) 
defines  a  relative  complement  relation. 
(D6)  +(v, y,  z) =:  zSMx[Pxv v Pxy] 

(z  is  the binary sum  of v  and y) 

(D7)  x(v,  y,  z)  =:  zSMx(Pxv &  Pxy) 

(z  is  the binary product  of v  and y) 

(D8)  -(v,  y,  z)  =:  zSMx(Pxy &  ~Oxv) 

(z  is  the  difference  of v  in  y) 

(D9)  -(v,  z)  =:  zSMx(Uxv &  ~Oxv) 

(z  is  the  relative  complement  of v) 
The  following  theorems  concerning  the  relative  com(cid:173)

plement can be derived: 
(PT7) 

LYx  (x has a relative complement 

iff x  is  not  a  layer) 

(PT8) -(x, z)  
ment  iff z  is  the  difference  of x  in  x's  layer) 

-(x,  I(x),  z)(z 

is  x's  relative  comple(cid:173)

Using  (PT4)  it  is  easy  to  prove  that,  when  they  exist, 
sums,  products,  and  relative  complements  belong  to  the 
same layer as the original object(s). 

It  is  straightforward  to  show  that  any  layer  of a  model 
of Layered  Mereology  is  a  model  of General  Extensional 
Mereology  (GEM).  More  precisely,  we  can  prove  the 
following: 
(Meta-Theorem)Let  M  be  any model  of Layered  Mereol(cid:173)
ogy with  domain,  D.  Note  that  M  need  not  belong  to  the 
class  of Layered  Models  defined  in  §2.  Let w  e  D and let 
Dw =  {y  :  y  D  &  l(y)  =  l(w)}.  Let  M w  be  the  structure 
whose  domain  is D w with  P  interpreted  as  in  M  (i.e.  Pyz 
holds  in  M w  iff y,  z   Dw  and  Pyz  holds  in  M).  Then  M w 
satisfies  axioms  (PI)  -  (P4)  and  axiom  schema  (GEM5). 

The  Region  Function 

4 
In  Layered  Mereology,  we  have  no  way  of  stating  that 
two objects  coincide.  Layered  Mereology lets  us describe 
the  parthood  relations  between  objects.  It  does  not  let  us 
describe  the  (relative)  locations  of objects.  To  do  this,  I 
extend  Layered Mereology by adding  the unary function, 
r.  On  the intended interpretation r assigns each  object, x, 
to the region,  r(x),  at  which  x  is  exactly located.  In  Lay(cid:173)
ered Models,  r is  interpreted  as  the  function  r. 

Using r,  we can  define a one-place predicate, R, which 

distinguishes  the  sub-domain  of regions. 
(D10)  Ry =: 
When  r  is  interpreted  as  r  in  Layered  Models,  Rx,  if and 
only if i  =  0. 

(y is  a  region) 

(r(x)  =  y) 

The axioms  for r are added to axioms (PI) - (P6). 5 It  is 

easy to check  that  they are  satisfied  in  Layered  Models. 
the 
(Rl)  Ry &  Rz  ->  Uyz 

(all  regions  are  located  in 
same  layer) 

(R2)  Ry &  Uyz  ->  r(z)  =  z 

(every  member  of the  region 
layer  is  its  own  region) 

The  theorems  below  are  immediate  consequences  of 

(Rl)and(R2). 
(RT1)  Ry ->  r(y)  =  y 
(every region  is  located  at  itself) 
(RT2)  Ry &  Uyz  ->  Rz  (every member  of a  region's  layer 

(RT3) Ex  & 

( 

is a region) 
->  Rx)  &  zSMx  

->  Rz 

Additional  axioms 

parthood. 
(R3)  Pxy ->  Pr(x)r(y) 

(every sum  of regions  is  a region) 
relate 
to 

function 

region 

the 

(if  x  is  part  of y,  then  x's  re(cid:173)
gion  is  part  of y's  region) 

Notice  that  the  converse  of (R3)  is  not  generally satis(cid:173)
fied  in  Layered  Models.  r(Xj)  may be  part  of  r(yj)  even 
though  Xj is not  part of yj.  This will  be the case whenever 
x 

y, but i # j. 

On the other hand, in Layered Models, if 0(r(Xj), r(yj)) 

and  i  = j,  then  0 ( x„  yj  must  also hold. 

5 All  axioms specific to the r function are marked with "R". 
Theorems specific to the r function are marked with " R T ". 

1272 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

(R4)  Uxy &  0(r(x),  r(y))  ->  Oxy 

(if x  and  y are  on  the 
same  layer  and  x's  region  overlaps  y's  re(cid:173)
gion,  then x overlaps y) 

The  coincidence  relations  are  defined  in  terms  of the 

region  function,  r. 
(Dl 1)  CCoin(x,  y)  =:  r(x) = r(y)(x  and  y  completely 

coincide) 
(y covers x) 

(D12)  Cov(x,  y) =:  P(r(x),  r(y)) 
(D13)  Coin(x,  y)  =:  0(r(x),  r(y)) (x  and  y coincide) 

It is easy to check that when P is interpreted as P and r 
as  r  in  Layered  Models,  CCoin,  Cov,  and  Coin  are,  re(cid:173)
spectively,  CCoin,  Cov,  and Coin. 

The following theorems can  be derived  from  (P1)-(P6) 

and(Rl)-(R4). 
(RT4)  Cov(x,  y)  &  Cov(y,  x) <-> CCoin(x,  y)  (y  covers  x 
and  x  covers  y iff x  and  y completely coincide) 
(RT5)  CCoin(x,  y)  &  CCoin(x,  z)  &  Uyz  ->  y =  z  (any 
object  can  completely coincide with  at most one object in 
any  layer) 
(RT6)  CCoin(x,  y)  & Uxy ->  x  =  y 
(if  x  and  y  com(cid:173)
pletely coincide and are on  the same  layer,  then x = y) 
(RT7)  Cov(x,  y)  & Uxy —> Pxy 
and y are on  the same  layer,  then  x  is part  of y) 
(RT8)  Coin(x,  y)  & Uxy —> Oxy 
and are on  the same layer,  then  x  and y overlap) 

(if  y  covers  x  and  x 

(if  x  and  y  coincide 

In  addition,  the implications illustrated in  the diagram 
below can be derived.  The arrow indicates that the atomic 
formula  at  the  start  of the  arrow  implies  the  atomic  for(cid:173)
mula at the end of the arrow. 

Figure  1:  Implication  hierarchy 

Layered  Mereotopology 

5 
The base theory can  be extended to Layered Mereotopol(cid:173)
ogy  in  a  straightforward  way  by  adding  a  connection 
relation,  C,  where Cxy means  "x  is  connected to y".  C  is 
interpreted as C in  Layered  Models.  6 
(CI)  Cxx 
(C2)  Cxy  ->  Cyx 
(C3)  Pxy  -> 
thing connected to x  is connected  to y) 
(C4)  Cxy ->  Uxy 
then  they are parts  of the  same  layer) 
(C5)  Cxy ->  C(r(x),  r(y)) 
their  regions  are also  connected) 

(connection  is reflexive) 
(connection  is  symmetric) 
(if  x  is  part  of  y,  every(cid:173)

(if  x  and  y  are  connected, 

(if x  and  y  are  connected, 

(Czx  ->  Czy) 

6 Axioms specific to Layered Mereotopology are marked with 
a "C". Theorems are marked with "CT" 

(C6)  Uxy  &  C(r(x),  r(y))  ->  Cxy 
(if x  and  y are  mem(cid:173)
bers  of the  same  layer  and  their  regions  are  connected, 
then  x  and y are connected) 

External  Connection  and Abutment are defined as fol(cid:173)

lows. 
(D14)  ECxy =:  Cxy & ~  Oxy 

(x  and  y  are  externally 
connected) 
(x  and y abut) 

(D15)  Axy =:  EC(r(x),  r(y)) 
When C is interpreted as C in  Layered Models, EC is the 
relation,  EC  and A is  the relation,  A. 

The  following theorems  are easily derived: 

(CT1)  ECxy  —>  Axy  (if  x  and  y  are  externally  con(cid:173)

nected,  then  x and y abut) 

(CT2)  Uxy ->  (Axy <-> ECxy)  (if x  and  y are on  the same 
layer,  then  they abut  iff they are  externally connected) 
(CT3) Axy —> ~Coin(x, y) 

(if x and y abut, then they do 
not  coincide) 

The  tangential  part  relation,  TP,  is  usually defined  in 

terms  of external  connection  as  follows: 

(ECzx  &  ECzy)   

TPxy =:  Pxy  & 
This  definition  is  not  appropriate  for  layered  models. 
To  see why,  consider  the  Layered  Model  whose  underly(cid:173)
ing topological  space  is  K  with  its standard topology and 
whose  layers  have  the  members  of the  following  sets  as 
parts: 

Layer  0: 
Layer  1:   
It  would  follow  from  the  standard  definition  of TP  that 
[0,  l]1  has  no  tangential  parts,  since  it  is  not  externally 
connected  to  any member  of the  domain.  For  example,  it 
would  follow  that  [0,  0] 1  and  [ 1,  l] 1  are  not  tangential 
parts of [0,  l]1. 

I  will  therefore  use  the  following  definition  of tangen(cid:173)

tial  part: 
(D16)  TPxy =:  Pxy  &  
part  of y) 

(Azx  &  Azy) 

(x  is  a  tangential 

Applying this definition  to the previous model,  it turns 
out  that  any part  of [0,  l] 1  that  contains  either  [0,  0] 1  or 
[ 1,  l] 1  is  a  tangential  part  of [0,  l ] 1 .  More  generally,  it 
follows  from  (D16)  that,  for  objects  x  and y on  the  same 
layer,  x  is  a  tangential  part  of y if and only if x's region  is 
a  tangential  part  of y's  region. 
(CT5)  Uxy ->  (TPxy <->  TP(r(x),  r(y))) 

Interior parthood is then  defined as usual. 

(D17)  IPxy =:  Pxy &  -TPxy 

(x  is  an  interior  part  of y) 
Relational  counterparts  of  topological  operators  can 
now  be  defined  in  the  usual  way.  For  instance,  an  ob(cid:173)
ject's  interior  can  be  defined  as  the  sum  of its  interior 
parts: 
(D18)  INT(y,  z ) =:  zSMx[IPxy] 

(z  is  the  interior of y) 
Since  each  layer  of any  model  of  Layered  Mereology 
is  a  model  of GEM,  it  is  easy to  show  that  each  layer  of 
any  model  of Layered  Mereotopology  is  a  model  of the 
standard mereotopology which uses 
as the definition 
of tangential  parthood  and  includes  axioms  (C1)-(C3)  in 
addition  to those  of GEM. 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

1273 

6  Conclusions  and  Further  Work 
The  goal  of this  paper  was  to  construct  a  mereotopology 
for  domains  that  include  coincident  but  non-overlapping 
entities.  The  result  is  an  extension  of mereotopology that 
includes  coincidence  relations  and  a  region  function  in 
addition  to mereotopological  relations. 

These  additional  elements  of  the  theory  make  it  par(cid:173)
ticularly appropriate  for applications  that  involve reason(cid:173)
ing  about  objects  that  are  located  in  holes.  Reasoning 
about  holes  is  crucial  in  a  wide  variety  of domains,  in(cid:173)
cluding  medicine  (body  cavities  and  orifices)  and  me(cid:173)
chanics  (valves,  pathways  formed  by  piping).  For  more 
examples, see [Casati and Varzi,  1994]. 

The particular theory presented  in  this paper allows the 
same  mereotopological  relations  to  apply  directly  to  all 
spatial  entities,  including  regions,  material  objects,  and 
holes.  This  approach  is  an  alternative  to  that  of  [Cohn, 
2001]  in  which  spatial  relations apply to material  objects 
only  indirectly,  via  the  spatial  regions  at  which  they are 
located.  One  advantage  of allowing  direct  descriptions  of 
the  spatial  properties  of  material  objects  is  that  this 
leaves  open  the  possibility of attributing  different  spatial 
structures  to  material  objects  and  the  regions  at  which 
they  are  located.  For  example,  we  may wish  to represent 
material  objects  as having  only closed,  regular,  divisible 
parts,  but  represent  spatial  regions  as  sums  of  points. 
Slight  changes  in  the  conditions  on  the  domains  of Lay(cid:173)
ered  Models (specifically,  condition  4) and  in  the axioms 
of  Layered  Mereotopology  (specifically, 
(R4))  would 
allow  models  in  which  the  parts  of  different  layers  are 
restricted  to  different  granularities. 

One  other  project  for  further  work  is  to  relax  the  re(cid:173)
strictions on  the underlap relation  so that members of the 
domain  that  properly coincide (i.e.  coincide without over(cid:173)
lapping)  can  be  parts  of the  same  object.  An  organism 
has both  material  parts,  such  as  a  heart  and  a  liver,  and 
immaterial parts, such as an abdominal cavity. It has been 
argued  in  [Schulz  and  Hahn,  2001]  that  material  and 
immaterial  parts  of the  body  may  properly  coincide:  the 
brain  is  located  in  the  cranial  cavity,  but  it  is  not part  of 
the  cranial  cavity.  It  is  possible  to  define  models  similar 
Layered  Models  in  which  properly  coincident  members 
of the  domain  may underlap.  It  remains  to  develop  a  for(cid:173)
mal  theory of coincidence and mereotopological  relations 
for  these  kinds  of models. 

Acknowledgements 

I  am  grateful  for  the  helpful  comments  of Jonathan 
Simon,  Barry  Smith,  Thomas  Bittner,  and  three  anony(cid:173)
mous  reviewers  on  previous  drafts  of  this  paper.  This 
work  was  supported  by  the  Alexander  von  Humbolt 
Foundation  under  the  auspices  of its Wolfgang  Paul  Pro(cid:173)
gram. 

References 
[Asher and Vieu,  1995] N.  Asher and L. Vieu. Towards a 
Geometry  of  Commonsense:  A  Semantics  and  a  Com(cid:173)
plete  Axiomatization  of  Mereotopology.  Proceedings  of 
IJCAI'95,  846-852,  Morgan  Kaufmann,  San  Mateo,  CA, 
1995. 

[Bennett,  2001]  B.  Bennett.  Space,  Time,  Matter,  and 
Things.  In  C.  Welty  &  B.  Smith  (Eds.),  Proceedings  of 
FOIS'01  105-116,  ACM Press, New York,  2001. 

[Biacino and Gerla,  1991]  L. Biacino and G.  Gerla.  Con(cid:173)
nection  Structures.  Notre  Dame  Journal  of  Formal  Logic. 
32:242-247, 1991. 

[Borgo  et  al.,  1996]  S.  Borgo,  N.  Guarino,  and  C.  Ma-
salo.  A  Pointless  Theory of Space  Based  on  Strong  Con(cid:173)
nection  and  Congruence.  In  L.  C.  Aiello  &  S.  Shapiro 
(Eds.),  Proceedings  of KR'96,  220-229,  Morgan  Kauff-
mann,  San Mateo, CA,  1996. 

[Borgo  et  al.,  1997]  S.  Borgo,  N.  Guarino,  and  C.  Ma-
salo.  An  Ontological  Theory  of Physical  Objects.  In  L. 
Ironi  (Ed.),  Proceedings  of  QR'97,  223-231,  Cortona, 
Italy,  1997. 

[Casati and Varzi,  1994] R. Casati and A. C. Varzi. Holes 
and  Other  Superficialities.  MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  MA, 
1994. 

[Casati and Varzi,  1999]  R.  Casati and A. C. Varzi. Parts 
and  Places.  The  Structures  of  Spatial  Representation. 
MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  MA,  1999. 

[Cohn,  2001]  A.  G.  Cohn.  Formalizing  Bio-Spatial 
Knowledge.  In  C.  Welty &  B.  Smith  (Eds.),  Proceedings 
ofFOIS'01,  198-209,  ACM  Press,  New  York,  2001. 

[Cohn  and  Varzi,  1998]  A.  G.  Cohn  and  A.  C.  Varzi. 
Connection  Relations  in  Mereotopology.  In  H.  Prade 
(Ed.),  Proceedings  ofECAI'98,  150-154,  Wiley  1985. 

[Gotts et ai,  1996]  N.  M.  Gotts,  J.  M.  Gooday,  and A.  G. 
Cohn.  A  Connection  Based  Approach  to  Commonsense 
Topological  Description  and  Reasoning.  The Monist,  79: 
51-75,  1996. 

[Schulz  and  Hahn,  2001]  S.  Schulz  and  U.  Hahn. 
Mereotopological Reasoning about Parts and (W)Holes in 
Bio-Ontologies.  In  C.  Welty & B.  Smith  (Eds.), Proceed-
ings  ofFOIS'01  210-221,  A CM Press, New York, 2001. 

[Smith,  1996]  B.  Smith.  Mereotopology:  A  Theory  of 
Parts  and  Boundaries.  Data  &  Knowledge  Engineering. 
20:287-303,  1996. 

1274 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

