Reasoning about distances 

Frank Wolter  and  Michael Zakharyaschev 

Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, 

Liverpool L69 7ZF, U.K.; 

Department of Computer Science, King's College, 

Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K. 

(emails: frank@csc.liv.ac.uk, mz@dcs.kcl.ac.uk) 

Abstract 

The paper presents a novel expressive logic-based 
formalism  intended  for reasoning  about numerical 
distances.  We  investigate its  computational  prop(cid:173)
erties  (in  particular,  show  that  it  is  EXPTIME-
complete) and devise a tableau-based satisfiability-
checking algorithm.  To be able to express knowl(cid:173)
edge about implicit or unknown distances, we then 
extend  the  language  with  variables  ranging  over 
distances  and  prove that the  resulting  logic  is  de-
cidable as well. 

Introduction 

1 
The  numerical  notion  of distance or metric  as  a  measure of 
closeness  or similarity  (in  a  great  variety  of senses)  plays  a 
fundamental  role  in  many  branches  of  science—including, 
naturally,  knowledge  representation,  artificial  intelligence 
and  informatics  in  general.  Recent  examples  are  such  dif(cid:173)
ferent  fields  as  spatial  KR&R  and  geographic  information 
systems  [Cohn  and  Hazarika,  2001;  Adam  and  Gangopad-
hyay,  1997],  computational  molecular biology  [Setubal  and 
Meidanis,  1997; Clote and Backofen, 2000], text processing 
[Salton, 1989] and data mining [Dunham, 2003]. Unlike clas(cid:173)
sical physics and the corresponding mathematical models, the 
'distance  spaces'  arising  in  these  applications  may  be quite 
different from  the  standard Euclidean  spaces,  e.g.,  they are 
often  finite  and  do  not  necessarily  satisfy  all  of the  metric 
axioms.  Another important feature is  that properties of only 
some objects in the space may be known, and the task is to 
use the available information to determine properties of other 
elements of interest.  Traditional methods of dealing with met(cid:173)
ric data are mostly numerical or  'sub-symbolic' (e.g., graph-
theoretic or probabilistic) and usually do not involve any kind 
of (automated) reasoning which is based upon symbolic, ex(cid:173)
plicit knowledge representation.  The main  aim  of this paper 
is to present a new expressive logic-based formalism intended 
for reasoning about distances and to provide  it with a tableau 
decision  algorithm. 

The language we propose is—as far as its algorithmic prop(cid:173)
erties and expressiveness are concerned—a compromise be(cid:173)
tween full first-order and propositional languages:  it contains 
object names and unary atomic predicates from which com(cid:173)
plex predicates are constructed by means of the Boolean oper(cid:173)

and 

(Tor all  objects 
ators and restricted quantifiers like, 
('for some object within 
within a circle of radius 
denotes the set of all  ob(cid:173)
a circle  of radius  r').  Thus,  
jects each of which is located at distance 
from at least one 
object with property P.  To illustrate the expressive power of 
the language and to convince the reader that it can be useful, 
we give three concrete examples. 
Example  1.  Consider a space of proteins (i.e., sequences of 
amino acids);  some of them are well  studied,  but properties 
of the  majority  are  not  known.  Using  one  of the  available 
techniques, we can define a 'similarity measure' between pro(cid:173)
teins which gives rise to a certain 'distance' (perhaps, metric) 
space.  One  of the  typical  problems  is  to recognise whether 
a given protein p has some property P,  e.g.,  whether it con(cid:173)
tains an EF-hand motif. The usual approach of comparing the 
structure  of p  with  that  of  'closely  located'  proteins  whose 
properties are known can be supplemented with a knowledge 
base composed by an expert and containing information like 

Note  that,  in  view  of incomplete  information  about  proper(cid:173)
ties  of elements  of the  distance  space,  to  answer  the  query 
whether/) can have P, we have to run a satisfiability-checking 
algorithm rather than a model-checking one. 
Example 2.  Suppose  now  that  we  are  trying  to  organise a 
web site for selling books (or any other goods) on-line.  One 
way of classifying the existing books is  to introduce a mea(cid:173)
sure  of closeness  of the  contents of some of them.  We  then 
obtain  a database  containing  items  of the  form 
= 
a,  if the  distance  between  books  b1  and  b2  is  a,  and,  say, 
for  some  number  c,  if the  distance  between 
b1  and  b2  is only  known  to be  greater than  c.  Now  we can 
built a sort of terminology by saying: 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

1275 

and  deduce,  for  instance,  that Al  is  not subsumed by Com(cid:173)
puter Science. 
Example 3.  Perhaps the most natural application of this kind 
of formalism is spatial representation and reasoning.  We can 
speak in terms of  'absolute'  distances: 

(London,  Leipzig)  >  100, 

• 
•  house 

(shop 

restaurant)  —  'the  house  is 
located within 1 mile distance from a shopping centre of 
radius 0.5/ 
•  doughnut 

{centre}. 

{centre} 

We can  also deal  with  distances given  implicitly  by  saying, 
for example, 

• 
•  my-house 

(London,  Leipzig)  >  3 • 
college, 

(Liverpool,  Manchester), 
(Dov1 s-house, college)  = 

('I  do  not  want  to  have  a  house  that  is  located  farther 
from my college than Dov's house') 

without referring to concrete distances between the cities and 
perhaps having no idea where Dov's house is. 

The  approach  to  reasoning  about  distances  we  advocate 
in  this  paper  has  grown  up  from  four  main  sources.  First, 
extensive  research  has  been  done  by  the  (spatial/constraint) 
database community [Revesz, 2002] aiming to deal efficiently 
with large sets of data which come equipped with some kind 
of distance  (or similarity)  measure;  consult,  e.g.,  the  litera(cid:173)
ture on  'similarity search'  and  'k-nearest  neighbour queries' 
[Bozkaya and Ozsoyoglu, 1999; Hjaltason and Samet, 19991. 
Although  this  paper  does  not  contribute  to  this  field,1  we 
were  driven  by  the  idea that  it  may  be  useful  to extend  the 
'evaluation-based' methods by automated reasoning services. 
As was mentioned above, complete information about models 
based on distance spaces, and even distances themselves, are 
often not available, which means that the quality of solutions 
provided by the database technology can be significantly im-
proved by using explicit knowledge of the field (or even con(cid:173)
jectures) supported by appropriate reasoning procedures. 

Two  approaches  to  extend  the  database  technology  by 
means of KR&R have been developed by the qualitative spa(cid:173)
tial reasoning community. One is based upon the representa(cid:173)
tion of spatial data by means of constraint systems [Renz and 
Nebel,  1999],  while the other uses  first-order  theories,  e.g., 
[Randell  et al,  1992].  Constraint  systems  are  usually  very 
efficient  (at  most  NP-complete);  however,  their  expressive 
power is  rather  limited  (for  instance,  they  do  not  allow  any 
kind  of quantification).  On  the  other hand,  the  unrestricted 
quantification of first-order representations is a serious obsta(cid:173)
cle for their use in practical reasoning systems. 

In  a  sense,  our  approach  is  similar  to  that  taken  by  the 
description  logic  community  which  represents  conceptual 
knowledge  by  means  of restricted  quantification  (a  kind  of 
modal  necessity  and  possibility operators) and uses  reason(cid:173)
ably  effective  tableau-based  procedures  even  for  expressive 
and  complex  (say,  EXPTIME-complete)  formalisms  [Hor-
rocks,  1998].  The chief difference from description logics is 

that we have to integrate rather sophisticated reasoning about 
quantitative data into a logic-based framework. 

Logics  of  distance  spaces  were  introduced  in  [Sturm  et 
al,  2000;  Kutz et  al.,  2003],  where  our main  concern  was 
to  find  out whether such  logics  can  be  decidable.  Unfortu(cid:173)
nately,  the  logics constructed  in  these  papers  were not sup(cid:173)
ported  by  effective  reasoning  machinery.  The  aim  of  this 
paper  is  more  practical.  To  begin  with,  in  Section  2,  we 
present an  application oriented  variant 
of a  dis(cid:173)
tance logic  (containing  location  constants,  set  variables  and 
restricted quantifiers) and show that the satisfiability problem 
for its formulas in metric (and some weaker distance) spaces 
is EXPTIME-complete. As distance spaces used in computer 
science  and  AI  are  often  finite  (e.g.,  data  with  a  similarity 
measure, a model of a railway system, etc.), we consider also 
the  problem  of satisfiability  of 
knowledge bases 
in finite spaces. We show that the language does not 'feel' the 
difference  between  finite  and  infinite  spaces:  all  the  results 
presented  for  satisfiability  in  arbitrary  spaces  hold  for  finite 
spaces as well.  (Unfortunately, if we restrict attention to the 
two-dimensional Euclidean  space  or  its  subspaces,  then  the 
satisfiability  problem  becomes  undecidable.)  Then,  in  Sec(cid:173)
tion  3,  we  devise a  tableau-based  satisfiability  checking  al(cid:173)
gorithm for this  logic.  An  interesting  and  quite  unexpected 
consequence  of the  proofs  of  these  results  is  the  following 
observation. The full 
and 3 <u   which together allow assertions like 

contains both operators  

cated in precisely  1  mile distance from the house.' 

But  in  everyday  life  we  often  do  not  pay  attention  to  the 
boundaries of spatial  regions or treat them  in  a sort of vague 
manner.  What happens  if we  keep only one of the operators 
in our language? Do the two resulting fragments 
behave differently, or to put it another way, does our language 
feel the difference between regions  with  and  without bound(cid:173)
aries? To our surprise, the answer turns out to be  'NO'  (for a 
precise formulation of the result see Theorem 7). 

To be able to express knowledge about implicit or unknown 
distances, in  Section 4 we extend 
with  variables 
ranging over distances and prove that the satisfiability  prob(cid:173)
lem for the resulting language is decidable. 

Because  of lack  of space  we  had  to  omit  all  (rather non-

trivial and lengthy) proofs.  They are available at  

Here we only say that 
the complexity result as  well  as  the proof of the correctness 
and completeness of the tableau algorithm are based on a rep(cid:173)
resentation  of metric  spaces  in  the  form  of relational  struc(cid:173)
tures 
Kripke frames. This representation allows us to use 
advanced techniques from modal and description logics. 

2  The logic  
Let  M  be  a  non-empty  subset  of positive  rational  numbers 
(i.e.,  a subset  of 
the  language 
with the following alphabet and term and formula formation 
rules.  The alphabet consists of 

Denote  by 

1Note, however, that our logics can express some of the cluster(cid:173)

ing conditions. 

•  an infinite list of set (or region)  variables   
•  an  infinite list of location constants   

1276 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

Theorem  4.  The  satisfiability  problem  for 
knowledge  bases  in  arbitrary  metric  spaces  is 
complete  (even  if the  parameters from  M  are  coded  in  bi(cid:173)
nary). 

Actually the same result can  be proved for satisfiability in 
weaker distance spaces, say, the class of spaces which do not 
necessarily satisfy the triangular inequality (2) or the symme(cid:173)
try axiom  (3).  The proof of this and some other theorems in 
this paper are based on  a rather sophisticated representation 
of distance  spaces  in  the  form  of  relational  structures  a  la 
Kripke  frames.  The  EXPTIME  satisfiability-checking algo(cid:173)
rithm is basically an elimination procedure which iteratively 
deletes  from  the  set  of  all  1-types  over  a  sufficiently  small 
set of terms all those that contain distance quantifiers without 
witnesses. 

According to the next result, the logic of metric spaces in(cid:173)
troduced above has the  finite  model property, and so Theo(cid:173)
rem 4 holds for the class of finite  metric spaces as well  (the 
third equivalence actually  follows immediately from the fact 
that any finite metric space is isometric to a subspace of some 
[Matousek, 
Theorem 5. The following conditions are equivalent for any 

2002]). 

-knowledge base  

•  E  is satisfiable in a metric space; 
•  E is satisfiable in a finite metric space; 
•  E is satisfiable in a finite subspace of some space  

SPATIAL  REASONING 

1277 

1278 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

2 Actually, at most /oc(E) • |trra( ∑)| 2 

It is to be  noted that the rule 

is  rather  inefficient as  it 
stands. Actually, there is no need to add those 
 
but then  some other rules,  as  well  as  the blocking strategy, 
have to be changed in a subtle way. We show here this 'ineffi­
cient variant' to make the tableaux as transparent as possible. 
The  worst case  complexity  (even  of the  more  efficient  vari­
ant) of the  tableau  algorithm does  not  match  the EXPTIME 
upper bound of Theorem 4, which is actually a feature of all 
implemented tableau procedures in description logic. 

and 

4  Metric logic with numerical variables 
Let us consider now the language 
almost  precisely as 

which is defined 
with  the  only  difference  be-

SPATIAL  REASONING 

1279 

is  an  MS 

and 
, . . .,  
the  satisfiability  problem  for 
complete. 
(In  fact 

is  satisfiable  relative  to 
=1  and a 

=  1  + 

where a 

}]-knowledge  base.  Then 
relative  to  T  is  EXPTIME-

iff 

is satisfiable, 

for 1   

5  Conclusion 
We have introduced and investigated a ' practical'  variant of 
the  distance  logics  from  [Sturm  et  al,  2000;  Kutz  et  al, 
2003].  Our  main  achievement  is  a  tableau-based  decision 
procedure similar to those  implemented in  working descrip­
tion  logic  systems  like  FACT  and  RACER,  see  [Baader  et 
al,  2003].  This  similarity  gives  us  some grounds to  believe 
that a system based on this tableau procedure (which is cur­
rently being implemented) will be sufficiently fast for 'realis­
tic'  applications. As in spatial databases, however, a very im­
portant problem is  to  integrate  the distance  logic  with other 
KR&R  formalisms.  Although  in  the  intended  applications 
the extensions of relevant predicates may strongly depend on 
the distance measure, usually non-metric attributes and rela­
tions  also  play  a  rather  significant  role  (e.g.,  classifications 
of proteins, their topological properties)  Without an integra(cid:173)
tion  of formalisms  taking  care  of  these  different  aspects  of 
the  problem domain one cannot  imagine a  system  powerful 
enough for real-world applications. Fortunately, a framework 
for  such  an  integration  is  already  available.  The  terms  of 
the  language  MS 
are constructed from  atomic  pred­
icates  by  means  of  distance  and  Boolean  operators.  This 
makes  it  possible  to treat  MS 
as an abstract descrip­
tion  system  in  the  sense  of  [Baader  et  al,  2002]  and  com­
bine  it  in  an  algorithmically  robust way  with  other effective 
KR&R formalisms, say, description logics or spatial  RCC-8 
via  E-connections  [Kutz  et  al,  20021  or  fusions  [Baader  et 
a/., 2002]. 

Acknowledgements 
The work on this paper was supported by the DFG-grant Wo 
583/3-3  and by  U.K.  EPSRC grants no.  GR/R45369/01  and 
GR/R42474/01.  Thanks  are  due  to  Anatoli  Degtyarev,  Ian 
Hodkinson,  Carsten  Lutz,  and  Oliver  Kutz  for  stimulating 
discussions  and  remarks  on  the  preliminary  versions  of the 
paper. 

References 
[Adam and Gangopadhyay, 1997]  N.  Adam  and  A.  Gan-
gopadhyay.  Database  Issues  in  Geographic  Information 
Systems, Kluwer, 1997. 

[Baader and Sattler, 2000]  F. Baader and U. Sattler.  Tableau 
algorithms  for  description  logics. 
In  R.  Dyckhoff,  edi­
tor,  Proceedings  of Tableaux 2000,  volume  1847  of Lec(cid:173)
ture  Notes  in  Artificial Intelligence,  pages  1-18.  Springer, 
2000. 

[Baader et al, 2002]  F.  Baader,  C.  Lutz,  H.  Sturm,  and 
F.  Wolter.  Fusions of description  logics and  abstract de­
scription  systems. 
Journal  of Artificial  Intelligence  Re(cid:173)
search, 16:1-58,2002. 

[Baader etal, 2003]  F.  Baader,  D.  Calvanese,  D.  McGuin-
ness, D. Nardi, and P. Patel Schneider, editors.  The De(cid:173)
scription  Logic  Handbook:  Theory,  Implementation,  and 
Applications.  Cambridge University Press,  2003. 
Bozkaya 

[Bozkaya and Ozsoyoglu,  1999]  T. 

and 
Indexing  large  metric  spaces  for  sim­

Z.  Ozsoyoglu. 
ilarity search queries.  TODS, 24(3):361-404,1999. 

[Clote and Backofen, 2000]  P. Clote and R. Backofen. Com(cid:173)
putational Molecular Biology.  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  2000. 
[Cohn and Hazarika, 2001]  A. Cohn and S. Hazarika.  Qual­
itative spatial  representation and reasoning:  an overview. 
Fundamenta Informaticae, 43:2-32, 2001. 

[Dunham, 20031  M.  Dunham.  Data  Mining.  Introductory 

and Advanced Topics.  Pearson Education, 2003. 

[Hjaltason and Samet,  1999]  G.  Hjaltason  and  H.  Samet. 
Distance browsing in spatial databases. ACM Transactions 
on Database Systems, 24(2):265-318,1999. 

[Horrocks,  1998]  I.  Horrocks.  Using an expressive descrip­
tion  logic:  FACT  or  fiction? 
In  A.  Cohn,  L.  Schubert, 
and  S.  Shapiro,  editors,  Proceedings  of the  6th  Interna(cid:173)
tional  Conference  on  Principles  of Knowledge  Represen(cid:173)
tation and Reasoning, pages 636-647,1998. 

[Kutz et al, 2002]  O.  Kutz,  F.  Wolter,  and  M.  Za-
kharyaschev.  Connecting  abstract  description  systems. 
In  D.  Fensel,  F.  Giunchiglia,  D.  McGuinness,  and 
A.  Williams,  editors,  Proceedings of the 8th  International 
Conference  on  Principles  of  Knowledge  Representation 
and reasoning, pages 215-226. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002. 
[Kutz et al, 2003]  O.  Kutz,  H.  Sturm,  N.-Y.  Suzuki, 
F. Wolter, and M. Zakharyaschev. Logics of metric spaces. 
ACM  Transactions  on  Computational  Logic,  2003. 
In 
print. 

[Matousek, 2002]  J. Matousek.  Lectures on Discrete Geom(cid:173)

etry.  Springer, 2002. 

[Randell etal,  1992]  D.  Randell,  Z.  Cui,  and  A.  Cohn.  A 
spatial logic based on regions and connection. In Proceed(cid:173)
ings  of the  3rd  International  Conference  on  Knowledge 
Representation  and Reasoning,  pages  165-176.  Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1992. 

[Renz and Nebel,  1999]  J. Renz and B. Nebel.  On the com­
plexity  of  qualitative  spatial  reasoning.  Artificial  Intelli(cid:173)
gence, 108:69-123,1999. 
[Revesz, 2002]  P.  Revesz. 

Introduction 

to  Constraint 

Databases.  Springer Verlag, 2002. 

[Salton, 1989]  G.  Salton.  Automated Text Processing:  The 
Transformation,  Analysis,  and Retrieval  of Information  by 
Computer.  Addison-Wesley,  1989. 

[Setubal and Meidanis, 1997]  J. Setubal and J. Meidanis. In(cid:173)
troduction  to  Computational  Molecular  Biology.  PWS 
Publishing Company, 1997. 

[Sturm et al, 2000]  H.  Sturm,  N.-Y.  Suzuki,  F.  Wolter,  and 
M.  Zakharyaschev.  Semi-qualitative reasoning about dis­
tances:  a preliminary  report.  In  Logics  in Artificial Intelli(cid:173)
gence.  Proceedings of JELIA  2000,  Malaga,  Spain,  num­
ber 1919 in LNAI, pages 37-56. Springer-Verlag, 2000. 

1280 

SPATIAL  REASONING 

