Tractable Pareto Optimization of Temporal Preferences 

Lina Khatib1.2 Paul Morris2 Robert Morr 

1.  Kestrel Technology 

2. Computational Sciences Division 

NASA Ames Research Center, MS 269-2 

Moffett Field, CA 94035 

Kristen Brent Venable 

;ment of Pure and Applied Mathematics 

University of Padova 

via G.Belzoni.7 

35131 Padova, Italy 

Abstract 

This  paper  focuses  on  temporal  constraint  prob(cid:173)
lems where the objective is to optimize a set of lo(cid:173)
cal  preferences for when events occur.  In previous 
work,  a  subclass  of these  problems  has  been  for(cid:173)
malized as a generalization of Temporal CSPs, and 
a tractable strategy for optimization has been  pro(cid:173)
posed, where global optimality is defined as maxi(cid:173)
mizing  the  minimum  of the  component preference 
values.  This criterion for optimality, which we call 
"Weakest Link Optimization" (WLO), is known to 
have limited practical usefulness because solutions 
are compared only on the basis of their worst value; 
thus,  there  is no requirement to  improve the other 
values.  To address this limitation,  we  introduce a 
new  algorithm  that  rc-applies  WLO  iteratively  in 
a  way  that  leads  to improvement of all  the  values. 
We show the value of this strategy by proving that, 
with suitable preference functions, the resulting so(cid:173)
lutions are Pareto Optimal. 

Introduction 

1 
The notion of softness has been applied to either a constraint 
or planning goal, indicating that either can be satisfied to mat(cid:173)
ters  of degree. 
It  is  not  hard  to  find  applicable  real  world 
problems for such a notion.  For example,  in  an  earth orbit(cid:173)
ing  spacecraft,  sensitive  instruments  like  imagers  have duty 
cycles,  which  impose  restrictions  on  the  amount  of use  of 
the instrument.  A duty cycle is typically a complex function 
based on both the expected lifetime of the instrument, as well 
as short term concerns such as  the amount of heat it can be 
exposed to while turned on.  Duty cycles impose constraints 
on  the duration  of the  periods  for which  the  instrument can 
be on, but it is natural to view this duration as  flexible.  For 
example,  this restriction might be waived to capture an  im(cid:173)
portant event such as an  active volcano.  Thus, the  flexibility 
of the duty cycle "softens" the constraint that the  instrument 
cannot be on beyond a certain duration. Reasoning about soft 
constraints  for  planning  or  scheduling  is  for  the  purpose  of 
finding a solution  that satisfies  the constraints to the highest 
degree possible. 

For  temporal  reasoning  problems,  a  simple  method  for 
evaluating  the  global  temporal  preference  of  a  solution  to 

a  Temporal  CSP  involving  local  temporal  preferences  was 
introduced  in  [Khatib  et  at,  2001],  based  on  maximizing 
the  minimally  preferred  local  preference  for  a  time  value. 
Because  the  locally  minimally  preferred  assignment  can  be 
viewed as a sort of "weakest link" with respect to the global 
solution,  we  dub  this  method  "weakest  link  optimization" 
(WLO),  in  the  spirit  of  the  television  game  show.  WLO 
can  be  formalized using  a generalization  of Simple Tempo(cid:173)
ral Problems (STPs), called STPs with Preferences (STPPs), 
that  preserves  the  capability  to  tractably  solve  for  solutions 
(with  suitable preference functions associated  with the  tem(cid:173)
poral constraints).  Unfortunately, as often occurs,  this effi(cid:173)
ciency has a price.  Specifically, WLO offers an insufficiently 
fine-grained method  for comparing  solutions,  for it  is  based 
on a single value, viz., the "weakest link."  It is consequently 
easy  to conceive of examples  where  WLO  would  accept in(cid:173)
tuitively inferior solutions because of this myopic focus.  Al(cid:173)
though it is possible to consider more robust alternatives to a 
WLO strategy for evaluating solutions, it is not clear whether 
any of these methods would preserve the computational ben(cid:173)
efits of WLO.  This  impasse  is the  starting point  of the  work 
described in this paper. 

We  propose  here  to  make  WLO  more  robust  by  combin(cid:173)
ing it with an  iterative strategy for solving STPPs.  The pro(cid:173)
cess  involves  repeatedly  restricting  temporal  values  for  the 
weakest  links,  resetting  their preference  values,  and  apply(cid:173)
ing  the  WLO  procedure to  the  reduced problem that results 
from these  changes.  The  intuition  is  a simple one,  and we 
motivate this technique with an example from a Mars Rover 
planning domain.  In Section 2,  we summarize the soft con(cid:173)
straint problem solver based on WLO introduced previously. 
We  then  illustrate  in  section  3  the  deficiencies  of WLO  on 
a  simple  example,  which  also reveals  the  intuition  underly(cid:173)
ing the proposed strategy for overcoming this deficiency. The 
main contribution of this paper is discussed in sections 4 and 
5,  which formalize this  strategy and prove that any  solution 
generated  by  an  application  of this  strategy  is  in  the  set  of 
Pareto optimal solutions for the original problem. 

2  Reasoning about preferences with soft 

constraints 

This section reviews the material first presented in [Khatib et 
al.,  2001].  There,  a class of constrained optimization prob-

TEMPORAL  REASONING 

1289 

lems, called Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Problems with 
Preferences (TCSPPs), was first defined.  A TCSPP is a gen(cid:173)
eralization  of classical  TCSPs  which  allows  for a  represen(cid:173)
In  classical  TCSPs  [Dechter  et 
tation  of  soft  constraints. 
al.,  1991],  a  unary  constraint  over  a  variable  X  represent(cid:173)
ing  an  event restricts  the domain of X,  representing its  pos(cid:173)
sible times of occurrence; the constraint is then shorthand for 
Similarly,  a 
binary constraint over X  and Y restricts the values of the dis(cid:173)
in which case the constraint can be expressed as 
tance 
A  uniform, 
binary representation of all the constraints results from intro(cid:173)
for the beginning of time, and recasting 
ducing a variable 
unary constraints as binary constraints involving the distance 

A soft temporal constraint is  a  pair 

where / is a set 
of temporal values, and / is a func(cid:173)
of intervals 
tion  from  (UI  to  a  set  A  of values.  Intuitively,  /  expresses 
local preferences for temporal values based on the value it as(cid:173)
signs  from  A.  For example,  the  soft  constraint  represented 
by 
can be interpreted to mean that the 
temporal assignments must be selected from either of the in(cid:173)
tervals in the set, and the function  min  assigns a greater pref(cid:173)
erence  to  smaller  values.  The  cardinality  of the  set  A,  i.e., 
the  number of distinct  preference  values,  reflects  the  ability 
to discriminate among degrees of preference for temporal as(cid:173)
signments. The class of TCSPPs in which each soft constraint 
consists of a single interval  is called Simple Temporal Prob(cid:173)
lems with Preferences (STPPs). 

Local preferences combine to form global preferences for 
complete assignments.  To formalize these operations, A can 
be  structured  in  the  form  of a  c-semiring  [Bistarelli  et  al.,   
1997].  A semiring is a tuple 
A: 

•  A is a set and 0,1 
•  +,  the  additive  operation,  is  commutative,  associative 

such that 

and 0 is its identity element (a+0= a); 

•  x, the multiplicative operation, is associative, distributes 
over  +,  1  is  its  identity  element and 0 is  its  absorbing 
element  (ax  0 =  0  ). 

A  c-semiring  is  a  semiring  in  which  +  is  idempotent  (i.e., 
a  +  a  =  a,a 
A),  1  is  its  absorbing  element,  and  x  is 
commutative.  The semi-ring representation of operations on 
preference  values  is  used  as  part  of the  proof of tractability 
for restricted sub-classes of TCSPP, which occurs below. 

A  solution  to  a  TCSPP  is  a  complete  assignment  to  all 
the variables that satisfies the temporal constraints.  An arbi(cid:173)
trary assignment of values to variables has a global preference 
value, obtained by combining the local preference values us(cid:173)
ing the  semiring  operations.  A c-semiring  induces  a partial 
over A to compare preference values of ar(cid:173)
order relation 
bitrary assignments; a 
b can be read b is more preferred 
than a. Classical Temporal CSPs can be seen as a special case 
of TCSPP, with "soft" constraints that assign the "best" pref(cid:173)
erence value to each element in the domain, and the "worst" 
value to everything else.  The optimal  solutions of a TCSPP 
are  those  solutions  which  have  the  best  preference value  in 
terms of the ordering  

As with classical (binary) CSPs, TCSPPs can be arranged 
to form a network of nodes representing variables, and edges 
labeled with constraint information.  Given a network of soft 
constraints, under certain restrictions on the properties of the 
semiring,  it can  be  shown  that  local  consistency  techniques 
can be applied in polynomial time to find an equivalent mini(cid:173)
mal network in which the constraints are as explicit as possi(cid:173)
ble.  The restrictions that suffice for this result apply to 

1.  the "shape" of the preference functions used  in the soft 

constraints; 

2.  the multiplicative operator  x  (it should be idempotent); 

and 

3.  the ordering of the preference values (<s must be a total 

ordering). 

The  class  of  restricted  preference  functions  that  suffice  to 
guarantee that local consistency can be meaningfully applied 
to soft constraint networks is called semi-convex.  This class 
includes  linear,  convex,  and  also  some  step  functions.  All 
of these  functions have the  property that  if one draws a hor(cid:173)
izontal  line  anywhere  in  the  Cartesian  plane  of the  graph of 
the  function,  the  set  of X  such  that 
is  not  below  the 
line forms an interval. Semi-convexity is preserved under the 
operations performed  by  local  consistency  (intersection  and 
composition). STPPs with semiring SWLO can easily be seen 
to satisfy these restrictions. 

f(X) 

The  same  restrictions  that  allow  local  consistency  to  be 
applied  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  STPPs  can  be  solved 
tractably.  Finding  an  optimal  solution  of  the  given  STPP 
with semi-convex preference functions reduces to a two-step 
search process consisting of iteratively choosing a preference 
value,  "chopping"  every  preference  function  at  that  point, 
then solving a STP defined by considering the interval of tem(cid:173)
poral values whose preference values lies above the chop line 
(semi-convexity ensures that there  is  a single interval  above 
the  chop  point,  hence  that  the  problem  is  indeed  an  STP). 
Figure  1  illustrates the chopping process.  It has been shown 
that the "highest" chop point that results in a solvable STP in 
fact produces an STP whose solutions are exactly the optimal 
solutions of the original STPP. Binary search can be used to 
select candidate chop points, making the technique for solv(cid:173)
ing the STPP tractable. The second step, solving the induced 
STP, can be performed by transforming the graph associated 

1290 

TEMPORAL  REASONING 

tions that have the optimal value includes solutions in which 
the CPU duration for the second sensing event varies from  1 
to 3 time units.  The fact that WLO is unable to discriminate 
between the global values of these solutions, despite the fact 
that the  one  with  1  time  unit  is  obviously preferable to  the 
others, is a clear limitation of WLO. 

and s'  = 

One  way  of formalizing  this  drawback  of WLO  is  to  ob(cid:173)
serve that a WLO policy is not Pareto Optimal.  To see this, 
we  reformulate  the  set  of  preference  functions  of  a  STPP, 
as  criteria  requiring  simultaneous  optimization, 
be two solutions 

and let s  = 
to a given STPP. s' dominates s if for each  j, 
and  for  some 
In  a  Pareto  optimiza(cid:173)
tion  problem,  the  Pareto  optimal set  of solutions  is  the  set 
of non-dominated solutions.  Similarly,  let the  WLO-optimal 
set  be  the set  of optimal  solutions  that result  from  applying 
the chopping technique for solving  STPPs described above. 
Clearly,  applying WLO to an  STPP does  not guarantee that 
the set of WLO-optimal solutions is a Pareto optimal set.  In 
the  rover planning  problem,  for example,  suppose  we  con(cid:173)
sider only solutions where the CPU duration for the first sens(cid:173)
ing event is 3.  Then the solution in which the CPU duration 
for the second sensing event is  1  time unit dominates the so(cid:173)
lution in which it is 2 time units, but both are WLO-optimal, 
since they have the same weakest link value.1 

Assuming that Pareto-optimality is a desirable objective in 
optimization,  a  reasonable  response  to  this  deficiency  is  to 
replace WLO with an alternative strategy for evaluating solu(cid:173)
tion tuples.  A natural, and more robust alternative evaluates 
solutions  by  summing  the  preference  values,  and  ordering 
them based on preferences towards larger values.  (This strat(cid:173)
egy  would  also  ensure  Pareto  optimality,  since  every  maxi(cid:173)
mum sum  solution  is Pareto optimal.)  This policy might be 
dubbed  "utilitarian."  The  main  drawback  to  this  alternative 
is  that  the  ability  to  solve  STPPs  tractably  is  no  longer ap(cid:173)
parent.  The reason  is that the formalization of utilitarianism 
as a semiring forces the multiplicative operator (in this case, 
sum),  not  to  be  idempotent  (i.e.,  a  +  a  #  a),  a  condition 
required in the proof that a local consistency approach is ap(cid:173)
plicable to the soft constraint reasoning problem. 

Of course,  it  is  still  possible  to  apply  a  utilitarian  frame-
work for optimizing preferences, using either local search or 
a complete search strategy such as branch and bound. Rather 
than  pursuing  this  direction  of resolving  the  problems  with 
WLO, we select another approach, based on an algorithm that 
interleaves flexible assignment with propagation using WLO. 

4  An algorithm for Pareto Optimization 
The proposed solution is based on the intuition that if a con(cid:173)
straint solver using WLO could iteratively "ignore" the weak(cid:173)
est link values (i.e.  the values that contributed to the global 
solution  evaluation) then  it could eventually  recognize solu(cid:173)
tions that dominate others in the Pareto sense.  For example, 
in the Rover Planning problem illustrated earlier, if the weak(cid:173)
est link value of the global  solution could be "ignored,"  the 
WLO solver could recognize that a solution with the CPU on 

'This phenomenon  is often referred to in the literature as the 

"drowning effect.*' 

Figure 2:  The STPP for the Rover Science Planning Problem 
where T is any timepoint 

with this STP into a distance graph, then solving two single-
source  shortest  path  problems  on  the  distance  graph.  (The 
solutions  to  these  provide  upper and  lower time  bounds  for 
each event. If the problem has a solution, then for each event 
it is possible to arbitrarily pick a time within its time bounds, 
and find corresponding times for the other events such that the 
set of times for all the events satisfy the interval constraints.) 
For  N  nodes  and  E  edges,  the  complexity  of this  phase  is 
0{EN)  (using  the  Bellman-Ford  algorithm  [Cormen  et  al, 
1990]). 

3  The problem with WLO 
Formalized in this way, WLO offers what amounts to a coarse 
method  for comparing solutions,  one  based on  the minimal 
preference value over all the projections of the solutions to lo(cid:173)
cal preference functions. Consequently, the advice given to a 
temporal solver by WLO may be insufficient to find solutions 
that  are  intuitively  more  globally  preferable.  For  example, 
consider the following simple Mars rover planning problem, 
illustrated in Figure 2. The rover has a sensing instrument and 
a CPU. There are two sensing events, of durations 3 time units 
and  1  time unit (indicated in the figure by the pairs of nodes 
labeled ins", ins1
e respectively). There is a hard 
temporal constraint that the CPU be on while the instrument 
is on, as well as a soft constraint that the CPU should be on 
as  little  as  possible,  to  conserve  power.  This  constraint  is 
expressed in the STPP as a function from temporal values in(cid:173)
dicating the duration that the CPU is on, to preference values. 
For  simplicity,  we  assume  that  the  preference function  min 
on the CPU duration constraints is the negated identity func(cid:173)
tion;  i.e.,  min(t)  = 
thus  higher preference values,  i.e. 
shorter durations, are preferred. Because the CPU must be on 
at least as long as the sensing events, any globally preferred 
solution using WLO has preference value -3. The set of solu(cid:173)

e and ins2

8, ins2

TEMPORAL  REASONING 

1291 

Figure 3:  STPP solver WLO+ returns a solution in the Pareto 
optimal  set of solutions 

for  1  time  unit  during the  second  instrument event  is  to  be 
preferred to one where the CPU is on for 2 or 3 time units. 

We  formalize  this  intuition  by  a  procedure  wherein  the 
original STPP is transformed by iteratively selecting what we 
shall refer to as a weakest link constraint, changing the con(cid:173)
straint in such a way that it can effectively be "ignored," and 
solving the transformed problem.  A weakest link (soft) con(cid:173)
straint for a WLO set of solutions is one in which the prefer(cid:173)
ence value of its duration in all the WLO solutions is the same 
as the chop level v of the optimal STP using WLO. For exam(cid:173)
ple, after applying WLO to the problem in Figure 2, the CPU 
duration constraint associated with the first sensing event will 
be a weakest link,  since it now has a  fixed  preference value 
of -3.  However, the CPU constraint for the second event will 
not be a weakest link since its preference value can still vary 
from -3 to - 1. 

We also define a weakest link constraint to be open if v  is 
where  1  is the 
not  the "best"  preference value (i.e., 
designated "best" value among the values in the semi-ring). 
Formalizing the process of "ignoring" weakest link values 
is a two-step process of restricting the weakest links to their 
intervals of optimal  temporal  values,  while eliminating their 
WLO restraining influence by resetting their preferences to a 
single, "best" value.  Formally, the process consists of: 

•  Squeezing the temporal domain to include all  and only 

those values which are optimally preferred; and 

•  Replacing  the  preference  function  by  one  that  assigns 
the most preferred value (i.e.  1) to each element in  the 
new domain. 

The  first  step ensures that only the  best temporal  values are 
part of any  solution,  and the second step allows  WLO to be 
re-applied  to eliminate Pareto-dominated solutions  from  the 
remaining solution space. 

The  algorithm  WLO+  (Figure  3)  returns  a  Simple  Tem(cid:173)
poral  Problem  (STP)  whose  solutions  are  contained  in  the 
WLO-optimal, Parcto-optimal solutions to the original STPP, 
P.  Where  C  is  a  set  of soft  constraints,  the  STPP 
is solved (step 3) using the chopping approach described ear(cid:173)
lier.  In step 5, we denote the soft constraint that results from 
the  two-step process described above as 
where 

is  the  interval  of temporal  values  that  are 

Figure 4:  Relationships between  Solution Spaces  for STPPs 
that are WLO or Pareto Optimal 

optimally preferred, and fbest is the preference function such 
for any  input value v.  Notice  that the run 
that 
time  of 
times  the time  it takes to execute 
Solve(V, Cp),  which  is  a polynomial. 

We now proceed to prove the main result, in two steps.  In 
this section we assume the existence of weakest links at every 
algorithm, and show that the subset of 
iteration of the 
solutions of the  input STPP returned by 
is contained 
in  the  intersection  of WLO-optimal  and  Pareto-optimal  so(cid:173)
lutions.  In  the  next  section  we  show  that,  given  additional 
restrictions  on  the  shape  of  the  preference  functions,  such 
weakest links can be shown to always exist. 

Given an STPP P, let 

be 
the set of WLO-optimal  (respectively,  Pareto-Optimal) solu(cid:173)
be the set of solutions to  P 
tions of P, and let 
Then the result can be stated as follows. 
returned by 

Proof: 

First  note  that  after an  open  weakest  link  is  processed  in 
steps (4) to (6),  it  will  never again be an  open weakest  link 
(since  its  preference  is  reset  to 
Since  the  theorem 
assumes  a  weakest  link  constraint  is  found  at  each  stage  of 
the  algorithm  will  terminate  when  the  weakest  link 
constraint is not open, i.e., when all the soft constraints in Cp 
have WLO preferences that equal the best (1) value. 

Now  assume s 

Since  the  first  iteration 
reduces  the  set  of solutions  of (V, Cp)  to 
and 
each subsequent iteration either leaves the set unchanged or 
reduces it further, it follows that .s 
Now sup(cid:173)
Then s must be dominated by a Pareto 
pose 
optimal solution .s'.  Let c be a soft constraint in C for which 
is  superior to  s.  Thus,  the  preference  value  of the  dura(cid:173)
tion  assigned by  s  to c cannot be  1.  It follows that at some 
point during the course of the  algorithm,  c must become an 
open  weakest  link.  Since  s  is  in 
it  survives 
until then, and so it must provide a value for c that is equal to 
the chop level.  However, since s'  dominates s,  s'  must also 
survive until then.  But this contradicts the assumption that c 
is a weakest link constraint, since s'  has a value greater than 
the WLO chop level.  Hence,  s is in 
and so in 

s 

Next suppose  the  original  STPP  P  has at  least  one  solu(cid:173)
tion. To see that 
is nonempty, observe that the 
modifications in steps (4) to (6), while stripping out solutions 

1292 

TEMPORAL  REASONING 

STP P is defined in terms of an assignment to each variable, it 
also determines a value 
= 
where X  and  Y  are the start and end variables 

for each edge e, given by 

of r, respectively.  We will use this notation in what follows. 
Now  consider  any  consistent  STP  P.  The  minimal  net-
work [Dechter et al., 1991]corresponding to P is another STP 
P'. The constraints between any two points  X  and Y in P' are 
formed by intersecting the constraints induced by all possible 
paths between  X  and Y in P. 

In the following, a preference function / is said to be con-
is a convex set. The claim of the 

vex if 
existence of weakest links can be stated as follows: 

Theorem 2  Let P be an STPP with continuous domains and 
convex preference functions.  Then  there  will he at least one 
weakest link constraint for the WLO optimal set of solutions. 
Proof: 

Consider  the  (minimal)  STP 

that  corresponds to  the 
optimal chopping level for P (as described in the WLO algo(cid:173)
rithm).  Suppose there is no weakest link constraint. Then for 
each edge constraint c there is a solution 
such that 
where  /  is  the  preference  function  for  the 

to 

edge.2 

Let s be the average of all the sc  solutions, i.e. 

Figure 5:  A unique WLO+ Solution. 

that are not WLO optimal  with respect to 
do retain 
all  the  WLO  optimal  solutions.  Clearly,  if there  is  any  so(cid:173)
lution, there is a WLO optimal one.  Thus,  if the  
in 
any iteration has a solution, the 
in  the next iteration 
will  also  have  a  solution.  Since  we  are  assuming  the first 
(—  (V, C))  has  a  solution,  it  follows  by  induction 

that 

is nonempty.  

The  theorem  shows  that  it  is  possible  to  maintain  the 
tractability  of  WLO-based  optimization  while  overcoming 
some  of the  restrictions  it  imposes.  In  particular,  it  is  pos(cid:173)
sible  to  improve  the  quality  of the  flexible  solutions  gener(cid:173)
ated within an STPP framework from being WLO optimal to 
being Pareto optimal. 

Although the algorithm determines a nonempty set of so(cid:173)
lutions that are both WLO optimal and Pareto optimal, the set 
might  not  include  all  such  solutions.  Consider the  example 
in figure 5.  Assume the preference function for all  soft con(cid:173)
straints  is  given  by  / ( t)  =  t,  i.e.,  longer durations  are  pre(cid:173)
ferred (signified by the max label on the edges).  The 
algorithm will  retain a single solution where BC and CD are 
both  5.  However,  the solution  where BC  =  2  and CD  =  8, 
which is excluded, is also both Pareto optimal and WLO op(cid:173)
timal.  (Note that AB, with a fixed value of 1, is the weakest 
link.) 

Many  optimization  schemes  seek  what  is  known  as  utili(cid:173)
tarian optimality, where the objective is to maximize the sum 
of the  local  preferences.  However,  the WLO+  solutions are 
not necessarily utilitarian optimal with respect to all solutions 
or even  the  WLO  solutions.  For example,  in figure 5,  if the 
preference  function  is  f(t)  — 
a  utilitarian optimal  WLO 
solution would be given by BC —  1 and CD = 9, but 
will still return the solution where BC and CD are both 5. 

We can summarize the position taken in this paper by say(cid:173)
ing  that  utilitarian  strategies,  while  attractive in  many ways, 
are  apparently  intractable.  The 
approach  provides 
some  of the  same  benefit  at  lower cost.  For example,  non-
competing  constraints  are  fully  optimized  by 
For 
competing constraints, 
tends to divide the preferences 
as equally  as possible.  In  some  applications,  this  might be 
more desirable than a utilitarian allocation. 

5  Existence of Weakest Links 
In  this  section  we  show  that  under  suitable  conditions,  a 
weakest  link  constraint  always  exists. 
This  involves  a 
stronger requirement than for WLO:  the preference functions 
must be convex, not merely semi-convex. This would include 
linear functions, cycloids, and upward-pointing parabolas, for 
example,  but not Gaussian  curves,  or step  functions.  (Later 
on, we will see this requirement can be relaxed somewhat so 
that Gaussians can be permitted.) 

Before proceeding, we  note that while a solution  .s of an 

The operations in  the  WLO+ algorithm preserve the  con(cid:173)
vexity  property  of the  preference  functions.  Each  stage  of 
repeats a WLO calculation. Thus, theorem 2 implies 
Corollary 2.1  Suppose  P  is  an  STPP  with  continuous  do-
mains and convex preference functions. Then a weakest link 
is found at each iteration of  
An example of why the existence result does not apply more 
generally to semi-convex functions is found in figure 6.  The 

2To avoid excessive subscripting, we suppress the implied e sub(cid:173)
script on  / here and  in what follows.  In all cases,  the applicable 
preference function will be clear from the context. 

TEMPORAL  REASONING 

1293 

The results described here are clearly relevant to any effort 
whose objective  is  representing and reasoning about prefer(cid:173)
ences  and utility.  A detailed  survey  of this  vast  literature  is 
clearly beyond our scope;  here we provide pointers to  work 
that exhibits significant overlap.  First,  the  idea of extending 
CSPs  to  solve  multi-criteria  optimization  problems  is  pro(cid:173)
posed in  [Torrens and Faltings  ,  2002];  this  work also  uses 
Pareto-optimaiity as a criterion for ordering solutions.  Sec(cid:173)
ond,  the  idea  of applying  the  notion  of degrees  of satisfac(cid:173)
tion to solving temporal reasoning problems has been applied 
previously  [Dubois  and  Prade  ,  1989].  Third,  a  number of 
graphical-based representations of local  preferences have ap(cid:173)
peared; in [Bacchus and Grove ,  1995], for example, an ap(cid:173)
proach is taken based on drawing connections between pref(cid:173)
erences and probabilities, as expressed in a Bayesian network. 
Finally,  for  a  survey  of Al-based  approaches  to  preferences 
and utility,  with an emphasis on  qualitative approaches,  the 
reader is referred to [Doyle and Thomason ,  1999]. 

7  Summary 
This paper has presented a reformulation of problems in the 
optimization  of temporal  preferences  using  a  generalization 
of Temporal  CSPs.  The  practical  context  from  which  this 
effort arose is temporal  decision-making in  planning, where 
associated with domains representing temporal distances be(cid:173)
tween  events  is  a  function expressing  preferences  for  some 
temporal values over others.  The work here extends previous 
work  by  overcoming  limitations  in  the  approach  that  arose 
when  considerations  of efficiency  in  reasoning  with  prefer(cid:173)
ences resulted  in  coarseness  in  the evaluation  procedure for 
global temporal assignments. 

References 
[Bistarelli et al., 1997]  S. Bistarelli, U.  Montanari,  and F.  Rossi. 
Semiring-based Constraint Solving and Optimization.  Jour(cid:173)
nal of the ACM, 44(2): 201-236, March 1997. 

[Bacchus and Grove , 1995]  F.  Bacchus  and  A.  Grove.  Graphi(cid:173)
cal Models of Preferences and Utility.  Proceedings of the 
Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 
3-10, Morgan Kaufmann, 1999. 

[Cormen et a/., 1990]  T.H.  Cormen,  C.E.  Leiserson,  and  R.L. 
Rivest.  Introduction to Algorithms.  MIT press, Cambridge, 
MA, 1990. 

[Dcchter et al, 1991]  R. Dechter, I. Meiri, and J. Pearl.  Temporal 

constraint networks. Artificial Intelligence, 49, 61-95, 1991. 
[Doyle and Thomason , 1999]  J. Doyle and R. Thomason.  Back(cid:173)
ground to Qualitative Decision Theory. AI Magazine, 55-68, 
Summer, 1999. 

[Dubois and Prade , 1989]  D.  Dubois  and  H.  Prade.  Processing 
Fuzzy Temporal Knowledge. IEEE Transactions on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics, 19(4), 1989. 

[Khatib et al.,2001] L. Khatib, P. Morris, R.  Morris and F. Rossi. 
Temporal Reasoning about Preferences.  In Proceedings of 
IJCAI-01. Morgan Kaufman, 1995. 

[Torrens and Faltings , 2002]  M.  Torrens  and B.  Faltings.  Using 
Soft CSPs for Approximating Pareto-Optimal Solution Sets. 
In AAAI Workshop Proceedings Preferences in AI and CP: 
Symbolic Approaches, AAAI Press, 2002. 

Figure 6:  An STPP with no weakest link 

STPP in the figure contains two semi-convex step-like func(cid:173)
tions  with  optimal  preference  values  associated  with  dura(cid:173)
tions  t  and  t'.  Assume  the  STPP  is  minimal,  and  that  the 
assignment e  =  t, e'  =  t'  is  inconsistent.  Then  the highest 
possible chop point is p, and no weakest link exists, i.e., for 
neither e nor e' is it the case that, for every solution s, p is the 
value returned by the preference function associated with that 
constraint for the duration assigned by s. 

6  Discussion and Related Work 
An  examination  of  the  proof  of  theorem  2  shows  that  the 
weakest link constraint exists under a  somewhat less restric(cid:173)
tive condition than convexity:  it is enough,  assuming semi-
convexity,  to  require  that  plateaus  (subintervals  of non-zero 
length where the preference function is constant) can only oc(cid:173)
cur at the global  maximum of the preference function.  This 
means, for example, that the theorem is applicable in princi(cid:173)
ple to any semi-convex smooth function such as a Gaussian 
curve. 

However,  in  the  practical  setting  of a  computer program 
where numbers are computed to a finite precision and contin(cid:173)
uous curves are approximated, some adjustments may need 
to be made.  Note that a representation as a discretized step 
function does not satisfy the no-plateau condition.  An alter(cid:173)
native is to treat a discretized function as corresponding to a 
piecewise linear function where the linear segments join suc(cid:173)
cessive points on the discretized graph.  Even there, the long 
tails of a Gaussian curve may get approximated by horizontal 
segments.  However, generally we can trim the domain of the 
curve to eliminate the flat tails  without excluding all  the so(cid:173)
lutions.  In that case, the discretized Gaussian  is acceptable. 
(Note that figure 6 could be simulated by an example involv(cid:173)
ing  extreme  Gaussians  where  the  tails  are  essential  for  the 
solution.) 

Note that preferences such as longest or shortest durations, 
or closest to a fixed time, which appear to be the most useful 
in practice, can be easily modeled within this framework. 

WLO+ has been implemented and tested on randomly gen(cid:173)
erated  problems,  where  each  semi-convex preference  func(cid:173)
tion is a quadratic 
with randomly selected pa(cid:173)
rameters and a 
0.  We compared the best solution found 
after applying WLO+ with the quality of the earliest solution 
found using the chop solver, using the utilitarian measure of 
quality  (i.e.,  summing  preference  values).  An  average  im(cid:173)
provement of between 6 and  10% was observed, depending 
on  constraint  density  (more  improvement  on  lower  density 
problems).  Future research will  focus on the  application  of 
WLO+ to the rover science planning domain. 

1294 

TEMPORAL  REASONING 

