Switching Hypothesized Measurements: A Dynamic Model 
with Applications to Occlusion Adaptive Joint Tracking 

Yang Wang 

Tele Tan 

Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore 

{ywang, telctan}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg 

Kia-Fock  Loe 

Dept. Computer Science, National Univ. Singapore 

loekf@comp.nus.edu.sg 

Abstract 

This paper proposes a dynamic model supporting 
multimodal  state  space  probability  distributions 
and presents the application of the model in dealing 
with  visual  occlusions  when  tracking  multiple 
objects jointly.  For  a  set  of hypotheses,  multiple 
measurements  are  acquired  at  each  time  instant. 
The model  switches among a  set of hypothesized 
measurements  during 
the  propagation.  Two 
computationally  efficient  filtering  algorithms  are 
derived 
the 
occlusion relationship and  state of the objects  are 
recursively  estimated 
the  history  of 
measurement  data.  The  switching  hypothesized 
measurements 
is  generally 
applicable  to  describe  various  dynamic  processes 
with multiple alternative measurement methods. 

for  online  joint 

(SHM)  model 

tracking.  Both 

from 

Introduction 

1 
Visual  tracking  is  important  in  such  application  areas  as 
human-computer 
interaction,  surveillance,  and  visual 
reconstruction. Given a sequence of images containing the 
objects that are represented with a parametric motion model, 
parameters of the motion model are required to be estimated 
in successive frames. Tracking could be difficult due to the 
potential  variability  such  as  partial  or  full  occlusions  of 
objects,  appearance  changes  caused  by  the  variation  of 
object  poses  or  illumination  conditions,  as  well  as 
distractions from background clutter. 

One principle challenge for visual tracking is to develop 
an  accurate  and  effective  model  representation.  The 
variability  in  visual  environments  usually  results  in  a 
multimodal state space probability distribution. The Kalman 
filter  [Brown,  1983;  Rohr,  1994],  a  classical  choice 
employed  in  tracking  work,  is  restricted  to  representing 
unimodal  probability  distributions.  Switching 
linear 
dynamic  systems  (SLDS)  [Pavlovic  and  Rehg,  2000]  and 
their equivalents [Shumway and Stoffer,  1991; Kim,  1994] 
have been used to describe dynamic processes. Intuitively, a 
complex dynamic system is represented with a set of linear 
models  controlled  by  a  switching  variable.  Joint 
probabilistic  data  association  (JPDA)  [Bar-Shalom  and 

Fortmann,  1988]  and  multiple hypothesis  tracking  (MHT) 
[Cox  and  Hingorani,  1996]  techniques,  which  represent 
multimodal  distributions  by  constructing  data  association 
hypotheses, can be cast in the framework of SLDS as well. 
Moreover, Monte Carlo methods such as the Condensation 
algorithm  [Isard  and  Blake,  1996]  support  multimodal 
probability densities with sample based representation.  By 
retaining only the peaks of the probability density, relatively 
fewer samples are required in the work of Cham and Rehg 
[1999]. A switching model framework of the Condensation 
algorithm is also proposed by Isard and Blake [1998]. 

from 

On the other hand, the measurement process is another 
essential  issue  to  deal  with  the  potential  variability. 
Measurements  are  not  readily  available 
image 
sequences  in  visual  tracking.  Even  an  accurate  tracking 
model  may  have  a poor performance  if the  measurements 
are too noisy. Parametric models can be used to characterize 
appearance  changes  of 
[Hager  and 
Belhumeur,  1998]. In the work of Galvin et al. [1999], two 
virtual  snakes,  a background  and  a  foreground  snake  for 
each object, are generated to resolve the occlusion when two 
objects  intersect.  Rasmussen and Hager [2001]  describe a 
joint  measurement  process  for  tracking  multiple  objects 
enumerating  all  possible  occlusion  relationships.  The 
measurement  with  respect  to  the  most  possible  occlusion 
relationship 
frame. 
Moreover,  layered  approach  [Wang  and  Adelson,  1994; 
Ayer and Sawhney, 1995; Jojic and Frey, 2001; Tao et al., 
2002]  is  an  efficient  way  to  represent  multiple  moving 
objects.  A  moving  object  is  characterized  by  a  coherent 
motion model over its support region. 

is  determined 

the  current 

target 

regions 

from 

the 

In  this  paper, 

idea  of  switching  hypothesized 
measurements  (SHM),  which  results  in  a  SHM  model 
supporting multimodal distributions, is proposed to handle 
the  potential  variability  in  visual  tracking.  The  approach 
acquires  a  set  of hypothesized measurements  for  different 
occlusion hypotheses at each time instant. Comparing with 
the above mentioned state space models, the SHM approach 
switches among a set of hypothesized measurements rather 
than switches among a set of models. Two computationally 
efficient filtering algorithms are derived for jointly tracking 
multiple objects. Both the occlusion relationship and state of 
the objects are estimated from the history of measurements. 

1326 

VISION 

2  Model 
2.1  Hypothesized Measurement 
the  objective  of 
For a  hidden  state sequence 
from  the  set  of 
online  tracking  is  to  recursively  estimate 
all available measurements 
up to time  For a 
certain  complex  system,  the  estimation  may  be  influenced 
by a mode or switching state sequence  {sk}  as well,  with   
Specifically,  the  mode  switching 
originates  from  the  measurement  process  in  our  work.  The 
to  a  set  of  L 
notion  of  a  measurement 
hypothesized measurements 
at each 
time  instant.  Each 
is  called  a  hypothesized 
measurement  since  it  is  obtained  by  assuming  that  the 
switching state 

is  extended 

is  at time  

To 

illustrate  the 

idea  of  hypothesized  measurement, 
consider  the  measurement  process  for jointly  tracking  two 
objects, e.g.  a rectangle and a circle,  in an image sequence 
To deal  with occlusions between the two objects when 
measuring  the  kih  frame  gK,  the  switching  state  sk  is 
introduced to describe the depth ordering at time 
2}, where s k equals  1  if the rectangle is in front of the circle, 
front  of  the  rectangle.  The 
and  2 
in 
is  denoted  as 
hypothesized  measurement 
for  the 

is  the  measurement 

if  the  circle 

where 

is 

is  the measurement  for the circle under 

rectangle, and 
theyth hypothesis. 

Under the hypothesis  of  = 1, i.e. the circle is occluded 
the rectangle should be measured 
by the rectangle at time 
first  to  acquire 
Then the observed rectangle is masked 
in  the  image.  The occluded  area of the circle  is  ignored and 
only  the  visible  region  is  matched  normally  to  get   
Similarly, under the hypothesis  of  = 2, i.e. the rectangle is 
occluded by the circle, the circle  should be matched  first  to 
get 
Thus, the occlusion will not affect the measurement result. It 
is obvious that both hypothesized measurements support the 
condition  of nonocclusion  since different depth  orderings  of 
nonoverlapping  objects  are  visually  equivalent.  The 
probabilities  of the  hypotheses  should  be  equal  in  the  case 
of nonocclusion. 

then  the  masked  image  is  used  to  measure  

Unfortunately,  the  occlusion  relationship  is  not  given 
before  hand.  The  objective  of  our  SHM  approach  is  to 
estimate both the  switching state  and the hidden  state  from 
the history of the hypothesized measurements. 

Linear  S HM  Model  for  Joint  Tracking 

2.2 
For joint  tracking  of 
objects  in  the  scene,  the 
switching  state  sk  represents  the  occlusion  relationship  at 
time 
We  assume  the 
switching  state  follows  a  first  order  Markov  chain  with  the 
following  transition probability, 

and  L  - 

..., 

with 

The  hidden  state 

is  denoted  as 

(1) 

with 

being the state 
for  the  mth  object  at  time  k.  For  a  linear  process  with 
Gaussian noise, the hidden state transition model becomes 
(2a) 
(2b) 

where 
is  the  state  transition  matrix,  n  is  a 
zero-mean  Gaussian  noise  with  covariance  matrix  Q,  and 
is a Gaussian density with  argument z, mean  m, 

and covariance z. 

Figure 1: Bayesian network representation of the SHM model 

for 

at time 

Given the switching state 

the  corresponding 
hypothesized  measurement  yksi  could  be  considered  as  a 
proper  measurement  centering  on  the  hidden  state,  while 
is  an  improper  measurement 
every  other 
generated  under  a  wrong  assumption.  The 
improper 
measurement  should  be  weakly  influenced  by  the  hidden 
state 
the 
computation,  we  assume  a normal  distribution  for a proper 
measurement  and  a  uniform  distribution  for  an  improper 
measurement. The measurement model is simplified as 

large  variance.  To  simplify 

and  have  a 

(3a) 

(3b) 

is  a  zero-mean  Gaussian  noise  with  covariance 
where 
matrix 
and  w  is  a  uniformly  distributed  noise,  whose 
density is a small positive constant. For the measurement of 
M  objects, 

is  denoted as 

and 

is written as 
the  conditional 
measurements 
computationally  efficient. 

independence  among 
is 

assumed 

Given the current state, 
the  hypothesized 
the  model 

to  make 

VISION 

1327 

The SHM model can be represented by a dynamic Bayesian 
network shown in figure  1. 

(4) 

3  Method 
3.1  Measurement 
layer 
Multiple,  occluding  objects  are  modeled  using 
representation. Layers are indexed by 
with 
layer 1 being the layer that is closest to the camera and layer 
There  is  one  object  in 
layer.  The  number  of  all  occlusion  relationship 
Each 

each 
hypotheses (or depth ordering permutations) is 
permutation is tagged with a index  

being  behind  layer 

Under  each  permutation  hypothesis,  the  object  in  the 
front layer  1  should be measured  first from the  image gk at 
time 
Then the object in  layer 2  can be matched  from  the 
masked image, and so on. At last, the object in  layer 
can 
be  measured.  Occluded  points  aie  not  matched  when 
measuring 
of 
nonoverlapping  objects  should  be  equivalent  for  different 
depth  ordering  permutations.  Given  the  reference  image gr 
the  measurement  is  based  on  minimizing  the  mean 
of squared  intensity  differences  between  the  current  image 
and  the  reference region.  Under theyth hypothesis, 
is 

objects.  Measurement 

results 

the 

the hypothesized measurement of the Mth object, and 
is 
the  corresponding  squared  difference  mean  at  time  k.  The 
vector 
The 
covariance  matrix 
is  obtained  by  assuming  that  the 
components  of the  measurement  noise  are  uncorrelated  to 
each  other,  and 
the 
corresponding squared difference mean. 

is  proportional 

is  written  as 

the  variances 

to 

3.2  SHM Filter 
From a Bayesian perspective, the online tracking problem is 
to recursively calculate the posterior state space distribution. 
Given  the  measurement  data  up  to  time  k,  the  probability 
density function (pdf) of the state is expressed as 

where 

is denoted as 

with 

(5) 

and 

the  conditional  density 
normal  distribution 
state  hypothesis.  Thus  the  pdf 
Gaussians. 
At  time 

is  modeled  as  a 
under  each  switching 
is  a  mixture  of L 

the  set  of hypothesized  measurements   

becomes  available,  and  it  is  used  to  update   
via Bayes' rule. 

the 

filtering  process  has 

In  principle, 
three  stages: 
prediction,  update,  and  collapsing  [Murphy,  1998].  From 
(1),  (2),  (4)  and  (6),  the  approximate  inference  algorithm 
can  be  derived  in  a  similar way  as  that  in  a  Gaussian  sum 
filter [Anderson and Moore,  1979]. 

(6) 

From (7) it can be seen that the computation of the SHM 
filter is  slightly more complex  than that of multiple  Kalman 
filters or Gaussian sum filters. 

Fast  S HM  Filter 

3.3 
When occlusion is the main factor in the potential variability 
of joint tracking, we can assume that the measurement noise 
under the true occlusion hypothesis is small. When the noise 
becomes zero, the measurement model can be simplified as 

1328 

VISION 

(9) 

is 

the  Dirac  delta 

where 
function.  Consider  the 
minimized  mean  of  squared  differences  as  a  part  of  the 
hypothesized  measurement,  so 
the  definition  of 
measurement can be generalized as 

that 

(10) 

is  independent  on 

Assume  that 
and  the 
posterior  density  of  the  squared  difference  mean  is  of 
exponential  distribution  for  each  object  (More  accurate 
expression could be derived using the 
distribution.)  under 
the true hypothesis, the pdf of 

is factorized as 

and 

(11a) 

(l1b) 

(12) 

(15a) 

(15b) 

The  result 

can  then  be  plugged  into  a  Kalman 
filter  to  achieve  improved  performance.  Such  a  SHM-
Kalman  filter  keeps  the  multimodality  of the  SHM  model 
and has attractive computation requirement. In addition, the 
collapsing stage is not necessary in the fast SHM filter. 

Implementation 

4 
In  practice,  we  use  the  second  order  (constant  velocity) 
model. The hidden state transition function is 

(16) 

where zk is the tracked entity (e.g. position and orientation). 
transition  matrix  can  be 
The  hidden  state  and  state 
correspondingly  defined.  The  switching  state 
transition 
probability is set as 

(17) 

is a small positive value (0.1  in this paper) so that 
where 
two successive switching states are more  likely  to be of the 
same label. At the beginning, the reference image gr is set as 
the  initial  image  go-  When  there  is  a  high  confidence  in 
nonocclusion, 
image  can  be  adaptively 
updated. The objects are assumed to be separated from each 
should be equal for 
other  in 

the  reference 

The initial 

different j  because  of  nonocclusion.   

is  set  as  a  zero  vector.  The  initial 
The  initial  mean 
covariance matrix 
is set as diagonal with small variances 
since the initialization  is  assumed to be accurate.  When  an 
object  is  totally  occluded by  the  other objects,  no  points  of 
the  target  region  will  be  matched.  The  estimation  is  based 
on  the  result  of  time  k  using  the  state  transition  function 
when no visible region of the object is expected at time £+1. 

VISION 

1329 

5  Results and Discussion 
Test  results  of  two  video  sequences  are  shown  in  our 
experiments.  The  state  is  the  position  and  orientation,  and 
the second order model is employed. Fach measurement is a 
translation and rotation. 

In 

the 

three 

figure  2c.3,  the  distraction 

Figure  2  shows  the  tracking of two hands  of a person  as 
they  cross  several  times  in  an  image  sequence.  Figure  2a 
shows 
frames  of  the  sequence.  Appearance 
variation  of  the  hands  due  to  pose  changes  can  be  seen. 
Figure  2b  and  2c  demonstrate  the  tracking  efficacy  of the 
fast SHM filter versus the Kalman filter. The fast SHM filter 
successfully  tracks  both  hands  under  different  occlusion 
relationships.  In  figure  2b,  one  hand  is  drawn  in  black 
contour when  the  detected  depth order indicates  that  it  is  in 
front  of  the  other  hand.  The  Kalman  filter  has  a  similar 
performance when occlusions are not severe, but poor under 
heavy  occlusions. 
from 
background  clutter  causes  the  Kalman  tracker  to  fail.  The 
normalized posterior distributions for the vertical position of 
the left hand in figure 2a.2 and 2a.3 are shown in figure 2d.l 
and 2d.2.  When the occlusion  is not  severe,  measurements 
under the two hypotheses are the same, and the distribution 
the  distribution 
is  unimodal.  Under  heavy  occlusions, 
becomes  multimodal 
hypothesized 
measurements tend to be different.  The measurement under 
true  hypothesis  matches  the  hand  correctly,  while  the 
measurement  under 
is  distracted  by 
background clutter.  Figure 2e shows the probabilities of the 
first  occlusion  hypothesis  (the  left  hand  being  in  the  front) 
over  the  first  300  frames.  The  probabilities  for  the  three 
frames  in  figure 2a are  circled.  The probabilities of the  two 
hypotheses are equal in the nonoverlapping cases, while the 
probability  of the  true  hypothesis  becomes  dominant  under 
occlusions. 

false  hypothesis 

since 

the 

two 

Figure  3  shows  the  results  of jointly  tracking  the  four 
shanks of a man and a woman as they cross. The man's right 
shank  has  been  totally  occluded  in  the  sequence.  There 

should be totally 4! = 24 hypotheses if we directly apply the 
SHM  filter  in  section  3.2.  To  reduce  the  computation,  two 
reasonable  assumptions  are  made  to  prune  less  plausible 
hypotheses.  Firstly,  one's 
legs  can  not  simultaneously 
occlude and  be occluded by the other's  legs.  Secondly,  the 
occlusion relationship between the man  and woman can be 
determined  from  their  bodies.  Thus  the  whole  tracking 
procedure is divided into three trackers.  The  first  one tracks 
the  two  bodies  of the  walkers.  According  to  the  detected 
occlusion  relationship,  the  two  shanks  of the  person  in  the 
front are then tracked. At last, the shanks of the other person 
are tracked in the masked image. Figure 3a shows the results 
for  the  four  frames  of the  sequence  (circles  are  marked  on 
the  man's  body  and  shanks,  and  rectangles  are  marked  on 
the woman).  Figure  3b  shows  the posterior distributions  for 
the horizontal position of the occluded body  in  figure  3a. 1-
3a.3.  When  the  two  bodies  are  separated,  the  density  is 
unimodal  and  of  a  small  variance.  The  density  variance 
increases  when  occlusions  occur.  It  becomes  multimodal 
under heavy occlusions. Figure 3c shows the probabilities of 
the  woman's  body  being  in  the  front.  The  probabilities  for 
the four frames in figure 3a are circled. 

Under  realistic  environments,  it  is  understandable  that 
comparing  with  the  other  hypothesized  measurements,  the 
measurement  under  the  true  occlusion  hypothesis  usually 
shows more regularity and has smaller variances (or squared 
difference means). Thus, the true information (the switching 
state  and  the  hidden  state)  could  be  enhanced  through  the 
propagation. 
the  acquirement  of  multiple 
measurements  helps  decrease  the  information  loss  (e.g. 
caused  by  background  clutter)  during  the  measurement 
process. 

In  addition, 

6  Conclusion 
This  paper  proposes  a  SHM  model 
for  state  space 
representation of dynamic  systems  and derives two  efficient 
filtering  algorithms.  Our joint  tracking  approach  explicitly 

1330 

VISION 

is  quantitatively  analyzed 

reasons  about  the  occlusion  relationships.  The  occlusion 
relationship 
the 
propagation.  The  information  can  be  used  for  reference 
update and  further analysis.  Moreover,  experimental  results 
show  that  our method helps  handle  appearance  changes  and 
distractions. 

throughout 

The  SHM model  discusses  the measurement switching in 
dynamic  systems.  It  is  complementary  to  the  idea  of model 
switching  in  [Ghahramani  and  Hinton,  1998].  Our  future 
study  is  to  effectively  combine  these  two  ideas  in  visual 
tracking.  Furthermore, 
is  generally 
applicable  to  various  dynamic  processes  in  which  there  are 
multiple alternative measurement methods. 

the  SHM  model 

A 

Inference in  Fast SHM Filter 

References 
[Anderson and Moore,  1979] B.  D. O.  Anderson and J. B.  Moore, 

Optimal  filtering,  Prentice-Hall,  1979. 

[Ayer and  Sawhney,  1995]  S.  Ayer  and  H.  S.  Sawhney,  Layered 
robust  maximum-

representation  of  motion  video  using 

likelihood  estimation  of mixture models  and MDL  encoding,  In 
Proc.  International Conf.  Computer  Vision, pp.  777-784,  1995. 
[Bar-Shalom  and  Fortmann,  1988]  Y.  Bar-Shalom  and  T.  E. 
Fortmann,  Tracking  and  data  association,  Academic  Press, 
1988. 

[Brown,  1983]  R.  G.  Brown,  Introduction  to  random  signal 

analysis  and Kalman filtering,  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  1983. 

[Cham'and  Rehg,  1999]  T.-J.  Cham  and  J.  M.  Rehg,  A  multiple 
hypothesis approach to figure tracking, In Proc.  Conf. Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 2, pp.  239-245,  1999. 

[Cox  and  Hingorani,  1996]  I.  J.  Cox  and  S.  L.  Hingorani,  An 
efficient  implementation  of Reid's  multiple  hypothesis  tracking 
algorithm  and  its  evaluation  for  the  purpose  of visual  tracking, 
IEEE  Trans.  Patt.  Anal.  Mach.  Intel.,  vol.  18,  pp.  138-150, 
1996. 

[Galvin et al.,  1999] B. Galvin, B. McCane, and K. Novins, Virtual 
snakes  for  occlusion  analysis,  In  Proc.  Conf.  Compiler  Vision 
and Pattern Recognition, vol. 2, pp. 294-299,  1999. 

[Ghahramani and Hinton,  1998] Z. Ghahramani  and G.  E.  Hinton, 
Variational  learning  for  switching  state-space  models,  Neural 
Computation, vol.  12, pp. 963-996,  1998. 

[Hager and  Belhumeur,  1998]  G.  D.  Hager and  P.  N.  Belhumeur, 
Efficient  region  tracking  with  parametric  models  of  geometry 
and  illumination,  IEEE  Trans.  Patt.  Anal.  Mach.  Intel.,  vol.  20, 
pp.  1025-1039, 1998. 

[Isard  and  Blake,  1998]  M.  Isard  and  A.  Blake,  A  mixed-state 
Condensation  tracker with  automatic  model-switching,  In  Proc 
International  Conf  Computer  Vision,  pp.  107-112,  1998. 

[Isard  and  Blake,  1996]  M.  Isard  and  A.  Blake,  Contour  tracking 
In  Proc 

by  stochastic  propagation  of  conditional  density, 
European  Conf  Computer  Vision, pp.  343  356,  1996. 

[Jojic  and  Frey,  2001]  N.  Jojic  and  B.  J.  Frey,  Learning  flexible 
sprites  in  video  layers,  In  Proc.  Conf.  Computer  Vision  and 
Pattern Recognition, vol.  I, pp.  199-206,2001. 

[Kim,  1994]  C.-J.  Kim,  Dynamic  linear  models  with  Markov-

switching, Journal of Econometrics, vol. 60, pp. 1 22, 1994. 

[Murphy,  1998]  K.  P.  Murphy,  Learning  switching  Kalman  filter 
models,  Technical  Report  98-10,  Compaq  Cambridge  Research 
Lab, 1998. 

[Pavlovic and Rehg, 2000]  V.  Pavlovic and J.  M.  Rehg, Impact of 
dynamic  model  learning  on  classification  of human  motion,  In 
Proc.  Conf.  Computer  Vision  and  Pattern  Recognition,  vol.  1, 
pp. 788-795, 2000. 

[Rasmussen  and  Hager,  2001]  C.  Rasmussen  and  G.  D.  Hager, 
Probabilistic  data  association  methods  for  tracking  complex 
visual objects, IEEE Trans.  Patt. Anal.  Mach.  Intel., vol. 23, pp. 
560-576,2001. 

[Rohr,  1994]  K.  Rohr, Towards model-based recognition of human 
movements  in  image  sequences,  Computer  Vision,  Graphics, 
and Image  Processing:  Image  Understanding,  vol.  59,  pp.  94 
115, 1994. 

[Shumway  and  Stoffer,  1991]  R.  H.  Shumway  and  D.  S.  Stoffer, 
Dynamic linear models with switching, Journal of the American 
Statistical Association, vol. 86, pp. 763  769,  1991. 

[Tao et al.,  2002]  H.  Tao,  H.  S.  Sawhney,  and  R.  Kumar, Object 
tracking  with  Bayesian  estimation  of  dynamic  Layer 
representations,  IEEE  Trans.  Patt.  Anal.  Mach.  Intel.,  vol.  24, 
pp. 75-89, 2002. 

[Wang  and  Adelson,  1994]  J.  Y.  A.  Wang  and  E.  H.  Adelson, 
Representing  moving  images  with  layers,  IEEE  Trans.  Image 
Processing, vol. 3, pp. 625  637, 1994. 

VISION 

1331 

