A Live-User Evaluation of Collaborative Web Search∗

Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Oisin Boydell, Keith Bradley, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, Jill Freyne

Smart Media Institute, Department of Computer Science,

University College Dublin, Ireland

{ﬁrstname.surname}@ucd.ie

Abstract

Collaborative Web search exploits repetition and
regularity within the query-space of a community
of like-minded individuals in order to improve the
quality of search results.
In short, search results
that have been judged to be relevant for past queries
are promoted in response to similar queries that oc-
cur in the future. In this paper we present the re-
sults of a large-scale evaluation of this approach, in
a corporate Web search scenario, which shows that
signiﬁcant beneﬁts are available to its users.

Introduction

1
Collection size, document diversity, and limited searcher ex-
pertise all combine to make the Web a very challenging in-
formation retrieval environment. In 2000 the entire World-
Wide Web consisted of just 21 terabytes of information; now
it grows by 3 times this ﬁgure every single day [Roush, 2004;
Lyman and Varian, 2003]. Moreover, the average search
query contains only about 2 query terms [Lawrence and Giles,
1998] and the terms used are often poorly chosen [Bollmann-
Sdorra and Raghavan, 1993; Furnas et al., 1987]. These
problems have led to rapid developments in the term-based
matching approaches at the heart of modern search engines.
For the most part this has meant looking for new sources
of knowledge with which to guide search. For example,
Brin & Page [Brin and Page, 1998] and Kleinberg [Klein-
berg, 1999] have argued for the need to consider factors such
as link-connectivity information, while others have sought
to exploit context as a way to disambiguate vague queries
(see [Lawrence, 2000]). Still others have begun to con-
sider the structure of the query-space as a new source of
search knowledge. For example, [Fitzpatrick and Dent, 1997;
Glance, 2001; Raghavan and Sever, 1995; Wen, 2002] have
all demonstrated how query logs can be mined to identify use-
ful past queries that may help the current searcher.

In [Freyne et al., 2004; Smyth et al., 2003; In Press], a
novel approach to Web search—collaborative Web search—
was introduced. It combined techniques for exploiting knowl-
edge of the query-space with ideas from social networking
∗The Support of the Enterprise Ireland Informatics Initiative and

Science Foundation Ireland is gratefully acknowledged.

to develop a Web search platform capable of adapting to the
needs of (ad-hoc) communities of users. In brief, the queries
submitted and the results selected by a community of users
are recorded and reused in order to inﬂuence the results of
future searches for similar queries. Results that have been re-
liably selected for similar queries in the past are promoted.
For example, users of an AI-related Web site might have a
tendency to select case-based reasoning results in response
to vague queries such as ‘CBR’, while largely ignoring al-
ternatives such as Google’s higher-ranking ‘Central Bank of
Russia’ or ‘Comic Book Resources’ results. In this instance
collaborative search will gradually adapt its result-lists to em-
phasise case-based reasoning results, for searches that origi-
nate from such a site, perhaps through a search-box on the
site.

While intuitively appealing, the collaborative Web search
approach has never been fully evaluated under realistic con-
ditions. Previous evaluations have been limited to the use of
artiﬁcial users [Freyne et al., 2004] or closed-world search
scenarios [Smyth et al., 2003; In Press]. In our work we have
implemented the collaborative Web search technique as a ro-
bust and scalable meta search engine architecture and the cen-
tral contribution of this paper is to evaluate its deployment in
a realistic, real-world Web search setting involving the em-
ployees of a local software company over an extended period
of time. While the results indicate that there is indeed a sig-
niﬁcant beneﬁt accruing from collaborative Web search, they
also serve to highlight certain issues, in relation to the man-
ner in which promotions are made, that are likely to lead to
critical problems over time. We conclude by discussing how
these problems have been overcome in our implementation.

2 Regularity & Repetition in Web Search
Collaborative Web search is motivated by regularity and repe-
tition that is assumed to be inherent in Web search, especially
among the searches of communities of like-minded individ-
uals. It proposes to exploit these regularities when respond-
ing to new queries by reusing the result selections from simi-
lar past queries. But how commonplace is community-based
search? And how regular and repetitive is its query-space?

2.1 The Case for Community-Based Web Search
While most searches are conducted through generic search
engines, servicing the needs of individuals, many are never-

theless examples of community-based searches. For instance,
the use of a Google search box on a specialised Web site (e.g.
a motoring enthusiast’s site) means that its searches are likely
to be initiated by users with some common (motoring) inter-
est. Alternatively, searches originating from a computer labo-
ratory assigned to 2nd year students are likely to share certain
characteristics related to their studies (courses, projects etc.)
and social lives (college societies, local gigs etc.)

Of course, more formalised examples of community-based
search are also possible. The advent of blogging services and
social networking services such as Friendster and Orkut pave
the way for a growing number of community-based search ap-
plications. While the precise nature of a community’s shared
interests may not be easy to characterise, they are neverthe-
less likely to be encoded within the search patterns (queries
and result selections) of the community’s members.

2.2 How Much Repetition?
If many searches can be traced back to ad-hoc communities
of searchers, what degree of regularity can be observed? We
can begin to answer this question by proﬁling the degree of
term overlap between queries from different communities of
searchers. One way to measure query similarity is by the de-
gree of overlap between query terms as in Equation 1; for
example, Sim(‘jaguar pictures’,‘jaguar photos’)=0.33.

Sim(q, q0) =

|q ∩ q0|
|q ∪ q0|

(1)

Previous analyses of a variety of search engine logs have
shown that query repetition is prevalent in specialised search
scenarios that are likely to attract communities of like-minded
searchers. For example [Smyth et al., In Press] report how it
is common to ﬁnd that up to 70% of search queries may share
at least 50% of their query terms with other queries’; this
drops to 30% for more general search scenarios. Later in this
paper we describe a major evaluation of collaborative Web
search involving the employees of a local software company.
Prior to this evaluation, we performed a similar query analy-
sis over 9 weeks worth of search sessions extracted from the
company’s Internet access logs. Our working hypothesis at
the time was that these employees would behave as a com-
munity of like-minded searchers and that their search queries
would exhibit a high degree of similarity, thus motivating col-
laborative Web search.

The results are presented in Figure 1 as the percentage of
queries at set similarity thresholds and the average number
of similar queries for these different thresholds. The results
show that the group of searchers do appear to behave as a
community of like-minded users as high degrees of repetition
are noted for many similarity thresholds. For example, we see
that nearly 60% of queries share at least 50% of their query
terms with other queries and that on average each of these
queries shares 50% of its terms with about 6 other queries.

3 A Review of Collaborative Web Search
The collaborative Web search technique is conceived of as a
form of meta-search; see Figure 2 for the summary architec-
ture and refer to [Freyne et al., 2004; Smyth et al., In Press]

Figure 1: Query repetition in the search logs of the commu-
nity used as part of the evaluation in Section 4.

for a more comprehensive technical description. Brieﬂy, each
new user query, qT , is submitted to a set of underlying search
engines and their results are combined to form a meta-search
result-list, RM . The novelty of collaborative Web search
stems from the way that this result-list is processed to pro-
duce a new result-list, RT , that reﬂects the learned prefer-
ences of a community of like-minded searchers. It achieves
this by recording the selections of searchers. In other words,
collaborative search records the fact that a result si has been
selected for query qT , and then reuses this information for
similar queries in the future, by promoting results that were
reliably selected in the past.

3.1 Proﬁling Community Preferences
The hit-matrix, H, is a key data structure for collaborative
Web search. It is a record of the results selected in past search
sessions by a speciﬁc community of users, and multiple hit
matrices can be readily maintained to reﬂect the separate pref-
erences of many different communities. Each time a searcher
(from a speciﬁc community) selects a result page, pj, that
was retrieved for query, qT , the value of HT j is incremented.
Thus, HT j represents the number of times that pj has been
selected as a result for qT . The row of H that corresponds to
qT provides a complete account of the number of all page se-
lections for this query over all search sessions that have used
this query. Note that no record is maintained of which user
selected which result, so in effect the hit matrix serves as an
anonymous account of community preferences.

3.2 Reusing Similar Queries
The similarity between a new query, qT , and a search record
(row) in a hit-matrix can be estimated by the term overlap be-
tween the new query and the query of the past search record
(Equation 1); see [Balfe and Smyth, 2005] for a number of al-
ternative query similarity models. Collaborative Web search
selects those rows from the hit matrix whose corresponding
query has a similarity to qT that is above some speciﬁed
threshold (typically 0.5). The pages associated with these

Sheet1 Chart 1Page 189.778.657.044.141.615.5601455560255075100>0>0.25>0.5>0.751ExactQuery Similarity Threshold% Repeating Queries020406080Mean Similar Queries% RepetitionMean QueriesFigure 3: The I-SPY result page for the ‘ijcai 2005’ query.

ests, for a community of like-minded searchers. Collaborative
Web search contemplates the creation of multiple hit-matrices
to enable different communities of users to access a search
service that is adapted for their query-space and their pre-
ferred pages. For example, a large Web portal might create
different hit-matrices for different portal sections (e.g. News,
Sports, Entertainment, Business sections) on the grounds that
searchers are more likely to submit queries that are related to
the content that is found within this portal section.

3.5 An Example Session
Collaborative Web search has been implemented in the form
of the I-SPY search engine (http://ispy.ucd.ie). I-SPY can be
conﬁgured to use a range of different search engines as its
base-level search engines, including Google, Teoma, HotBot
etc., and it allows users to use existing search communities or
to create new ones via a simple form-based interface.

Figure 3 shows the results of a typical search for the query
‘ijcai 2005’ by a particular I-SPY community. The result-list
is presented in the main panel, ﬂanked by recent and popu-
lar queries and web pages lists; certain sensitive information
items have been blanked out in the ﬁgure. In this case the
top 4 results are shown and the ﬁrst 3 of these are result pro-
motions; indicated by the ‘I-SPY eyes’ icon next to the pro-
moted result titles. This means that these results have been
previously selected for this query or for similar queries. In
fact we can see from the ‘related queries’ lists after the ﬁrst
and third results that these have been previously selected for
the similar query ‘ijcai’. The results shown are obviously
relevant to the target query. The top result is for the main
IJCAI 2005 home page and the third result corresponds to
the main IJCAI Conferences page, for example. However it
is also worth noting that the second result is for the forth-
coming user modeling conference, UM 2005. This page has
been promoted because it has been selected in the past, for the
current query, by members of the current community—these
community members have a speciﬁc business interest in user
modeling technology—but ordinarily this result would not be
expected to appear so high in the result list for ‘ijcai 2005’.

Figure 2: The collaborative web search architecture.

records (rows) are called promotion candidates and they are
assumed to be potentially relevant to the new target query be-
cause they have been relevant for similar queries, and for the
same community of searchers, in the past.
3.3 Result Relevancy & Ranking
Consider a page, pj, that is associated with query, qi. The rel-
evance of pj to qi is estimated by the relative number of times
that pj has been selected for qi; see Equation 2. And the rel-
evance of pj to qT is a combination of Relevance(pj, qi) for
all qi’s (q1, ..., qn) deemed similar to qT , as shown in Equa-
tion 3. Each Relevance(pj, qi) is weighted by Sim(qi, qT )
to discount the relevance of results from less similar queries;
Exists(pj, qi) = 1 if Hij 6= 0 and 0 otherwise.

Relevance(pj, qi) = HijP∀j Hij
P
P
W Rel(pj, qT , q1, ..., qn) =
i=1...n Relevance(pj, qi) • Sim(qT , qi)
i=1...n Exists(pj, qi) • Sim(qT , qi)

(2)

(3)

This weighted relevance metric is used to rank-order the pro-
motion candidates. These ranked pages are then listed ahead
of the remaining meta-search results, which are themselves
ranked (according to a standard meta-search scoring metric),
to give RT . Of course, alternative promotion models can also
be envisaged but are omitted here for space reasons.
3.4 Communities and Collaboration
Obviously this approach assumes that the contents of a given
hit-matrix reﬂect some relatively uniform domain of inter-

S1S2SnAdapterAdapterAdapterMETA-SEARCHqTRMRTqT1qT2qTnR1R2RnqT1qT2qTnR1R2RnqTHit-Matrix, HRELEVANCE ENGINEUPDATE ENGINEsiTPromoted ResultsThis result is, however, relevant to this query given the com-
munity context, especially since UM 2005 takes place directly
before IJCAI 2005 and in the same city. This type of promo-
tion speaks to the potential power of I-SPY to promote results
that are uniquely relevant to the speciﬁc needs of a commu-
nity of like-minded searchers results that would ordinarily
be lost among the competing results of traditional, generic
search engines.

4 Live-User Evaluation
Past evaluations of collaborative Web search have included a
mixture of artiﬁcial-user and live-user studies [Smyth et al.,
2003; Freyne et al., 2004; Smyth et al., In Press]. However
these studies have been limited; for example, the live-user
evaluation studied a narrowly focused, single-shot, question-
answering search task which did not allow for more realistic
open-ended search scenarios over an extended period of time.
In this section we describe the results of a more realistic trial,
which took place over a 4-week period among the 50 staff
members of a local software company.

4.1 Preliminaries
The trial began on Monday, November 8, 2004 and the re-
sults presented in this paper account for the 4 working-weeks
(Monday to Friday) up to and including December 3. During
this time employees were asked to use I-SPY as their primary
search engine; prior to the trial 90% of search sessions used
Google. I-SPY was conﬁgured to draw on Google and Hot-
Bot as a source of search results and a new community was
created for participants with a hit-matrix trained from search
log data for the 9 weeks prior to the start of the trial. I-SPY’s
query-similarity threshold was set at 50%, so that only those
past sessions that shared more than 50% of their query terms
with the current target query would be considered to be simi-
lar for the purposes of result promotion (see Section 3). Par-
ticipants were introduced to I-SPY via a short explanatory
email and encouraged to use it as they would a normal search
engine. Over the 4 weeks more than 1500 queries were sub-
mitted and more than 1800 result URLs were selected.

Figure 4 presents a histogram of the number of search ses-
sions with different numbers of promotions.
It shows that
46% of search sessions contained at least 1 promoted re-
sult; on average these sessions contained 3.7 promotions.
This speaks to the potential for I-SPY’s result-promotion
technique to usefully inﬂuence a signiﬁcant percentage of
searches. The results are in broad agreement with the pre-trial
query-overlap analysis described in Section 2, which sug-
gested that we could expect up to 57% of new queries to have
50%-similar queries from the past to draw on as a source of
promotions (see Figure 1).

4.2 Successful Sessions
While the above ﬁgures indicate that I-SPY is making pro-
motions in roughly half of the search sessions,
the real
test is whether these promotions turn out to be relevant for
the searcher, and whether they are more relevant than non-
promoted results. Evaluating the relevance of search results
in a trial such as this is difﬁcult to do, at least in a direct fash-
ion. Standard search interfaces do not provide a facility to

Figure 4: A histogram of the number of search sessions with
different numbers of result promotions.

allow users to indicate how well their information needs have
been answered by search results, and while it would be pos-
sible to add such a facility to I-SPY for the purpose of mea-
suring relevance in this trial, many users indicated that they
would ﬁnd this to be a nuisance. For this reason we examine
a less direct measure of relevance.

We propose that the selection of at least one result in a
given search session acts as a crude, but nevertheless useful
indicator of result-list relevance. We refer to a search session,
where at least one result has been selected, as a successful
session. If no results are selected (a failed session) then we
can be relatively conﬁdent that the search engine has not re-
trieved a result that is obviously relevant to the searcher. Note
that we do not distinguish here between sessions with dif-
ferent numbers of selected results, mainly because it is not
possible to conclude much from the frequency of result se-
lections. For example, one might be tempted to conclude that
users selecting more results is a sign of increasing result rele-
vance, except that a similar argument can be made in support
of decreasing result relevance, on the basis that the initial se-
lections must not have satisﬁed the users.

To analyse the ability of collaborative search to deliver suc-
cessful sessions, we split the search sessions into those that
contained promotions (promoted sessions) and those that did
not (standard sessions). The former correspond to sessions
where collaborative search has the potential to inﬂuence rele-
vance, whereas the latter serve as a pure meta-search bench-
mark against which to judge this inﬂuence. Incidentally, there
appears to be no difference between the queries for the pro-
moted sessions when compared to those for standard sessions
and both sets of queries have almost identical distributions;
for example, an average of 2.4 terms per query for the pro-
moted sessions compared to 2.5 for the standard sessions was
measured. Indeed, given enough time it is likely that many
of the standard queries would eventually be paired with new
similar queries and so participate in future promoted sessions.
Figure 5(a) presents the average percentage of success-
ful sessions among the promoted and standard sessions and

275106885461322816810267731010020030001234567891015202530MoreNumber of Promotions Number of Sessions0%25%50%75%100%Cumulative % Sessions850900in other search scenarios, such as mobile Web search, where
screen-space is so restricted as to severely limit the number of
results that may be presented on a single screen. For instance,
on many mobile devices (eg. WAP phones), screen-space is
so restricted that only 3 results can be presented per screen.
The positional advantage enjoyed by I-SPY results suggests
that it has the potential to ensure that relevant results will ap-
pear on the ﬁrst page of such mobile-search results. In fact
99% of the result selections that occur in the promoted ses-
sions are for results in the top 3 of a result-list, compared to
only 79% of the standard session selections. Moreover, 93%
of promoted session selections are for the top result, com-
pared to only 63% of standard session selections.

5 Discussion
The results so far indicate that I-SPY’s collaborative Web
search has the potential to signiﬁcantly improve search per-
formance. Result promotions are made frequently, and when
they are they translate into more successful search sessions
and a better ranking for relevant results. In this section we
brieﬂy consider the number of promotions made during a ses-
sion and the likely success of this session. In our analysis to
date we have noticed that promoted sessions can contain up to
10 or more promoted results; this may be a problem because
too many promotions may swamp result-lists to the detriment
of search performance. In addition, sessions with many pro-
moted results are likely to be caused by the reuse of large
numbers of past search sessions, some of which may be the
result of less reliable query overlaps, which in turn are more
likely to contribute results of limited relevance to the target
query.

One solution that we have adopted recently is to provide
the searcher with a facility to adjust the level of community
personalization that is offered, by manipulating a slider-bar
to increase the number of promoted results that are displayed
(see Figure 6). We are also considering different result-
integration strategies to allow for a more ﬂexible combination
of I-SPY relevance and meta-search result scores.

We are concerned about issues relating to fairness, relia-
bility and security. For example, it should be clear that as it
stands, older results will tend to be preferred over newer re-
sults; the former will have had a greater opportunity to attract
selections. This may cause problems when it comes to the
promotion of very recent results. We are currently looking at
ways to address this issue, for example by using a suitable de-
cay function to gradually erode the selections of older results.
We are also investigating ways to detect false selections by
unreliable searchers as a way to defend against the fraudulent
activities of self-interested parties; see also [O’Mahony et al.,
2002; Smyth et al., In Press].

6 Conclusions
Collaborative Web search is an approach to Web search that
exploits the natural regularity that exists within the search be-
haviours of ad-hoc communities of users.
It espouses the
reuse of search sessions for past queries that are similar to
the current target query, resulting in the active promotion of
those results that have been preferred by the community in

Figure 5: Promoted vs. Standard Sessions: (a) the percentage
of successful sessions; and (b) the mean position of selected
results among successful sessions.

demonstrates a clear advantage for the promoted sessions. On
average, 80% of the promoted sessions were successful, com-
pared to 56% for the standard sessions, a difference that is
signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level. In other words, the
collaborative search result-promotion mechanism leads to a
40% relative improvement in the chances that a given search
will translate into a successful search session.

4.3 Selection Positions
As a complementary measure of result-relevance, it is also
interesting to compare the promoted and standard sessions in
terms of the average position of selected results within suc-
cessful sessions; that is, those sessions in which selections
have been made. We would like to see relevant results appear-
ing higher up in result-lists. Moreover, assuming that users
are likely to select results that at least appear to be more rel-
evant than those that do not, then we would like to minimise
the mean position of a selected result.

Figure 5(b) presents the mean position of the selected re-
sults among the successful sessions of the promoted and stan-
dard sessions. This once again shows a clear advantage for
the former. On average, the mean position of a selected result
among the successful promoted sessions is 1.96, compared to
3.51 for the successful standard sessions. This difference is
statistically signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level and corre-
sponds to a 44% reduction in the position of relevant results
for promoted sessions compared to standard sessions.

It is worth commenting on the importance of this observed
difference in the selection positions. While there is an ad-
vantage due to the promoted sessions, one might ask whether
the observed reduction of one or two places is likely to be
important. We believe that it is, for a number of reasons, not
the least of which is that results should be ordered by their ex-
pected relevance as a matter of course. In addition, users have
a tendency to focus their attention on the top-ranked results.
The fact that promoted sessions have a higher success rate
than the standard sessions is likely due to this difference in the
position of apparently relevant results, because for the most
part I-SPY promotes results from lower-down in the standard
result-lists (returned by Google and HotBot) to higher posi-
tions.

This observed difference may become even more important

01234PromotedSessionsStandardSessionsMean Selection Position00.250.50.751PromotedSessionsStandardSessions% Successful Sessions(a)(b)Development in Information Retrieval, pages 306–313.
ACM Press, 1997.

[Freyne et al., 2004] Jill Freyne, Barry Smyth, Maurice
Coyle, Evelyn Balfe, and Peter Briggs. Further Exper-
iments on Collaborative Ranking in Community-Based
Web Search. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review, 21(3–4):229–
252, 2004.

[Furnas et al., 1987] George W. Furnas, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, Louis M. Gomez, and Susan T. Dumais. The Vocab-
ulary Problem in Human-System Communication. Com-
munications of the ACM, 30(11):964–971, 1987.

[Glance, 2001] Natalie S. Glance. Community Search As-
sistant.
In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces, pages 91–96. ACM Press,
2001.

[Kleinberg, 1999] Jon M. Kleinberg. Authoritative Sources
Journal of the ACM,

in a Hyperlinked Environment.
46(5):604–632, 1999.

[Lawrence and Giles, 1998] Steve Lawrence and C. Lee
Giles. Context and Page Analysis for Improved Web
Search.
IEEE Internet Computing, July-August:38–46,
1998.

[Lawrence, 2000] Steve Lawrence. Context in Web Search.

IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 23(3):25–32, 2000.

[Lyman and Varian, 2003] Peter Lyman

How Much Information.

Varian.
http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/how-much-info-2003
January 14th, 2005, 2003.

and Hal R.
Retrieved from
on

[O’Mahony et al., 2002] Michael O’Mahony, Neil Hurley,
and Guenole C. M. Silvestre. An Attack on Collaborative
Filtering. In Proceedings of the 13th International Confer-
ence on Database and Expert Systems Applications, pages
494–503. Springer-Verlag, 2002.

[Raghavan and Sever, 1995] Vijay V. Raghavan and Hayri
Sever. On the Reuse of Past Optimal Queries. In Proceed-
ings of the 18th Annual International ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pages 344–350. ACM Press, 1995.

[Roush, 2004] Wade Roush. Search Beyond Google. MIT

Technology Review, pages 34–45, 2004.

[Smyth et al., 2003] Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Peter
Briggs, Maurice Coyle, and Jill Freyne. Collaborative Web
Search.
In Proceedings of the 18th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-03, pages
1417–1419. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. Acapulco, Mexico.
Jill
Freyne, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, and Oisin Boydell.
Exploiting Query Repetition & Regularity in an Adaptive
Community-based Web Search Engine. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction: The Journal of Personal-
ization Research, (In Press).

[Smyth et al., In Press] Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe,

[Wen, 2002] Query clustering using user logs. ACM Trans-

actions on Information Systems, 20(1):59–81, 2002.

Figure 6: I-SPY’s promotion slider-bar allows the searcher to
manipulate the degree of community personalization.

the past. In effect, this approach offers a form of anonymous
personalization, thus protecting the privacy of individuals.

In this paper we have presented the results of a signiﬁ-
cant evaluation of the collaborative Web search approach in
a corporate search environment. The results show the clear
beneﬁts that are available: the promotion of results translates
into more successful search sessions and relevant results are
ranked more highly. The evaluation has also helped to clarify
the potential pitfalls of swamping result-lists with too many
promotions. We have found that the best beneﬁts arise from
between 5-8 result promotions indicating the need for a mech-
anism to limit the number of promotions on a session by ses-
sion basis. In response, we have described how I-SPY’s in-
terface has been adapted to include a means for searchers to
interactively control the number of promotions at search time.

References
[Balfe and Smyth, 2005] Evelyn Balfe and Barry Smyth. An
Analysis of Query Similarity in Collaborative Web Search.
In Proceedings of the European Conference on Informa-
tion Retrieval, pages 330–344. Springer-Verlag, 2005.

[Bollmann-Sdorra and Raghavan, 1993] Peter

Bollmann-
Sdorra and Vijay V. Raghavan. On the Delusiveness of
Adopting a Common Space for Modeling IR objects: Are
Queries Documents? Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 44(10):579–587, 1993.

[Brin and Page, 1998] Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. The
Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search En-
gine. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 30(1–
7):107–117, 1998.

[Fitzpatrick and Dent, 1997] Larry Fitzpatrick and Mei
Dent. Automatic Feedback using Past Queries: So-
cial Searching?
In Proceedings of the 20th Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and

By manipulating the I-SPY slider-bar the searcher can choose thenumber of promotions that aredisplayed, thereby setting thedegree of community influencethat Is permitted.Promoted ResultsMeta-Search Results