A Novel Framework for Integrating Discrete Event System Control and Diagnosis 

Gregory Provan* 

Rockwell Scientific Company 

1049 Camino Dos Rios, Thousand Oaks, CA 91360 

1  Towards an Integrated Control/Diagnosis 

Framework 

Diagnosis  of discrete  event  systems  (DES)  is  an  impor(cid:173)
tant task, with several desiderata that include the ability to (1) 
encode both control and diagnosis properties within a single 
representation, and (2) to compose system models from com(cid:173)
ponent models in a simple and efficient manner, e.g., without 
the kind of state explosion that can occur during parallel com(cid:173)
position of component Finite State Machines (FSMs). 

Many formalisms have been proposed for the Model-Based 
Diagnosis  (MBD)  of a  DES,  but  each  has  drawbacks.  The 
representations based on FSMs, e.g.,  [Sampath et al.,  1995], 
have a clear control  semantics but suffer from  incompletely-
specified  diagnostic  semantics  and  state  explosion  during 
model  composition.  MBD  representations,  e.g.,  [Darwiche, 
1998],  have been used to  model  DESs using space-efficient 
compositional  methods  [Darwiche  and  Provan,  1996],  but 
lack well-developed control-theoretic specifications. 

This article proposes a framework based on FSMs that has 
a clear control and diagnostics semantics, yet enables model 
composition  without  state-space  explosions.  We  propose  a 
two-level  modeling  framework,  based  on  a  system  hyper-
graph  H  that  can  serve  as  a  generator  for  MBD  and  FSM 
models.  H  specifies  the  component  causal  relations  using 
the  graphical  framework  described  within  causal  networks 
(CN)  [Darwiche,  1998],  whereby we can clearly specify in(cid:173)
dependence  relations  for system  variables,  and  as  a  conse(cid:173)
quence compose system models with system state spaces lim(cid:173)
ited  through  independence  relations.  Our  representation  is 
not significantly more complex than that of either FSM or CN 
alone, yet is equivalent to both these representations.  We in(cid:173)
troduce to MBD modeling additional requirements for speci(cid:173)
fying control transitions, and to FSM modeling requirements 
on state descriptions and causal independence of components. 

2  A Discrete Event Modeling Framework 

We adopt a representation that  is  a hybrid of two key mod(cid:173)
eling approaches, an MBD approach, Causal Networks (CN) 
[Darwiche,  1998],  and  an  FSM  control/diagnosis  approach 
[Sampath et ai., 1995]. 

*email: gprovan@rwsc.com 

We  propose  a  two-level,  component-based  framework to 
model  complex  discrete  event  systems.'  Our  higher  level 
system representation, termed System Causal Graph (SCG), 
provides a well-defined approach (based on bond graphs) for 
describing the high level component (or sub-system) config(cid:173)
urations  and  the  physical/causal  inter-relations  of the  com(cid:173)
ponents (or  sub-systems).  We  model  the  behaviors of indi(cid:173)
vidual components using a lower level representation, called 
a  Control  Causal  Network  (CCN).  The  CCN  models  can 
be  converted  into  regular Finite  State  Machines  or Proposi-
tional  Logics  for  further analysis  using  FSM-based  discrete 
event system techniques (e.g., supervisory control theory) or 
model-based reasoning techniques (e.g., CN diagnostics), re(cid:173)
spectively  [Provan  and  Chen,  2003].  The  behaviors  of the 
complete  system  are  described  by  (the  composition  of)  the 
individual component models. 
2.1  Component-Based Modeling Approach 
This section describes the CCN framework we adopt for mod(cid:173)
eling the components of a system.  This representation adopts 
the CN graphical structure and diagnostics specifications, and 
encodes  propositional  equations  for each  node  in  the  graph 
based on an extension of FSMs.  To explain our framework, 
we first briefly introduce CNs and FSMs. 

called  a  system  description 

We  adopt  the  CN  model  specification  [Darwiche,  1998], 
which  defines  a  tuple 
where  (a)  P is a  finite set of discrete-valued vari(cid:173)
represents 
ables comprising two  disjoint variable types: 
represents sys(cid:173)
the failure modes of the components, and 
tem  properties other than failure modes;  (b) 
is a directed 
acyclic graph that defines the  causal relations over the vari(cid:173)
is a set of propositional sentences, the do(cid:173)
ables  in 
main axioms, constructed from members in P.  This approach 
has a number of important properties, such as compositional 
modeling based on  the  independence properties specified  in 
then the system 
behavior is  specified  simply  by  the  union  of the  component 
equations, i.e., 
[Darwiche,  1998],  Specifications 
of, and algorithms for computing a diagnosis, minimal diag(cid:173)
nosis, etc., are all well-defined [Darwiche, 1998]. 

if  component  has behavior equations 

An  FSM  is  defined as  G  = 

state space, 

is  the  set  of events, 

where 

is the 
is  the  partial  transi-

'Our approach can be easily expanded into a multi-level nested 

hierarchical structure to accommodate more complex systems. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1341 

(and defines  the  transitions 
tion  function 
between  states  in 
is  the  initial  state  of the  sys(cid:173)
tem.  This framework has been extended for failure diagnosis 
through the use of unobservable failure transitions and auto-
construction of an observer 

[Sampath et al., 1995 ]. 

and 

a graph, and 

the initial state, 

the  marked states, 

using a control causal  network 

In  our  hybrid  representation,  we  model  each  component 
consisting  of a  tuple 
where  P  is  the  set  of 
is  the  event set,  Q  the  state  set,  T  the set of 

parameters, 
guards (or  pre-conditions),   
the initial value 
the transition function, 
of  parameters, 
a 
set  of propositional  equations.2  Parameters  in  the  parame(cid:173)
ter  set  P  are  discrete-valued,  and  guards 
are pred(cid:173)
icates  on  the  parameters  in  P.  We  can  view 
as  a  set  of 
transitions.  An  equation  describing  transition 
de(cid:173)
can be  interpreted as  follows:  If 
noted 
at state q the guard 
occurs, then 
and the parameters at  will  be  updated 
the next state is 
the actions of the tran(cid:173)
We call the functions 
to 
sition 
The  set  of all  sequences  of event  labels  (traces)  of 
a CCN given initial parameter setting p Q  is the language L it 
generates.  We have shown in  [Provan and Chen, 2003] that 
this  representation possesses the control-theoretic properties 
of the finite state machine with parameters representation, and 
is based on standard propositional logic with well-known se(cid:173)
mantics. 

is true and the event 

is a directed graph whose nodes  in  

2.2  System  Causal  G r a ph 
An  SCG 
represent the components of the  system and whose edges in 
denote the causal relations between the compo(cid:173)
is associated with a CCN component 

nents.  A node 
model  Au  which represents the component's behaviors. 

has properties similar to  those  of the 
The SCG's graph 
graph  G  of a CCN. 
must  preserve  a  number  of control 
and simulation/diagnostics properties.3  As an example, in or(cid:173)
der to prevent possible ambiguity and direct circularity in the 
causal  semantics,  we assume that the system represented in 
an SCG should be structured such that any component in the 
SCG may not be both the (direct) predecessor and the (direct) 
successor of the same component in the SCG. 

3  Properties of Integrated Representation 
In the full paper [Provan and Chen, 2003 J, we prove a num(cid:173)
ber of important properties of the SCG. One key property in(cid:173)
volves the sound FSM and CN models that can be generated, 
where by sound we mean that the model obeys the syntactic 
and semantic requirements of the (FSM or CN) representation 
in question: 

2The definition is a discrete-parameter restriction of Finite State 
Machines with Parameters [Chen and Lin, 2000], such that we use 
a logical representation for state transitions.  Our representation ex(cid:173)
tends the representation and control semantics of the causal network 
models defined in [Darwiche and Provan,  1996] by adding an ex(cid:173)
plicit transition framework for each CN sentence in  

3The full paper, [Provan and Chen, 2003], discusses 

and its 

properties in detail. 

Lemma  1  Mapping an  SCG  into  an  FSM  (CN) produces  a 
sound system-level FSM (CN),  respectively. 

To show the CN model created by the above procedure is 
equivalent to the FSM model, we show that they generate the 
same language. 
Theorem 1  Given an FSM G and a  CN model  generated 
from  an  SCG  with 
initial  state-settingthe  FSM  and 
CN languages are equal, i.e.,  

From a control perspective, this means that the FSM  and 
CN  possess the  same control properties,  e.g.,  livencss,  cor(cid:173)
rectness, etc.  From a plant modeling perspective, we can use 
the logical representation of the SCG to validate a plant model 
using a theorem prover. 

In  addition,  [Provan  and  Chen,  2003]  shows  the  equiva(cid:173)
lence of diagnostic capabilities of the generated models.  We 
assume that, to perform fault isolation, for the FSM (CN) ap(cid:173)
proach we use a diagnoser 
respectively. 
Theorem 2 If we map an SCG into a FSM G and a CN model 
then:  (a)  Given observation set  G is diagnosable (i.e., 
is diagnosable;  (b)  Given 
the set of diagnoses for G is equivalent to 

we can isolate failure events) iff 
observation set 
the set of diagnoses for  

(CN model 

This result means that we can now establish equivalent di(cid:173)
agnostic capabilities between an FSM and a CN representa(cid:173)
tion,  if they  can  be  encoded by  the  same  SCG.  Hence,  the 
important MBD properties, e.g., completeness and soundness 
of diagnostics given a model 
can be inherited by an appro(cid:173)
priate FSM model. 

In  summary,  these  properties  indicate  that  this  approach 
acquires  the  control  semantics  of FSMs,  and  the  diagnos(cid:173)
tic  semantics  of CNs.  On  the  practical  side,  although  we 
can generate and use algorithms for either FSM or CN mod(cid:173)
els,  further research is  necessary to  identify the  model type 
most  appropriate  to  a  particular  class  of applications,  since 
model/algorithm efficiency is domain-dependent. In addition, 
we  need  to  analyze  the  tradeoffs  associated  with  the  extra 
modeling requirements of the SCG graphical framework ver(cid:173)
sus  the  linear (rather than  worst-case  exponential,  as  in  an 
FSM) growth associated with system model composition. 

References 
[Darwiche and Provan, 1996]  A. Darwiche and G. Provan, Exploit(cid:173)
ing system structure in model-based diagnosis of discrete event 
systems. In Proc. 7th Intl. Workshop on Principles of Diagnosis, 
pages 95-105  1996. 

[Darwiche, 1998]  Adnan Darwiche.  Model-based diagnosis using 
structured system descriptions. Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
Research, 8:165-222 1998. 

[Chen and Lin, 2000] Y.-L. Chen and F. Lin. Modeling of Discrete 
Event Systems using Finite State Machines with Parameters.  In 
Proc. IEEE Confon Control Applications, pages 941-946, An(cid:173)
chorage, AK, September 2000. 

[Provan and Chen, 2003] G. Provan and Y-L. Chen. A general mod(cid:173)
eling framework for model-based reasoning and discrete event 
systems analysis. Technical Report SCTR-03-21, Rockwell Sci(cid:173)
entific Company, March 2003. 

[Sampath et al., 1995]  M.  Sampath,  R.  Sangupta,  S.  Lafortune, 
K.  Sinnamohideen,  and  D.  Teneketzis.  Diagnosibility  of dis(cid:173)
crete event systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 
40(9): 1555-1575, September 1995. 

1342 

POSTER  PAPERS 

