Prolegomenon to a Theory of Conservative Belief Revision 

James P. Delgrande 

School of Computing Science 

Simon Fraser University 

Abhaya C. Nayak 

Department of Computing 

Maurice Pagnucco* 

School  of CSE 

Macquarie  University  The  University  of  New  South  Wales 

Burnaby, B.C., CANADA, V5A  1S6  NSW 2109, AUSTRALIA 

NSW, 2052, AUSTRALIA 

j 

im@cs.sfu.ca 

abhaya@ics.mq.edu.au 

morri@cse.unsw.edu.au 

Abstract 

A  standard  intuition  underlying  traditional  ac(cid:173)
counts of belief change is the principle of minimal 
change.  In this paper we introduce a novel account 
of belief change in which the agent's belief state is 
modified minimally to incorporate exactly the new 
information. Thus a revision by p V q will result in 
a new belief state in which p V q is believed, but a 
stronger proposition (such as p A q) is not, regard(cid:173)
less of the initial  form of the belief state. 

A reasoning entity will need to maintain its stock of beliefs 
in the face of new information.  Such belief change is not ar(cid:173)
bitrary;  rather belief change  is  generally  taken  to be  guided 
by  various  rationality criteria.  One  of the  most widely  advo(cid:173)
cated rationality criterion is the principle of minimal change: 
that a belief state is modified minimally to incorporate new in(cid:173)
formation [Makinson,  1993].  Perhaps the most evident way 
in which a change in belief can be said to be minimal  is in 
terms  of standard  constructions  such  as  systems  of spheres 
LGrove, 1988] i.e., orderings of possible worlds. 

In this paper we introduce an account of belief change that 
is  orthogonal  to  the  notion  of revision  in  which  "minimal 
change"  is  taken  with  respect  to  the  new  information.  We 
examine an account of belief change in which all we wish to 
accept is the new information itself—no more, no less.  This 
is reminiscent of the Gricean principle of Conversational Im-
plicature, that in interpreting a speaker we should assume that 
the speaker means no more, and no less, than what she says. 
Our approach ensures that, in a sense to be specified, exactly 
the sentence accepted as evidence is incorporated. It proves to 
be the case that a modified knowledge base is a conservative 
extension  (see  Section  2)  of the  sentence  for belief change; 
consequently we term this conservative belief change. 
1  Motivation and Examples 
The  following  example  illustrates  the  traditional  account  of 
integrating new information, in accord with minimal change. 
Example 1.1  (Exclusive disjunctive update)  Leslie 
and 
Robin  are  two  students  who  share  an  apartment  above 
your's.  While they get along,  they are independent and have 

"Also affiliated with National ICT Australia and the ARC Centre 

of Excellence in Autonomous Systems. 

their  own  circles  of  friends.  You  initially  believe  that  for 
the upcoming weekend neither will be in  the apartment,  say 
However, come the weekend you hear muted 
but  unmistakable  sounds  of domestic  activity.  You  modify 
your  beliefs  minimally  to  account for  this  new  information, 
and consequently you conclude just that one of them has not 
gone away for the weekend, i.e.  
To be sure, this result is not dictated by the standard postu(cid:173)
lates but  it  seems to be the  most plausible minimal  change, 
given  the  information available;  as  well,  this  phenomenon 
recurs  in  the  standard  distance-based  approaches  to  update 
(e.g., [Winslett, 1990]), as well as in the belief revision coun(cid:173)
terparts.  The next example illustrates that these results aren't 
necessarily desirable all the time. 
Example 1.2 (Inclusive disjunctive update)  There  are  two 
rooms in a warehouse, on the left and on the right.  Let I and r 
denote the fact that the respective rooms are not empty. There 
are a number of boxes outside the warehouse but the rooms 
are initially empty, and so 
It subsequently be-
gins to rain, and the boxes are moved inside.  One concludes 
just that the rooms are not empty, i.e.  
This  example  apparently  violates  the  principle  of  minimal 
change. As well it conflicts with the aforecited distance-based 
approaches, which dictate that the result be 
that all 
the boxes are in one room or the other. 

The idea here is that for a revision (or update) by a formula 
exactly 
is  to be  incorporated into the knowledge base. 
Consider  K  *  (pV  q).  If the  idea  is  that  all  we  know  about 
p and q is that p V q is true, then we would want the possible 
combinations of truth  values  {p,  q},  
to 
and 
be considered possible, and so be consistent with 
This sense  is reminiscent of Gricean conversational implica-
ture [Grice,  1975] wherein a speaker is required to be max(cid:173)
imally  informative.  Thus  if a  listener  is  told  that p  V  q  is 
true, then the communicator does not know which of p, q are 
true;  if they did,  they would have conveyed the  stronger in(cid:173)
formation to the  listener.  A  similar notion has been studied 
by Levesque, and Lakemeyer and Levesque (see [Lakemeyer 
and Levesque, 2000]) dealing with "only-knowing" or "only-
knowing about".  These  concepts arise  in autoepistemic de(cid:173)
fault reasoning where one may want to assert that all an agent 

<---> is material biconditional and = is logical equivalence. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1391 

is 

knows is  or all that an agent knows about 
Techni(cid:173)
cally in our approach this will amount to the result of a belief 
change being a conservative extension (Section 2) of the for(cid:173)
mula to be incorporated in the knowledge base. 
2  Preliminaries 
over  a 
We  consider  a  finitary  propositional  language 
{a,6, c,...}, 
set  of  atoms,  or  propositional  letters,  P  = 
and truth-
truth-functional  connectives 
and 
functional  constants  T  and 
Interpretations and  models 
are  defined  in  the  standard  way;  M  is  the  set  of interpreta(cid:173)
tions  of 
denotes  the  set  of models  of sentence 
the  subscript  may  be  dropped  if the 
the lan(cid:173)
is expressed, as comprising the minimum 
(see [Parikh, 1999]). Thus 
This extends to sets of sen(cid:173)
then 

language is clear.  For 
guage in which 
set of atoms required to express 

tences  in the obvious way.  It follows that  if 

we  will  define 

over  language 

and  if 

then 

 

We will make use of the notion of a conservative extension 

of one set of sentences by another. 
Definition 2.1 For sets of sentences 
that  T'2  is  a  conservative  extension  of  T1  iff  for  every   

we have 

then  

Intuitively T2  is a conservative extension of T1 iff T2 extends 
Y\  but tells  us nothing more about sentences that are  in the 
language of T1. T2 may entail sentences in its extended lan(cid:173)
guage of course but as far as the language which it shares with 
T1 is concerned, it says no more than T1 

A common approach in addressing belief revision has been 
to  provide  a  set  of rationality postulates  for  belief  change 
functions.  The AGM approach  [Gardenfors,  1988]  provides 
the best-known set of such postulates. The goal is to describe 
belief change  at the  knowledge  level,  that  is  on  an  abstract 
level, independent of how beliefs are represented and manip(cid:173)
ulated. Belief states are modelled by sets of sentences, called 
belief sets, closed under logical consequence. K can be seen 
as a partial theory of the world.  For belief set K and formula 
the expan(cid:173)
Expansion is intended to be applied when 
is the 

sion  of  K  by 
new information is consistent with current beliefs. 
inconsistent belief set  

is  the deductive closure  of 

In  belief revision,  the  new  information  may  be  inconsis(cid:173)
tent with the reasoner's beliefs and needs to be incorporated 
in a consistent manner where possible. 
See  [Gardenfors, 
1988] for the revision postulates.  We will make reference to 
Grove's  use of a system of spheres (SOS) model  for charac(cid:173)
terizing  AGM  revision  [Grove,  1988].  A  system  of  spheres 
centred on  X  is  a total,  well-founded preorder on the set of 
in  £  such  that  for  x 
M  we  have 
interpretations, 
that:  x 
y  for all  y  M.  (That  is,  X  is  the 
least  set of worlds  in  the  preorder.)  We  will  often omit the 
subscript from 
for readability.  Revision is defined for 

X  iff  x 

by 

denotes the minimal models under 

where  min 
Grove shows that for every belief revision operator satisfying 
the AGM postulates there is a system of spheres characteris(cid:173)
ing that operator, and vice versa. 

(1) 

So for 

3  Conservative Belief Revision 
to  denote  the  type  of  belief  revision  described 
We use 
in  Section  1,  called  "conservative  belief revision"  or  "C-
revision."  The idea we wish to capture is that,  for 
is  exactly  what  will  be  believed  in  the  resulting  knowledge 
base,  relative  to  the  "subject  matter"  or  "context"  implicit 
the idea is that (P V  q ) Ar 
constrains the truth values of the  atoms  in  {p, q, r},  and that 
exactly 
will be known about these atoms in the re(cid:173)
sulting knowledge base. In particular, strengthenings of p V q, 
such as p or 
will not be true in the resulting knowl(cid:173)
edge base.  This will  be the case even when  K  implies p or 
hence  a  revision  may  in  fact  yield  a  weakening 
of the knowledge base.  This restriction does not necessarily 
hold for the sentences not in  

The semantic intuition behind our proposal is easily visu(cid:173)
alised. In Figure 1 we consider a revision where the underly(cid:173)
ing language is generated from atoms x, y and z.  The agent 
believes 
and encounters  e v i d e n c e A c c o r d(cid:173)  
ingly the models are partitioned into four cells corresponding 
to the interpretations over 
The best worlds from 
each of the three cells satisfying 
are chosen to rep(cid:173)
resent the revised knowledge base. Clearly, the belief content 
of the new knowledge base  modulo 
will be ex(cid:173)
Beliefs regarding  will depend on extralogical 
actly 
factors, namely the plausibility of different worlds. 

Figure  1:  Conservative Revision - Semantics 

Now, in determining C-revision, we consider the plausibility 
of different worlds represented in Figure  1  by the concentric 
"rings".  The worlds that are more centrally located are more 
plausible.  Accordingly, from the 
is selected, whereas worlds 
are selected 
from the cells 
respectively.  Since some of 
these selected worlds satisfy z and some 
under this plau(cid:173)
sibility ordering the belief z  is lost.  In fact,  the new beliefs 
regarding z can be captured by the beliefs x 
that are retained from the old knowledge base.  

cell, the world  

z and 

and 

and 

We  can  formalize  this  analogously  to  Grove's  system  of 
spheres model  for characterizing AGM  revision.  Given (1), 
we have the analogous definition for C-revision: 

The overall result is captured by the following theorem: 

1392 

POSTER PAPERS 

Theorem 3.1  For  any  belief set  K  and  input sentence   

is  a  conservative extension  of 

i.e.,  for   

We obtain the following elementary results. 
Theorem 3.2 

This gives rise to the question of whether a specific C-revision 
function can be captured using the standard definition of re(cid:173)
vision (1) in some suitably-constructed system of spheres.  In 
general  the  answer is  negative;  for  a  counterexample,  con(cid:173)
sider where 
and we are given a C-revision  func(cid:173)
tion such that 
This entails the following constraints on the ordering: 

and in which 

However, as is easily verified in this case, 
This however cannot be obtained by standard revision given 
the above constraints on the ordering, since it would require 

at the same level. 

While  a  given  system  of spheres  determines  a  unique  C-
revision (as constructed by (2)), the converse in general does 
not hold.  The following example demonstrates this. 

represent an identical subsequence.  The C-revision based on 
these  SOS's  (using  Definition  2)  exhibit  identical behaviour 
since  no  cell  of any partition  based  on  a  sub-language  of 
{x, y,  z}  will pick  up  exactly the set  
Thus  we  notice  an  asymmetry  between  the  classical  AGM 
account of belief revision and  C-revision.  An  AGM  revision 
operation  *,  given  a  fixed  belief set  K,  determines  a  unique 
system  of spheres.  On  the  other hand,  the  C-revision  oper(cid:173)
ation,  given  a  fixed  belief set  A',  corresponds to  a  class  of 
systems of spheres.  It is of interest to characterise the class of 
systems of spheres that a given C-revision operation 
deter(cid:173)
mines.  However, we leave this to future work. 

We consider next those postulates satisfied by C-revision. 
be 

Theorem  3.3  Let  K  be  a  belief  set, 
and  let 
defined  via  (2),  then  *  satisfies  the  following  properties: 

The  numbering  is  intended  to  reflect  correspondences  with 
the AGM  revision postulates.  Postulate 
is  new and 
states that 
Since C-
revision behaves the same as (standard, AGM-style) revision 
if the formulas involved in a revision are equivalent to sets of 
literals, AGM postulates 7 and 8 hold in C-revision  if   and 

is a conservative extension  of 

are equivalent to conjunctions of literals. 
There are counterexamples to other AGM postulates. 

4  Conclusion 
We have outlined a  theory of conservative belief change and 
presented an analysis of its properties. The main intuitive mo(cid:173)
tivation for this work stems from an attempt to make the most 
of the information presented by new evidence that a reasoner 
acquires.  As such, our approach focuses much more on the 
content  of the  new  evidence.  Our  current  analysis  suggests 
that the operator we introduced based on these intuitions pos(cid:173)
sesses some interesting and appealing properties. 

update, for a C-revision, 

With respect to semantics, the distinction between standard 
AGM revision and C-revision is very much analogous to the 
distinction between revision and  update, and in  fact the two 
distinctions may be seen as duals of each other. For an (AGM) 
we  consider the  set of all  models of  K,  and 
revision, 
revise by selecting the closest models  of 
to that set.  For an 
we consider instead each model of A' individ(cid:173)
update, 
ually, and for each model of A'  look for the closest models of 
the update is the union of all  such models.  Analogous to 
we consider each model  of   
and revise A' by this model; the C-revision is the 
union of all such models.  In a similar way in which we moti(cid:173)
vate C-revision from standard revision, we can define a notion 
of C-update  from  standard update.  This  duality between  C-
and standard belief change on the one hand, and between re(cid:173)
vision and update on the other, completes a classification of 
belief change  operators,  in  terms  of whether  the  models  of 
a knowledge  base  or  formula  for change  are  considered  en 
masse, or individually.  It is also relatively straightforward to 
define  syntax-dependent versions  of both  C-revision  and  C-
update.  Also  we can  look  at C-contraction operations (both 
syntax-independent  and  dependent  versions).  However  we 
leave this to future work. 

References 
[Gardenfors,  1988]  P. Gardenfors. Knowledge in Flux: Mod-
eling the Dynamics of Epistemic States. MIT Press, 1988. 
[Grice, 1975]  H. P. Grice. Logic and Conversation. In Syntax 

and Semantics 3: Speech Acts.  Academic Press,  1975. 

[Grove,  1988]  A. Grove.  Two modellings for theory change. 

Journal  of  Philosophical  Logic,  17:157-170,1988. 

[Lakemeyer and Levesque, 2000]  G.  Lakemeyer  and  H.J. 

Levesque. Logic of Knowledge Bases. MIT Press, 2000. 

[Makinson,  1993]  D.  Makinson.  Five  faces  of minimality. 

Stadia Logica,  52:339-379,1993. 

[Parikh, 1999]  R. Parikh.  Beliefs, belief revision, and split(cid:173)
In  L.S.  Moss,  J.  Ginzburg,  and  M.  de 
ting  languages. 
Rijke,  editors, Logic,  Language and Computation,  Vol //, 
pages 266-278. CSLI Publications, 1999. 

[Winslett,  1990]  M.  Winslett.  Updating Logical Databases. 

Cambridge University Press,  1990. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1393 

