Extending DTGOLOG with Options4 

A. Ferrein, Ch. Fritz,  and  G. Lakemeyer 

Department of Computer Science 

RWTH Aachen 

{ferrein, fritz, gerhard}@cs.rwth-aachen.de 

Introduction 

1 
Recently  Boutilier et al.  (2000) proposed the  language  DT-
G O L OG  which  combines explicit agent programming with 
decision theory.  The motivation is that a user often has some 
idea about how to go about solving a particular problem yet at 
the same time does not want to or cannot commit in advance 
to an exact course of action.  Instead, certain choices are left 
to the agent running the program and determining an optimal 
action  selection  policy  involves  solving  a  Markov  Decision 
Process (MDP) [Puterman,  1994].  In a sense, a D T G O L OG 
program can be thought of as a factored representation of an 
MDP. As an example, Boutilier et al. consider a mail-delivery 
scenario where the task of delivering mail to a particular per(cid:173)
son is hand-coded and fixed, while the agent chooses the or(cid:173)
der in which the various people are served according to some 
reward function.  They note that this approach allows solving 
problems which are much larger than those solvable using the 
traditional dynamic-programming approach for MDPs. 

Nevertheless,  it  is  not  very  difficult  to  find  examples 
where  DTGOLOG  also  shows poor computational behavior. 
Roughly,  the  complexity  is  determined  by  the  number  of 
choices the agent needs to  consider when computing a pol(cid:173)
icy and  the  number of actions  with  uncertain outcomes (na(cid:173)
ture's  choices)  that  need  to  be  considered  along  the  way. 
To better control this potential blow-up we were inspired by 
work  on  so-called  macro  actions  or  options  previously  de(cid:173)
veloped  in  the  MDP  framework  [Hauskrecht  et  al,  1998; 
Sutton  et  al.,  1999].  The  idea  is  that  the  policies  for  cer(cid:173)
tain subtasks like leaving a room are pre-computed and then 
simply used when working on the global policy. 

This  is,  roughly,  what  we  propose:  for  a  given  domain 
identify  subtasks  and compute  local  policies  using  standard 
MDP  techniques  like  value  iteration.  From  those  local 
policies  generate  two  representations:  (1)  a  (deterministic) 
DTGOLOG  program  directly  encoding  the  local  policy  in 
terms  of what  action  to  take  while  the  local  policy  is  ap(cid:173)
plicable  and  (2)  so-called abstract stochastic  actions  which 
only address the expected outcome of a local policy.  It turns 
out that,  while both representations can be used to compute 
a  global  policy,  the  use  of abstract  stochastic  actions  may 
result  in  an  exponential  speed-up.— In  the  next section  we 

*This work was partly supported by the German Science Foun(cid:173)
dation (DFG), Grant No. LA 747/9-1, and a grant by the NRW Min(cid:173)
istry of Education and Research (MSWF). 

briefly introduce MDPs and DTGOLOG.  Section 3 describes 
options in more detail and how to map them into DTGOLOG. 
We end with a discussion of experimental results. 
2  Decision Theory and GOLOG 
A  fully  observable  MDP  is  represented  as  a  tuple  M  = 
where S is a finite set of states, A is a finite set 

of actions, Pr is a probability distribution 
[0,1]  (Pr(s j|A,  s i)  denotes the  probability of the  agent end(cid:173)
ing up  in  state  Sj  after performing action  A  in  state  s t,  and 
is  a bounded reward  function.  The objective 
is then to construct a policy 
that maximizes  the 
expected total reward over some horizon. A simple algorithm 
for constructing optimal policies  is value  iteration (cf.  [Put(cid:173)
erman, 1994]). 

DTGOLOG  [Boutilier  et  al,  2000]  can  be  thought  of, 
roughly,  as  a  programming  language  which  allows  a  user 
to  combine pre-defined  primitive  actions  into  complex  pro(cid:173)
grams using the usual constructs like sequence, if-then-else, 
while, and recursive procedures. In addition there are nonde-
terministic actions to model  that an agent can choose among 
alternatives.  The  semantics  is based on the  situation calcu(cid:173)
lus and, in particular, the so-called basic action theories de(cid:173)
scribed  in  [Reiter,  2001],  which  define  when  primitive  ac(cid:173)
tions are executable and how they change and do not change 
what is true in the world.  As a special  form of primitive ac(cid:173)
tion  DTGOLOG  allows  so-called  stochastic  actions,  which 
have probabilistic outcomes, just as  in MDPs.  For example, 
it  is possible  to  define an  action  r  (move to  the right),  after 
which a robot has moved one step to the right with probabil(cid:173)
ity 0.9, but has moved to the left, up, or down with probability 
0.1. MDP-style reward and cost functions are incorporated as 
well.  Given a DTGOLOG program, the idea is then to com(cid:173)
pute a policy in  the sense  that each  nondeterministic choice 
is resolved in a decision theoretic manner, that is, by choos(cid:173)
ing the action with maximal expected reward. Assuming that 
there are not too many nondeterministic or stochastic actions, 
a policy can be computed even in cases where an MDP repre(cid:173)
sentation seems infeasible due to the size of the state space. 
3  Mapping Options into DTGOLOG 
As  in  [Sutton  et  al.,  1999],  we  define  options  as  triples 
is a policy, and 
is the  set of terminating states.  To  illustrate  options con(cid:173)
sider the example in Figure  1  from [Hauskrecht et al,  1998]. 

where  I  is the set of initial states, 

1394 

POSTER PAPERS 

Figure 1: Mazc66 from [Hauskrecht et al, 1998]. 

The task  is to  find  an  optimal  policy to  get from position  S 
to position G.  Performing an action has cost  1, the goal po(cid:173)
sition has a high positive reward.  The agent can perform the 
stochastic  basic  or primitive  actions  r,l,u,d  succeeding  with 
probability 0.9.  With probability 0.1  it will be in any other ad(cid:173)
jacent position.  For each room options arc defined to leave the 
room through a certain door (one for each room/door combi(cid:173)
nation). The gray dots correspond to the termination positions 
of these options. For the left lower room in Figure 1 there are 
two options OE and  ON  (leave through the east or north door, 
and 
respectively) with  IE  = 
=  {(2,4), (4,2)},  and  similarly  for  O N.  (In  order  to 
as success and (2,4) as failure, they are 

mark state (4,2) in 
assigned positive and negative reward, respectively.) 

Applying  standard  value  iteration  techniques,  the  follow(cid:173)

ing can be computed for an option O: 

1. the optimal policy 

that is, the most appropriate action 

Ai  for each st 

2. for each st 

J; 

I  and  Sj 

the probability to terminate 

the option with the outcome SJ  when starting in si 
These results can now be translated into a form suitable for 
{s1,...,  sn),  suppose that each  st 
DTGOLOG.  Given  I  = 
can be uniquely characterized by a logical formula 
(In our 
example, <pi simply expresses the coordinates of the location 
of .s\.)  Then the  policy 
can be translated in a straightfor(cid:173)
ward fashion into the following DTGOLOG program: 

where 
and  senseState(O)  is a so-called sens(cid:173)
ing action.  Roughly, executing senseState(O)  establishes 
the  truth  values  of the 
so  that  they  can  be  tested  in  the 
following  while  and  if conditions.  (The  sensing  actions  are 
necessary to account for the MDP assumption of full observ(cid:173)
ability.)  All  in  all,  the  program  simply  prescribes  that  the 
optimal action (according to 
) should be executed as long as 
the agent is in one of the initial states of O. 

Given  (2.)  above  we  can  also  generate  for each  st 

I 
an  abstract  stochastic  action  o(si).  For  example,  for  the 
option  OE  and  state  s1  =  (2,2)  we  would  define  an  ab(cid:173)
stract  stochastic  action 
and 
for leaving through the east or north door, respec(cid:173)
tively, together with the probabilities of these actually occur(cid:173)
ring as computed in (2.) 
=  0.99898, 

with  nature's  choices 

Just as options in the MDP  framework  can be treated like 
primitive actions in MDPs that use these options, the transla(cid:173)
tion into abstract stochastic actions in the DTGOLOG  frame-
work  has  the  same  effect,  that  is,  we  can  now  write  DT(cid:173)
GOLOG programs treating abstract stochastic actions just like 
any other primitive actions.  A global policy computed by DT(cid:173)
GOLOG for such a program usually mentions abstract actions. 
These are not readily executable (leaving a room through the 

east door is not a primitive action).  Hence, in a final step we 
need to replace the abstract actions by the programs which we 
derived above. 
4  Experimental results 
Using our running example we conducted a number of exper(cid:173)
iments,  the goal  being at different distances from the  initial 
position (Fig.l  shows the special case of distance 8).  The re(cid:173)
sults are given in Figure 2.  The x-axis depicts the initial dis(cid:173)
tance to the goal, the y-axis the running time.  We compared 
three different approaches:  (A) calculating the optimal policy 
in  DTGOLOG  nondeterministically  choosing  only  from  the 
primitive actions, (B) using a set of procedures like the one in 
the previous section for leaving each room towards a certain 
neighboring  room,  choosing  from  primitive  actions  only  in 
the goal room, and (C)  using options in the  form of abstract 
stochastic actions, choosing from primitive actions only in the 
goal room. 

Figure 2: Runtimes of the three test programs in the maze. 
Note that the y-axis of the diagram has a logarithmic scale. 
The  speed-up  from  (A)  to  (B)  shows  the  benefit using  DT(cid:173)
GOLOG to constrain the search space by providing fixed pro(cid:173)
grams  for certain  subtasks.  Interestingly,  (C),  that is,  using 
abstract actions, clearly outperforms (B). Roughly, this is be(cid:173)
cause  each  abstract action  has  only two  outcomes,  whereas 
the corresponding program provides a very fine-grained view 
with a huge number of outcomes that need to be considered. 
Taking  the  time  of calculation  of all  options  into  account 
(here:  10.51  seconds) the use of options pays off at horizons 
greater than 5.  Also, calculating options can be done off-line 
and can be neglected in case of frequent reuse. 

We  remark  that  while  method  (A)  guarantees  optimality, 
this  is not necessarily  so  for (B)  ana  (C),  for essentially  the 
same  reasons  as  in  [Hauskrecht  et  ai,  1998].  Certainly  in 
the  case  of (C),  this  price  seems  worth  the  computational 
gain.  Finally,  while we  currently assume  options  as  given, 
Hauskrecht  et  al.  (1998)  discuss  ways  of  automatically 
generating options with good solution qualities, an issue we 
intend to investigate in the future as well. 
References 
[Boutilier et al, 2000]  C. Boutilier, R. Reiter, M. Soutchanski, and 
S. Thrun.  Decision-theoretic, high-level agent programming in 
the situation calculus. In Proc. AAAI-2000, 2000. 

[Hauskrecht et al., 1998]  M.  Hauskrecht,  N.  Meuleau,  L.  Kael-
bling, T. Dean, and C. Boutilier. Hierarchical solutions of MDPs 
using macro-actions. In Proc. UAI98, 1998. 

[Puterman, 1994] M. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Dis(cid:173)

crete Dynamic Programming. Wiley, New York, 1994. 

[Reiter, 2001]  R. Reiter. Knowledge in Action. MIT Press, 2001. 
[Sutton et al., 1999]  R. Sutton, D. Precup, and S. Singh.  Between 
MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework for temporal abstraction in 
reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence, 1999. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1395 

