Constructing utility models from observed negotiation actions 

Angelo Restificar 

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 

Milwaukee, WI 53211 USA 
angelo@cs.uwm.edu 

Peter Haddawy 

Asian Institute of Technology 
Pathumthani, Thailand 12120 

haddawy@ait.ac.th 

Abstract 

We propose a  novel method for constructing util(cid:173)
ity  models  by  learning  from  observed  negotiation 
actions. 
In  particular,  we  show  how  offers  and 
counter-offers  in  negotiation  can  be  transformed 
into gamble questions providing the basis  for elic(cid:173)
iting  utility  functions.  Results  of experiments and 
evaluation are briefly described. 

Introduction 

1 
Utility functions encode an agent's preference and risk  taking 
behavior,  and  in  many  negotiation  scenarios  they  are  often 
considered private information.  Although various elicitation 
techniques for decision  makers have been  widely  used  (see 
for example [Keeney and Raiffa,  1976]), they are not readily 
applicable in the negotiation scenario. For example, an agent 
can not ask the the opposing party lottery questions to assess 
its utility function.  The use of learning mechanisms in nego(cid:173)
tiation has been investigated in several recent studies, see for 
example [Bui et al.,  1999; Zeng and Sycara,  1998], and has 
been shown to be an effective tool in handling uncertainty and 
incompleteness.  None of the previous studies, however, have 
directly  addressed  the  issue  of utility  elicitation. 
In  many 
cases, value functions and utilities are assumed to be partially 
or completely known as shown in their experiments and eval(cid:173)
uation.  In  this  work,  we  assume  that each party's utility  is 
completely unknown to  the  other and no trusted third party 
exists.  We  describe  how  information provided by observed 
negotiation actions can be used to construct the utility model 
of an agent. 

An  important  tool  in  eliciting  utility  functions  is  the  use 
of lottery  or  gamble  questions  and  the  concept  of certainty 
equivalence.  Let  D  be  a  domain,  U  be  a  utility  function 
over D, and let o2  and Oj  be outcomes in a gamble G where 
o,  occurs  with  a  probability p,  O 2  occurs  with  a  probabil(cid:173)
ity  (1  -  p),  and 
A  certainty  equivalent  is  an 
amount  x  such  that  the  decision  maker  (DM)  is  indifferent 

of utility  functions,  our  approach  attempts  to  build  a  utility 
model by observing negotiation actions. 

A conflict occurs when both parties do not reach an agree(cid:173)
ment.  The  probability  that  a  party  would  risk  a  conflict  is 
proportional to the  difference between  what the party  wants 
and what it is offered.  The closer the other party's offer is to 
what  is desired,  the smaller this probability should be.  The 
farther away  the  other party's  offer  is  from  what  is  desired, 
the larger the readiness to risk a fight or conflict. 
Definition 1  Let  UB  and Us  be B 's (buyer) and S 's (seller) 
utility function,  respectively.  Let  XB  be  B 's position  and  xs 
be  S's position.  The probability  that  B  will  risk  a  conflict, 
PB.  and  the probability  that  S  will  risk  a  conflict,  ps,  are 
defined  as follows: 

(1) 

(2) 

By  computing the expected  utility,  B  can  decide whether 
to accept S"s offer or insist its own position.  In particular, B 
counter-offers XB  whenever the  gamble  has  a  utility  higher 
than  xsJ.e., 
(conflict). 
B  accepts xs  if for B  the expected utility  of the  gamble  (1  -
.  If the 
utility  of a  non-agreement  (conflict)  is  higher  than  xS  then 
the offer is rejected. 

(conflict) can not exceed 

Without losing generality we will assume that  U B  is mono-
tonicallv  decreasing  while  Us  is  monotonically  increasing. 
The following theoretical results allow us to generate training 
instances implied by a counter-offer. 
Theorem  1  Let XB  beB 's counter-offer and xs  be S 's offer 
(conflict)  and 
Furthermore,  let G  = 
let 
UB(XS)) 
then for any nondegenerate G,  
Theorem 2  (Inferior Offers)  Let  XB  be  B'S  counter-offer 
andxs  be  S's offer.  Furthermore,  letG  =  (1~PS)UB(ZB) + 

be  B's  certainty  equivalent for  G. 

If(G 

2  Negotiation actions as gamble questions 
We would like to construct a model that gives us preference 
and risk-taking information given a position  x i  and a gamble 
that  insists  on  a position Xj.  A position is  either an offer or 
a counter-offer.  Due to space limitation, our discussion is re(cid:173)
stricted to constructing the buyer's model.  We use Zeuthen's 
concept of probability  to  risk  a  conflict  [Zeuthen,  1930]  as 
a  basis  for transforming  negotiation  transactions  into  gam(cid:173)
ble questions.  While Zeuthen assumes complete knowledge 

By  Theorem  1,  if B  decides  to  make  a  counter-offer XB 
to  an  offer  xs  by  5,  then  B's  certainty  equivalent  belongs 
to  the  interval  ( x B , z s ).  Theorem  2  states that  if B  prefers 
the  gamble to  an  offer of xs  by  S  then  B  would  also prefer 
to  gamble than  accept any  offer by  5  higher than xs.  Sym(cid:173)
metrically, B prefers any offer lower than XB  over a gamble. 
Counter-offers imply preference between a gamble and a spe(cid:173)
cific offer.  Although B's estimate of 5's probability to  risk a 

1404 

POSTER PAPERS 

the control utility function, lies inside each interval.  For each 
of the  region  below  and  above  the  certainty  equivalent  100 
test points are generated.  We then evaluate the approach by 
comparing how well the model performs when trained using 
the  intervals  against  the  test  points  from  the  control  utility 
function. 

Intuitively,  not  all  negotiation  transactions  maybe  useful. 
For example, an offer that is near the maximum domain value 
and  a counter-offer that  is  near the  minimum domain  value 
has an interval width that is close to the width of the domain. 
Since we are using the interval to estimate the certainty equiv(cid:173)
alent such  a negotiation transaction would be  less  useful to 
one in which both the offer and counter-offer are closer to the 
certainty  equivalent.  Results  of regression  analysis  suggest 
that useful interval widths are those that are about 50% of the 
domain width. We have used this result as a basis to eliminate 
data points that may not be useful in constructing the utility 
model. 

To  test  the  overall  performance,  negotiation  sequences 
were grouped into subsets where normalized interval widths 
are no greater than 0.50, 0.45, 0.40, 0.35, and 0.30.  The av(cid:173)
erage interval width for each subset is 0.35, 0.34, 0.31, 0.29, 
and 0.24, respectively.  The average network performance of 
each  of these  respective  subsets  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  The 
overall network performance increases as  the average  inter(cid:173)
val  width  corresponding  to  the  negotiation  transactions  de(cid:173)
creases.  The solid curve shows the performance of the util(cid:173)
ity model in predicting whether an offer is preferred by  B to 
a gamble using only implicit data points below the  interval. 
This is important because B's counter-offers only correspond 
to the lower limit of the interval.  The dotted curve shows the 
accuracy of the  model  in predicting whether an offer is pre(cid:173)
ferred by B to a gamble and whether B prefers a gamble to an 
offer. Tne mean accuracy is obtained by averaging the results 
using implicit data points below and above the interval.  The 
results  suggest that  for  intervals  with  average  width  of 0.24 
the  network  can  predict  about  72%:  of the  time  whether  an 
offer is preferred to a gamble by B.  For intervals with aver(cid:173)
age width of less than or equal to 0.31, we are able to predict 
with more than G0%  accuracy whether B prefers the offer to 
a gamble.  In addition,  the predictive accuracy of the model 
when  implicit data  points  above  and  below  the  interval  arc 
used is better than a random guess.  We ran four right-tailed 
z-tests and one right-tailed t-test using the following hypothe(cid:173)
ses:  H0 :  =  0.50  and Ha  : 
>  0.50.  For the /-test the null 
hypothesis is rejected at a = 0.005. In each of the r-tests, the 
null hypothesis is rejected at  =  0.001. 

In summary, we have outlined theoretical results that would 
allow us to construct utility models from negotiation actions. 
Results  from  our experiments suggest that  our utility  model 
provides significant predictive capability. 
References 
[Bui et al.9 1999]  H. H. Bui, S. Venkatesh, and D. Kieronska. 
Learning other agents' preferences in multi-agent negotia(cid:173)
tion  using the bayesian  classifier.  International Journal of 
Cooperative Information Systems, 8:275-294,  1999. 

[Keeney and Raiffa,  1976]  Ralph  Keeney  and  Howard 
Raiffa.  Decisions  with  Multiple  Objectives:  Preferences 
and Value Tradeoffs. Cambridge University Press, 1976. 

[Zeng and Sycara, 1998]  Dajun  Zeng  and  Katia  Sycara. 
Int.  Journal  Human-

Bayesian  learning  in  negotiation. 
Computer Studies ,48:125-141,1998. 

[Zeuthen,  1930]  Frederick  Zeuthen.  Problems  of  Monopoly 
and Economic  Warfare.  Routledge and Kegan Paul, Ltd., 
1930. 

conflict, ps, is not specifically known,  B's  counter-offers are 
in part based on ps.  Hence, by learning B's actions, ps  val(cid:173)
ues are indirectly incorporated into the model. 

3  Utility model construction and evaluation 
We  ran  experiments  using  two  control  utility  functions: 
(risk-averse,  decreasing  function)  and 
(risk-prone, decreasing function).  In each 
negotiation sequence,  ps  is  either generated randomly  or is 
set using {0.50,0.25,0.60} as values.  The negotiation using 

is  over the domain  D1  =  [50,100]  and  that  of 

is  over  D2  =  [200,700].  The  value  of conflict  c  is  set  at 
the maximum value of the domain. The buyer-seller negotia(cid:173)
tion strategy, 
vary among Boulware-Conceder, Conceder-
Boulware,  and  Conceder-Conceder  pairs.  We  define  our 
Boulware strategy as one where the agent concedes only 10% 
of the time and a Conceder strategy as one where concession 
is frequent at 90% of the time.  Whenever an agent concedes, 
concession is randomly chosen between 0—50% of the differ(cid:173)
ence between both agents' most recent counter-offers. 

The  artificial  neural network  used  in our experiments has 
one  hidden  layer with  four nodes.  The  input layer contains 
three  input  nodes  and  the  output  layer  contains  two  nodes. 
Data  fed  into  the  input  layer are  scaled  so  that  values  only 
range between 0 and 1. Negotiation sequences used for train(cid:173)
ing, tuning, and testing are randomly generated using a cho(cid:173)
sen strategy pair, a control utility function 
a negotiation 
domain, and a constant conflict value.  We used a k -1 cross 
validation method to train and tune the network, where  k  is 
the  number  of negotiation  transactions  (offer-counter  pairs) 
in  each  negotiation  sequence.  Network  training  is  stopped 
when  either no  improvement in performance  is  detected  for 
a  successive  2,000  epochs  or the  number of epochs reaches 
20,000.  Among the data generated using the intervals, 90% 
is used for training and 10% is used for tuning.  We point out 
that although the generated data maybe  learned  using other 
techniques we have chosen to use neural networks for conve(cid:173)
nience purposes. 

We have randomly generated a total of 97 negotiation se(cid:173)
quences, wherein each of B's counter-offer B's expected util(cid:173)
ity  of the  gamble  is  greater than  that of S's  offer.  The  total 
number of negotiation transactions is 477 which gives an av(cid:173)
erage of 5 transactions per negotiation sequence. The training 
instances  are  obtained by  generating a  total  of 200  random 
data  points  for  each  observed  negotiation  transaction;  100 
random data points  for each  of the  region below  and  above 
the interval. The certainty equivalent, which is obtained from 

POSTER PAPERS 

1405 

