A Logic-based Algorithm for Image Sequence Interpretation and Anchoring 

Paulo Santos*  and  Murray Shanahan 

Dep.  of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 

Imperial College, London 

{p.santos,  m.shanahan}@imperial.ac.uk 

Abstract 

This  paper describes  a  logic-based  framework  for 
interpretation of sequences of scenes captured by a 
stereo  vision  system  of a  mobile  robot.  An  algo(cid:173)
rithm  for anchoring  and  interpretation  of such  se(cid:173)
quences is also proposed. 

1 

Introduction 

In this work we extend the logic-based spatial reasoning sys(cid:173)
tem for scene interpretation proposed in  [Santos and Shana(cid:173)
han, 2002] and develop an algorithm that encodes the inter(cid:173)
pretation process.  This  algorithm also accounts for the pro(cid:173)
cess whereby mappings between logical symbols and sensor 
data are built up and maintained over time.  This is an aspect 
of the  so-called symbol anchoring problem  [Coradeschi  and 
Saffiotti, 2000]. 

This paper assumes a stereo vision system embedded in a 
mobile robot as the source of data about the world.  A  sym(cid:173)
bolic representation of the sensor data from the vision system 
is  constructed  assuming  a  horizontal slice  of each  snapshot. 
A horizontal slice is, in effect, a 2D depth profile of the scene 
before the robot,  taken  at  a particular height.  Within  these 
depth profiles, peaks occur that are caused by nearby objects 
or collections of objects, these peaks are called depth peaks. 
The size and disparity  values of single depth peaks,  the dis(cid:173)
tance between pairs of peaks and the transitions that occur in 
these  attributes  through  consecutive pairs  of profiles  are  the 
building blocks for our spatial reasoning theory. 

Within this  framework scene  understanding is understood 
as a process of hypothesising the existence and the dynamic 
relationships between  physical  objects  (and  between  physi(cid:173)
cal objects and the observer) assuming temporally ordered se(cid:173)
quences of depth profiles. This process recalls sensor data as(cid:173)
similation as abduction first proposed in [Shanahan, 1996], In 
fact the initial motivation for the present research was to pro(cid:173)
pose  a new qualitative background  theory about space-time 
within this framework by using notions from qualitative spa(cid:173)
tial reasoning theories such as [Randell et al., 1992]. 

* Supported by CAPES. 

1408 

2  Depth Profiles 
This work assumes sequences of depth profiles as temporally 
ordered snapshots of the world.  A sketch of a depth profile is 
shown in Figure  lb. 

Figure  1:  a) Two objects a, b noted from a robot's viewpoint 
v\  b)  Depth  profile  (relative  to  the  viewpoint  v  in  a)  repre(cid:173)
senting the  objects  a and  b respectively by  the peaks p and 
q. 

The  axis  disparity  in  depth  profiles  is  constrained  by  the 
furthest point that  can be  noted  by  the  robot's  sensors,  this 
limiting value is represented by L in these charts (Figure  lb). 
In  fact,  L  is  determined  by  the  specification  of the  robot's 
sensors. 

Differences in the size (and/or disparity) of peaks and tran(cid:173)
sitions of the size (disparity) of a peak  in  a sequence  of pro(cid:173)
files  encode  information  about dynamical  relations  between 
objects in the world and between the objects and the observer. 
This  is  the  initial  insight  upon  which  the  scene  interpreta(cid:173)
tion system proposed in this paper is based.  The next section 
presents some relations that represent transitions in depth pro(cid:173)
files. 

3  Relations on Depth Profile Transitions 
This  work  assumes  a  relation 
for short,  representing that there  is a peak p assigned to the 
physical body b with respect to the viewpoint v.  In this work 
we are dealing with the viewpoint of a single robot, therefore 
to  p-o(p, b).  The  relation  p_o/2 
we  abbreviate 
plays  a  similar  role  of the predicate  grounding  relation  de(cid:173)
fined in [Coradeschi and Saffiotti, 2000]. 

Assuming  that  the  symbols  a  and  b  represent  physi(cid:173)
cal  bodies,  p  and  q  depth  peaks,  and  t  a  time  point, 

POSTER  PAPERS 

that 

that 

t; 

time 

t; 

investigated 
that 

the  disparity  value  of  a  peak  p 

this  paper: 
the 
following  relations  are 
extending(p-o(p,b),t),  states 
the  disparity  value  of 
a  peak  p  is  increasing  at  time  t\  shrinking(p-o(p,b),t), 
states 
is  de(cid:173)
approaching(p-o(p,a),p-o(qib),t), 
creasing  at 
two  peaks  p  and  q  are  approaching 
represents 
that 
receding(p_o(jp,a),p-o(q,b),i), 
each  other  at 
states 
receding  each 
other  at  time 
states 
t; 
that 
states the case of one peak 
splitting into two distinct peaks p and q at time t.  These rela(cid:173)
tions are hypotheses assumed to be possible explanations for 
transitions in the attributes of a peak (or set of peaks). 

coalescing(p_o(p,a),p_o(q,b),t), 
two  peaks  p  and  q  arc  coalescing  at 

two  peaks  p  and  q  are 

time 

t; 

time 

in 

Similarly to [Santos and Shanahan, 2002], the relations de(cid:173)
scribed above can be connected to descriptions of transitions 
on sensor data and, further, to relations about changes in the 
robot environment by means of sets of axioms.  Due to space 
restrictions, however, we do not present axioms for these re(cid:173)
lations. 

Informally, 

and 
can be related, respectively, 
to  the  event  of an  object a  occluding  an  object  6  and  of a 
appearing from behind b.  Therefore, once a hypothesis on 
peak  transition  has  been  obtained,  a  relative  hypothesis  on 
objects in the world can be inferred from the appropriate ax(cid:173)
iom stating this connection.  This is a central idea underlying 
our  solution  for  anchoring. 
In  fact,  this  solution  assumes 
processes of explanation and expectation as described in the 
following sections. 

4  Sensor Data  Assimilation 
Following the ideas proposed in [Shanahan,  1996] and [San(cid:173)
tos and Shanahan, 2002], the task of the abductive process for 
sensor data assimilation  is to  infer the relations described in 
Section 3  as hypotheses given a description (observation) of 
the sensor data in terms of depth peaks transitions.  More for(cid:173)
mally, assuming that 
is a description (in terms of depth pro(cid:173)
files)  of a sequence of stereo images, and 
is a background 
theory comprising axioms connecting the relations in Section 
3 to sensor data transitions and to changes in the robot's envi(cid:173)
ronment, the task of assimilation as abduction is to find a set 
of formulae 

such that 

5  Expectation 
Expected  peak  transitions  are  suggested  by  the  conceptual 
neighbourhood  diagram  (CND)  of the  relations  described  in 
Section 3, shown in Figure 2 1. 

Given an abduced explanation for a transition on a pair of 
peaks, the expected future relations involving these peaks are 
the  neighbours of this transition  in  the  diagram  in Figure  2. 
As  this  process  generates  multiple  competing  expectations, 
only those that are verified by further sensor data lead to the 

generation of new predictions.  In practice, prediction in this 
work is, thus, reduced to a table look-up procedure. 

Figure 2:  Conceptual neighbourhood diagram. 

Image  segmentation 

6 
From  a  practical  point  of  view,  horizontal  slices  defining 
depth  profiles  are  comprised  of  a  sequence  of  measure(cid:173)
ments  made  by  the  considered  off-the-shelf vision  system. 
Each  horizontal  slice  is  then  segmented  into  peaks  and 
backgrounds via a simple threshold mechanism on disparity 
values.  This  segmentation procedure  outputs  a  sequence  of 
first-order terms of the form:  peak (Lb,  Disp,  Size)  and 
background((Lbl,  Lb2),  D i s p l , S i z e l ),  where  Lb, 
Lb1  and  Lb2  are  variables  for P-o/2  terms  labelling peaks. 
In particular Lbl  and Lb2  are the labels of the peaks bound(cid:173)
ing the background segment;  Disp and Size are the values 
of disparity and size of the peak  Lb;  and,  D i s pl  and S i z el 
are the disparity and size  values of the background  segment 
labelled  ( L b l,  Lb2).  If it  is the case that a background  is 
bounded by one of the end points of a depth profile (borders 
of the  field  of view),  a corresponding  symbol  is  assigned  to 
compose  its  label.  In  other words,  in such  cases,  either the 
symbol  borderLeft  or  borderRight  are  part  of the  pair 
defining the label of a background segment. 

Subsequent pairs  of horizontal-slice descriptions  are  input 
to an algorithm that provides the appropriate interpretation in 
terms  of the  dynamic  relations discussed  in  Section  3.  This 
algorithm is summarised in the next section. 

7  The anchoring and interpretation algorithm 
This section describes an algorithm for interpretation and an(cid:173)
choring,  so  called  A&I  algorithm,  that  works  by  matching 
peak  segments  in  consecutive  pairs  of profile  descriptions 
that are depicting the same object in the world.  Each profile 
description is comprised of a finite number of segments peak 
and  background,  which  are  provided by  the  segmentation 
routine described in the previous section. 

In  order to  describe  the A&I algorithm  let  Pi  and  Pz+1  be 
one consecutive pair of profiles, we assume that Pi has n seg(cid:173)
ments and P,+i  has m.  In this section we denote a segment r 
in a profile k by  sk,r  thus, Pi and  Pi +1  can be denoted as: 

and  

'For brevity,  we are  omitting  from this  diagram the  relations 

extending/2  and  shrinking/2. 

Let  PRED  and  INT  be  initially  empty  lists  containing, 
respectively,  a  set  of predictions  and  a  set  of interpretations 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1409 

for the  profile  pair 
denoting a physical body. 

We assume also a symbol o 

is 

in 

task 

the  algorithm's 

For  every  subsequent  pair  of  profile  descriptions 
to  match  pairs  of 
segments 
that  depict  the  same 
object  in  the  world.  The  segments are considered  from  left 
to right in the profile descriptions,  starting with the first pair 
of  segments 
The algorithm  is summarised as 
follows. 
Begin: (A & J algorithm) 
While (Pi  and  P i +1   are non-empty) 

1.  if 

and 

are peak segments; then 

(a)  if Si  j is bound to a term 

term p~o(r, o) to the label  of   

then assign the 

(b)  else,  create two new terms 

and 

and  assign  them  respectively  to  the  labels  of 
and  

(c)  compare  the  size  and  disparity  measurements  in 
both  segments  and  put  into  INT  the  appropriate 
interpretation  according to  the  relations extending 
and  shrinking,  in  Section  3; 

(d)  from 

these 

interpretations  and 

the  conceptual 
neighbourhood diagram in Figure 2 obtain the pre(cid:173)
dicted  predicates  and  insert them  into  PRED; 

(e)  return the next pair of segments:  

2.  if 

and 

are background segments; then 

(a)  unify their labels; 
(b)  compare  the  sizes  of 

and consider 
the  difference  between  these  values,  which  gives 
the difference in the distance between the two peaks 
bounding 

and 

and 

 

(c)  interpret  this  difference  in  terms  of  the  relations 
approaching  and  receding,  and  insert  the  appro(cid:173)
priate  interpretation  into  INT; 

(d)  from  this  interpretation  and  the  CND  in  Figure  2 

insert  the  relative  predictions  into  PRED; 

(e)  return the next pair of segments:  

3.  if  Si,j 

is  a  background  segment  and 

is  a 
peak  segment  then  check  in  the  prediction  set  PRED 
whether the two peaks bounding  si,j  have been expected 
to  be  coalescing  or  splitting, 
(a)  if so, assume this expectation as explanation for Si,j 
inserting  it  into  INT.  Execute  the  ap(cid:173)
and  Si+1,r 
propriate  unifications  on  peak  variables and  terms 
P-o/2  as  explained  in  step  la  and  lb.  Then,  ob(cid:173)
tain  the  predicted  predicates,  inserting  them  into 
PRED.  Return  the  pair 
to be con(cid:173)
sidered for interpretation; 

(b)  else explain away the peak  Si,j  as noise and assume 

the pair 
is a peak segment and 

4.  if 

for interpretation; 

a background seg(cid:173)

ment then proceed analogously to the previous case. 

End while. 

•  If P{  is  empty,  get  the  next pair  of profile  descriptions 

•  else,  if 

is empty but Pi is not, then explain away the 
remaining  peak  segments  in  Pi  and  consider  the  next 
pair of profile  descriptions 

The while loop above is repeated until there are no more depth 
profile descriptions. 
End. 

Informally,  the  algorithm  above  considers  consecutive 
pairs of depth profile descriptions as  lists.  Pairs of elements 
from these lists are compared and a match for peak segments 
is obtained according to the expected transitions in depth pro(cid:173)
files.  The  result  of this  process  is  the  interpretation  of peak 
transitions,  which  are  related  to  changes  in  the  objects  de(cid:173)
picted by peaks. 

The algorithm main processing is the while loop that con(cid:173)
siders,  in  pairs,  every  segment  in  the  depth  profile  descrip(cid:173)
tions.  The  running time  of this  algorithm  is,  thus,  linear on 
the size of the list: containing these descriptions. However, as 
the  number of segments  in  these  lists  is  related  to the  num(cid:173)
ber of objects depicted by the considered depth profiles,  and 
there  are  only  a  finite  number of objects  in  each  scene,  the 
asymptotic upper bound of this algorithm is  0(1). 
8  Conclusion 
This paper presents a new step towards an abductive frame-
work  for  sensor  data  interpretation  of sequences  of stereo-
vision  images  obtained  by  a  mobile  robot's  vision  system. 
We  proposed  a  symbolic  representation  of the  stereovision 
data based on depth profiles obtained from horizontal  slices 
of snapshots of the world.  These profiles encode information 
about objects in the world as peaks.  Each profile was, then, 
segmented into first-order statements that were input of an al(cid:173)
gorithm whose task was to unify pairs of segments, providing 
the interpretation for the occurred transition in depth peaks. 

Further research  has  to  consider two main  open  issues  in 
this framework. First, we have to develop of a qualitative the(cid:173)
ory about object's shape  from multiple horizontal  slices of a 
scene.  This  theory  would  enhance  the  representation  of the 
environment  and,  therefore,  improve  the  capabilities  of the 
reasoning  system.  A  second  issue  is  the  development  rea(cid:173)
soning modules capable of explaining away noise patches  in 
the image sequences according to common-sense knowledge 
about the world and about the sensor's limitations. 

References 
[Coradeschi and Saffiotti, 2000]  S.  Coradeschi  and  A.  Saf-
fiotti.  Anchoring symbols  to  sensor data:  Preliminary  re(cid:173)
port.  In Proc. ofAAAI, pages 129-135, Austin, U.S., 2000. 
[Randell et al., 1992]  D.  Randell,  Z.  Cui,  and  A.  Cohn.  A 
spatial logic based on regions and connection.  In Proc. of 
the KR, pages 165-176, Cambridge, U.S., 1992. 

[Santos and Shanahan, 2002]  P.  Santos  and  M.  Shanahan. 
Hypothesising object relations from image transitions.  In 
Frank  van  Harmelen,  editor,  Proc.  ofECAI,  pages  292-
296, Lyon, France, 2002. 

[Shanahan,  1996]  M.  Shanahan.  Robotics and the common 
sense  informatic  situation.  In  Proc.  ofECAI,  pages  684-
688, Budapest, Hungary, 1996. 

1410 

POSTER  PAPERS 

POSTER  PAPERS 

INFORMATION RETRIEVAL AND DATA MINING 

