Collaborative Web Search* 

Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, Jill Freyne 

Smart Media Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland 

{firstname.lastname} @ucd.ie 

Abstract 

Web search engines struggle to satisfy the needs of 
Web users.  Users are notoriously poor at represent(cid:173)
ing  their needs  in the  form of a query,  and  search 
engines  are  poor  at  responding  to  vague  queries. 
However  progress  has  been  made  by  introducing 
context  into  the  search  process.  In  this  paper  we 
describe  and  evaluate  a  novel  approach  to  using 
context in Web search that adapts a generic search 
engine  for  the  needs  of a  specialist  community  of 
users. This collaborative search method enjoys sig(cid:173)
nificant  performance  benefits  and  avoids  the  pri(cid:173)
vacy and  security  concerns that  are commonly as(cid:173)
sociated with related personalization research. 

Introduction 

1 
It  is a tragic irony  of the  information  age that users are find(cid:173)
ing it increasingly difficult to benefit from access to unprece(cid:173)
dented amounts of information. Even with the help of modern 
search engines we regularly fail to locate relevant information 
in a timely manner.  Many  factors contribute to this informa-
tion  overload  problem.  Certainly,  the  sheer  quantity  of in(cid:173)
formation,  and  its  growth  rate,  tax  even  the  most  advanced 
search engines.  For example, various estimates indicate that 
even the largest search engines often cover only a fraction of 
the available information space [Lawrence and Giles,  1999]. 
However, search engine coverage is just the tip of the ice(cid:173)
berg, and can be greatly enhanced by using meta-search meth(cid:173)
ods [Dreilinger and Howe, 1997; Selberg and Etzioni, 1997]. 
A more pressing problem is the limited degree to which those 
pages  that  are  covered  can  be  accurately  ranked  with  re(cid:173)
spect  to  a  given  query.  Part  of this  problem  lies  with  the 
users.  Search  engines  work  very  well  for  properly  formu(cid:173)
lated  queries,  but  they  come  up  short  when  presented  with 
an average Web user's query, which typically contains about 
2  query  terms  [Lawrence  and  Giles,  1998].  The  inevitable 
outcome is long lists of apparently relevant results, with gen(cid:173)
uinely useful results (for the target user) few and far between. 
Moreover,  these problems  are  exacerbated  by the  new  gen(cid:173)
eration  of mobile  computing  devices  (eg.  WAP phones  and 

The support of the Informatics Research Initiative of Enterprise 

Ireland is gratefully acknowledged. 

PDAs).  Their restricted input capabilities and  limited screen 
real-estate mean that mobile users are even less likely to pro(cid:173)
vide well formulated queries or tolerate long result lists. 

For the most part, recent search engine advances have fo(cid:173)
cused  on better ways to handle  vague queries by  improving 
existing page analysis, indexing and ranking methods.  How(cid:173)
ever a critical  shortcoming  still  remains:  a  query  might  in(cid:173)
clude terms that  identify the primary  information  target,  but 
rarely  includes  terms  that  usefully  describe  the  search  con-
text.  For  example,  a  simple  query  for  "jaguar"  docs  not 
indicate  whether  the  user  is  interested  in  cars  or  cats,  and 
queries  for "Michael Jordan"  do  not  distinguish between  the 
basketball  star  and  the  Berkeley  professor.  Consequently, 
researchers  have  recently  focused  on  ways  to  exploit  con(cid:173)
text  during  search,  either  by  explicitly  establishing  context 
up-front  or  by  implicitly  inferring  it.  For  example,  the  In-
quires  2  meta-search  engine  [Glover  et  al.,  2001]  supple(cid:173)
ments keyword-based queries with a context category;  users 
explicitly select from a set of categories such as "research  pa(cid:173)
per", "homepage" etc.  Alternatively, implicit context can  be 
automatically inferred. For example, systems such as Watson 
[Budzik  and  Hammond,  2000]  take advantage of user activ(cid:173)
ity prior to search to judge context; Watson monitors a user's 
word processing activity and uses document text as the basis 
for query  terms.  In  contrast,  relevance  feedback  techniques 
attempt  to  use  actual  search  results  to  inform  context.  For 
example,  [Mitra  et  al.,  1998]  extract  correlated  terms  from 
top-ranking search results to focus context on the most rele(cid:173)
vant search results as opposed to the entire set. 

In this paper we describe a novel technique  for exploiting 
context  during  search:  collaborative search  acts  as  a  front-
end  for  existing  search  engines  and  re-ranks  results  based 
on  the  learned  preferences  of a  community  of users.  We 
describe  and  evaluate  its  implementation  in  the  I-SPY  sys(cid:173)
tem and highlight how  I-SPY  achieves personalization  in an 
anonymous fashion, without storing individual user profiles. 

2  Collaborative Search 
Collaborative search is motivated by two key ideas. First, spe(cid:173)
cialised  search  engines  attract  communities  of like-minded 
users and naturally limited context variations.  For example, 
a  motoring  search  engine  is  likely  to  attract  queries  with  a 
motoring theme;  here "jaguar" queries are more likely to re(cid:173)
late to cars than cats.  Second, by capturing the selections of 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1417 

engine can be used to service many different search services 
across a range of portals,  for example, each one adapted  for 
the needs of a particular user group through its associated hit 
matrix.  Alternatively,  different hit matrices could be associ(cid:173)
ated with different regions of the same site to bias search with 
respect to different topics. For instance, the work of [Havel i-
wala,  2002]  biases  PageRank  with  respect to  different topic 
groups in an Internet directory by generating category-biased 
PageRank  vectors  from the  URLs  contained  in  top-level  di(cid:173)
rectory categories.  A similar strategy can be supported by 1-
SPY.  Placing  a  search  box  on  the  Programming Languages 
directory  page  will  naturally  capture  queries  from  this  do(cid:173)
main. And the behaviour of the users providing these queries, 
will  gradually  adjust  I-SPY's  relevancy  metric  and  ranking 
function in favour of Programming Languages pages. 

3  Evaluation 
For  our  evaluation  we  focus  on  a  specific  user  community 
and search domain:  computer science students and program(cid:173)
ming  languages.  A  set  of 60  queries  is  produced  from  the 
programming languages listed in Yahoo.  I-SPY is configured 
to query  two underlying  search engines,  Yahoo (which  uses 
Google) and  Splat!,  and each  of the  60 queries  is  submitted 
to  obtain  up  to  30  results  based  on  a  standard  meta-search 
ranking  function.  A  group  of 20  computer  science  students 
are asked to identify relevant results, based on the summary 
result descriptions returned by 1-SPY. 

A  leave-one-out  evaluation  methodology  is  employed  so 
that  each  user  is  designated  to  be  a  test  user  with  the  re(cid:173)
maining  19  serving as  training users.  The relevancy results 
of the  training  users  are  used  to  populate  I-SPY's hit matrix 
and  the  results  for  each  query  are  re-ranked  using  I-SPY's 
relevancy metric.  Next, we count the number of these results 
listed  as relevant by  the test user for various  result-list  sizes 
(k  =  5..30).  Finally, we make the equivalent relevancy mea(cid:173)
surements by analysing the results produced by the untrained 
version of I-SPY (Standard), which serves as a benchmark. 

Figure 2 presents the results for I-SPY and the benchmark 
search  engine as a graph  of precision  versus recall  for each 
result-list size; these are really bounded versions of the stan(cid:173)
dard precision and recall  metrics and  the measures  for each 
engine converge once a complete result-list  is returned.  The 
results indicate a significant and consistent benefit  for I-SPY 
over the standard meta-search benchmark.  For example,  for 
result-lists of 5 items, I-SPY achieves a precision of just over 
96% compared to the standard meta-search precision of only 
63%.  Similarly,  at the  same  result-list  size,  we  find  an  av(cid:173)
erage  recall  for  1-SPY  of 64%  compared  to just  under 40% 
for the standard method.  Indeed we see that I-SPY achieves 
100%  recall  at just over 20  items  whilst  it  takes the bench(cid:173)
mark  30  items  to achieve  the same  level  of recall.  The  fact 
that larger relative benefits are available at smaller result-list 
sizes  is important.  Users rarely sift through large result-lists 
and so, the more relevant items that can be presented earlier 
on,  the  better.  This  means  that  I-SPY  is  likely  to  be  espe(cid:173)
cially  valuable  in  situations  where  large  result  lists must  be 
truncated for other reasons, such as the small screen sizes o f 
mobile devices. 

Figure  1:  The I-SPY meta-search engine. 

a  community  of users  it  is  possible  to  estimate  query-page 
relevance  as the probability  that  a page  pj  will  be  selected 
for query  qt.  Collaborative search  combines both  ideas  in  a 
meta-search engine called I-SPY (Figure  1). 

The  unique  feature  of collaborative  search  is  its  ability  to 
personalize search results for a community of users, but with(cid:173)
out relying on traditional context-analysis (eg. [Lawrence and 
Giles,  1998J)  or personalization  (eg.  [Bradley  et al,  2000]) 
techniques.  I-SPY achieves this by storing the usage patterns 
of users  as  a  hit  matrix,  H.  Each  element,  Hi,j,  equals  the 
number of times that page  pj  was selected for query  qt.  This 
matrix is a powerful source of relevancy information; after all 
its data reflect query-page relevancy judgments by users. The 
relevancy of p3 to query qz is estimated by the probability that 
Pj will be selected for query  qi;  sec Equation  1. 

(1) 

This relevancy metric is tuned to the preferences of a commu(cid:173)
nity of users, and the queries and pages that they tend to pre(cid:173)
fer.  Deploy  I-SPY  on  a motoring web site and  its hit matrix 
will  become populated with queries and pages that are rele(cid:173)
vant to car fans.  For example, over time queries for "jaguar'" 
will tend to result in the promotion of car sites because users 
submitting this query term will tend to select Jaguar car sites, 
ignoring the wild cat pages.  The wild cat pages may still be 
returned but will be relegated to the bottom of the result list. 
In  fact  I-SPY  can  deploy  multiple  I-SPY  search  agents, 
each with its own separate hit table.  Thus the central I-SPY 

1418 

POSTER  PAPERS 

5  Conclusions 
Improving the accuracy of Web search engines by introducing 
context into the search process is an important and challeng(cid:173)
ing research problem.  We  have described a generic  search 
engine that can be adapted or personalized to  fit  the context 
and needs of a community of users by using the collaborative 
search technique. The benefits include superior precision and 
recall characteristics when compared to a benchmark search 
engine.  In addition,  this level  of personalization is achieved 
without the need to store individual  user profiles,  leading to 
superior security and privacy benefits when compared to al(cid:173)
ternative approaches. 

In closing it is worth highlighting that collaborative search 
makes no strong assumptions about the form of the underly(cid:173)
ing search engines and is generally applicable across a range 
of content  types  including  Web pages,  graphics and  photos, 
audio and video. Finally, its proposed ranking metric is com(cid:173)
putationally  efficient  (O(k)  in  the  number  of search  results) 
and requires no additional parsing of result pages. 

References 
[Bradley et al, 2000]  K.  Bradley,  R.  Rafter,  and  B.  Smyth. 
Case-based User Profiling for Content Personalization.  In 
O. Stock P. Brusilovsky and C. Strapparava, editors, Pro(cid:173)
ceedings of the International Conference on Adaptive Hy(cid:173)
permedia and Adaptive Web-based Systems, pages 62-72. 
Springer-Verlag, 2000. 

[Budzik and Hammond, 2000]  J. Budzik and K. Hammond. 
User  Interactions  with  Everyday  Applications  as  Con(cid:173)
text for Just-In-Time Information Access.  In Proceedings 
International  Conference  on  Intelligent  User  Interfaces., 
pages 44-51. ACM Press, 2000. 

[Dreilinger and Howe,  1997]  D.  Dreilinger  and  A.  Howe. 
Experiences  with  Selecting  Search  Engines  Using  Meta 
Search. 
ACM  Transactions  on  Information  Systems, 
15(3): 195-222, 1997. 

[Glover et al, 2001]  E. Glover, S. Lawrence, M. D. Gordon, 
W. P. Birmingham, and C. Lee Giles.  Web Search - Your 
Way. Communications of the ACM, 44(12): 97-102, 2001. 
Topic-Sensitive 
PageRank.  In Proceedings of the  World-Wide  Web Con(cid:173)
ference. ACM Press, 2002. 

[Haveliwala, 2002]  T.  H.  Haveliwala. 

[Lawrence and Giles, 1998]  S.  Lawrence and C.  Lee Giles. 
Context  and  Page  Analysis  for  Improved  Web  Search. 
IEEE Internet Computing,  July-August:38-^6,  1998. 

[Lawrence and Giles, 1999]  S.  Lawrence and C.  Lee Giles. 
Nature, 

the  Web. 

Accessibility  of  Information  on 
400(6740): 107-109, 1999. 

[ M i t r a la l,  1998]  M.  Mitra,  A.  Singhal,  and  C.  Buckley. 
Improving  Automatic  Query  Expansion.  In  Proceedings 
of ACMSIGIR, pages 206-214. ACM Press, 1998. 

[Selberg and Etzioni, 1997]  E. Selberg and O. Etzioni.  The 
Meta-Crawler  Architecture  for  Resource  Aggregation  on 
the Web.  IEEE Expert, Jan-Feb:l 1-14,  1997. 

Figure 2: Precision vs. Recall Results. 

4  Discussion 
There are number of problems with collaborative search  that 
need  to  be  addressed  to guarantee  its  applicability  across  a 
broad range of search tasks. Perhaps the most important prob(cid:173)
lem is the so-called cold-start problem. This refers to the fact 
that  newly  indexed Web pages  find  it  difficult to attract  user 
attention since they will have a low relevancy score using 1-
SPY's metric and thus appear far down in result-lists, limiting 
their ability to attract the hits they deserve for a given query. 
Essentially there is an in-built bias towards older pages. 

There  are  a  number  of ways  that  this  problem  might  be 
dealt with.  One is to look at ways to normalize the relevancy 
of pages  with  respect  to  their age.  For  example,  we  might 
measure the age of a page by the time (or number of queries) 
since  its  first  hit  and  amplify  the  relevancy  of young  pages 
relative to older pages. 

Indeed there is another side to this problem.  Just as new 
pages  find  it  difficult to  attract  hits,  so too  older pages may 
find it easy to attract hits.  In the worst case scenario this could 
even bias I-SPY's result-lists towards pages that are likely to 
be out of date and thus less relevant to current users than they 
were  to  past  users.  Once  again,  biasing  relevance  towards 
new pages should help to cope with this problem. 

Of course  in  general  there are many  factors that can,  and 
probably should, be taken into account when ranking search 
results. We have focused primarily on I-SPY's relevancy fac(cid:173)
tor, but other factors such as the age of a page and its meta-
search  ranking  are  also  appropriate.  As  part  of our  future 
work  we  will  explore  how  best  to  combine  these  factors  to 
produce optimal result rankings.  This may or may not involve 
a direct combination of the rankings.  For example, one op(cid:173)
tion is to present search results not as a single list of results, 
as is normally the case, but perhaps as two or more  lists of 
results in order to emphasise the different qualities of the re(cid:173)
turned pages.  For instance, in general only a subset of search 
results  are  likely  to  have  non-zero  I-SPY  relevance  scores; 
that is, a subset of results will have been selected in the past 
for the current query.  Therefore, it is practical to present the 
I-SPY results with relevancy scores as special recommenda(cid:173)
tions (ranked by their relevancy).  The remaining results can 
be presented separately, ranked by their meta-score. In turn a 
third list of new pages, ranked by meta-search score or rele(cid:173)
vancy, can also be separately presented. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1419 

