Learning to Compete in Heterogeneous Web Search Environments" 

Rinat Khoussainov  and  Nicholas Kushmerick 

Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin 

Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland 

{rinat, nick}@ucd.ie 

Introduction 

1 
Previous research in Web search has mainly targeted perfor(cid:173)
mance of search  engines  from  the  user's point  of view.  Pa(cid:173)
rameters such as precision, recall, and freshness of returned 
results  were  optimised.  On  the  other  hand,  a  provider  of 
search services is rather interested in parameters like the num(cid:173)
ber of queries processed versus the amount of resources used 
to  process  them.  We  focus on  performance optimisation of 
search engines from the service provider's point of view. 

An  important  factor that  affects  the  search  engine perfor(cid:173)
mance  is  competition  with  other  independently  controlled 
search engines. When there are many engines available, users 
want to  send  queries to  those that provide the  best possible 
results.  Thus, the service offered by one search engine influ(cid:173)
ences queries received by others. 

Competition  is  even  more  important  in  heterogeneous 
search  environments  consisting  of many  specialised  search 
engines (which provide access to the so-called "deep" or "in(cid:173)
visible" Web).  Each specialised engine in such environment 
indexes only  a  subset  of all  documents (e.g.  on  a particular 
topic).  Each  user  query  is  only  sent  to  a  small  number  of 
the engines which can return the  best results.  Selection be(cid:173)
tween specialised search engines is done (semi)automatically 
by  meta-searchers,  which rank  engines  for each  user query. 
Thus,  parameters of specialised  engines automatically affect 
their ranking and, hence,  the queries they receive,  and  ulti(cid:173)
mately their profit. 

We are examining the problem of performance-maximising 
behaviour for non-cooperative specialised  search  engines  in 
heterogeneous search environments. In particular, we analyse 
how specialised search engines can select on which topic(s) 
to specialise and how many documents to index on that topic. 
We  provide  a  game-theoretic  analysis  of a  simplified  ver(cid:173)
sion  of the  problem  and  motivate  the  use  of the  concept  of 
"bounded  rationality".  Bounded  rationality  assumes  that 
decision  makers  are  unable  to  act  optimally  in  the  game-
theoretic sense  due to incomplete information about the en(cid:173)
vironment and/or limited  computational resources.  We  then 
cast our problem as a reinforcement learning task, where the 
goal of a specialised  search engine  is to exploit sub-optimal 
behaviour of its competitors to improve own performance. 

*This research was funded by Science Foundation Ireland and 

the US Office of Naval Research. 

2  Problem Formalisation 
Performance metric. We adopt an economic view on search 
engine performance. Performance is a difference between the 
value of the search service provided (income) and the cost of 
the resources  used to  provide the  service.  In  our  simplified 
version  of the  problem  we  only  take  into  account  the  cost 
of resources  involved  in  processing  search  queries.  Under 
these assumptions, engine performance can be expressed as 
follows:  

where  Q  is  the  number of queries  received  in  a  given  time 
interval,  D  is the number of documents in  the search engine 
index,  and  are constants. 

then 

represents the service value:  if the price of processing 
would be the total 
one search request for a user is 
income from service provisioning. 
represents the cost 
of processing search requests. If x amount of resources is suf(cid:173)
ficient to process Q queries, then we need 2x to process twice 
as many queries in the same time.  Similarly, twice as many 
resources are needed to search twice as many documents in 
the same time. Thus, the amount of resources (and, hence, the 
cost) is proportional to both Q and D, and so can be expressed 
as 
reflects the resource costs.  The example of 
the FAST search engine confirms that our cost function is not 
that far from reality [Risvik and Michelsen, 2002]. 

where 

Environment  model.  Let  us  assume  that  users  issue 
queries on just a single topic, e.g. "cars".  We will  see later 
how  this  extends  to  multiple  topics.  It  is  reasonable  to  as(cid:173)
sume that users would like to send queries to search engines 
that  contain  the  most relevant  documents  on  the  topic,  and 
the  more  of them,  the  better.  Suppose  that  search  engines 
have "ideal" Web robots which for a given D can find the D 
most relevant documents on the topic.  In this case, the user 
would simply  have to  send  queries to the  engine containing 
the largest number of documents on the topic. 

This model can be extended to multiple topics, if the state 
of a search engine is represented by the number of documents 
that engine i  indexes for each topic  t  (a query on topic  t 
would be sent to the engine i with the largest 
Of course, 
such  extension  ignores possible  overlaps between  topics  in 
both queries and documents.  On the other hand, if we asso(cid:173)
ciate each topic with a search term, the whole engine selec(cid:173)
tion  model  would  closely  reflect  how  some  real-life  engine 
selection algorithms work  [Callan et al,  1995]. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1429 

Decision  making  process.  For  each  time  interval,  the 
search  engines simultaneously  and  independently decide on 
how many documents to index and allocate resources to pro(cid:173)
cess expected search queries (thus incurring the correspond(cid:173)
ing costs).  As search engines cannot have unlimited crawling 
resources, we presume that they can only do incremental ad(cid:173)
justments  to  their index  contents that  require the  same  time 
for all engines.  The user queries are allocated to the engines 
based on their index parameters 

as described above. 

Since a  search  engine cannot know the number of queries 
that  users  will  submit,  it may  allocate  less  query processing 
resources than the number of queries it will  receive.  We  as(cid:173)
sume that excess queries are discarded and the search engine 
does not benefit  from  them.  Then, performance of engine / 
over a given time interval can be represented as 

where 
is  the expected number of queries 
across all topics for which the search engine is trying to com(cid:173)
pete  (i.e.  index  at  least  one  d o c u m e n t ) ,
is  the 
is the total 
total  number of indexed documents, 
number of queries actually received by engine i, and 

is the share of queries in topic /  received by engine i, and Qt 
is the number of queries users submitted on topic t. 

3  Analysis and Solution Approach 
The  decision-making  process  can  be  modelled  as  a  multi(cid:173)
stage game.  At each stage,  a matrix game is played, where 
players  are  search  engines,  actions  are  values  of  (Dt),  and 
player i  receives payoff  Pi  (as  above).  If player  ,•  knew  the 
actions of its opponents at a future stage k, it could calculate 
the optimal  response as  the one maximising its  payoff Pi(k) 
at that stage. For example, in case of a single topic and a con(cid:173)
stant query stream it should play  
if 
otherwise (sim(cid:173)
ply  put,  outperform opponents  by  1  document if profitable, 
and do not incur any costs otherwise). 

In reality, the players do not know the future. One possible 
way around this would be to agree on (supposedly, mutually 
beneficial)  actions  in  advance.  To  avoid deception,  players 
would  have  to  agree  on  playing  a  Nash  equilibrium  of the 
game, since only then there will be no incentive for them to 
not  follow the agreement.  Agreeing to play a Nash equilib(cid:173)
rium, however, becomes problematic when the game has mul(cid:173)
tiple  such  equilibria.  Players  would  be  willing  to  agree  on 
a  Nash  equilibrium  yielding to  them the  highest (expected) 
payoffs, but the task of characterising all Nash equilibria of a 
game is NP-hard even given complete information about the 
game (as follows from [Conitzer and Sandholm, 2002]). 

NP-hardness  results  and  the  possibility  that  players  may 
not  have  complete  information  about  the  game  lead  to  the 
idea of "bounded rationality", when players may not use the 
optimal  strategies in the game-theoretic sense.  Our proposal 
is to cast the problem of optimal behaviour in the game as a 

learning task, where the player would have to learn a strategy 
that performs well against its sub-optimal opponents. 

Learning in repeated games has been studied extensively in 
game theory and machine learning. Examples include fictious 
play and opponent modelling  [Robinson,  1951; Carmel  and 
Markovitch,  1996].  We apply a more recent algorithm from 
reinforcement  learning  called  GAPS  [Peshkin  et al,  2000]. 
In  GAPS,  the  learner plays  a  parameterised  strategy  repre(cid:173)
sented by a  finite  state automaton, where the parameters are 
the  probabilities of actions  and  state  transitions.  GAPS  im(cid:173)
plements stochastic gradient ascent in the space of policy pa(cid:173)
rameters.  After each  learning trial,  parameters of the policy 
are updated by following the payoff gradient. 

GAPS  has  a  number of advantages  important  for  our do(cid:173)
main.  It  works  in  partially observable games.  It also scales 
well  to  multiple  topics  by  modelling  decision-making  as  a 
game with  factored actions (where action components corre(cid:173)
spond to topics). The action space in such games is the prod(cid:173)
uct of factor spaces for each action component.  GAPS, how(cid:173)
ever, allows us to reduce the learning complexity: rather than 
learning in the product action space, separate GAPS learners 
can  be  used  for each action  component.  It has been shown 
that such distributed learning is equivalent to learning in the 
product action space.  We call  a search  engine that uses the 
proposed approach COUGAR,  which stands for Competitor 
Using GAPS Against Rivals. 

4  Preliminary Results 
We evaluated our approach in a number of simulation exper(cid:173)
iments,  which  demonstrated  COUGAR's  ability  to  compete 
successfully with different opponents. For the sake of brevity, 
we  present  here  results  from  one  such  experiment with  two 
competing search  engines.  One  search  engine  was  using  a 
fixed strategy, called "Bubble", the other one was COUGAR. 
The search engines could increase, decrease (by one), or keep 
the number of documents indexed on each topic.  They could 
also observe the size of own index, the relative sizes of oppo(cid:173)
nents'  indices,  and the number of user queries  Qt  submitted 
for each topic (the last two observations can be obtained from 
the meta-searcher).  The expected number of queries on topic 
t at future stage A; was calculated as  

The experimental setup consisted of three components: the 
generator of search queries, the metasearcher, and the search 
engines.  The  state  of a  search  engine's  document  index  is 
represented by  a  vector 
of the  numbers  of documents 
indexed by the search engine for each topic. This is the infor(cid:173)
mation used by the metasearcher to select search engines. 

To simulate  user search queries,  we  used HTTP logs ob(cid:173)
tained from a Web proxy of a large ISP. We developed extrac(cid:173)
tion rules individually for 47 well-known search engines. The 
total number of queries extracted was 657,861 collected over 
a period of 190 days.  We associated topics with search terms 
in the logs. To simulate queries for T topics, we extracted the 
T most popular terms  from the  logs.  The number of queries 
generated on topic t for a given day was equal to the number 
of queries with term t in the logs belonging to this day. 

The  "Bubble"  strategy  tries  to  index  as  many documents 
as  possible  without any  regard to  what  competitors are  do-

1430 

POSTER  PAPERS 

ing.  As  follows  from  our performance formula (Section  2), 
such unconstrained growing leads eventually to negative per(cid:173)
formance. Once the total reward falls below a certain thresh(cid:173)
old, the "Bubble" search engine goes bankrupt (it shrinks its 
index to 0  documents and retires until  the end  of the  trial). 
This process imitates the situation, in which a search provider 
expands  its  business  without  paying  attention  to  costs,  and 
eventually runs out of money (or an analogy with the " . com 
bubble").  An  intuitively  sensible  response  to  the  "Bubble" 
strategy would be to wait until the bubble "bursts" and then 
come into the game alone.  That is,  a competitor should not 
index anything while the "Bubble" grows and should start in(cid:173)
dexing  a  minimal  number of documents  once  the  "Bubble" 
search engine goes bankrupt. 

Our simulation had two topics, and "Bubble" was increas(cid:173)
ing  (and  decreasing)  the  number  of documents  indexed  for 
each topic simultaneously.  First,  we trained COUGAR in a 
number of learning trials.  Once  it  reached  a  steady  perfor(cid:173)
mance level, the resulting strategy was evaluated in a scries 
of testing  trials.  Each  simulation  trial  consists  of 100 days, 
where each  day corresponds to  one  stage of the  multi-stage 
game played.  The resulting performance in the whole trial is 
calculated as a sum of discounted rewards from each day. 

Figure  1  shows how  COUGAR's  performance improving 
during learning.  Figure  2  visualises  a  testing trial  between 
the "Bubble" and the COUGAR engines by showing the num(cid:173)
ber of documents indexed by the engines on each day of the 
trial  (the  top half of Y  axis  shows the  number of documents 
for topic  1, the bottom half shows the number of documents 
for  topic  2).  Note  that  COUGAR  has  learned  to  wait  until 
"Bubble" goes bankrupt, and then to win all queries for both 
topics. 

We also investigated effectiveness of our approach against 
evolving opponents.  In particular, we evaluated performance 
of  a  COUGAR  strategy  learned  in  self-play  against  other 
learners  (other COUGARs  in  our  case).  We  observed that 
while  COUGAR's  performance  can  be  quite  stable  against 
equally complex learners, it may still  be sub-optimal, in the 
sense that a "cleverer" learner (e.g.  a COUGAR with more 
policy states) can outperform it. 

Figure 2:  "Bubble" vs COUGAR: sample trial 

5  Future Work 
We  do  not  claim  to  provide  a  complete  solution  for  the 
problem of performance management in  heterogeneous Web 
search, but COUGAR is a promising first step.  Clearly,  we 
have  made  many  strong  assumptions  in  our  models.  One 
future direction  will  be  to  relax  these  assumptions to  make 
our  simulations  more  realistic.  Another  important  direction 
would  be to  further study  performance of the  learning algo(cid:173)
rithm in self-play, as well as against other learners. 

While  we  are  motivated  by  the  optimal  behaviour  for 
search  services  over  document collections,  our  approach  is 
applicable in more general  scenarios  involving services that 
must weigh  the  cost of their  inventory  of objects  against the 
expected inventories of their competitors and the  anticipated 
needs of their customers.  For example,  it would be interest(cid:173)
ing to apply our ideas to large retail e-commerce sites which 
must decide what products to stock. 

References 
[Callan et al., 1995]  J. P. Callan, Z. Lu, and W. B. Croft. Searching 
distributed collections with inference networks. In Proc. of the 
18th Annual Intl. ACM S1G1R Conf, pages 21-28. ACM Press, 
July 1995. 

[Carmel and Markovitch, 1996]  D.  Carmel  and  S.  Markovitch. 
Learning models of intelligent agents.  In Proc. of the 13th Na(cid:173)
tional Conf. on Artifical Intelligence, pages 62-67, Menlo Park, 
CA, 1996. 

[Conitzer and Sandholm, 2002]  V.  Conitzer  and  T.  Sandholm. 
Complexity  results  about  Nash  equilibria.  Technical  Report 
CMU-CS-02-135, Carnegie Mellon University, 2002. 

[Peshkin etal.,2000] L.  Pcshkin,  N.  Meuleau,  K.-E.  Kim,  and 
L.Kaelbling.  Learning to cooperate via policy search.  In Proc. 
of the 16th Conf on Uncertaintly in Artifical Intelligence, pages 
489-496. Morgan Kaufmann, 2000. 

[Risvik and Michelsen, 2002]  K. Risvik and R. Michelsen.  Search 
engines and web dynamics.  Computer Networks, 39:289-302, 
June 2002. 

[Robinson, 1951]  J. Robinson.  An iterative method of solving a 

game. Annals of Mathematics, 54:296-301, 1951. 

POSTER PAPERS 

1431 

