Network Meta-Reasoning for Information Assurance in  Mobile Agent Systems 

Donovan Artz 

Max Peysakhov 

William  Regli 

Department  of Computer Science 

Drexel  University 

Philadelphia, PA 19104-2875 

Introduction 

1 
This paper develops a practical means of measuring informa(cid:173)
tion  assurance  for mobile  agent  systems  operating  on  wire(cid:173)
less,  ad  hoc  networks  based  on  meta-reasoning  [Dix  et ai, 
2000;  Xuan  et  al,  2001]  to  improve  the  security  of com(cid:173)
munication.  Figure  1  shows  an  agent  system  and  its  two 
distinct  layers of communication:  host-to-host  and agent-to-
agent.  Given  the plethora  of new  techniques  for  identifying 
network intruders, we study the compromised host problem: 
determining the appropriate response to an identified intruder. 
In the context of a mobile, multi-agent system operating on an 
ad hoc network [Forman & Zahorjan,  1994], it is not merely 
a  simple matter of removing  the  compromised hosts  and  its 
agents.  While  keeping  the  compromised  host  can  result  in 
information  disclosure,  removal  of the  host  can  degrade  or 
even sever the network.  Wc develop a state description for an 
agent system and introduce a measure of* information assur(cid:173)
ance for the system in terms of the integrity of the messages 
delivered to the agents in a given network state.  Agents have 
three responses to a compromised host:  ignore the compro(cid:173)
mised host; reroute around the compromised host using net(cid:173)
work  route redundancies;  or remove the compromised host, 
by having the agents instruct their hosts to eliminate  it  from 
the network. These responses are shown in Figure 2. 

2  Technical Formulation 
A  state  description  for a mobile agent network is  defined  in 
terms  of sets of hosts  (H)  and  agents  (.4).  Given  H  and  A, 
we can define: 

Figure  1:  Nodes  are  either physical  hosts  or agents;  edges 
are network host or agent-to-agent connections.  The shaded 
node is a compromised host. The bold arrow is a safe network 
route; the dashed arrow is a compromised network route. 

2.1  Evaluation of an Agent System Network 
We  model  the  information  assurance  level  in  an  agent  net(cid:173)
work  by  analyzing  how  agents  communicate.  Observe  that 
agents must send messages to other agents in order to collab(cid:173)
orate in any decision procedure.  In a decision procedure, typ(cid:173)
ically  certain  agents  are  authorities that  collate  voting  mes(cid:173)
sages  from  all  other agents  involved  in the decision.  In  the 
context of  TH,  any host housing an agent involved in at least 
one  decision  procedure  authority  is  a  sink  in  the  network 
topology graph into which messages flow.  For a simple deci(cid:173)
sion, there may be only one sink;  in the most complex case, 
all hosts are sinks.  This paper will assume the most complex 
case, in which all hosts are housing decision authority agents. 
For any decision procedure, messages sent to the decision 
authority can be classified into successful messages and failed 
messages.  A successful message is delivered without using 
the  compromised  host.  A failed message either:  (1)  origi(cid:173)
nates or ends at the compromised host; (2) is routed through 
the  compromised  host;  or (3)  cannot  be  routed  because  no 
network route exists. 

For a given TV, a change in 7// can could cause a change 

POSTER PAPERS 

1455 

Figure 2:  Responses to compromised hosts:  (a) ignore, (b) reroute; (c) remove. 

in  routing.  If a route  changes,  the  time  taken  to  transmit a 
message over that route may also change.  A change in mes(cid:173)
sage  delivery  time  can  negatively  impact  a  decision  proce(cid:173)
dure.  Moreover,  a  compromised  host  contains  agents  that 
may violate their expected behavior in a decision procedure. 
Both factors must be considered when evaluating a state TV. 
Wc  define  two  values  that  can  be  used to  evaluate  TV  with 
respect to each factor: 

routes used by host h%  as:  ti  = 
Note, as tt 
increases, the routing efficiency to host  hi  decreases.  When 
the routing efficiency  is minimized  (i.e., no connections ex(cid:173)
ist) for a host 
=  1.0.  As the routing efficiency increases 
(i.e.,  shorter routes  are  used)  for host  hi,  ti  approaches  0.0. 
Hence, the  mean time rating for the entire mobile agent net-

1.  A  message  integrity  rating,  which  relates  successful 

messages received to failed messages. 

2.  A  time rating, which is an estimate of optimality for the 

current network routes. 

Assurance  for  Whole  Mobile  Agent  Network.  A  linear 
combination  of message  integrity rating  and  time  rating  de(cid:173)
fines a  utility  function  assessing  a  mobile  agent  network  in 
state TV in terms of both assurance and routing efficiency: 

(1) 

a is a coefficient between 0 and  1 that determines the balance 
between  assurance  and  network  performance. 
If  —  1.0, 
only message integrity  is considered;  if  —  0.0, only time 
efficiency is considered. Note that V : TV 
[0.0,1.0], where 
V(TV)  =  1.0 is the best possible result. 

2.2  Operators  on  an Agent System  Network 
Using Equation  1, agents can decide how to operate on their 
network.  Naturally,  the  ignore  operator does  nothing.  The 
reroute  operator generates  a  new  set  of network  routes,  us(cid:173)
If  VR'is  the  set  of 
ing  only  safe  routes  wherever  possible. 
safest possible  routes,  the  resulting  mobile  agent  network 
is  generated  using  the  reroute  oper(cid:173)
ator on TV (Figure 2(b)).  Given the routing algorithm p and 
route weight function w, the following algorithm can be used 
to compute TV'; 
Algorithm  1 

reroute(N,hc) 

= 

The  remove  operator  results  in  the  complete  removal  of 
the  compromised  host  from  participation  in  the  agent  sys(cid:173)
tem's  underlying  network.  The  new  mobile  agent  network, 
is the result of applying the removal 
operator on TV and is generated by the following algorithm: 

Measuring  Message Assurance. 
munication  with  all  of  the  other  agents,   

If each  agent  is  in  com(cid:173)

is the total  number of messages that the 
agents on host hi expect to receive from agents on other hosts 
per unit of time given state TV. Based on the current routes 
one can calculate the number of successful messages received 
The message integrity rating for host h2 
on host 
Note, as  mi  increases, the 
is computed as: 
integrity  of messages  sent  to  host  hi  also  increases.  When 
all messages sent to 
are successful,  mi=  1.0.  When  all 
=  0.0.  The mean message in(cid:173)
messages sent to 
tegrity rating over the entire mobile agent network in state TV 

fail, 

is:  

Measuring  Network Routing  Efficiency.  The  trade  off is 
between message integrity and the timeliness of message de(cid:173)
livery.  Network  routing  algorithms  find  sets  of routes  that 
minimize some value for all routes in a network.  In general, 
routing algorithms use a weight function on each route and 
find  the  shortest,  single  source,  paths  to  all  vertices  in  TH. 
In  this  context,  the  function  p  represents  the  network  rout(cid:173)
ing algorithm  which  returns a set of shortest path  routes  for 
the  set of hosts,  given  their current physical  network  topol(cid:173)
where  w  is  the  edge  weight  fiinc-
ogy: 
tion.  There are several  schemes that can be used to weight 
routes in wireless, ad hoc networks [Royer & Toh,  1999], all 
of which can be approximated or bounded using a w that re(cid:173)
turns a value proportional to the time required to transmit a 
message through the network.  The units of time returned by 
w  are used for relative comparison of network routes,  which 
we normalize w to simplify computations:  w  :TZ 
[1,  \H|], 
=  |H|  signifies that the route  from host ht  to 
where 
h3  is non-existent and weight of the longest possible route is 
\H\ — 1.  Now we can define a time rating, Ti for the network 

1456 

POSTER  PAPERS 

In order to select the operator resulting in the highest val(cid:173)
ued  agent  system,  consider  the  values  V{N),  V(N'),  and 
V(N").  The  highest  of these  values  represents  the  best  ac(cid:173)
tion for the agent system. 

3  Application:  A Compromised Auction 
The  disclosure of bids to a compromised host can affect the 
intended,  timely,  outcome of an auction.  A  Vickrey auction 
is a sealed bid auction where the second highest bid is paid 
by the highest bidder [Vickrey,  1961].  All bidders maximize 
their payoff if they employ a truthful bidding strategy. Agents 
often use Vickrey auctions to acquire resources.  Each agent 
submits its bid to an auctioneer host hi (the sink)—but unless 
the physical  host of a bidding agent is directly  connected to 
h1,  the message containing the bid must pass through other 
hosts in the agent system.  All agents operating under normal 
conditions have neither the intent nor the capability of reading 
bids that are routed through their physical hosts. 

Figure 3:  Bid propagation to host h\  in a Vickrey auction:  (a) 
h4  and h7 bid (b) h2 and h6 bid (c)  h3  and h.5 bid (d) h8 bids 

First,  a  compromised  host,  hc  can  read  all  bids  that  are 
sent directly to or routed by means of hc  and potentially cor(cid:173)
rupt the auction.  In this case, instead of maximizing absolute 
payoff,  the  bidding  agents  on  hc  maximize  their payoff rel(cid:173)
ative to other bidding agents.  In this type of "antisocial  bid(cid:173)
ding" [Brandt & Weiss, 2001], assuming there are n bidding 
agents in the agent system, hc most successful  if it knows all 
bids  6i, b 2,..., bn  placed  by  all  of the  other bidding  agents. 
The worst case is when all physical hosts use routes that con(cid:173)
tain  hc.  In  general  this  is  not the  case.  Hence,  if there  are 
n' hosts that use routes containing hc, the probability that the 
highest (or any) bid is disclosed to hc is equal to  

Secondly,  time  is an issue:  auctioneers are not willing to 
wait indefinitely for all  bidders to respond.  In any given de(cid:173)
cision problem there is some threshold, T, such that, if a bid(cid:173)
der is more than  hops from the auctioneer,  its bid will not 
reach  the  auctioneer  in time.  Let 
be  the  set of all  hosts 
that communicate with host  hi  via a route longer than r hops: 
may  contain  hosts 
that use a route containing the compromised host.  To adjust 
for this  overlap,  compute the set Ct  of hosts  affected by  the 

operator 
ignore 
reroute 
remove 

m 

0.286 
0.714 
0.833 

t 

0.250 
0.321 
0.524 

V(N) 
0.509 
0.598 
0.577 

C1/n 
0.5 
0.25 
0.0 

U1/n 
0.0 
0.25 

Table  1:  The  terms  and  result  of V(N)  using 
probability of compromised messages 
of unreceived messages 

for the result of each operator. 

0.42857 
=  0.5,  the 
, and the probability 

compromised host, but not by the required message delivery 
time:  

The  disclosure  of bids  to a  compromised host  during this 
decision procedure is illustrated in Figure 3.  Assume for tim(cid:173)
ing that  r  —  3.  In  this  example,  the  probability 
is 
representative  of the  effect  of compromised  messages,  and 
the probability 
is  representative  of the  effect of time. 
As  either  probability  increases,  the  value  of the  underlying 
mobile agent system should decrease. 

Table  1  demonstrates how V(N)  can be used to minimize 
the effect of a compromised host in a Vickrey auction.  As the 
probability of compromised messages increases, the message 
integrity  rating  decreases.  As  the  probability  of unreceived 
messages increases, the time rating also increases.  The oper(cid:173)
ator yielding the highest value in this example is reroute. 

4  Conclusions 
This paper developed a utility-based model for agents to bal(cid:173)
ance  information  assurance  and  network  routing  efficiency. 
We  have  discovered  that there  exists  a  natural  tradeoff be(cid:173)
tween  information assurance and network routing efficiency 
for ad hoc  mobile  agent networks.  Further,  by empowering 
agents to decide for themselves how they communicate at the 
network level, one can  increase the overall level of message 
integrity in an agent system.  Our approach involves a novel 
exploitation  of properties  of ad  hoc  networks,  enabling mo(cid:173)
bile  agents  to  automatically  adapt to changes that  affect  the 
security of their communication and migration.  The capabil(cid:173)
ity to dynamically reason about the state of their network will 
provides new possibilities for secure computing. 

References 
[Brandt & Weiss, 2001]  F.  Brandt  &  G.  Weiss.  Antisocial 
agents and Vickrey auctions.  Wkshp on ATAL, V 2333, pp 
335-347,2001. 

[Dix et al., 2000]  J.  Dix,  V.  S.  Subrahmanian,  &  G.  Pick. 
Meta-Agent Programs.  1  Logic Prog., 46( 1): 1-60, 2000. 
[Forman & Zahorjan,  1994]  G.  H.  Forman  &  J.  Zahorjan. 
IEEE  Comp., 

The  challenges  of  mobile  computing. 
27(4):38-47, Apr  1994. 

[Royer & Toh,  1999]  E. M.  Royer & C.  K. Toh.  A review of 
current routing protocols  for ad  hoc  mobile  wireless net(cid:173)
works.  IEEEPers.  Comm., 6(2):46-55, Apr  1999. 

[Vickrey,  1961]  W.  Vickrey.  Counter speculation,  auctions, 
and competitive sealed tenders. J. Fin., 16(1 ):8—37, 1961. 
[Xuan et al., 2001]  P.  Xuan,  V  Lesser,  &  S.  Zilberstein. 
in  multi-agent  cooperation: 

Communication  decisions 
model and experiments. AAAS, pp 616-623, 2001. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1457 

