The Knowledge Required to Interpret Noun Compounds 

James Fan, Ken Barker and Bruce Porter 

Department of Computer Sciences 

University of Texas at Austin 

Austin, TX 78712 USA 

{jfan, kbarker, porter}@cs.utexas.edu 

Abstract 

Noun  compound  interpretation  is  the  task  of de(cid:173)
termining  the  semantic  relations  among  the  con(cid:173)
stituents of a noun compound.  For example, "con(cid:173)
crete  floor"  means a floor made of concrete, while 
"gymnasium  floor"  is  the  floor  region  of a  gym(cid:173)
nasium.  We  would  like  to  enable  knowledge ac(cid:173)
quisition systems to interpret noun compounds, as 
part  of their  overall  task  of translating  imprecise 
and incomplete information into formal representa(cid:173)
tions that support automated reasoning.  However, 
if  interpreting  noun  compounds  requires  detailed 
knowledge of the constituent nouns, then it may not 
be  worth  doing:  the  cost  of acquiring this knowl(cid:173)
edge may outweigh the potential benefit. 
This  paper  describes  an  empirical  investigation  of 
the  knowledge  required  to  interpret  noun  com(cid:173)
pounds.  It concludes that the axioms and ontologi-
cal  distinctions  important for this  task  are  derived 
from  the  top  levels  of  a  hierarchical  knowledge 
base  (KB);  detailed  knowledge  of  specific  nouns 
is less  important.  This  is good news,  not only for 
our  work  on  knowledge  acquisition  systems,  but 
also for research on text understanding, where noun 
compound interpretation has a long history. A more 
detailed version of this paper can be found in  [Fan 
et al,  2003]. 

Introduction 

1 
Knowledge  acquisition  involves  building  knowledge  bases 
(KBs)  from the information provided by standard sources of 
expertise,  such  as  people and texts.  In  addition  to  extract(cid:173)
ing relevant information, knowledge acquisition involves re-
expressing the information in a formal language suitable for 
machines to reason with.  In general, this is difficult because 
the  information  is  initially  expressed  in  natural  languages, 
and these expressions are notoriously imprecise and  incom(cid:173)
plete.  However, the goal of our project is to improve knowl(cid:173)
edge  acquisition  methods  by  automating  the  translation  of 
some kinds of expressions from  natural languages to  formal 
ones.  We call this task loose-speak interpretation. 

Several kinds of expressions are good candidates for loose-
speak  interpretation by knowledge acquisition systems.  For 

example,  noun  compounds  omit  information  that  can  often 
be inferred, e.g.  concrete floor is "a floor made of concrete", 
while gymnasium floor is "the  floor  region  ofa gymnasium". 
Another candidate is metonymic expressions.  These expres(cid:173)
sions  contain  incompatible terms  and  must  be  expanded  to 
make  meaningful  phrases.  For  example,  the  statement Joe 
read Shakespeare,  means  "Joe  read  text  written  by  Shake(cid:173)
speare". 

This  paper  focuses  on  the  first  kind  of  loose-speak:  in(cid:173)
terpreting  noun  compounds  in  the  context of knowledge ac(cid:173)
quisition.  A  noun  compound  is  a  sequence  of nouns  com(cid:173)
posed of a head noun and one (or more) modifiers.  The head 
noun determines the type of the  whole compound (with  few 
exceptions),  and  the  modifiers  specialize  the  type  from  the 
head  noun.  Although  we  limit  our  study  to  only  pairs  of 
nouns, our results can be applied to longer noun compounds 
by bracketing them into pairs of nouns (with few exceptions), 
and then interpreting each pair [Liberman and Sproat,  1992; 
Pustejovsky and Bergler,  1993; Barker,  1998]. 

The computational linguistics community has studied noun 
compound interpretation extensively [Leonard,  1984; Down(cid:173)
ing,  1977; Levi,  1979; Finin,  1986; Fabre,  1996; Laucr and 
Dras,  1994;  Barker,  1998;  Vanderwende,  1994]. 
In  these 
studies,  the  task  is  to  select  a  single  semantic  category  for 
each  pair  of nouns.  The  selection  is  usually  made  from  a 
small  list  of semantic  categories,  for  example category part-
of is selected for noun compounds like human lung, category 
material  for  marble  statue,  and  category  ohject-of for  troop 
movement. 

Our task  is  more  general.  Rather  than  selecting  a  single 
semantic category, our task  is to  find  a sequence of semantic 
relations that links two nouns in a compound.  Semantic rela(cid:173)
tions are a list of about 50 thematic roles such as agent,  ob(cid:173)
ject,  has-part,  location,.....  For example,  given  animal virus, 
a traditional interpretation may classify this as a location cat(cid:173)
egory  (animal virus  is  a  virus  in  an  animal).  A  loose-speak 
interpretation may be composed of a combination of semantic 
relations, such as:  "an animal virus is a virus that is the agent 
of an invade, such that the object of the invade is the cell part 
of an animal". 

Furthermore,  computational  linguists  approach  the  noun 
compound  interpretation  task  armed  with  lots  of examples, 
but little or no knowledge about the constituent nouns.  Typ(cid:173)
ical  solutions are  based on  statistical  patterns  discovered  in 

POSTER PAPERS 

1483 

the corpus of examples.  In contrast,  we approach the task in 
the  context  of the  constituent  nouns  knowledge  -  their  tax-
onomic  classification,  at  least  -  but  few  examples  of noun 
compounds, let alone a corpus. 

2 

Interpreting  noun compounds  during 
knowledge  acquisition 

During knowledge acquisition,  the  domain expert (or,  more 
generally, the knowledge source)  may provide a noun com(cid:173)
pound  in  any  dialogue  that  expects  a  noun.  Our  knowl(cid:173)
edge acquisition system successfully interprets the noun com(cid:173)
pound  if it  finds a correct sequence of semantic relations be(cid:173)
tween the head noun and its modifier and builds a correct for(cid:173)
mal representation of the noun compound. 

If noun  compound  interpretation requires a priori,  detailed 
knowledge of the  head  noun  and  its  modifier,  then  the  cost 
of acquiring  this  knowledge  may  overshadow  the  benefit  of 
interpreting the compound.  If, on the other hand, noun com(cid:173)
pounds can be successfully interpreted without much knowl(cid:173)
edge about the specific constituent nouns, then the problem is 
avoided, and a knowledge acquisition system might interpret 
one concept (the noun compound) while related concepts (the 
constituent nouns) are only skeletal.  Knowledge bases tend to 
grow  in  this  uneven  way  -  following the  lead  of the  knowl(cid:173)
edge sources providing expertise -  and a knowledge acquisi(cid:173)
tion system should support it. 

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  determine  what  sort  of 
knowledge is required to interpret noun compounds, and how 
this  knowledge might be  obtained.  Before delving  into  the 
details of the study, it's  important to understand what we are 
not attempting to do. 

We  are  not  presenting  a  novel  algorithm  for  noun  com(cid:173)
pound  interpretation.  Our  algorithm  is  quite  simple  and  is 
derived from previous research. Also, we arc not introducing 
a new type of knowledge representation or a novel technique 
of automated reasoning. Finally, we are not using a new, com(cid:173)
prehensive knowledge base.  We built a couple of them rather 
quickly and we're using another -  not built for this task - "off 
the shelf." 

In  summary,  what  we arc doing  is  evaluating the  knowl(cid:173)
edge requirements of a standard search algorithm applied to 
a variety of typical knowledge bases through a series of abla(cid:173)
tion studies. 

3  Experiments 
The  challenge  in  measuring  an  algorithm's  sensitivity  to 
knowledge  base  content  is  that  the  results  may  vary  across 
domains  and  across  knowledge  bases.  We  attempt  to  neu(cid:173)
tralize these factors by replicating our study in three domains 
with quite different knowledge bases. 

The noun compound interpretation task can be viewed as 
follows:  given  a  knowledge  base  encoded  as  a  conceptual 
graph,  and  a  pair  of nouns  corresponding  to  two  nodes  in 
the  graph,  find  a  path  of semantic  relations  between  them. 
The algorithm we used is a breadth-first search algorithm on 
a knowledge base.  The algorithm is given a noun compound 
of the  form  <  C1,  C2  >  where C\  and  C2  are  the KB  con(cid:173)
cepts that are mapped from the constituents of the given noun 

compound.  Each  of the  first  two  steps  conducts a  breadth-
first search of the knowledge base along all semantic relation 
arcs.  The first search starts from C1 and looks for C2  or any 
superclass or subclass of it.  The second search starts from C2 
and looks  for C\  or any  superclass or subclass  of it.  Step  3 
combines the results, sorted by path length. 

To avoid getting results that are skewed to a particular do(cid:173)
main or knowledge representation, we used a variety of quite 
different data sets.  The first consists of 224 noun compounds 
from  a  college-level cell  biology  text  [Alberts ct  al.,  1998]. 
The  second  consists  of 294  noun  compounds  from  a  small 
engine repair manual. The third data set consists of 224 com(cid:173)
pounds from a Sun Sparcstation manual.  The nouns used in 
these data sets are mapped to the corresponding concepts in 
knowledge bases on these topics. 

Despite  these commonalities,  the  KBs  differ significantly. 
First they differ in terms of how they  were  built.  The knowl(cid:173)
edge  base  for  the  biology  text  was  built  using  the  generic 
Component  Library  [Barker ct  al,  2001]  to  answer  end-of-
the-chapter style questions, as one of the challenge problems 
for DARPA's  Rapid  Knowledge  Formation project  [Clark  ct 
al.,  2001].  The knowledge bases  for the other two data sets 
(the small engine repair manual and the Sparcstation manual) 
were built "on top of" the knowledge in WordNet [Fellbaum, 
1998].  We  augmented WordNet  with  the  upper ontology of 
the generic Component Library  plus about ten  concepts that 
are important to each of the two domains whose partonomies 
are not complete in WordNet.  Through this process, we en(cid:173)
coded 416 concepts in about 50 man-hours. The advantage of 
using WordNet as the foundation for these knowledge bases 
is two-fold: it includes most of the terms used in the data sets, 
linked with both taxonomic and partonomic relations, and  it 
is  widely  available  and  well  used.  The  KBs  also  differ  in 
content.  Other than the shared upper ontology of the generic 
component library, they have few concepts in common. 

The  importance of each  level  of the ontology is  measured 
through  a  series  of ablations.  When  a  level  is  ablated,  the 
concepts on that  level  and  all  their axioms are deleted  from 
the  knowledge  base.  The  superclasses  of the  subclasses  of 
these concepts are changed to the superclasses of the concepts 
being deleted. As a special case, when the 0th level (the root 
level concept) is deleted, it is replaced by a generic concept of 
"Thing".  Because the root level concept is vacuous, deleting 
it has no affect. 

4  Results 
Ablating levels of the ontology shows that they differ in their 
importance for the noun compound interpretation task.  With(cid:173)
out any ablation, both precision and recall of the noun com(cid:173)
pound interpretation arc around 80% across all three knowl(cid:173)
edge bases.  Ablating level one causes a big drop in both pre(cid:173)
cision and recall.  Ablating level two introduces a big gap be(cid:173)
tween precision and recall because the algorithm does not find 
interpretations for many noun compounds. As lower levels in 
the ontology are ablated one at a time, the impact diminishes 
and performance improves to the  level of a knowledge base 
with no ablations. 

The  contribution  of the  first  two  levels  of the  ontology  is 

1484 

POSTER  PAPERS 

LBarker,  1998]  Ken  Barker.  Semi-automatic  Recognition  oj 
Semantic Relationships in English  Technical  Texts.  PhD 
thesis, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,  1998. 

[Clark et al, 2001]  Peter  Clark,  J.  Thompson,  K.  Barker, 
B.  Porter,  V.  Chaudhri,  A.  Rodriguez,  J.  Thomcre, 
S. Mishra, Y. Gil, P. Hayes, and T. Reichherzer.  Knowl(cid:173)
edge  entry  as the  graphical  assembly  of components.  In 
Proceedings  of First  International  Conference  on  Knowl(cid:173)
edge Capture, 2001. 

[Downing,  1977]  Pamela A.  Downing.  On the creation and 
use of English compounds. Language, 53:810-842,1977, 
[Fabre,  1996]  Cecile Fabre.  Interpretation of nominal com(cid:173)
pounds:  Combining  domain  independent  and  domain-
In  Proceedings  of Sixteenth  Inter(cid:173)
specific  information. 
national  Conference  on  Computational Linguistics,  pages 
364-369,1996. 

[Fan et al, 2003]  James Fan,  Ken Barker, and Bruce Porter. 
The  knowledge  required  to  interpret  noun  compounds. 
Technical  Report  UT-AI-TR-03-301,  University of Texas 
at Austin, 2003. 

[Fcllbaum,  1998]  Christiane Fellbaum, editor.  WordNet:  An 
Electronic  Lexical  Database.  The  MIT  Press,  Boston, 
1998. 

iFinin,  1986]  Timothy  W.  Finin.  Constraining  the  Inter(cid:173)
pretation  of  Nominal  Compounds  in  a  Limited  Context. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc, New Jersey,  1986. 

[Laucr and Dras,  1994]  Mark Laucr and Mark Dras.  A prob(cid:173)
abilistic model of compound nouns. In Proceedings of the 
7th  Australian  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence. 
World Scientific Press, 1994. 

[Leonard,  1984]  Rosemary  Leonard.  The  Interpretation  of 
English Noun Sequences on the Computer.  Elsevier Sci(cid:173)
ence, Amsterdam, 1984. 

[Levi, 1979] Judith Levi. The Syntax and Semantics of Com(cid:173)

plex Nominals.  Academic Press,  New York,  1979. 

[Liberman and Sproat,  1992]  Mark  Liberman  and  Richard 
Sproat.  Stress  and Structure  of Modified Noun  Phrases. 
CSLI Publications,  1992. 

[Pustejovsky and Bergler,  1993]  James  S.  Pustejovsky  and 
Anick  P.  Bergler.  Lexical  semantic  techniques  for  cor(cid:173)
pus analysis.  Computational Linguistics,  19(2):331  -358, 
1993. 

[Vanderwende,  1994]  Lucy Vanderwende. Algorithm for au(cid:173)
tomatic interpretation of noun sequences.  In Proceedings 
of Fifteenth  Intional  Conference  on  Computational  Lin(cid:173)
guistics, pages 782 - 788,  1994. 

observed across all three data sets and knowledge bases. This 
pattern  strongly  suggests  that  top  levels  of the  ontology  are 
most  important  for  the  noun  compound  interpretation  task, 
which is likely due to some combination of two factors: 

1.  Top  levels  of the  ontology  include  concepts  that  make 
important ontological  distinctions.  For example,  ablat(cid:173)
ing  the  level  that  introduces Entity  and Event blurs the 
distinction  between  obviously different  concept,  which 
causes the  search to  stop  with  erroneous results.  Con(cid:173)
sequently,  many  more  interpretations are returned, and 
because we only use the first interpretation, the possibil(cid:173)
ity of it being correct is reduced. 

2.  Although they  contain  relatively  few  axioms, these  ax(cid:173)
ioms are important for the task.  The top-level ontology 
contains the most frequently used axioms, such as that 
"every  Action  involves  an  object  that  is  acted  upon". 
These axioms are used in the search as a step along the 
way.  Deleting these axioms makes it difficult to find an 
interpretation for many of the noun compounds, thereby 
causing recall to lag behind precision. 

5  Conclusion 
This paper reports an  encouraging result:  interpreting noun 
compounds does not  require detailed  knowledge of the con(cid:173)
stituent nouns.  Rather, it requires only that the nouns be cor(cid:173)
rectly placed  in  a  taxonomy, and  that the taxonomy  include 
the  ontological  distinctions  and  axioms  commonly  found  in 
domain  independent  upper  levels.  These  requirements  are 
easily met  in the context of knowledge acquisition,  which  is 
our focus. 

We  reached  this  conclusion  using  a  novel  experimental 
method.  We  measured  the  contribution  of each  level  of the 
ontology to the task of interpreting noun compounds.  We ab(cid:173)
lated successive levels of the ontology one at a time, thereby 
conflating ontological  distinctions and removing the axioms 
associated with concepts at each level. We found that the up(cid:173)
per  levels  of the ontology for the  KBs  we  used are the most 
important for noun compound interpretation.  As lower levels 
in the ontology are ablated one at a time, the impact dimin(cid:173)
ishes  to  nil.  A  more  detailed  version  of this  paper can  be 
found in [Fan et  al,  2003]. 

Acknowledgments 
Support for this research is provided by a contract from Stan(cid:173)
ford Research Institute as part of DARPA's Rapid Knowledge 
Formation project. 

References 
[Alberts et ai,  1998]  Bruce Alberts, Dennis Bray, Alexander 
Johnson,  Julian  Lewis,  Martin  Raff,  Keith  Robert,  Peter 
Walter,  and Keith Roberts.  Essential Cell Biology:  An In(cid:173)
troduction  to  the  Molecular  Biology  of the  Cell.  Garland 
Publisher, 1998. 

LBarker et al,,2001] Ken  Barker,  B.  Porter,  and  P.  Clark. 
A  library  of generic  concepts  for  composing  knowledge 
In  Proceedings  of First  International  Conference 
bases. 
on Knowledge Capture, 2001. 

POSTER  PAPERS 

1485 

