Two-Sided Bandits and the Dating Market

Sanmay Das

Center for Biological and Computational Learning

and Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Emir Kamenica

Department of Economics

Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02138

kamenica@fas.harvard.edu

Cambridge, MA 02139

sanmay@mit.edu

Abstract

We study the decision problems facing agents in
repeated matching environments with learning, or
two-sided bandit problems, and examine the dat-
ing market, in which men and women repeatedly go
out on dates and learn about each other, as an ex-
ample. We consider three natural matching mecha-
nisms and empirically examine properties of these
mechanisms, focusing on the asymptotic stability
of the resulting matchings when the agents use a
simple learning rule coupled with an -greedy ex-
ploration policy. Matchings tend to be more stable
when agents are patient in two different ways —
if they are more likely to explore early or if they
are more optimistic. However, the two forms of pa-
tience do not interact well in terms of increasing
the probability of stable outcomes. We also deﬁne
a notion of regret for the two-sided problem and
study the distribution of regrets under the different
matching mechanisms.

Introduction

1
This paper analyzes the learning and decision problems of
agents in a model of one-to-one two-sided matching, focusing
on the role of the matching mechanism and the exploration-
exploitation tradeoff. We consider a repeated game in which
agents gain an uncertain payoff from being matched with a
particular person on the other side of the market in each time
period. A natural example of such a situation is the dating
market, in which men and women repeatedly go out on dates
and learn about each other. Another example is a spot labor
market, in which employers and employees are matched for
particular job contracts. A matching mechanism is used to
pair the agents. For example, we can consider a mechanism
in which all the women decide which man to “ask out,” and
then each man selects a woman from his set of offers, with
the rejected women left unmatched for that period.

Standard models of matching in economics [Roth and So-
tomayor, 1990] almost always assume that each agent knows
his or her preferences over the individuals on the other side
of the market. This assumption is too restrictive for many
markets, including the market for romantic partnerships. Our

model is driven by the need to relax this assumption. The ex-
isting literature on two-sided search with nontransferable util-
ity (for example [Burdett and Wright, 1998]) assumes match-
ing is exogenous and random. Our problem is more deeply re-
lated to bandit problems [Berry and Fristedt, 1985], in which
an agent must choose which arm of an n-armed bandit to pull
in order to maximize long-term expected reward, taking into
account the tradeoff between exploring, that is learning more
about the reward distribution for each arm, and exploiting,
pulling the arm with the maximum expected reward. How-
ever, in our model the arms themselves have agency — they
can decide whether to be pulled or not, or whom to be pulled
by, and they themselves receive rewards based on who the
puller is. This motivates our formulation of the problem as a
“two-sided” bandit problem.

In principle, we would like to examine the equilibrium be-
havior of agents in two-sided bandit problems. However, per-
fect Bayesian equilibria of the game we formulate are pro-
hibitively hard to compute. Because of this difﬁculty, the ap-
proach we use is closely related to the theory of learning in
games [Fudenberg and Levine, 1998], which considers more
generally how individual learning rules affect outcomes in
games and whether agents reach static equilibria.

In this paper we formally deﬁne the two-sided bandit prob-
lem and describe three important matching mechanisms. We
deﬁne regret as the difference between the actual reward re-
ceived and the reward under the stable matching, i.e. a match-
ing such that there is no pair that would rather be with each
other than with whom they are matched. We experimentally
analyze the asymptotic stability and regret properties when
agents use -greedy learning algorithms adapted to the differ-
ent matching mechanisms.

The Gale-Shapley mechanism [Gale and Shapley, 1962],
which yields stability when information is complete and pref-
erences are truthfully revealed, converges quickly to stable
matchings, whereas mechanisms that are more realistic for
the dating example, in which women make single offers to
the men, do not always converge to stable matchings. Asymp-
totically stable matches are more likely when agents explore
more early on. They are also more likely when agents are
optimistic (again, early on) — that is, they assume a higher
probability of their offer being accepted or an offer being
made to them than is justiﬁed by the past empirical frequen-
cies of these events. However, increased optimism does not

interact well with increased exploration in terms of stability;
the probability of stability is actually higher for lower explo-
ration probabilities when optimism is greater.

ij is the value of woman j to man i, and vw

2 The Model
There are M men and W women, who interact for T time
periods. vm
ij is
the value of man j to woman i. These values are constant
through time. In each period, men and women are matched
to each other through a matching mechanism. A matching is
a pairing between men and women in which each woman is
paired with one or zero men and each man is paired with one
or zero women. Formally, a matching mechanism is a map-
ping from agents’ actions to a matching. If man i is matched
with woman j in period t, he receives vm
ijt, and she re-
ceives vw
jit. If unmatched, individual i receives some
constant value Ki.

ij + m

ji + w

For our empirical analysis we put some structure on the
reward processes and the matching mechanism. First, we
make the strong assumption of sex-wide homogeneity of pref-
erences. That is, every man is equally “good” for each
woman and vice versa — there are no idiosyncratic prefer-
ences and there are no couples who “get along” better than
j ∀i. We also
others. Formally, vm
assume that people dislike being single: ∀i, Ki (cid:28) minj vz
∀i, z ∈ {m, w}, and that the noise terms  are independently
and identically distributed.1 Extensions to more general pref-
erences are straightforward.2

j ∀i and vw

ij = vm

ij = vw

ij

We consider three matching mechanisms. Without loss of

generality, we assume that women always ask men out.
Gale-Shapley matching Each agent submits a list of prefer-
ences and a centralized matching procedure produces a
matching based on these lists. The Gale-Shapley algo-
rithm [Gale and Shapley, 1962] guarantees a matching
that is stable under the submitted preferences. The man-
optimal variant yields the stable matching that is opti-
mal for men, and the woman-optimal variant the stable
matching that is optimal for women. We use the woman-
optimal variant.

Simultaneous offers Each woman independently chooses
one man to make an offer to. Each man selects one of
the offers he receives. Women who are rejected are un-
matched for the period, as are the men who receive no
offers.

Sequential offers Each woman independently chooses one
man to make an offer to. The offers are randomly or-
dered and men must decide on these “exploding” offers
without knowing what other offers are coming. Men see
all the offers they receive, including ones that arrive after
they accept. If an offer is rejected the woman making the
offer is unmatched in that period. A man is unmatched
if he rejects all offers he receives.

1Another plausible and interesting structure to consider is pair-

wise homogeneity of preferences with vm

ij = vw

2There is always a unique stable matching under the assumed
preference structure. With multiple stable matches, we would need
to use a different notion of regret, as discussed later.

ji ∀i, j.

Intuitively, it is useful to think of the simultaneous choice
mechanism as capturing a situation in which women ask men
out over e-mail and each man can review all his offers before
making a decision, while the sequential choice mechanism
captures the situation where women ask men out over the
telephone. We are particularly interested in these two match-
ing mechanisms because they are more plausible descriptions
of reality than a centralized matchmaker and do not require
agents to reveal their preferences to a third party.

3 The Decision and Learning Problems
We ﬁrst describe the decision problems agents face at each
time step if they want to optimize their myopic reward in that
time step. After this we discuss the exploration-exploitation
issues under the different matching mechanisms and describe
speciﬁc forms of the -greedy algorithm.

Let Q

denote man (woman) i’s estimate of the value
of going out with woman (man) j, pw
ij denote woman i’s esti-
mate of the probability that man j will go out with her if she
asks him out and pm
ij denote man i’s estimate of the probabil-
ity that woman j will ask him out under the sequential choice
mechanism.

{m,w}
ij

3.1 Women’s Decision Problem
Under Gale-Shapley matching, women’s action space is the
set of rankings of men. Under the other two mechanisms, a
woman chooses which man to make an offer to. She must
base her decision on any prior beliefs and the history of re-
wards she has received in the past. She has to take into ac-
count both the expected value of going on a date with each
man and (for the non-Gale-Shapley mechanisms) the proba-
bility that he will accept her offer.

ij).

ijQw

Under the woman-optimal variant of the Gale-Shapley
the dominant myopic strategy, and thus the
mechanism,
greedy action, is for woman i to rank the men according to
the expected value of going out with each of them, Qw
ij. For
the other two mechanisms, the greedy action is to ask out man
j = arg maxj(pw
3.2 Arms With Agency: Men’s Decision Problem
The action space of men, the arms of the bandit, may be con-
strained by women’s actions. The decision problem faced
by a man depends on the matching mechanism used. Under
the woman-optimal Gale-Shapley mechanism, men may have
an incentive to misrepresent their preferences, but since the
sex-wide homogeneity of preferences ensures a unique stable
matching [Roth and Sotomayor, 1990], this is less likely to
be a problem.3 So, the greedy action for man i under Gale-
Shapley is to rank women based on their Qij’s.

With the simultaneous choice mechanism, in each time pe-
riod a man receives a list of women who have made him an
offer. He must decide which one to accept. This is a ban-
dit problem with a different subset of the arms available at
each time period. The greedy action is to accept the woman
j = arg maxj Qm
ij .

3Speciﬁcally, if the submitted rankings satisfy sex-wide homo-
geneity, man- and woman-optimal algorithms yield the same match-
ing so truthtelling is the dominant myopic strategy for men.

Under the sequential choice mechanism, a man might re-
ceive multiple offers within a time period, and each time he
receives an offer he has to decide immediately whether to ac-
cept or reject it, and he may not renege on an accepted offer.
The information set he has is the list of women who have
asked him out so far. For each woman who has not asked him
out, it could either be that she chose not to make him an offer,
or that her turn in the ordering has not arrived yet. We can
formulate the man’s value function heuristically. Let i be the
index of the man, let S be the set of women who have asked
him out so far, and let h be the woman currently asking him
out (h ∈ S).

V (S, h) = max{Qm
ih,

Pr(k next woman to ask i out)V (S ∪ {k}, k)}

X

k /∈S

X

k /∈S

The base cases are V (W, h) = Qw

ih where W is the set of

all women. The greedy action is to accept an offer when

Qm

ih >

Pr(k next woman to ask i out)V (S ∪ {k}, k)

The relevant probabilities are:

Pr(k next woman to ask i out) =

X

 1

|S0|

 Y

T∈Perm(S0)

j preceding k in T

 pm

ik

(1 − pm
ij )



where S0 = W \S. This is a variant of the classic secretary
problem [Gilbert and Mosteller, 1966]. We are not sure at the
moment if this particular form can be simpliﬁed to yield a
closed form solution for the value or decision function.

3.3 The Exploration-Exploitation Tradeoff
Women and men both have to consider the exploration-
exploitation tradeoff (summarized in [Sutton and Barto,
1998]). Exploitation means maximizing expected reward in
the current period (also called the greedy choice), and is
solved as above. Exploration happens when an agent does not
select the greedy action, but instead selects an action that has
lower expected value in the current period in order to learn
more and increase future rewards.

The one-sided version of the exploration-exploitation prob-
lem is central to n-armed bandit problems [Berry and Frist-
edt, 1985; Gittins and Jones, 1974, inter alia]. An n-armed
bandit is deﬁned by random variables Xi,t where 1 ≤ i ≤ n
is the index of the arm of the bandit, and Xi,t speciﬁes the
payoff received from pulling arm i at time t. The distribu-
tion of some or all of the Xi,t is unknown so there is value to
exploring. The agent pulls the arms sequentially and wishes
to maximize the discounted sum of payoffs. In our model, if
there is a single woman and n men, the woman faces a stan-
dard n-armed bandit problem.

One of the simplest techniques used for bandit problems
is the so-called -greedy algorithm. This algorithm se-
lects the arm with highest expected value with probability

1 −  and otherwise selects a random arm. Although sim-
ple, the algorithm is very successful in most empirical prob-
lems, and we therefore use it in our experiments. We have
also experimented with alternatives like softmax-action selec-
tion with Boltzmann distributions [Sutton and Barto, 1998;
Luce, 1959] and the Exp3 algorithm [Auer et al., 2002].
These do not improve upon the empirical performance of -
greedy in our simulations.

Under each matching mechanism the exploratory action is
to randomly select an action, other than the greedy one, from
the available action space. Since the value of exploration de-
creases as learning progresses, we let  decay exponentially
over time which also ensures that the matchings converge.

At this stage we cannot solve for the perfect Bayesian equi-
librium set. We believe, however, that if the agents are sufﬁ-
ciently patient and the horizon is sufﬁciently long, the match-
ings will converge to stability on the equilibrium path. Solv-
ing for the equilibrium set would enable us to explicitly char-
acterize the differences between equilibrium behavior and be-
havior under the -greedy algorithm.

The two-sided nature of the learning problem leads to non-
stationarities. Under the sequential and simultaneous mech-
anisms, women need to consider the reward of asking out a
particular man, not the reward of going out with him. The re-
ward of asking out a particular man depends on the probabil-
ity that he will accept the offer. Thus, the reward distribution
changes based on what the men are learning, introducing an
externality to the search process. The same applies to men un-
der the sequential mechanism since the probability that a par-
ticular woman will ask a man out changes over time. This is a
problem of coordinated learning that is related to the literature
on learning in games [Fudenberg and Levine, 1998] and to
reinforcement learning of nonstationary distributions in mul-
tiagent environments [Bowling and Veloso, 2002]. Some re-
cent work by Auer et al. on “adversarial” bandit problems,
which makes no distributional assumptions in deriving regret
bounds, is relevant in this context [Auer et al., 2002].

Since the underlying vij’s are constant we deﬁne Qij as
person i’s sample mean of the payoff of going out with per-
son j. In order to deal with the nonstationarity of pij’s, on the
other hand, we use a ﬁxed learning rate for updating the prob-
abilities which allows agents to forget the past more quickly:

pij[t] = (1 − η)pij[t − 1] + ηI[offer made / accepted]
where η is a constant and I is an indicator function indicat-
ing whether a man accepted an offer (for the woman’s update,
applied only if woman i made an offer to man j at time t) or
whether a woman made an offer to a man (for the man’s up-
date, applied at each time period t).

4 Empirical Results
Our simulations involve a market with 5 women and 5 men.
The agents use η of 0.05 for updating their probability esti-
mates and the probability of exploration evolves with time as
1 =
t = t/1000. Agents have true values vm
1 = 9, vm
4 = 6. We
vw
assume Ki = 0 ∀i. The noise signals 
are i.i.d. and

0 = vw
4 = vw
{m,w}
ijt

0 = 10, vm

2 = vw

2 = 8, vm

3 = vw

3 = 7, vm

ID Simultaneous Regret

Sequential Regret
Man’s Woman’s Man’s
0.126
0.552
0.009
0.278
-0.148
0.136
-0.024
-0.126
-0.414
-0.187

0.578
-0.023
-0.153
-0.005
-0.171

Woman’s
0.126
0.090
0.236
0.238
-0.690

0
1
2
3
4

Table 2: Distribution of regret under simultaneous choice
( = 0.1) and sequential choice ( = 0.9) mechanisms

Figure 1: Probability of a stable (asymptotic) matching as a
function of initial value of 

drawn from a normal distribution with mean 0. Unless other-
wise speciﬁed, the standard deviation of the noise distribution
is 0.5. Reported results are averages from 500 simulations,
each lasting a total of 30,000 time steps. Initial values of Qij
are sampled from a uniform [6, 10] distribution and initial val-
ues of pij are sampled from a uniform [0, 1] distribution.

Our experiments show that settings in which agents are
matched using the Gale-Shapley mechanism always result in
asymptotically stable matchings, even for very small initial
values of  such as 0.1. After a period of exploration, where
the agents match up with many different partners and learn
their preferences, agents start pairing up regularly with just
one partner, and this is always the agent with the same rank-
ing on the other side. This indicates that agents are generally
successful at learning their preferences. Interestingly, even if
only one side explores (that is, either men or women always
pick the greedy action), populations almost always converge
to stable matchings, with a slight decline in the probability of
stability when only men explore (under the woman-optimal
matching algorithm, women’s rankings can have a greater ef-
fect on the matching than men’s rankings).

The probabilities of convergence under the simultaneous
and sequential choice mechanisms are signiﬁcantly lower, al-
though they increase with larger initial values of . We can see
this behavior in Figure 1, which also reveals that the probabil-
ity of convergence to a stable matching is much higher with
the simultaneous choice mechanism. Table 1 shows these
probabilities as well as the score, which is a measure of how
P
large the deviation from the stable matching is. If men and
women are indexed in order of their true value ranking, the
i∈W |i − Partner(i)|
score for a matching is deﬁned as 1
W
where Partner(i) is the true value ranking of the man woman
i is matched with, and W is the set of all women.

It is also interesting to look at who beneﬁts from the insta-
bilities. In order to do this, we deﬁne a notion of regret for
an agent as the (per unit time) difference between the reward
under the stable matching and the actual reward received (a
negative value of regret indicates that the agent did better than

Figure 2: A “phase transition”: men and women are ranked
from 0 (highest) to 4 (lowest) with -1 representing the un-
matched state. The graph shows the transition to a situation
where the second highest ranked man ends up paired with the
lowest ranked woman

(s)he would have done under the stable matching). This de-
ﬁnition is unambiguous with sex-wide homogeneity of pref-
erences since there is only one stable matching, but could be
problematic in other contexts, when there may be multiple
stable matchings. In such cases it might make sense to ana-
lyze individual agent performance in terms of the difference
between average achieved reward and expected reward under
one of the stable matchings depending on context.

In the case of sex-wide homogeneity of preferences we of
course expect that regret will be greater for more desirable
agents since they have more to lose when their value is not
known. Table 2 shows the distribution of regrets for simul-
taneous and sequential choice. The regrets are averaged over
the last 10,000 periods of the simulation. Under simultaneous
choice, the worst woman beneﬁts at the expense of all other
women while the worst two men beneﬁt at the expense of the
top three. Under sequential choice, other agents beneﬁt at the
expense of the best ones. Further research is needed to bet-
ter understand this apparent difference in the distribution of
regrets under the two mechanisms.

Figure 2 shows interesting dynamic behavior in one par-
ticular simulation where the second best man ends up with
the worst woman. The graph shows which man is matched
with which woman at each time period. The lines represent
the men, and the numbers on the Y axis represent the women.
The value -1 represents the state of being unmatched in that
period for a man. The men and women are ranked from 0
(best) to 4 (worst). Initially, the second best man is paired
with the best woman so he keeps rejecting offers from all the

0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.900.20.40.60.81Initial epsilonProbability of asymptotic stable matchingGale−ShapleySimultaneousSequential1600  1650 17001750180018501900−101234TickWomanMan 0Man 1Man 2Man 3Man 4

.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9

Simultaneous Choice
Score
Pr (stability)
0.4296
0.3832
0.2920
0.1880
0.0992
0.0672
0.0296
0.0120
0.0008

0.318
0.444
0.548
0.658
0.788
0.856
0.930
0.970
0.998

0.050
0.054
0.050
0.058
0.096
0.108
0.130
0.164
0.224

Sequential Choice

Pr (stability)

Gale-Shapley

Pr (stability)

Score
0.9688
0.9280
0.8560
0.8080
0.7448
0.7064
0.6640
0.5848
0.4912

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

Score
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

Table 1: Convergence to stability as a function of 

σ
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

Pr (stability)

0.658
0.636
0.624
0.600

Score
0.1880
0.1952
0.2120
0.2328

Table 3: Convergence to stability as a function of σ with si-
multaneous choice and initial  = 0.4

other women. These women thus learn that he is extremely
particular about whom he dates and there is no point in asking
him out. When the best woman ﬁnally learns that she can get
a better man this triggers a chain of events in which all the
men sequentially move to the woman ranked one higher than
the one they were seeing. However, all the women have such
a low opinion of the second best man that he ends up getting
matched with the very worst woman. The matching shown at
the end of the graph is the ﬁnal asymptotic matching in this
simulation. Note that the gender asymmetry (women ask men
out) precludes this from happening to a woman.

Finally, we analyze how the noise distribution affects the
probability of stability. We expect that there will be less con-
vergence to stability when the signals are less precise. We ran
experiments in which the standard deviation of the noise dis-
tribution was changed while holding other factors constant.
We used an initial  of 0.4 and the same underlying values
as above. Table 3 shows the results using the simultaneous
choice mechanism. We vary the standard deviation from one
half of the distance between the two adjacent true values (0.5)
to twice that distance (2.0), and the probability of stability
falls by less than 10%. This suggests that the instabilities
arise mostly from the structure of the problem and the non-
stationarity of probability estimates rather than from the noise
in the signals of value.

5 Optimism and Exploration
The insight that instabilities arise mostly from the structure
of the problem suggests an alternative method for engineer-
ing asymptotic stability into the system. Suppose agents are
initially optimistic and their level of optimism declines over
time. This is another form of patience — a willingness to wait
for the best — and it should lead to more stable outcomes.

Optimism can be represented by a systematic overestima-
tion of the probability that your offer will be accepted or that

Figure 3: The mechanism of stability with optimism: agents
keep trying better ranked agents on the other side until they
ﬁnally “fall” to their own level

an offer will be made to you. We explore this empirically
with the sequential choice mechanism. Instead of using the
learned values of pij as previously deﬁned, agents instead use
an optimistic version. At time t, both men and women use the
optimistic probability estimate:

ij = αt + (1 − αt)pij
p0

in decision making (the actual pij is maintained and updated
as before). αt should decline with time. In our simulations
α0 = 1, αT = 0 (where T is the length of the simulation) and
α declines linearly with t. There are no other changes to any
of the decision-making or learning procedures.

Figure 3 shows the process by which agents converge to
asymptotic matchings (in this case a stable one) with the op-
timistic estimates. The structure of the graph is the same
as that in Figure 2. Essentially, each agent keeps trying for
the best agent (s)he can match with until the optimism para-
meter has declined sufﬁciently so (s)he “falls” to the equiv-
alently ranked agent on the other side of the market. Figure
4 shows that agents are considerably more likely to converge
asymptotically to stable matchings using this algorithm for
any value of the initial exploration probability. Of course,
this convergence comes at the expense of utility achieved in
the period before the agents settle down.

0  0.51  1.52  3  −101234TickWomanMan 0Man 1Man 2Man 3Man 4Acknowledgements
We would like to thank David Laibson, Sayan Mukherjee,
Tommy Poggio, Al Roth and the referees for useful com-
ments. SD acknowledges grants to CBCL from Merrill-
Lynch, the National Science Foundation, the Center for e-
Business at MIT, the Eastman Kodak Company, Honda R&D
Co, and Siemens Corporate Research, Inc. EK acknowledges
support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Re-
search Fellowship, the National Institute on Aging (Grant #
T32-AG00186), the Institute for Humane Studies, and the
Chiles Foundation.

References
[Auer et al., 2002] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, Y. Freund, and
R. E. Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed bandit prob-
lem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.

[Berry and Fristedt, 1985] D. A. Berry and B. Fristedt. Ban-
Sequential Allocation of Experiments.
dit Problems:
Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability. Chap-
man and Hall, London, UK, 1985.

[Bowling and Veloso, 2002] M. Bowling and M. M. Veloso.
Multiagent learning using a variable learning rate. Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, 136:215–250, 2002.

[Burdett and Wright, 1998] K. Burdett and R. Wright. Two-
sided search with nontransferable utility. Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, 1:220–245, 1998.

[Fudenberg and Levine, 1998] D. Fudenberg and D. Levine.
The Theory of Learning in Games. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, 1998.

[Gale and Shapley, 1962] D. Gale and L. S. Shapley. College
admissions and the stability of marriage. The American
Mathematical Monthly, 69(1):9–15, 1962.

[Gilbert and Mosteller, 1966] J. Gilbert and F. Mosteller.
Recognizing the maximum of a sequence. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 61:35–73, 1966.

[Gittins and Jones, 1974] J. C. Gittins and D. M. Jones. A
dynamic allocation index for the sequential design of ex-
periments. In J. Gani, K. Sakadi, and I. Vinczo, editors,
Progress in Statistics, pages 241–266. North Holland, Am-
sterdam, 1974.

[Luce, 1959] D. Luce.

New York, 1959.

Invidual Choice Behavior. Wiley,

[Roth and Sotomayor, 1990] A. E. Roth and M. Sotomayor.
Two-Sided Matching: A Study in Game-Theoretic Model-
ing and Analysis. Econometric Society Monograph Series.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1990.

[Sutton and Barto, 1998] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Re-
inforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, 1998.

Figure 4: Probability of convergence to stability for different
initial values of epsilon with all agents using the optimistic
algorithm versus all agents using the realistic algorithm

The surprising feature in Figure 4 is that stable matchings
are more likely with smaller initial exploration probabilities.
The V-shape of the graph shows that the probability of sta-
bility declines with increasing exploration up to an initial 
value of 0.6, before starting to increase again, in contrast to
the monotonically increasing probability of stability without
optimism. This can be explained in terms of the fact that
a small level of exploration is sufﬁcient for agents to learn
their preferences. Beyond that, additional exploration be-
comes counterproductive because the probability estimates at
the key stages become less reliable.

6 Conclusions and Future Work
We have deﬁned two-sided bandit problems, a new class of
problems in multi-agent learning and described the proper-
ties of three important matching mechanisms with -greedy
learning rules. Two-sided bandit problems are of great rel-
evance for social science in general and the search for mar-
riage partners in particular. The social norms governing ex-
ploration before marriage have been changing rapidly over
the last few decades and until now we have had no formal
structure within which to study the sources and consequences
of these changes. Our model is also more generally applica-
ble to two-sided markets in which agents have to learn about
each other.

This paper only scratches the surface of a large and poten-
tially fruitful set of theoretical and empirical questions. We
are exploring learning algorithms that would allow agents to
perform well4 across a broad range of environments without
having to make assumptions about the decision-making algo-
rithms or learning processes of other agents. Another direc-
tion of research is to explicitly characterize equilibria in sim-
pler settings. We are also interested in more complex versions
of the problem that allow for a greater diversity of preferences
and a larger number of agents.

4In the sense of regret minimization.

0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.900.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Initial epsilonProbability of stabilityOptimisticRealistic