Web Intelligence (WI): What Makes Wisdom Web? 

(Invited  Talk  at  IJCAI'03) 

Jiming Liu 

Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC) & 

Computer Science Department, Hong Kong Baptist University 

Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong jiming@comp.hkbu.edu.hk 

Abstract 

Web Intelligence (WI)  sheds  new  light on  direc(cid:173)
tions for scientific research and development which 
explores the fundamental roles as well as practi(cid:173)
cal impacts of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and ad(cid:173)
vanced  Information Technology  (IT)  on  the  next 
generation of Web-empowered products, systems, 
services, and activities. This paper gives new per(cid:173)
spectives on the future WI research and highlights 
some of the research challenges and initiatives. 

The notion of Web Intelligence (WI) was first introduced 
in  [10;  17;  18;  19; 21; 221.  Since then,  WI  has become 
a fast growing research  field  which concerns scientific re(cid:173)
search and development to explore the fundamental roles as 
well as practical  impacts of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
advanced Information Technology (IT) on the next generation 
of Web-empowered systems, services, and environments. WI 
is aimed at producing theories and technologies that will en(cid:173)
able us to optimally utilize the global connectivity, as offered 
by the Web infrastructure, in life, work, and play. 
1  Been There, Done That 
The Web has irrevocably revolutionized the world we live in. 
This impact is inevitable due to the facts that the Web con(cid:173)
nectivity rapidly increases and that the online information as(cid:173)
tronomically explodes.  In order not only to live with such a 
change but also to benefit from the information infrastructure 
that the Web has empowered, we have witnessed the fast de(cid:173)
velopment as well as applications of many WI techniques and 
technologies, which cover: 

1. Internet-level  communication,  infrastructure,  and 
security protocols. The Web is regarded as a computer-
network system. WI techniques for this level include, for 
instance, Web data prefetching systems built upon Web 
surfing patterns to resolve the issue of Web latency. The 
intelligence of the Web prefetching comes from adaptive 
learning based on observations of user surfing behavior. 
2.  Interface-level  multimedia  presentation  standards. 
The Web is regarded as an interface for human-Internet 
interaction.  WI  techniques  for this  level  are  used  to 
develop  intelligent Web interfaces  in  which  the capa(cid:173)
bilities of adaptive cross-language processing, person(cid:173)

alized multimedia representation, and multimodal data 
processing are required. 

3.  Knowledge-level  information  processing  and  man(cid:173)
agement tools.  The Web is regarded as a distributed 
data/knowledge base.  We need to develop semantic 
markup languages to represent the semantic contents of 
the Web  available  in  machine-understandable  formats 
for agent based computing, such as searching, aggre(cid:173)
gation, classification,  filtering,  managing, mining, and 
discovery on the Web [3]. 

4.  Application-level  ubiquitous  computing  and  social 
intelligence environments.  The Web is regarded as a 
basis for establishing social networks that contain com(cid:173)
munities of people (or organizations or other social en(cid:173)
tities) connected by social relationships, such as friend(cid:173)
ship, coworking or information exchange with common 
interests.  They are Web-supported social networks or 
virtual communities. The study of WI concerns the im(cid:173)
portant issues central to social network intelligence (so(cid:173)
cial intelligence for short) 17; 15]. Furthermore, the mul(cid:173)
timedia contents on the Web are not only accessible from 
stationary platforms, but increasingly from mobile plat(cid:173)
forms [16]. Ubiquitous Web access and computing from 
various wireless devices need adaptive personalization 
for which WI techniques are used to construct models 
of user interests by inferring from user behavior and ac(cid:173)
tions [l; 4]. 

In spite of on-going WI technological advances,  it is still 
rather unclear to many what will be the next paradigm shift in 
WI. In what follows, I will present new perspectives on this 
question and at the same time point out some WI research 
challenges. 

2  What's Next? 
In the movie Star Wars:  Episode II, there is an interesting 
scene:  When Obi Wan Kenobi failed to locate any relevant 
information about a mysterious planet (where later he discov(cid:173)
ered the clone manufacturing ground), he turned to his friend 
for advice.  His friend, who apparently knew more than the 
Jedi's academy knowledge banks combined, had the follow(cid:173)
ing in reply: Other people seek knowledge, but you my friend 
know wisdom. 

1596 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

The reply in the above scene also provides an answer to 
our earlier question. The next paradigm shift in WI lies in the 
notion of wisdom.  The goal of the new generation Wl is to 
enable users to gain new wisdom of living, working, playing, 
and learning, in addition to information search and knowledge 
queries. Here, the word of wisdom, according to the Webster 
Dictionary (Page:  1658) 114], implies the following mean(cid:173)
ings: 

1. The quality of being wise; knowledge, and the capacity 
to make due use of it; knowledge of the best ends and 
the best means; discernment and judgment; discretion; 
sagacity; skill; dexterity. 

2.  The  results  of wise judgments;  scientific  or  practical 

truth; acquired knowledge; erudition. 

In the Web context, the manifestation of wisdom can best 

be illustrated with a minimalist Wisdom Web example. 

3  When the Web Offers Practical Wisdom ... 
Imagine that this is your first trip to the city of Montreal. You 
would like to find a really nice place to spend your evening. 
So, you walk into a Cyber Cafe on Sherbrook Street (the only 
street that you can recognize), and decide to get some prac(cid:173)
tical wisdom from a public Wisdom Web outlet. You log in 
with a user name, "Spiderman", and ask: 

"What is the best night life in Montreal during this 
season of the year?" 

The Wisdom Web thinks for about a second or two and then 
responds: 

"Spiderman, the hockey games are on during this 
season of the year. Would you like to go?" 

You reply: 
"Yes" 

Then the Wisdom Web suggests: 

"As far as 1 know, there are still some tickets left 
and you may purchase some at the Montreal Forum. 
It is easy to get there by taking Metro to the Atwater 
station." 

Now you decide that this could be an interesting evening for 
you... 

One hour later, you arrive at the ticket office by Metro, but 
surprisingly find that the tickets left are all for the day after 
tomorrow when you will be traveling in Quebec City. 

As you are a bit disappointed, you notice that there is a 
free Wisdom Web Kiosk right beside the ticket office. Well, 
that's convenient.  So, without too much hesitation, you log 
on to the Wisdom Web, again as "Spiderman". The Wisdom 
Web still remembers your conversations an hour ago. As soon 
as it recognizes that you are "Spiderman", it says to you: 
"Hello Spiderman, you were in such a hurry last 
time that I couldn't have a chance to tell you that 
all tickets available here are only for the day after 
tomorrow. They are quite expensive too..." 

4 10 Capabilities of the Wisdom Web 
In order to make the above Wisdom Web scenario a reality, 
the following 10 fundamental capabilities have to be incorpo(cid:173)
rated and standardized: 

1. Self-organizing servers:  The Wisdom  Web will au(cid:173)
tomatically regulate the functions and cooperations of 
related Websites and application services available.  A 
Wisdom  Web  server  automatically  self-nominates  to 
other services its functional roles as well as correspond(cid:173)
ing spatial or temporal constraints and operational set(cid:173)
tings. 

2.  Specialization:  A Wisdom Web server is an agent by 
itself, which is specialized in performing some roles in 
a certain service.  The association of its roles with any 
service will be measured and updated dynamically, for 
instance, the association may be forgotten if it is not used 
for some time. 

3.  Growth:  The population of Wisdom Agents will dy(cid:173)
namically change, as new agents are self-reproduced by 
their parent agents in order to become more specialized, 
or aged agents are deactivated. 

4.  Autocatalysis:  As various roles of wisdom agents are 
created through specialization and activated by the Wis(cid:173)
dom Search requests, their associations with some ser(cid:173)
vices and among themselves must be aulocatalytically 
aggregated.  In this respect,  the autocatalysis of asso(cid:173)
ciations is similar to the pheromone laying for positive 
feedback in an ant colony. 

5.  Problem Solver Markup  Language (PSML):  PSML 
is necessary for wisdom agents to specify their roles and 
settings as well as relationships with any other services. 
6.  Semantics: The Wisdom Web needs to understand what 
are meant by "Montreal", "season", "year", and "night 
life", and what is the right judgment of "best", by under(cid:173)
standing the granularities of their corresponding subjects 
and the whereabouts of their ontology definitions. 

7.  Metaknowledge:  Besides  semantic  knowledge  ex(cid:173)
tracted and manipulated in the Wisdom Search, it is also 
essential for wisdom agents to incorporate a dynamically 
created source of metaknowledge that deals with the re(cid:173)
lationships between concepts and the spatial or tempo(cid:173)
ral constraint knowledge in planning and executing ser(cid:173)
vices.  It allows agents to self-resolve their conflict of 
interests. 

8.  Planning:  In the above example, the goal is to find a 
function or an event that may sound attractive to a visi(cid:173)
tor. The constraint is that they must be happening during 
this season. There are involved two associated subgoals: 
In order to have an access to the recommended function 
or event, one needs a ticket. Further, in order to go to get 
the ticket, one can travel by Metro. In the Wisdom Web, 
ontology alone will not be sufficient. 

9.  Personalization:  The Wisdom Web remembers the re(cid:173)
cent encounters and relates different episodes together, 
according to (1) "Spiderman", (2) time, and (3) attain(cid:173)
ability of (sub)goals.  It may further identify other goals 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1597 

as well as courses of actions for this user as their conver(cid:173)
sation goes on. 

10.  A sense of humor:  Although the Wisdom Web does 
not explicitly tell a funny story, it adds some punch lines 
to the situation or anxiety that "Spiderman" is presently 
in when he/she logs on for the second time, which will 
make "Spiderman" feel absurd. 

5  Research Challenges 
In the preceding sections, I have stated the goal and vision of 
the new generation WI, and what constitutes a Wisdom Web. 
In this section, I will point out some WI research challenges. 

5.1  Problem Solver Markup  Language (PSML) 
One practical  Wisdom Web issue that has to be addressed 
is how to  integrate distributed and  centralized  information 
sources/structures.  Information/knowledge on the Web can 
be either globally distributed throughout the Web or locally 
hosted, centralized on an intelligent portal providing Web ser(cid:173)
vices {i.e., an intelligent service provider) that is integrated to 
its own cluster of specialized intelligent applications.  How(cid:173)
ever, each approach has a serious  flaw.  As pointed out by 
Alesso and Smith  [1],  the intelligent portal approach limits 
uniformity and access,  while the global semantic Web ap(cid:173)
proach faces combinatory complexity limitations. 

A  way  to  solve  the  above  issue  is  to  develop  and  use 

the Problem  Solver Markup Language (PSML) for collect(cid:173)
ing globally distributed contents and knowledge from Web-
supported, semantic social networks and incorporating them 
with locally operational knowledge/databases in an enterprise 
or community for locally centralized, adaptable Web intelli(cid:173)
gent services. 

The core of PSML is based on distributed inference en(cid:173)
gines that can perform automatic reasoning on the Web by in(cid:173)
corporating contents and metaknowledge, autonomically col(cid:173)
lected and transformed from the semantic Web, with locally 
operational  knowledge/databases.  A  feasible  way  to  work 
with PSML is to use existing (Prolog-like) logic languages, 
together with dynamic contents and metaknowledge collec(cid:173)
tion and transformation agents. 

By using this information transformation approach, the dy(cid:173)
namic, global information sources on the Web can be com(cid:173)
bined with the local information sources in an enterprise por(cid:173)
tal for decision making and business intelligence. 

Ohsuga et al previously used KAUS for representing local 
information sources and for performing inferences and rea(cid:173)
soning.  KAUS is a knowledge based system that involves 
Multi-Layer Logic and databases based on the relational data 
model [13]. KAUS enables the representations of knowledge 
and data in the first order logic form with multi-layer data 
structures.  It can readily be used for inferences and reason(cid:173)
ing as well as for transforming and managing both knowledge 
and data. 

5.2  Automatic  Ontology  Construction 
Ontology is the basis for designing and implementing the Se(cid:173)
mantic Web for Web intelligence.  It plays a crucial role in 
enabling Web based knowledge processing and management, 

such as Web community communication,  semantics based 
agent communication, knowledge based Web retrieval, Web 
content understanding, and Web community discovery. 

Although ontology engineering has been studied over the 
last  decade,  there  is  still  a  demand  for  more  automatic 
methods in comprehensive ontology construction and learn(cid:173)
ing 120].  The tedious, cumbersome task of existing manual 
ontology construction can easily become a bottleneck in the 
development of semantics based Web intelligence. 

5.3  Wisdom Web Based Computing Paradigm 
The paradigm of Wisdom Web based computing is aimed at 
providing not only a medium for seamless  information ex(cid:173)
change and knowledge sharing but also a type of man-made 
resources for sustainable knowledge creation, and scien(cid:173)
tific and social evolution.  The Wisdom Web will reply on 
grid-like service agencies that self-organize, learn, and evolve 
their courses of actions in order to perform service tasks as 
well as their identities and interrelationships in communities. 
They will also cooperate and compete among themselves in 
order to optimize their as well as others resources and utili(cid:173)
ties. 

Self-organizing, learning agents are computational entities 
that are capable of self-improving their performance  in dy(cid:173)
namically changing and unpredictable task environments.  In 
[8],  Liu has provided a comprehensive overview of several 
studies in the field of autonomy oriented computing, with 
in-depth discussions on  self-organizing and  adaptive  tech(cid:173)
niques for developing various embodiments of agent based 
systems, such as autonomous robots, collective vision and 
motion, autonomous animation, and search and segmentation 
agents. The core of those techniques is the notion of synthetic 
or emergent autonomy based on behavioral self-organization. 

5.4  A New Turing Test 
In order to effectively develop the new  generation WI sys(cid:173)
tems, we need to define benchmark applications, i.e., a new 
Turing Test, that will capture and demonstrate the Wisdom 
Web capabilities. 

Take the Wisdom Web based computing benchmark as an 
example. We can use a service task of compiling and generat(cid:173)
ing a market report on an existing product or a potential mar(cid:173)
ket report on a new product. In order to get such service jobs 
done, an information agent on the Wisdom Web will mine 
and integrate available Web information, which will in turn 
be passed onto a market analysis agent. Market analysis will 
involve the quantitative simulations of customer behavior in a 
marketplace, instantaneously handled by other serviced agen(cid:173)
cies, involving a large number of grid agents [2].  Since the 
number of variables concerned may be in the order of hun(cid:173)
dreds or thousands, it can easily cost a single system years to 
generate one predication. 

6  Recent Initiatives 
In this section,  I will describe two recent WI  research  ini(cid:173)
tiatives:  (1) information foraging agents and (2) ubiquitous 
agent communities. 

1598 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

Information Foraging Agents 

6.1 
One of the  important  roles of wisdom  agents  is concerned 
with searching and filtering information from distributed Web 
sources.  In this respect, understanding and developing the 
right information foraging behaviors for wisdom agents will 
become a real challenge. In order to tackle this challenge, the 
first step is to have a clear picture of how humans search in(cid:173)
formation, what kind of human behavior dominates, and what 
is the origin of Web usage regularities. There have been few 
efforts on describing various aspects of human Web surfing 
regularities  15; 6]. However, the origin and interrelated vari(cid:173)
ables of the regularities still remain unknown. 

Liu and Zhang have developed a model for information for(cid:173)
aging agents on the Web [111.  The foraging agent model 
takes  into account  Web topology,  information distribution, 
and agent  interest profile.  They  have validated this model 
using empirical Web log datasets, and used it to explain the 
origin of regularities in Web surfing. In particular, they have 
discovered that it is the unique distribution of agent interest 
that leads to the regularities in agent surfing behavior,  i.e., 
a power law  distribution of agent surfing depth.  The Web 
topology can only influence the shape parameters of the dis(cid:173)
tribution without changing the nature of the distribution. Also 
discovered  is  that  the  power law  of link click  frequency  is 
largely due to agent purposeful surfing behavior.  This work 
shows that Web regularities are interrelated. 

Also in their studies, they have studied three categories of 
foraging agents, according to their interests and familiarities 
with the Web:  Random agents who have no obvious inten(cid:173)
tion in Web surfing, rational agents who have certain goals 
to achieve  but are not familiar with the Web structure, and 
recurrent agents who have certain specific  intents and are 
very familiar with the Web structure.  The ability to predict 
the contents at the next level nodes becomes stronger when 
moving from random to recurrent agents.  Experimental re(cid:173)
sults with respect to the three agent categories have unveiled 
that the regularities of agent surfing depth on pages and do(cid:173)
mains still remain the same, while a power law of link click 
frequency distribution will disappear as we move from recur(cid:173)
rent agents to random agents. This result shows that the order 
existing in link click frequency comes from agent's content 
prediction ability, that is whether or not an agent can deter(cid:173)
mine the next step according to its own interest and current 
information. 

6.2  Ubiquitous  Agent  Communities 
One of the key features in wisdom agents is ubiquity. Ubiq(cid:173)
uitous agents are autonomous entities that automatically ex(cid:173)
plore and exploit Wl-based Web services.  There have been 
some  earlier work performed  in  the  domains  of e-business 
and e-commerce.  Related issues and applications in which 
various tasks and objectives were achieved can be found in 
[9]. 

In this area of research,  a reasonable challenge to begin 
with  would  be  to  develop  and  demonstrate  a  Ubiquitous 
Agent Community (UAC), i.e., an intelligent infrastructure 
that enables agents to look ahead, plan, and deliver what a 
user wants [12].  It works like a personal  agency.  For in(cid:173)
stance, it can help a user to effectively manage tedious daily 

routine activities, such as processing emails, placing orders, 
making meeting arrangements, downloading news, etc. 

A  UAC can  interact with its users in various ways.  For 
instance, as a person uses a smart handheld device to enter a 
subway station on his/her way to work, a UAC can seamlessly 
upload a list of things to be done to the person's handheld 
device.  Along with each of the things listed, the informa(cid:173)
tion provided by the UAC can also include its corresponding 
tasks necessary to be carried out.  Thus, inside the moving 
subway train, he/she will be able to go through each of the 
recommended task items and to further verify and delegate 
certain jobs to a community agent (c-agent) in the UAC, such 
as forwarding a report or making a meeting appointment. In 
addition to planning and executing the items on a calendar, 
the user can also receive other personalized services based on 
his/her profile, which may include sports news, urgent emails, 
and specific documents prepared for the day's meetings. 

Figure 1 gives an illustrative example of personal services 
that can be provided by a community of competing and coop(cid:173)
erating agents, i.e., a Ubiquitous Agent Community (UAC). 
A UAC contains two types of agents:  community agents 
(c-agents) and service agents (s-agents). The former makes 
task plans as well as contracting decisions on what and where 
some tasks will be carried out, whereas the latter performs 
the delegated tasks.  In the illustrative example of Figure 1, 
suppose a user writes a few words on his/her PDA regarding 
what he/she plans to do.  A c-agent  in the distributed UAC 
will recognize the intention of the user and find similar ser(cid:173)
vice cases from its case base. Thereafter, it will perform task 
planning based on the similarity between the task at hand and 
the previous tasks. Once the c-agent completes its task plan(cid:173)
ning, a cluster of s-agents will be called upon to distribute and 
carry out the planned subtasks. 

In the UAC, s-agents will not act alone, but work coordi(cid:173)
nate,, in order to accomplish their subtasks. Coordination is 
one of the most important characteristics of UAC agents. The 
coordination of UAC agents is essentially the coordination of 
their ubiquitous service actions. 

Take a buyer-seller market community as an example. The 
goal of each agent is to maximize its own interest; agents are 
antagonistic in a certain sense. At the same time, the market 
exists on the basis of buyer-seller competitions. In this case, 
the coordination of the market agents is reflected in their com(cid:173)
petitions for the best prices. 

Generally speaking,  the coordination of UAC  agents  in(cid:173)
volves both competition and cooperation.  UAC agents han(cid:173)
dle their services in two main stages: task allocation and task 
execution. As mentioned above, a service task often consists 
of several subtasks. Each of the subtasks will be allocated to 
a specific s-agent. Thus, as far as the task allocation is con(cid:173)
cerned, various s-agents will compete among themselves in 
order to get a subtask assignment.  In this case, coordination 
manifests itself as competition. On the other hand, during the 
course of task execution,  an s-agent will require assistance 
from other s-agents in order to effectively fulfill the task at 
hand. Thus, coordination also manifests itself as cooperation, 
as s-agents exchange information and services among each 
other.  In many  ways,  the technical issues of implementing 
UAC can be reduced to those of implementing coordination 

INVITED  SPEAKERS 

1599 

Figure  1:  A scenario of services being provided by a community of competing and cooperating ubiquitious agents. The community is called 
a Ubiquitous Agent Community (UAC). 

among ubiquitous agents. 

7  Conclusions 
1  have  started  this paper by giving perspectives  on  the new 
generation  WI.  The  Web,  as  an  information  infrastructure, 
will remain to create a strong impact in the future by offering 
world-wide presence  and connectivity.  The  major challenge 
of the Web research and development in the next decade will 
be Wl-centric, focusing on how we can intelligently make the 
best use of the widely available Web connectivity.  The new 
WI technologies to be developed will be precisely determined 
by human needs in a post-industrial era; namely: 

1. information empowerment; 
2.  knowledge sharing; 
3.  virtual social clustering; 
4.  service enrichment; 
5.  practical wisdom development. 
The next paradigm shift in WI will be towards the notion of 
wisdom. Developing the Wisdom Web will become a tangi(cid:173)
ble goal for WI research.  The new generation WI will enable 

humans to gain wisdom of living, working, playing, in addi(cid:173)
tion to information search and knowledge queries. 

I  believe that our current efforts  will pave  the  way  toward 
the  next  biggest  technological  invention  of this  century,  the 
Wisdom Web, whose significance and impact will be equiva(cid:173)
lent to, or even far beyond, those of Alexander Graham Bell's 
invention of the telephone in  1876. 

The Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC) 
To meet the strong demands for participation and the growing 
interests in WI, the Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC) was 
formed in spring 2002.  The WIC  (http://wi-consortium.org/) 
is  an  international non-profit organization dedicated  to pro(cid:173)
moting  world-wide scientific  research  and  industrial  devel(cid:173)
opment in the era of Web  and agent  intelligence.  Its activi(cid:173)
ties include collaborations with WI research centers through(cid:173)
out the world and organization/individual members, technol(cid:173)
ogy showcases at IEEE/WIC conferences and workshops, and 
WIC  publications. 

In  addition  to  various  special  issues  on  WI  published 
including  IEEE  Com-

by  several  international  journals, 

1600 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

[14] N. Porter (ed.). Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictio(cid:173)

nary, G&C. Merriam Co., 1913. 

[15]  P. Raghavan. Social networks: From the Web to the en(cid:173)

terprise. IEEE Internet Computing, 6( 1 ):91 -94, 2002. 

[16]  M. Weiser. The future of ubiquitous computing on cam(cid:173)

pus. Communications of the ACM, 41(l):41-42,1998. 

[17]  Y. Y. Yao, N. Zhong, J. Liu, and S. Ohsuga. Web In(cid:173)
telligence  (WI):  Research  challenges  and  trends  in  the 
new information age. N. Zhong, Y. Y. Yao, J. Liu, and S. 
Ohsuga (eds.), Web Intelligence: Research and Develop(cid:173)
ment, LNAI 2198, pages 1-17, Springer, 2001. 

118] N. Zhong, J. Liu, Y. Y. Yao, and S. Ohsuga. Web In(cid:173)
telligence (WI). In Proceedings of the 24th IEEE Com(cid:173)
puter Society International Computer Software and Ap(cid:173)
plications Conference (COMPS AC 2000), pages 469-470, 
IEEE Computer Society Press,  Taipei, Taiwan, October 
25-28, 2000. 

[19] N. Zhong, Y. Y. Yao, J. Liu, and S. Ohsuga (eds.). Web 
Intelligence: Research and Development, LNAI 2198, 
Springer, 2001. 

[20]  N.  Zhong. Representation and construction of ontolo(cid:173)
gies for Web Intelligence. International Journal of Foun(cid:173)
dations of Computer Science (IJFCS),  13(4):555-570, 
World Scientific Publishing, 2002. 

[21 ] N. Zhong, J. Liu, and Y. Y. Yao. In search of the Wisdom 

Web. IEEE Computer, 35( 11 ):27-31, November 2002. 

[22] N. Zhong, J. Liu, and Y. Y Yao (eds.). Web Intelligence, 

Springer, 2003. 

puter,  a  Wl-focused  scientific journal,  Web  Intelligence 
and Agent Systems:  An International Journal (http://wi-
consortium.org/journal.html),  has  been  successfully  launched 
as the official journal of the WIC. 
Acknowledgments 
1 would like to thank Ning Zhong and Yiyu Yao for their con(cid:173)
tinuing collaborations in the development of Web Intelligence 
(WI). The contents of this paper include their contributions. 
I am very grateful  to people who have joined or supported 
the Wl community,  in particular,  the WIC Advisory Board 
members: Edward A. Feigenbaum, Setsuo Ohsuga, Benjamin 
Wah, Philip Yu, and Lotfi A. Zadeh, all the WIC Technical 
Committee Members, as well as the IEEE TCCI Chair, Xin-
dong Wu. I thank them for their strong support. 
References 
[1] H. P. Alesso and C. F. Smith. The Intelligent Wireless 

Web, Addison-Wesley, 2002. 

[2] F. Berman. From TeraGrid to knowledge grid. Communi(cid:173)

cations of the ACM, 44:27-28, 2001. 

[3] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila. The semantic 

Web. Scientific American, 284:34-43, 2001. 

[4]  D. Billsus, C. A. Brunk, C. Evans, B. Gladish, and M. 
Pazzani.  Adaptive interfaces for ubiquitous Web access, 
Communications of the ACM, 45:34-38, 2002. 

[5] B. A. Huberman, P. L. T. Pirolli, J. E. Pitkow, and R. M. 
Lukose. Strong regularities in World Wide Web surfing. 
Science, 280:96-97, 1997. 

[6]  B. A. Huberman and L.A. Adamic. Growth dynamics of 

the World-Wide Web. Nature, 410:131, 1999. 

[7] R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, S. Rajagopalan, and A. Tomkins: 
The Web and social networks. IEEE Computer Special Is-
sue on Web Intelligence, 35(11):32-36, November 2002. 
[8] J. Liu. Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 

World Scientific Publishing, 2001. 

[9] J. Liu and Y. Ye, (eds.). Advances in E-commerce Agents: 
Brokerage, Negotiation, Security, and Mobility, Springer, 
2001. 

[10] J. Liu, N. Zhong, Y. Y. Yao, and Z. W. Ras. The Wisdom 
Web: New challenges for Web Intelligence (WI). Journal 
of Intelligent Information Systems, Kluwer Academic Pub(cid:173)
lishers, 20(1 ):5-9,2003. 

[11] J. Liu and S. W. Zhang. Characterizing Web usage reg(cid:173)
ularities with information foraging agents. IEEE Transac(cid:173)
tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (in press). 

[12] J. Liu and C. Y. Yao. Rational competition and cooper(cid:173)
ation in ubiquitous agent communities. Knowledge Based 
Systems, Elsevier Science (in press). 

[13]  S. Ohsuga. Framework of knowledge based systems -
Multiple meta-level architecture for representing problems 
and problem solving processes. Knowledge Based Sys(cid:173)
tems, 3(4):204-214, Elsevier Science, 1990. 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1601 

