Automatically Personalizing User Interfaces 

Daniel S. Weld 

Corin  Anderson*  Pedro Domingos 

Oren Etzioni 

Krzysztof Gajos 

Tessa Lau* 

Steve Wolf man 

Department of Computer Science & Engineering 

University of Washington, Box 352350 

Seattle, WA 98195-2350 USA 

Abstract 

Todays  computer  interfaces  are  one-size-fits-all. 
Users  with  little  programming  experience  have 
very  limited  opportunities to  customize  an  inter(cid:173)
face to their task and work habits.  Furthermore, 
the overhead induced by generic interfaces will be 
proportionately greater on small form-factor PDAs, 
embedded applications and wearable devices. Au(cid:173)
tomatic personalization may greatly enhance user 
productivity, but it requires advances in customiza(cid:173)
tion (explicit, user-initiated change) and adapta(cid:173)
tion (interface-initiated change in response to rou(cid:173)
tine user behavior). In order to improve customiza(cid:173)
tion, we must make it easier for users to direct these 
changes.  In order to improve adaptation, we must 
better predict  user behavior and  navigate the  in(cid:173)
herent tension between the dynamism of automatic 
adaptation and the stability required in order for the 
user to predict the computers behavior and main(cid:173)
tain control. This paper surveys a decade's work on 
customization and adaptation at the University of 
Washington, distilling the lessons we have learned. 

Introduction 

1 
Today's software is mass produced with a plethora of features 
designed to satisfy every user. But since different people are 
working on different tasks with different styles, there is no 
way to organize features in a way that makes essential func(cid:173)
tionality convenient for everyone. Consider word processing, 
for example; most people will never use automatic line num(cid:173)
bering, but legal secretaries couldn't survive without it. 

The shift away  from the desktop and towards pervasive 
computing greatly exacerbates the problem of "Steelcase In(cid:173)
spired" software for several reasons. First, the shift from quiet 
office to  ubiquitous use  introduces complex environmental 
factors that increase the differences between the usage pat(cid:173)
terns of distinct individuals; indeed, a single user will require 
different features depending on context.  Second, the form 

"Current address: Google Inc, 2400 Bayshore Parkway, Moun(cid:173)

tain View, CA, 94043 

+Current address: IBM TJ Watson Research Center, P.O. Box 

704, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 

factor of mobile devices is  enormously more variable than 
that of desktop machines — for example, the ratio of large 
to small desktop display size is about four, but it varies by a 
factor of 625 between a cell-phone and a liveboard. 

The wisdom of user-centered design have been well doc(cid:173)
umented  [Lewis  and  Reiman,  1993].  However,  as  user 
needs and device characteristics diverge, the traditional de(cid:173)
sign methodology of intensive user studies becomes unscal(cid:173)
able.  While each user deserves a personalized interface, de(cid:173)
signed for the device at hand and providing simple access to 
the commands and features they need, there aren't enough 
ethnomethodologists and designers to manage, interpret, and 
respond to so many studies.  Indeed, the only resources that 
scale with the number of users are the users themselves and 
the computing devices they are using. 

We  use  the  term  adaptation  to  denote  personalization 
which  is  automatically performed by the  interface  without 
explicit user directives.  By customization we mean person(cid:173)
alization which is directly requested by the user.  Our argu(cid:173)
ment, thus, is that adaptivity and customization are the only 
scalable approaches to personalization. Interfaces should au(cid:173)
tomatically adapt to the  capabilities of the device at hand, 
to network connectivity, and to the individual user's activi(cid:173)
ties, location, and context; users should be able to guide and 
control adaptation through a variety of customization mecha(cid:173)
nisms. 
1.1  Customization and Adaptation 
Of course, many existing desktop applications allow limited 
customization by letting the user (1) select which menus are 
visible, (2) add buttons to toolbars, (3) define macros, and (4) 
even add custom functionality via scripting languages such as 
Visual Basic.  While customization is important, most users 
fail to customize effectively. Few users are comfortable with 
macros, regular expressions, or scripting languages, and even 
programmers are often too busy to invest the necessary time 
now in order to speed future sessions.  Thus, the challenge 
is to create improved methods for users to direct their inter(cid:173)
face, rearrange functionality as well as appearance, and re(cid:173)
cover from inappropriate adaptations. 

Similarly,  many systems support limited adaptation, but 
users don't always appreciate it.  Defaults that remember the 
last option or directory selected are simple and can be help(cid:173)
ful, but Microsoft's smart menus disorient, while the Office 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1613 

Assistant's guesses fall  far from the mark.  The danger of 
adaptivity is its potential to create confusing inconsistency 
and rob the user of control. Thus, the challenge is to develop 
datamining algorithms that can accurately predict a user's be(cid:173)
havior and to navigate the tension between too rapid adap(cid:173)
tation (disorienting) and too little (inefficient), and to seek 
interface metaphors that increase user control. 

1.2  Deep Deployment 
Successful customization and adaptation methods will max(cid:173)
imize their benefit when used by a broad range of applica(cid:173)
tions.  Ideally, there will be deep deployment',  a uniform 
layer at the operating systems level that records clickstream 
data across applications, and supports ubiquitous personaliza(cid:173)
tion. For this to work, the interfaces themselves must be de(cid:173)
scribed using declarative representations like those developed 
by the model-based interface community [Foley et al, 1989; 
Puerta, 1996] 

Deploying personalization methods at the OS  layer will 
bring several advantages. The first is consistency of behavior 
amongst applications.  Second, knowledge of a user's activ(cid:173)
ity with one application may improve adaptation of another's 
interface. Third, cross-application personalization may offer 
the highest benefit to users, since many common tasks involve 
patterns connecting two or more programs. 

1.3  Outline 
In  the  rest  of this  paper,  we  describe  a  sequence  of our 
projects which are making progress on this vision. The under(cid:173)
lying techniques range along a continuum of user-involvment, 
and our expository progression follows this vector from cus(cid:173)
tomization towards pure adaptation. Along the way we com(cid:173)
pare related endeavors and summarize lessons learned. 
2  Customization by Command 
The  Internet  Softbots  project  [Etzioni  and  Weld,  1994] 
marked the genesis of work on Intelligent User Interfaces at 
the University of Washington.  By acting as a personal as(cid:173)
sistant, the softbot supported a qualitatively different kind of 
human-computer interface.  Users were able to make high-
level requests, and the softbot used search [Weld, 1996], in(cid:173)
ference [Etzioni et al.,  1997], and knowledge to determine 
how to satisfy the request. Furthermore, the softbot was able 
to tolerate and recover from ambiguity, omissions, and errors 
in these requests. 

At its core, the softbot could handle goals specified in an 
expressive subset of first-order logic with modal operators for 
handling time and for distinguishing information gathering 
goals from those that requested state changes [Golden and 
Weld, 1996].  We labeled the softbot a goal-oriented inter(cid:173)
face, because human requests specified what the user wanted; 
the softbot was responsible for deciding how and when to sat(cid:173)
isfy the request.  Since most users are uncomfortable with 
logical notation, we provided a forms-oriented interface front 
end.  Unfortunately, we found the forms approach to be un(cid:173)
scalable,  and goal-specification was  a  challenge for many 
users.  In response, we investigated two research directions: 
reliable  natural-language  interfaces  [Popescu  et  al,  2003; 

Yates et al., 2003] and programming by demonstration [Lau 
et al, 2000]. 
3  Programming by Demonstration 
If it's too hard for users to specify goals, then a natural ob(cid:173)
jective is the design of an interface that can watch a user's 
normal behavior and help as appropriate. In the case of repet(cid:173)
itive tasks, this amounts to programming by demonstration 
(PBD). Of course, PBD has been studied extensively (Cypher, 
1993], but most previous systems were heuristic and domain-
specific.  We sought a domain-independent approach, suit(cid:173)
able for deep deployment, that offered the expressiveness of 
a scripting language and the ease of macro recording, with(cid:173)
out a verbatim recorder's accompanying brittleness.  While 
our PBD interface resembles a keystroke-based macro inter(cid:173)
face, it generalizes from the demonstrated actions to a robust 
program which is more likely to work in different situations. 
It is useful to think of a PBD-interface as having three com(cid:173)
ponents: 1) segmentation determines when the user is execut(cid:173)
ing an automatable task, 2) trace induction predicts what the 
user is doing from a prefix of her activity trace, and 3) facili(cid:173)
tation manages user interaction to aid the user in completing 
her task.  The focus of our work was on the trace induction 
phase. 

We formalized PBD trace induction as a learning problem, 
as follows.  A repetitive task may be solved by a program 
with a loop, where each iteration solves one instance of the 
task.  The PBD system must infer the correct program from 
a demonstration of the first few iterations. Each action (e.g., 
move, select, copy, paste, ...) the user performs during this 
demonstration causes a change in the state of the application 
(e.g., defines a mapping between editor states).  Therefore, 
we modeled this problem as one of inferring the function that 
maps one state to the next, based on observations of the state 
prior to and following each user action. 

PBD presents a particularly challenging machine learning 
problem,  because  users  are  extremely  reluctant to provide 
more than a few training instances.  Thus the learner must 
be able to generalize from a very small number of iterations. 
Yet in order to be  useful,  a wide  range of programs must 
be learnable.  Thus the problem combines a weak bias with 
the demand for low sample complexity. Our solution, called 
version-space algebra, lets the application designer combine 
multiple strong biases to achieve a weaker one that is tailored 
to the application, thus reducing the statistical bias for the 
least increase in variance.  In addition, the learning system 
must be able to interact gracefully with the user: presenting 
comprehensible hypotheses, and taking user feedback into ac(cid:173)
count. Version-space algebra addresses this issue as well. 

3.1  Version-Space Algebra 
Originally developed for concept learning, a version space is 
the subset of a hypothesis space which is consistent with a 
set of training instances [Mitchell, 1982]. If there is a partial 
order over candidate hypotheses, one may represent the ver(cid:173)
sion space implicitly (i.e., with boundary sets) and manage 
updates efficiently. Version space algebra defines transforma(cid:173)
tion operators (e.g., union, join, etc.) for combining simple 

1614 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

these  scenarios  can be  learned quickly  in  as  few  as  one  or 
two  training  examples.  An  informal  user  study  confirmed 
SMARTEDIT'S usability and usefulness, and showed that even 
novice S M A R T E D IT users perform tasks more quickly and 
concisely with PBD than without. 

However,  we  learned a  negative  lesson  when  we  started 
widespread  distribution  —  despite 
incorporation  within 
Emacs, relatively few people used S M A R T E D IT frequently. 
From this we conclude that the overhead of a macro recorder 
interface  is  relatively high.  Since  most  repetitive  tasks  are 
short,  it  is  often  easier to  do  them  manually  and  avoid  the 
cognitive load of complex customization.  Others have found 
similar  results  —  users  customize  relatively  little  [Mackay, 
1991]  — perhaps  because  customization  facilities  are  com(cid:173)
plex  themselves  [McGrenere  et  al,  2002].  We  conjecture 
that  widespread  PBD  adoption  requires  automatic  segmen(cid:173)
tation, and the adaptation mechanisms, described in the next 
section, may provide this capability. 

Figure  1:  Algebraic  specification  of the  version space  for a 
S M A R T E D IT program. 

version spaces into more complex ones. We also developed a 
probabilistic framework for reasoning about the likelihood of 
each hypothesis in a composite version space. 

After  constructing  a 

library  of  reusable,  domain-
independent component version spaces, we combined a set of 
primitive spaces to form a bias for learning text-editing pro(cid:173)
grams (Figure  1), which was used in the S M A R T E D IT PBD 
implementation. 

3.2  The  SmartEdit  Implementation 
We verified the utility of version-space algebra for PBD with 
S M A R T E D I T, an Emacs-like editor. When a user notices that 
she is about to perform a repetitive task, she clicks a button 
to start the  PBD recorder.  After completeing one instance of 
the  task,  she  clicks another button  to  mark the  first  demon(cid:173)
stration.  S M A R T E D IT initializes the version space using the 
recorded  state  sequence  as  the  first  training  example.  As 
the user continues to type, S M A R T E D IT updates the version 
space with every action.  In parallel,  S M A R T E D IT  displays 
what action it thinks the user will next perform, and its con(cid:173)
fidence in the prediction.  These probabilities are calculated 
by voting the version space.  When the user is confident that 
S M A R T E D IT  has  learned her procedure,  she  may  let it  exe(cid:173)
cute  in single-step or fully autonomous mode.  We  explored 
a  number  of ways  of structuring  the  user's  dialog  with  the 
learner,  including decision-theoretic control  [Wolfman et al, 
2001], but many aspects of facilitation require further study. 
Version-space algebra provides S M A R T E D IT with several 
benefits:  efficient methods for incremental update and voting, 
without explicit enumeration of the version space  [Lau et al, 
2000],  and  flexibility.  By  varying the  algebraic  formulation 
for the hypothesis space, we experimented with several other 
version spaces for learning single-loop programs from traces 
with varying amounts of segmentation information, as well as 
learning programs with multiple nested loops. 

3.3  Experiments  and  Observations 
Empirical studies validated our approach on  a range of text-
editing  scenarios  (e.g.,  bibliographic  reformatting,  HTML 
conversion,  information  extraction,  etc.).  We 
to 
show  that  a  program  that  generalizes  correctly  for  each  of 

4  Adapting to User Behavior 
The AI community has a long-standing interest in adaptive in(cid:173)
terfaces.  The Calendar's Apprentice  [Dent et al,  1992] used 
machine  learning to predict meeting  location  and  durations. 
This research and similar work on email classification  [Maes 
and Kozierok,  1993]  led to an  important principle about the 
incorporation of imperfect behavioral predictions in an  inter(cid:173)
face: defaults are an effective way to minimize the cost to the 
user of (inevitable) poor predictions.  Horvitz's decision  the(cid:173)
oretic framework [Horvitz,  1999] resulted in additional prin(cid:173)
ciples:  graceful  degradation  of service  prediction,  expected 
utility  of disambiguation  dialogs  as  a  function  of user  time 
and  attention),  and the  use  of timeouts  to  minimize  cost  of 
prediction errors.1 

Our work on adaptive interfaces focussed initially on web(cid:173)
site  design  [Perkowitz  and  Etzioni,  1997]  and  led  to  al(cid:173)
gorithms  for  datamining  web  logs  to  discover  aggregate 
patterns,  which  powered  the  automatic  creation  of  index 
pages [Perkowitz and Etzioni, 2000].  Later we concentrated 
on mining individual behavior patterns, generating personal(cid:173)
ized sites for display on small, wireless devices [Anderson et 
al,  2001b],  Our  emphasis  was  on  "information-goal  seek(cid:173)
ing" behavior, common to wireless  internet use,  rather than 
general  browsing  or  surfing.  The  PROTEUS  system  mod(cid:173)
eled adaptation as search through the space of possible web(cid:173)
sites.  Site modification operators included highlighting text, 
adding shortcut links, and eliding parts of pages. We adopted 
the decision-theoretic approach, guiding search with expected 
utility  calculations based on  a  model  of the  cost of manipu(cid:173)
lating the small PDA screen and fetching pages over the slow 
wireless connection. 

A small user study revealed two important lessons.  For the 
most part, the adaptations were good ones;  PROTEUS sug(cid:173)
gested useful shortcuts and the elided content was almost al(cid:173)
ways useless to  the user.  However,  the  cost of deleting  im(cid:173)
portant parts of a page was very high. Reweighting our utility 
function would have led to  more conservative behavior,  but 

'it is ironic that the Office Assistant violates most of Horvitz'\s 

principles, which were developed at Microsoft Research. 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1615 

Figure 2:  (a) Main dialog box for print command,  (b) After clicking the "Properties..."  button, the default "Setup" tab is 
displayed, (c) After clicking the "Features" tab, the user can select double-sided printing; the user must now click "ok" twice. 

the problem of accurate behavior prediction is central to in(cid:173)
terface adaptation; we discuss it in the next section. 

A second problem stemmed from the fact that frequently 
users didn't find a shortcut link, even though PROTEUS had 
added it in the appropriate place.  Shortcut-naming was usu(cid:173)
ally to blame, and this raised the general issue of saliency, 
which we discuss in section 4.2. 
4.1  Predicting User Behavior 
High-quality adaptation requires the ability to learn an ex(cid:173)
tremely accurate model of user behavior. Our comparison of 
existing techniques showed that a mixture of Markov mod(cid:173)
els had the best predictive power [Anderson et al, 2001a]. 
(Shortcuts generated by the mixture model saved users up to 
40% of their navigational effort.)  But all models performed 
poorly when data was sparse;  hence none of these models 
would work well for situations where a user is exploring new 
parts of the interface — even if she is performing a task which 
is similar to one she has performed frequently in another con(cid:173)
text (e.g., shopping cart checkout at a new store).  To rem(cid:173)
edy this problem, we developed relational Markov models 
(RMMs),  a generalization of Markov models that overlays 
relational structure on the states [Anderson et al, 2002]. 

Intuitively,  RMMs  do  for  Markov  models  what  Prob(cid:173)
abilistic  Relational  Models  (PRMs)  do  for  Baysian  net(cid:173)
works [Friedman et al.,  1999].  RMMs generalize Markov 
models by partitioning the states into classes; each class has 
an associated k-ary relation, R, and members of the class cor(cid:173)
respond to R instantiated with distinct ground values.  The 
domain of each variable can be hierarchically structured, and 
a smoothing techniqued called shrinkage is carried out over 
the cross product of these hierarchies.  RMMs make it pos(cid:173)
sible to generalize beyond the observed states. For example, 
suppose a user surfing through an e-commerce Web site goes 
from a page about Nirvana's "Nevermind" CD to a page con(cid:173)
taining a biography of Nirvana.  An ordinary Markov model 

can infer nothing from this about what the user will do when 
visiting a page about a Pearl Jam CD, but an RMM would be 
able to infer that the user might next go to a Pearl Jam bi(cid:173)
ography. RMMs make effective learning possible in domains 
with very large and heterogeneous state spaces, given only 
sparse data. Experiments on academic and e-commerce web(cid:173)
sites show that RMMs trained on only ten instances perform 
as well as Markov models which were trained on ten thousand 
instances [Anderson et al, 2002]. We are currently extending 
RMMs by incorporating structure in the same way that dy(cid:173)
namic Bayes nets extend Markov models; see [Sanghai et al, 
2003]. 
4.2  Partitioned Dynamicity 
As our experience with unnoticed shortcuts showed, saliency 
is essential — any adaptive mechanism that introduces new 
commands or options to an interface, must ensure that the 
user finds them. Furthermore, the mechanism must take care 
not to obscure important existing functionality. 

One way to increase saliency, while minimizing the cogni(cid:173)
tive dissonance associated with adaptivity, is to partition dy-
namism — to segregate dynamic and static areas of an inter(cid:173)
face.  Indeed, a number of well-designed adaptive interfaces 
exhibit this property.  For example, the news stories and ad(cid:173)
vertisements on Yahoo change continuously, but because the 
layout is fixed, the adaptation causes little distress to users. In 
contrast, the automatic menu shortening feature of Microsoft 
Office 2000 violates partitioned dynamicity, since the loca(cid:173)
tion of commands in the menus changes unpredictably. 

Powerpoint XP's "Insert Symbol" command provides an(cid:173)
other example.  Previous versions required a long sequence 
of clicks to select the correct font and navigate to the desired 
symbol, but the dialog box in the XP version has a "Recently 
used symbols" area. 

We  conjecture  that  partitioned  dynamicity  is  a  useful 
general  principle  for  adaptation  in  interfaces.  Because 

1616 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

Figure 3: Abstract-state machine for the printing dialogs; the 
example user's path is darkened. 

users become accustomed to changes in the dynamic area, 
these changes don't disturb their conceptual model [Norman, 
1998]. And because existing navigational patterns remain un(cid:173)
changed, users maintain control even if adaptation is unhelp(cid:173)
ful.  The alternative, dual-interface approach of [McGrenere 
et al, 2002] shares many benefits with partitioned dynamic(cid:173)
ity, but trades convenience for screen real estate. 

4.3  Example:  Adapting Desktop Dialogs 
We  believe that the  PROTEUS  architecture,  developed for 
adaptive  websites,  would be  even  more useful  in  a desk(cid:173)
top application setting.  As a story-board example, suppose 
that a user wishes to print a Word document, doublesided. 
As  Figures  2  and  3  show  this  requires  six  user actions.2 
First,  the  user  presses  c t r l -P  to  print the  current  docu(cid:173)
ment.  Next, she must click on "Properties..."  which yields 
"Setup" options.  Clicking on the "Features" tab uncovers 
two sided printing options;  another click selects book-style 
duplex. Then "Ok" must be clicked twice, once to close the 
Properties window and the other to confirm printing.3  How(cid:173)
ever, if an individual user executes this pattern hundreds of 
times, always choosing duplex printing, the system should 
recognize this and provide a shortcut. 

Figure 4 shows one possible result, where the main screen 
has partitioned dynamicity, and the duplex options (with a 
new default value) have been added. In this example, we as(cid:173)
sume that the user had never chosen the "tablet" duplex value. 
For the shortcut, therefore, the system deleted the value, cast(cid:173)
ing the duplex variable into a Boolean. As a result, the duplex 
option could be rendered with a simple, space-efficient check(cid:173)
box. Of course, if the user later desired the tablet format, they 

2Using Windows ME, Office XP, and a HP R80 printer. 
3Of course, one can quibble with the design of this particular 
interaction, but it is a result of today's software engineering pro(cid:173)
cess, and many similar designs exist —that's why adaptation is so 
promising 

Figure 4: After adaptation, duplex printing is the default and 
visible on the main print dialog.  By discarding the infre(cid:173)
quently used "tablet" value,  the variable can be cast as a 
Boolean and a simple, space-efficient check-box widget used. 

could find it unchanged on the "Features" tab.4 

Restricting a state variable's set of valid values and type 
casting  are just  two  representative  transformations;  many 
more exist.  Note that it  is only possible to perform these 
transformations when the interface is represented in an ab(cid:173)
stract, declarative language. The next section discusses addi(cid:173)
tional benefits from such a representation. 
5  Adapting to Device Characteristics 
The trend towards mobile and ubiquitous computing has re(cid:173)
sulted in an morass of device form factors and input mech(cid:173)
anisms,  and  it  is  nearly  impossible  for  a  designer to  tar(cid:173)
get each of these manually.  Furthermore, as shown in pre(cid:173)
vious  section,  some  parts  of the  interface  may  be  gener(cid:173)
ated  dynamically  in  response  to  the  particular  usage  pat(cid:173)
terns.  Hence, we are building an automated solution, called 
SUPPLE.  Others researchers have laid useful foundations. 
Starting with [Foley et ai,  1989], the model-based UI com(cid:173)
munity  has  developed  declarative,  interface-representation 
languages;  SUPPLE uses an extension of the representation 
developed for PEBBLES [Nichols et ai, 2002]. 

Researchers  have  explored  many  methods  for  "compil(cid:173)
ing" a declarative Ul representation into concrete form for 
use  on  a  specific  target  device.  For  example,  PEBBLES 
uses  a  hand-constructed decision  tree  for this  task;  other 
approaches  include  hierarchical  templates  [Szekely  et  ai, 
1993], stylesheets [Schreiber, 1994], and tools for facilitating 

4 Some might argue that this problem could be simply solved by 
using a MRU default for options like duplex, without restructuring 
the dialogs. But changing defaults is very dangerous unless they are 
visible to the user. 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1617 

Figure 5:  Given different PDA screen resolutions,  SUPPLE generates different interfaces for a household controller. 

manual  design  [Eisenstein et al,  2001].  Yet another method 
is based on a higher-level encoding of the design in terms of 
design patterns [Lin and Landay, 2002]. 

In contrast, we adopt the decison-theoretic framework and 
search for the design with the highest expected utility among 
those that satisfy the device constraints.  Our SUPPLE pro(cid:173)
totype focusses on  screen-size constraints and uses a  utility 
function  that  models  the  expected  ease  of interface  opera(cid:173)
tions  for each  widget.  If multiple  interface  actions  are  nec(cid:173)
essary to complete a task (e.g., if tabs must be selected, panes 
navigated, or confirmation buttons pressed) the costs are com(cid:173)
bined linearly.  Figure 5 shows three different interfaces (from 
amongst  the  3,888,000  possible)  which  were  generated  by 
SUPPLE  and deemed optimal for differing amounts of avail(cid:173)
able screen space. 

While the current  SUPPLE  implementation accepts as  in(cid:173)
put an arbitrary probability distribution over command usage, 
our framework supports user-based adaptation as described in 
the previous section.  For example, at present SUPPLE makes 
an independence assumption regarding command use, but in 
practice  people use  commands  in  sequence  and  human  de(cid:173)
signers recognize this by colocating the corresponding wid(cid:173)
gets.  By computing the expected utility of an  interface rela(cid:173)
tive to a recorded trace of individual user commands, SUPPLE 
should be able to automatically duplicate this form of design 
optimization, but in a personalized manner. 

6  Conclusions 
Effective personalization requires improved methods for both 
adaptation (change based on implicit user behavior) and cus(cid:173)
tomization (change guided by  explicit user requests).  Inter(cid:173)
faces should automatically adapt to the capabilities of the de(cid:173)
vice at hand, to network connectivity, and to the user's activi(cid:173)
ties, location, and context.  If they wish to provide customiza(cid:173)
tion guidance, users should be able to control the adaptation 
process at any level. 

This paper has briefly surveyed some of the projects at the 
University  of Washington,  which  are  investigating these  is(cid:173)
sues, and codified several emerging principles: 

•  Because users find it hard to specify their prefences and 
goals, it is often more effective to induce them from user 
behavior.  Version-space  algebra  allows  an  application 
designer to combine multiple strong biases to achieve a 
weaker one that is tailored to the application, thus reduc(cid:173)
ing the statistical bias for the least increase in variance. 
•  Many benefits of model-based UI design have been long 
recognized [Foley et al.,  1989], but it is increasingly ap(cid:173)
parent that these declarative models are essential to a set 
of transformations  (e.g.,  Currying  and  casting)  that  fa(cid:173)
cilitate adaptation. 

•  Since  adaptive  mechanisms  are  imperfect,  the  cost  to 
users of errors must be considered alongside the advan(cid:173)
tages.  Decison  theory provides a  powerful  framework 
for such analysis [Horvitz,  1999], and the requisit utili(cid:173)
ties can be  learned from  user behavior or derived  from 
device models. 

•  Certain interface mechanisms, such as defaults and au(cid:173)
tomatic timeouts, can minimize the cost of errors and so 
increase the value of adaptation.  Partitioned dynamicity 
offers  a  way  to  manage  adaptivity  while  minimizing a 
user's cognitive load. 

•  Another way to enhance the user experience by improv(cid:173)
ing prediction of user behavior. Because RMMs smooth, 
based on an abstraction lattice defined by the relational 
structure, they are exceptionally accurate when predict(cid:173)
ing sequential behavior (e.g.,  a user's next action) from 
sparse data. 

Acknowledgments 
We  thank  James  Landay  for  helpful  discussions.  This  re(cid:173)
search was funded in part by Office of Naval Research Grants 

1618 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

[Maes and Kozierok, 1993]  Pattie  Maes  and  Robyn 
Kozierok.  Learning interface  agents.  AAAI-93,  pages 
459-465, 1993. 

[McGrenere et al., 2002]  J. McGrenere, R. M. Baecker, and 
K. S. Booth. An evaluation of a multiple interface design 
solution for bloated software. CHI-02, 2002. 

[Mitchell, 1982] T.Mitchell. Generalization as search. Arti(cid:173)

ficial Intelligence, 18:203-226, 1982. 

[Nichols et al., 2002]  J. Nichols, B. A. Myers, M. Higgins, 
J. Hughes, T. K. Harris, R. Rosenfeld, and M. Pignol. Gen(cid:173)
erating remote control interfaces for complex appliances. 
UIST-02, pages 161-170,2002. 

[Norman, 1998] D. Norman. The Invisible Computer. MIT 

Press, 1998. 

[Perkowitz and Etzioni, 1997]  M. Perkowitz and O. Etzioni. 
Adaptive web sites: an Al challenge. IJCAI-97, Aug 1997. 
[Perkowitz and Etzioni, 2000]  M. Perkowitz and O. Etzioni. 
Towards adaptive web sites:  Conceptual framework and 
case study. Artificial Intelligence, 118:245-276,2000. 

[Popescu et al., 2003]  A.  M.  Popescu,  O.  Etzioni,  and 
H. Kautz.  High precision natural language interfaces to 
databases: a graph theoretic approach. IUI-03, Jan 2003. 
[Puerta, 1996]  A. Puerta.  The MECANO project:  Compre(cid:173)
hensive and integrated support for model-based interface 
development. CADUI'96, pages 19-36, June 1996. 

[Sanghai et al.,2003] S.  Sanghai, P. Domingos, and D. S. 
Weld. Dynamic probabilistic relational models. IJCAI-03, 
Aug 2003. 

[Schreiber, 1994]  S. Schreiber. Specification and generation 
of user interfaces with the boss-system. EWHCI-94, pages 
107-120,1994. 

[Szekely et al., 1993]  P.  Szekely,  P.  Luo,  and  R.  Neches. 
Beyond interface builders:  Model-based interface tools. 
INTERCHI-93, pages 383-390. ACM Press, 1993. 

[Weld, 1996]  D. Weld.  Planning-based control of software 

agents. AIPS-96,Mzy 1996. 

[Wolfman et al., 2001]  Steven A. Wolfman, Tessa Lau, Pe(cid:173)
dro Domingos, and Daniel S. Weld.  Mixed initiative in(cid:173)
terfaces for learning tasks:  Smartedit talks back.  IUI-01, 
pages 167-174, Santa Fe, USA, January 2001. 

[Yates et al, 2003]  A. Yates, O. Etzioni, and D. Weld.  Reli(cid:173)
able natural language interfaces to household appliances. 
IUI-03,2003. 

N00014-98-1-0147 & NOOO 14-02-1-0932, National Science 
Foundation Grants IRI-9303461, IIS-9872128, DL-9874759, 
and a CAREER Award. 
References 
[Anderson et al., 2001a] C. R. Anderson, P. Domingos, and 
D. S. Weld. Adaptive web navigation for wireless devices. 
IJCAI-01, Aug 2001. 

[Anderson et al., 2001b] C. R. Anderson, P. Domingos, and 
D.  S.  Weld.  Personalizing web sites for mobile users. 
WWW-01, May 2001. 

[Anderson et al., 2002]  C. R. Anderson, P. Domingos, and 
D. S. Weld.  Relational Markov models.  KDD-02, Aug 
2002. 

[Cypher, 1993] Allen Cypher, editor. Watch what 1 do: Pro(cid:173)

gramming by demonstration. MIT Press, 1993. 

[Dent etal,  1992]  L.  Dent,  J.  Boticario,  J.  McDermott, 
T. Mitchell, and D. Zabowski.  A personal learning ap(cid:173)
prentice. AAAI-92, pages 96-103, July 1992. 

[Eisenstein et al., 2001] J. Eisenstein, J. Vanderdonckt, and 
A.  Puerta.  Applying model-based techniques to the de(cid:173)
velopment of UIs for mobile computers.  IUI  2001, pages 
14-17,2001. 

[Etzioni and Weld, 1994] O. Etzioni and D. Weld. A softbot-
based interface to the Internet. C. ACM, 37(7):72-6,1994. 
[Etzioni etal, 1997]  O.  Etzioni,  K.  Golden,  and  D.  Weld. 
Sound and efficient closed-world reasoning for planning. 
Artificial Intelligence, 89(1-2): 113-148, January 1997. 

[Foley et al., 1989] J. Foley, W. C. Kim, S. Kovacevic, and 
K. Murray.  Defining interfaces at a high level of abstrac(cid:173)
tion. IEEE Software, Jan 1989. 

[Friedman?/al., 1999]  N.  Friedman, L.  Getoor,  D.  Koller, 
and A.  Pfefffer.  Learning probabilistic relational models. 
IJCAI-99, Aug 1999. 

[Golden and Weld, 1996]  K. Golden and D. Weld.  Repre(cid:173)
senting sensing actions: The middle ground revisited. KR-
96, pages 174-185,1996. 

[Horvitz, 1999]  Eric Horvitz.  Principles of mixed-initiative 
user interfaces. CHI-99, pages 159-166. ACM Press, May 
1999. 

[Lau et al, 2000]  Tessa Lau, Pedro Domingos, and Daniel S. 
Weld.  Version space algebra and its application to pro(cid:173)
gramming by demonstration.  ICML-00, pages 527-534, 
June 2000. 

[Lewis and Reiman, 1993] C. Lewis and J. Reiman.  Task-

Centered User Interface Design: A Practical Introduction. 
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 1993. 

[Lin and Landay, 2002]  J. Lin and J. A. Landay.  Damask: 
A  tool  for early-stage design  and  prototyping of multi-
device user interfaces.  8th International Conference on 
Distributed Multimedia Systems, pages 573-580,2002. 
[Mackay, 1991]  W.  Mackay.  Triggers and barriers to cus(cid:173)
tomizing software.  CHI-91, pages 153-160. ACM Press, 
1991. 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1619 

