Intelligent Systems in Travel and Tourism 

Hannes  Werthner 

e-Commerce and Tourism Research Lab (eCTRL) 

ITC-irst and University of Trento, Italy 

werthner@itc.it 

Abstract 

Travel and tourism is the leading application field in the 
b2c  e-commerce,  it  represents  nearly  50%  of the  total 
b2c  turnover.  Already  in  the  past  travel  applications 
were at the forefront of Information Technology, i.e., the 
airline Computerized Reservation  Systems  in the early 
60s.  The  industry  and  its product have rather specific 
features which explain this circumstance: the product is 
a confidence good, consumer decisions are solely based 
on  information beforehand;  and  the  industry  is highly 
networked,  based  on  world-wide  cooperation  of very 
different  types  of  stakeholders.  Consequently, 
this 
industry depends on advanced IT applications. As such 
travel  and  tourism  may  serve  as  an  example  of what 
happens  and  will  happen  in  the  emerging  e-markets, 
pointing  at  structural  changes  as  well  as  challenging 
application scenarios.  The paper provides an overview 
about the industry, describes ongoing structural changes, 
outlines  domain-specific  requirements  and  discusses 
achievements and challenges  in the  field,  following an 
AI  and  e-commerce  point  of  view.  It  finishes  with 
considerations regarding a future IT scenario.1 
1 
Despite unfulfilled business and stock market expectations, 
in  some  sectors  such  as  the  travel  and  tourism  industry 
online transactions are rapidly increasing. This industry is 
the  leading  application  in  the  b2c  arena.  The  travel  and 
tourism industry is witnessing an acceptance of e-commerce 
to the extent that the structure of the industry and the way 
business is conducted, is changing. The Internet is used not 
only  for  information  gathering;  there  is  an  obvious 
acceptance  of ordering  services  over  the  Internet.  A  new 
type  of user  is  emerging;  they  become  their  own  travel 
agents and build their travel packages themselves. 

Introduction 

In the year 2002 European online bookings increased by 
53  percent,  accounting  for  about  3,5  %  of all  consumer 
spending in this domain, whereas in the US this number is 

1 This work is partially funded by the CARITRO foundation 

and the European FP5 projects Dietorecs and Harmonise. 

about  11  % (according to the Danish Center for Regional 
and Tourism Research). 64 Mio. Americans researched their 
travel  options  online  (Travel  Industry  Association  of 
America);  and  32  percent  of US  travelers  have  used  the 
Internet 
(see 
www.nua.com/survevs/). Forecasts  state that by  2007  30% 
of all transactions in the European tourism domain will be 
done  via  the  Internet,  at  least  in  the  German  speaking 
countries [Schuster, 1998]. 

arrangements 

travel 

book 

to 

This importance of e-commerce can be explained by the 
features of the industry, but it highlights also another issue, 
not less important: e-commerce and especially the Web are 
not  only  transaction  and  business  oriented,  it  is  also  a 
medium of curiosity, of creating communities or having just 
fun,  all  of  which  may  or  may  not  result  into  business. 
Especially  the  tourism  product  has  to  do  with  emotional 
experiences; it is not just business [Werthner, 2001]. 

The  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  the  following  two 
sections  describe  the  industry  and  look  at  the  changing 
business environment.  Section 4 provides an overview on 
the  emerging  IT  landscape,  it  discusses  domain  specific 
requirements and related application examples, pointing at 
open research issues. 

2  The Industry 
The  travel  and  tourism  industry  is  a  global  (and  a 
globalization) industry, with very specific features: 
•  Travel and tourism represents approx.  11% of the world 
wide  GDP  (following  the  tourism  satellite  account 
method of the World Travel & Tourism Council). 

•  There will be one Billion international arrivals in the year 
2010 (following the World Tourism Organization). And 
tourism grows faster than the other economic sectors. 

•  It  represents  a  cross-sectoral  industry,  including  many 
related  economic  sectors  such  as  culture,  sport  or 
agriculture,  where  over  30  different 
industrial 
components have been identified that serve travelers. 

•  This explains the industry's heterogeneity, and due to its 
SME  structure  it  has  a  huge  importance  for  regional 
development.  For example,  in the EU there  are around 
1.3 Mio. hotels and restaurants (9 % of all enterprises). 
And 95 % of them are very small, i.e., 1-9 employees. 

1620 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

Figure 1: Structural view of the market [Werthner and Klein, 1999] 

•  The  supply  and  the  demand  side  form  a  worldwide 
network,  where  both  production  and  distribution  are 
based on cooperation. 

•  The  product  is  perishable,  complex  and  emotional:  i)  a 
hotel bed not sold for one night represents a lost income. 
Suppliers are in a risky situation, which can be reduced if 
access to information is available; ii) the tourism product 
is  a  bundle  of  basic  products,  aggregated  by  some 
intermediary.  To  support  the  rather  complex  bundling 
products  must  have  well  defined  interfaces  with  respect 
to  consumer  needs,  prices  or  also  distribution  channels; 
iii)  vacations  are  emotional  experience  structures  that 
involve  cognitive  and  sensory  stimulations  as  well  as 
affective responses to certain events. 
Tourism is an information based business, the product is 
a "confidence good"; an a priori comprehensive assessment 
of  its  qualities  is  impossible.  Tourists  have  to  leave  their 
daily  environment 
the 
moment of decision-making only a model of the product,  its 
description, 
is  available.  This  characteristic  of  tourism 
products  entails  high  information  search  costs  and  causes 
informational  market 
the 
industry has comparably long information and value chains. 
Figure  1  differentiates  between  the  supply  and  demand 
side  and  the  respective  intermediaries.  Links  mark  the 
relationships  as  well  as  the  flow  of information,  showing 
only  the  most  relevant  links.  Nodes  indicate  the  relevant 
types  of players. 

imperfections.  Consequently, 

the  product.  At 

for  consuming 

On  the  supply  side  we  denote  with  "primary"  suppliers 
enterprises  like  hotels,  restaurants,  etc.,  which  are  mostly 
SMEs.  One  should  note  that  with  respect  to  a  functional 
differentiation these companies are at the same level as the 
"big"  players  like  airlines.  Tour  operators  can  be  seen  as 

final  consumers  with 

travel  agents  act  as 

information 
product  aggregators, 
the  relevant 
brokers,  providing 
facilities.  CRS/GDS  (Central 
information  and  booking 
Reservation  Systems 
/  Global  Distribution  Systems), 
stemming  from  the  airline  reservation  systems  already 
developed  in  the  60s,  include  also  other  products  such  as 
packaged holidays, or other means of transport. Whereas the 
intermediaries  on 
the 
"professional"  connection  between  supply  and  demand 
(mainly  based  on 
infrastructure  of  the 
CRS/GDS),  the  left  side  is  relevant  for  the  management, 
planning  and  branding  of  a  destination.  Normally,  these 
entities  have  to  act  on  behalf  of  all  suppliers  within  a 
destination and are not engaged in the booking process. The 
links  to  governmental  -  as  dotted  lines  -  indicate  that 
Destination  Marketing 
often 
governmental organizations. 

the  right  side  can  be  seen  as 

the  electronic 

Organizations 

are 

The  upstream  flow  of  Figure  1  consists  of  product 
information,  whereas  the  downstream 
flow  reports  on 
market  behavior,  mostly  represented  in  terms  of statistical 
aggregates.  Both 
tourist 
information  network  tying  together  all  market  participators 
and,  apparently,  reflecting 
the  economic  relationships 
between them. 

flows  create  a 

information 

The New Business Landscape 

3 
The  Web  facilitates  new  ways  to  meet  changing  consumer 
behavior and  to  reach new  market  segments,  leading  to  an 
"informatization"  of the  overall  tourism  value  chain.  This 
allows different strategies to generate value [Sweet, 2001]: 
•  Value  extraction:  increases  efficiency  and  reduces  costs, 
e.g.,  automation  of  processes  or  outsourcing  to  clients 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1621 

such as self check-in of hotel guests or airline passengers. 
•  Value capturing: client and sales data are used to support 
the  marketing,  e.g.,  data  mining  for  forecast  or  yield 
management. 

•  Value adding:  a linear combination of products / services 
to create richer product bundles, e.g., new service quality 
for consumers such as linking mobile services to existing 
Web services to advise tourists during their travel. 

•  Value  creation:  the  focus  is  on  network  effects,  e.g., 
in  service 

tourists  within  a  destination  participate 
definition and planning. 
Such  strategies allow  for the design  of new products  and 
services, enlarging the range of options to customize and to 
configure  products.  IT  and,  more  importantly,  improved 
organizational  procedures  lower  the  price  of customization, 
enabling 
individualized  offerings  based  on  mass-
customization. On the other side, configuration points at the 
bundling  of  different  product  or  service  components  to 
integrated  offerings.  Core  product  can  be  combined  with 
additional  service  elements  in  order  to  create  integrated 
customer solutions. 

Given  the  dynamics  of  the  sector  and  the  emerging 
already  very  competitive  electronic  market,  nearly  all 
stakeholders  have 
Internet  strategy. 
Travel  and  tourism  has  also  become  the  playing  field  for 
new  entrants,  either start-ups  or companies  from  the  media 
and  IT  sector.  Since 
information-based 
business, it fits well with their respective background. 

implemented 

tourism 

is  an 

their 

The  overall  trend points  towards  a  further specialization 
and an ongoing deconstruction of the value chain paralleled 
by  an  integration  of players  and  products.  Companies  will 
compete and cooperate at the same time, boundaries within 
the  industry  are  blurring.  All  types  of market  players  are 
affected: 
•  Tourists  will  be addressed by more players,  and as  they 
accept the Web as a booking channel, they will also play 
a more active role in specifying their services. 

•  Travel  agents  will  see  a  diminishing  power  in  the  sales 
channel,  as  a consequence  they  will  put  more  emphasis 
on consulting and complex products. 

• 

Internet  travel  sites,  as  platforms  with  bundling  of 
offerings  will  enhance  by  providing  new  market 
functionality  and  technology.  This  will  lead  to  easier 
accessible  price  comparisons  and  market  overviews, 
enabled by personalized intelligent tools for travelers. 

•  Destination  management  organizations  will  develop 
cooperation  models  within  destinations  and  they  will 
occupy a new role as consolidator and aggregator. 

•  Tour operator will blur the boundaries between individual 
and  packaged  tour,  based  on  mass-customization  and 
flexible configurations. 

•  CRS  / GDS  show  an  "INTEL  inside"  marketing  strategy 
for  major  tourist  Web  sites  to  increase  their  transaction 
volume, and they also move into direct sales for the retail 
segment 

•  Suppliers  will  support  electronic  direct  sales,  increasing 
again  price  competition  as  well  as  price  differentiation, 
and  they  will  redefine  customer  processes  (electronic 
ticketing, automated check-in, etc.). 
This development leads to an evolution of the market best 
described as an ongoing interaction of concentration (e.g., as 
in the US with the major travel sites like Expedia, Orbitz or 
the  simultaneous  entering  of  new 
Travelocity)  versus 
players.  The 
increased  complexity,  however, 
generates  the  need  for  new  services  such  as  providing 
transparent  access  or  price  comparisons.  This  enforces  the 
design and deployment of more specialized services.  Such a 
process  will  quite  naturally 
create  new  business 
opportunities,  accelerating  competition  and  putting  even 
more emphasis on technical innovation. 

related 

The IT Scenario 

4 
is  based  on  flexible 
The  described  business  scenario 
network  configurations  and 
further 
integration  of 
the 
consumers  into  internal  business  processes.  Adding  the 
tourist  life  cycle  -  taking  into  consideration  the  mobility 
aspect  of travelers  -  one  can  draw  the  following  simplified 
figure  of  linking 
life  cycles  with  companies' 
business processes. 

tourists' 

Figure 2: Tourist life cycle and companies' processes - both suppliers and intermediaries 

1622 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

and 

supporting 

companies, 

Obviously,  processes  cross  company  borders,  leading  to 
requiring  cooperation 
distributed  b2b2c  applications, 
between 
also  mobile 
communication  with  the  consumer.  Such  a  future  business 
scenario is based on the assumption that technology - based 
on  a  common  pervasive 
infrastructure  -  will  become 
transparent,  invisible  for the consumer;  information  will  be 
available  at home, the work place  and during travel. Given 
such  a  "holistic"  approach 
interleaving  business  and 
technology  perspectives,  what  are  specific  requirements 
when looking at the user - machine interaction?  What is the 
intelligence  needed 
to  support  collaboration  among 
companies  within  a  networked  industry?  These  questions 
lead 
regarding  system 
architectures. 

interesting  considerations 

to 

4.1  User Requirements 
One  could  look  at  the  human-computer  interaction  as  a 
variant of the famous Turing test:  as a competition between 
a human and an intelligent travel system.2 Even if one thinks 
of it as  an  engineering  task, and not as a cognitive science 
test,  it  poses  hard  questions:  i)  a  simple  problem  like 
inquiring  a  flight  from  location  A  to  B,  with  specific  price 
and time constraints, complemented by a specific hotel, with 
similar  constraints.  In  this  case  linking  to  a  predefined 
database  or  to  one  of the  CRS/GDS  would  be  sufficient,  if 
one  ignores  interoperability  issues.  This  type  of  planning 
problem  is  already  partially  solved  by  existing  online 
systems  such  as  Expedia  or Orbitz.  But  the  need  for more 
intelligent  heuristics  is  obvious,  when  one  thinks  of  the 
enormous  number  of scheduled  flights  and  constraints  such 
as  different  rates  or  different  booking  conditions  within 
airline alliances,  etc.  ii)  a complex  problem which  involves 
background  knowledge  of  a  specific  traveler,  e.g.,  the 
problem  of traveling  to  Milan  only  when Milan  plays.  This 
needs  the  modeling  of knowledge  about  the  Italian  city  of 
Milan,  the  inference  that  in  this  case  Milan  refers  to  AC 
MILAN  (a  soccer  club), 
timing  regarding  soccer 
tournaments (normally at weekends). And other background 
knowledge  might  be  needed  such  as  specific  weather 
conditions or cultural activities. In fact, the "leisure" domain 
might  cover  nearly  all  domains  of  daily  life.  And  the 
information,  stored  in  different  bases  with  no  common 
format and even  unknown locations, needs to be extracted. 
Here wrapping techniques, learning accurate extraction rules 
and  also  adapting to structural  changes  in sites,  are needed 
[Knoblock  et  al,  2000;  Kushmerick,  2000].  Other  non-
trivial tasks within this context are 
•  conversation with its semantic and pragmatic aspects, 
• 
•  search  and 
evaluation, 

identification of problem  domains, 

retrieval  with 

information 

related 

the 

the 

•  negotiation  including  additional  and  even  unsolicited 
offers,  both  having  cooperative  and  opportunistic 

2  These  ideas  are  based on  discussions with  W.  Grossmann, 
University of Vienna, O. Stock, ITC-irst, A. Tjoa, TU Vienna, and 
W. Wahlster, DFK1. 

behavior. 
However, these problem types assume that users are able 
to  express  their  needs,  which  is  normally  not  the  case. 
Systems  have  to  "become  active"  and  to  provide  advice, 
adapting  to  different  travel  decision  processes  as  well  as 
navigation  styles  [Moutinho,  1987;  Ankomah et al.,  1996]. 
For example, Grabler and Zins [2002] have identified, based 
on  a  study  on  200  human  -  human  and  human  -  machine 
counseling  sessions,  6  different  traveler  groups  such  as 
highly  pre-defined,  recommendation  oriented  or  geography 
oriented  ones.  These  groups  differ  in  the  order  in  which 
information is searched, the type of information needed, the 
level of support required and the level of personal  flexibility 
and  knowledge.  Two  groups  of  factors  are  identified: 
personal,  i.e.,  socioeconomic  and  psychological/cognitive 
factors  (experience,  personality,  involvement),  and  travel 
features,  i.e., travel purpose, travel party  size,  the length  of 
travel or the distance to the destination. 

An  application  example  of  such  an  approach 

is 
[Ricci  and  Werthner,  2002].  Based  on  Case 
Based  Reasoning  (CBR),  it  adapts  its  dialogue  as  it  learns 
more  about  the  user,  supports  product  aggregation  for  a 
given  travel, provides personalized  recommendations based 
on  previous  system  experience,  and 
it  applies  query 
refinement  methods  helping  to  adjust  queries  according  to 
the  data  available  in  a  given  product  catalogues.  Thus,  it 
integrates  topical 
information  and  "good"  examples  of 
product  bundling  contained  in  previous  travels  built  by  a 
community  of users. 

Dietorecs,  another  example,  extends 
this  approach  by 
integrating  the  iterative  presentation  and  evaluation  of 
alternative  proposals  [Fesenmaier  et  al.,  2003].  It  assumes 
that  by  presenting  specific 
implicitly 
represent  the  most  discriminating  offers  within  a  given 
product  catalogue, 
the  evaluation  of  the  user  provides 
indications  about  his/her  references.  At  the  beginning  the 
systems  performs  a  cluster  analysis  of the  offers  within  a 
given catalogue. The user's choice is the starting point of an 
iterative process of refocused clustering and presentation. At 

images,  which 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1623 

the end, either the user directly takes the chosen product, or 
the obtained criteria serve as input for a CBR process. 

These examples show, that different decisions  styles  as 
well  as  the  seamless  switching between  them  have  to  be 
supported.  But  the  choice  on  tourism  products  is  not 
rational;  these products  are  complex experience  structures 
that involve cognitive and sensory stimulations. Due to the 
multi-sensory  nature  of tourism  products,  textual  ways  of 
describing vacations are very limited to convey a complete 
picture that can be used to formulate product expectations 
serving as a basis for decision. 

A possible approach is to look at product trails - these are 
sources  of information  for  the  formation  of brand  beliefs 
since  they  involve  an  experience  of  the  product  through 
multiple senses - describing leisure experiences and to draw 
conclusions on how to present tourism information and how 
to guide a user in a non rational navigation process. Gretzel 
and Fesenmaier  [2003]  looked  at  3000  randomly  selected 
persons who were asked to imagine a trip and to report the 
colors dominating their mental image, the scents they would 
like  to  smell,  and  the  sounds  they  expect  to  hear.  They 
identified a number of such sensory categories, which were 
clustered to experiences representing coherent bundles such 
as Autumn or Scenic / Nature. These findings indicate that 
sensory  domains  and  associations  thereof  exist  and  that 
these follow specific patterns. Such bundles can be used to 
describe coherent experiences sought after by certain groups 
of travelers.  These results can provide substantial input for 
interface design and user guidance. 

they  want,  making 

Finally,  travelers  need  access  to  information  whenever 
and  wherever 
tourism  a  perfect 
application  field  for mobile  computing.  Latest  generations 
of  mobile  devices  and  wireless  networks  offer  new 
opportunities,  but  mobile  devices  still  suffer  from 
restrictions compared to web based systems. Moreover, the 
mobile context imposes a very different interaction style and 
decision model. But, on the other side, mobile applications 
could take advantage when linked to existing web sites and 
refer to already existing personal profiles and selected travel 
products.  The  mobile  Intelligent  Travel  Recommender 
(mITR)  supports  travelers  to  complement  their  product 
while traveling  [Ricci  et al,  2002].  The objective of mITR 
is  to  improve  iteratively  the  "fitness"  of  recommended 
products.  But  instead of asking  the  user for explicit  input, 
mITR  exploits  the  knowledge  contained  in  the  pre-travel 
plan to guess an initial set of candidate products. The user 
can provide critics to some of these products, such as "I like 
this  feature  of  this  product"  or  "I  want  something  less 
expensive", which is used for further interaction. 
4.2  System Features - Intelligent Networking 
System designed to support such applications should 
•  allow users to access information whenever and wherever 

they want, 

•  guide the user in the decision and traveling process, and 
•  allow the user to create product bundles. 

Business services for the traveler may use Web services 
to be more easily integrated and bundled into new, ad-hoc 

can 

that 

architecture 

products. Web services provide an open, flexible, modular, 
layered 
integrate  multiple 
communication models. But these services do only facilitate 
the  "manual"  combination  of components  across  different 
platforms. The vision is that this should be available (semi-) 
automatically,  for example,  allowing a customer to plan a 
trip in the city of Vienna visiting restaurants with at least 15 
gourmet  points  and  some  classical  concerts.  Another 
enabling technology might be Peer-to-Peer (P2P) services to 
directly  exploit  resources  present  at  other  nodes  without 
intervention of any central server, where nodes may join and 
be integrated in an ad- hoc manner. Such services need to be 
described for the respective peer device  and discovered  in 
an  ad-hoc  manner  in  a  decentralized  scheme,  without  a 
centralized registry as this may be unavailable in a mobile 
environment;  to  be  composed  ad-hoc  and  to  interact  not 
only  with  servers,  but  also  with  other  peers;  and  to  be 
connectable to legacy systems. 

However,  when  taking  the  supply  side's  point  of view, 
the  requirements  become  even  more  complicated:  For 
instance, a middleman might search for 100 individual web 
services  hosted  by  several  individual,  privately-owned 
hotels  and  with  golf courses  nearby  in  the  Tyrol  within  a 
diameter of 100kms in order to bundle them with flights into 
tourist packages. In this case functions are needed to 
•  enable middlemen to create sets of bundled products, 
•  ease the participation of SMEs to larger networks, and 
•  facilitate networking leading to virtual organizations. 

In  this  context  networked  business  operations  could  be 
defined as P2P enabled semantic Web services that integrate 
business  networks  allowing  for  an  n:m  organization  and 
communication  between  participating  enterprises.  This 
transfers  the  level  from  composing  individual  instances  of 
services  to  composing  sets  of services;  and  from  ad-hoc 
integration between two participants to an arbitrary number 
of cooperating enterprises.  The orchestration  of a  large set 
of web  services requires possibilities  for business planning 
with  more 
refined  means.  Techniques  of  constraint 
reasoning, multi-value optimization and relaxation might be 
used  to  aggregate  web  services  at  the  set  level  and  to 
achieve specific business goals,  e.g., profit optimization or 
the equal distribution of income within a destination. 

However,  such  a  scenario  is  based  on  a  non-existing 
assumption:  there  exists  no  agreed  electronic  standard  to 
describe tourism services. Those existing such as the OTA 
(Open  Travel  Alliance)  specifications  are just  adopted  by 
few  players.  Given  that  the  number  of  available  tourism 
relevant information  sites  is huge,  e.g., out of the  1.3  Mio 
European enterprises in this sector nearly 40% have already 
their  Web  site, 
that  also  future 
standardization initiatives will fail. 

it  can  be 

foreseen 

One  approach  to  this  problem  is  the  European  project 
Harmonise,  creating  an  ontology  based  mediation  and 
harmonization tool [Dell'Erba et al., 2002]. The project puts 
emphasis on the combination of a social consensus process 
with  the  application  of new  technologies.  The  goal  is  to 
allow  participating  tourism  organizations  to  keep  their 
proprietary data format while cooperating with each other. 

1624 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

Specific tourism mediators are dedicated to the "translation" 
needs between these data sources. Such a mediator looks at 
information from a higher conceptual semantic level using 
this level of abstraction for the mapping purpose. 

Figure 4: The Harmonise process 

The data model of a source document, assuming XML, is 
first lifted to a local conceptual schema (C-Normalization) 
and then semantically mapped to the terminology specified 
by the shared ontology, which is built by domain experts. 
The output of the mapping process is a set of reconciliation 
rules, which are used in order to transform the local data and 
to code them according to the ontology content. Harmonise 
is based on RDF(S) as "language" for representing local 
conceptual schemata as well as the mediating ontology. But 
Harmonise has several limitations: i) it does not solve the 
problem  of  ontology  versioning,  which  is  severe  in  a 
domain with constantly new products; ii) and Harmonise, 
though mapping between different conceptual models, does 
not  support  ontology  reasoning,  or  even  more  advanced 
concepts  such  as  approximate  reasoning,  needed  in  a 
domain which is based not only on true axioms or facts. 
5  Conclusions 
The  tourism  business  is  changing.  More  specialized 
services, 
flexible  network  configurations  and  further 
consumer integration into  internal business processes will 
lead to smart market places,  integrating all stakeholders. 
The underlying IT scenario, enabling as well as enforcing 
this development, shows that tourism is an interesting field 
of application.  But  it also  demonstrates that  this  industry 
poses  hard  challenges,  which  offer  interesting  research 
opportunities.  This  has  also  been  acknowledged  by  the 
European Union, placing tourism as one of the preferred 
application fields of the European IT research. 
References 
[Ankomah et al., 1996] P.K. Ankomah, J. L. Crompton and 
D.  Baker.  Influence  of cognitive  distance  in  vacation 
choice. Annals of Tourism Research, 23(1):138-150, 
1996. 

[Dell'Erba et al, 2002] M. Dell'Erba, 0. Fodor, F. Ricci 
and  H.  Werthner.  Harmonise:  a  solution  for  data 
interoperability.  In  Proceedings  of 1FIP  I3E  2002 
Conference, pages 114-127, Lisbon, Portugal, Oct. 2002. 
[Fesenmaier  et  al,  2003]  D.  Fesenmaier,  F.  Ricci,  E. 
Schaumlechner, K. Wober and C. Zanella. DIETORECS: 
Travel  Advisory  for  Multiple  Decision  Styles.  In 
Proceedings of the ENTER 2003 Conference, pages 232-
242, Helsinki, Finland, January 2003. 

[Grabler and Zins, 2002] K. Grabler and A. Zins. Vacation 
trip  decision  styles  as  basis 
for  an  automated 
recommendation  system:  Lessons  from  observational 
studies. In Proceedings of the ENTER 2002 Conference, 
pages 458-469, Innsbruck, Austria, January 2002. 

[Gretzel  and  Fesenmaier,  2003]  U.  Gretzel  and  D. 
Fesenmaier.  Experience-based  Internet  Marketing:  An 
Exploratory  Study  of  Sensory  Experiences  Associated 
with Pleasure Travel to the Midwest US. In Proceedings 
of the ENTER 2003 Conference, pages 49-57, Helsinki, 
Finland, January 2003. 

[Knoblock  et ai,  2000]  C.  A.  Knoblock,  K.  Lerman,  S. 
Minton and I. Muslea. Accurately and reliably extracting 
data from the web: A machine learning approach. IEEE 
Data Engineering Bulletin, 23(4):33-41,2000. 

[Kushmerick,  2000]  N.  Kushmerick.  Wrapper  induction: 
Efficiency  and  expressiveness.  Artificial  Intelligence 
Journal, 118(1-2): 15-68, 2000. 

[Moutinho,  1987]  L.  Moutinho.  Consumer  behavior  in 
tourism. European Journal of Marketing, 21:2-44, 1987. 
[Ricci and Werthner, 2002] F. Ricci and H. Werthner. Case-
based  querying  for  travel  planning  recommendation. 
Information Technology and Tourism, 4(3-4):215-226, 
2002. 

[Ricci et al, 2002] F. Ricci, D. Cavada and Quang Nhat 
Nguyen:  Integrating  Travel  Planning  and  On-Tour 
Support  in  a  Case-Based  Recommender  System.  In 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Mobile Tourism Systems 
(in conjunction with Mobile HCI'02), pages 11-16, Pisa, 
Italy, September 2002 

[Schuster, 1998] A. Schuster. A Delphi survey on electronic 
distribution  channels  for  intermediaries  in  the  tourism 
industry: the situation in German speaking countries. In 
Proceedings of the ENTER 1998 Conference, pages 224-
234, Istanbul, Turkey, January 1998. 

[Sweet,  2001]  P.  Sweet.  Designing  Interactive  Value 
Development.  PhD,  Thesis,  Lund  University,  Lund 
Business Press, Sweden, 2001. 

[Werthner,  2001] H.  Werthner.  Just Business - Shouldn't 
We Have Some Fun? In Proceedings of the ECWEB -
DEXA Conference, pages 1-16, Munich, September 2001. 

[Werthner  and  Klein,  1999]  H.  Werthner  and  S.  Klein. 
Information Technology and Tourism - A Challenging 
Relationship. Springer Verlag, Wien, New York, 1999. 

INVITED SPEAKERS 

1625 

