Conﬂict-based Diagnosis: Adding Uncertainty to Model-based Diagnosis

Ildik´o Flesch, Peter Lucas and Theo van der Weide

Department of Information and Knowledge Systems, ICIS

Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Email: {ildiko,peterl,tvdw}@cs.ru.nl

Abstract

Consistency-based diagnosis concerns using a
model of the structure and behaviour of a sys-
tem in order to analyse whether or not the sys-
tem is malfunctioning. A well-known limitation
of consistency-based diagnosis is that it is unable
to cope with uncertainty. Uncertainty reasoning is
nowadays done using Bayesian networks. In this
ﬁeld, a conﬂict measure has been introduced to de-
tect conﬂicts between a given probability distribu-
tion and associated data.
In this paper, we use a probabilistic theory to rep-
resent logical diagnostic systems and show that
in this theory we are able to determine consis-
tent and inconsistent states as traditionally done
in consistency-based diagnosis. Furthermore, we
analyse how the conﬂict measure in this theory of-
fers a way to favour particular diagnoses above oth-
ers. This enables us to add uncertainty reasoning to
consistency-based diagnosis in a seamless fashion.

1 Introduction

Model-based diagnostic reasoning is concerned with the di-
agnosis of malfunctioning of systems, based on an explicit
model of the structure and behaviour of these systems [Reiter,
1987]. In the last two decades, model-based diagnosis has be-
come an important area of research with applications in var-
ious ﬁelds, such as software engineering [K¨ob and Wotawa,
2004] and the automotive industry [Struss and Price, 2003].

Basically, two types of model-based diagnosis are being
distinguished in literature: (i) consistency-based diagnosis
[Reiter, 1987], and (ii) abductive diagnosis [Console et al.,
1990].
In this paper, we only deal with consistency-based
diagnosis.

Consistency-based diagnosis generates diagnoses by com-
paring the predictions made by a model of structure and be-
haviour with the observations; it determines the behavioural
assumptions under which predictions and observations are
consistent. It is typically used for trouble shooting of devices
that are based on a design [Genesereth, 1984].

A limitation of consistency-based diagnosis is that it is only
capable of handling qualitative knowledge and unable to cope

with the uncertainty that comes with many problem domains.
This implies that an important feature of diagnostic problem
solving is not captured in the theory. To solve this problem, de
Kleer has proposed adding uncertainty to consistency-based
diagnosis by specifying a joint probability distribution on all
possible behavioural assumptions, taking these to be mutu-
ally independent [de Kleer, 1990]. One step further is a pro-
posal by Kohlas et al.
to adjust the probability distribution
by excluding diagnoses that are inconsistent [Kohlas et al.,
1998]. In both cases, consistency-based diagnosis and uncer-
tainty reasoning are kept separate.

There have also been proposals to utilise Bayesian net-
works as a probabilistic framework for model-based diag-
nosis [Pearl, 1988]. Poole has proposed using consistency-
based diagnosis to speed up reasoning in a Bayesian network
[Poole, 1996]. Lucas has proposed a method to integrate
consistency-based diagnosis into Bayesian network reason-
ing [Lucas, 2001].

None of the approaches above suggest determining and or-
dering diagnoses in a probabilistic manner, yet in a way sim-
ilar to consistency-based diagnosis.

In this paper, we explore a probabilistic framework that
models the structure and behaviour of logical diagnostic sys-
tems. The two major aims of our research were to develop a
new probabilistic framework that

1. is capable of distinguishing between consistent and in-
consistent states of a system and, therefore, allows de-
termining diagnoses;

2. offers a way to favour particular diagnoses above others

by means of a statistical measure.

The ﬁrst aim is achieved by deﬁning consistency and in-
consistency probabilistically; the second aim is fulﬁlled by
using the conﬂict measure from Bayesian network as such a
statistical measure [Jensen, 2001].

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, the nec-
essary basic concepts are deﬁned. Subsequently, in Section
3, the deﬁnition of Bayesian diagnostic problems is given to-
gether with probabilistic deﬁnitions of consistency and incon-
sistency. Section 4 shows that the conﬂict measure is capable
of ordering diagnoses. Finally, in Section 5 the results of this
paper are summarised.

IJCAI-07

380

1

AND

O1

0 observed
1 expected

u

P (xu) = 0.2

1

0

1

I2

I1

I3

1

OR1

1

OR2

O2

1 observed
1 expected

Figure 1: Example of a circuit.

2 Preliminaries

In this section, we provide a brief summary of the theories of
consistency-based diagnosis and Bayesian networks.

2.1 Consistency-based Diagnosis

In the theory of consistency-based diagnosis [Reiter, 1987],
the structure and behaviour of a system is represented by a
logical diagnostic system SL = (SD, CMP), where

• SD denotes the system description, which is a ﬁnite set
of logical formulae, specifying structure and behaviour;
• CMP is a ﬁnite set of constants, corresponding to the
components of the system; these components can be
faulty.

The system description consists of behaviour descriptions,
and connections. A behavioural description is a formula spec-
ifying normal and abnormal (faulty) functionalities of the
components. These normal and abnormal functionalities are
indicated by abnormality literals. A connection is a formula
of the form ic = oc(cid:2) , where ic and oc(cid:2) denote the input and
output of components c and c(cid:2).

A logical diagnostic problem is deﬁned as a pair PL =
(SL, OBS), where SL is a logical diagnostic system and OBS
is a ﬁnite set of logical formulae, representing observations.
Adopting the deﬁnition from [de Kleer et al., 1992], a diag-
nosis in the theory of consistency-based diagnosis is deﬁned
as follows. Let Δ be the assignment of either a normal or an
abnormal behavioural assumption to each component. Then,
Δ is a consistency-based diagnosis of the logical diagnostic
problem PL iff the observations are consistent with both the
system description and the diagnosis:

SD ∪ Δ ∪ OBS (cid:2) ⊥.

Here, (cid:2) stands for the negation of the logical entailment rela-
tion, and ⊥ represents a contradiction.

EXAMPLE 1 Consider Figure 1, which depicts an elec-
tronic circuit with one AND gate and two OR gates. Now, the
output of the system differs from the one expected according
to the simulation model, thus it gives rise to an inconsistency.
One of the diagnoses, resolving the inconsistency, is to as-
sume that the AND gate is functioning abnormally.

2.2 Bayesian Networks and Data Conﬂict
Let P (XV ) denote a joint probability distribution of the set
of discrete random variables XV with ﬁnite set of indices V .
Let U, W, Z ⊆ V be mutually disjoint sets of indices. Then,

P (xv | xu) = 0.8
P (xv | ¯xu) = 0.01

v

n

P (xn | xu) = 0.9
P (xn | ¯xu) = 0.1

Figure 2: Example of a Bayesian network.

the set of random variables XU is said to be conditionally
independent of XW given XZ , if

P (XU | XW , XZ) = P (XU | XZ ).

(1)
A Bayesian network is a pair B = (G, P ), where all indepen-
dencies in the acyclic directed graph G are also contained in
P , and P is factorised according to G as

(cid:2)

P (XV ) =

P (Xv | πv),

(2)

v∈V

where πv denotes the random variables associated with the
parent set of vertex v in the graph. In this paper, we assume
that all random variables are binary; xv stands for a positive
value of Xv, whereas ¯xv denotes a negative value.

Bayesian networks specify particular probabilistic patterns
that must be fulﬁlled by observations. Observations are ran-
dom variables that obtain a value through an intervention,
such as a diagnostic test. The set of observations is denoted
by Ω. The conﬂict measure has been proposed as a tool for
the detection of potential conﬂicts between observations and
a given Bayesian network [Jensen, 2001], and is deﬁned as:

conf(Ω) = log

P (Ω1)P (Ω2) · · · P (Ωm)

P (Ω)

,

(3)

with Ω = Ω1 ∪ Ω2 ∪ · · · ∪ Ωm.

The interpretation of the conﬂict measure is as follows. A
zero or negative conﬂict measure means that the denominator
is equally likely or more likely than the numerator. This is
interpreted as that the joint occurrence of the observations is
in accordance with the probabilistic patterns in P . A positive
conﬂict measure, however, implies negative correlation be-
tween the observations and P indicating that the observations
do not match P very well.

The interpretation of the conﬂict measure is illustrated by

Example 2.

EXAMPLE 2 Consider the Bayesian network shown in Fig-
ure 2, which describes that stomach ulcer (u) may give rise to
both vomiting (v) and nausea (n).

Now, suppose that a patient comes in with the symptoms
of vomiting and nausea. The conﬂict measure then has the
following value:

conf({xv, xn}) = log

P (xv)P (xn)
P (xv, xn)

= log

0.168 · 0.26

0.1448

≈ −0.5.

As the conﬂict measure assumes a negative value, there is no
conﬂict between the two observations. This is consistent with
medical knowledge, as we do expect that a patient with stom-
ach ulcer displays symptoms of both vomiting and nausea.

IJCAI-07

381

As a second example, suppose that a patient has only symp-
toms of vomiting. The conﬂict measure now obtains the fol-
lowing value:

conf({xv, ¯xn}) = log

0.168 · 0.74

0.0232

≈ log 5.36 ≈ 0.7.

As the conﬂict measure is positive, there is a conﬂict between
the two observations, which is again in accordance to medical
expectations.

3 Probabilistic Diagnosis

The main aim of this section is to deﬁne a probabilistic theory
that is related to consistency-based diagnosis.

In Section 3.1, the system description and the components
of a logical diagnostic system are mapped to a probabilistic
representation, deﬁned along the lines of [Pearl, 1988] and
[Poole, 1996]. This representation is called a Bayesian diag-
nostic system, which, together with the observations Ω, yield
a Bayesian diagnostic problem. In Section 3.2, consistency
and inconsistency are deﬁned for Bayesian diagnostic prob-
lems.

3.1 Bayesian Diagnostic Problems

To start, we introduce some necessary notation. In the re-
maining part of this paper, the set CMP acts as the set of
indices to the components of a diagnostic system.
In this
context, C denotes a subset of these components, whereas
c indicates an individual component.

We are now in a position to deﬁne Bayesian diagnostic sys-
tems.
In this formalism, the relations between the compo-
nents are deﬁned qualitatively by a graph and quantitatively
by a probability distribution.

A Bayesian diagnostic system, deﬁned as a pair SB =
(B, CMP), is obtained as the image of a logical diagnostic
system SL, where: (i) B = (G, P ) is a Bayesian network
with acyclic directed graph G and joint probability distribu-
tion P of the set of random variables XV ; (ii) the acyclic
directed graph G = (V, E) is the image of the system de-
scription, with V = O ∪ I ∪ A; O are the output vertices cor-
responding to the outputs of components, I are input vertices
corresponding to the inputs of components and A are abnor-
mality vertices corresponding to abnormality literals. The set
of arcs E results from the mapping of connections in SD.

According to the deﬁnition above, the set of random vari-
ables corresponds one-to-one to the set of vertices,
thus
XV ↔ V . Figure 3 shows the graphical representation of
the Bayesian diagnostic system corresponding to the circuit
in Figure 1.

As we have already mentioned, we also need to add ob-
servations, thus inputs and outputs, to Bayesian diagnostic
systems.
It is generally not the case that the entire set of
inputs and outputs of a system is observed. We, therefore,
make the following distinction: observed system inputs and
outputs will be denoted by IS and OS , whereas the remaining
(non-observed) inputs and outputs are denoted by IR and OR.
Clearly, I = IS ∪ IR and O = OS ∪ OR.

Now, we are ready to deﬁne the notion of Bayesian diag-

nostic problem.

¯ı1

I1

i3

I3

A∨1

i2

I2

O∨1

A∨2

A∧

O∨2

o∨2

O∧

¯o∧

Figure 3: Bayesian diagnostic system corresponding to the
circuit in Figure 1.

Deﬁnition 1 (Bayesian diagnostic problem) A Bayesian di-
agnostic problem, denoted by PB, is deﬁned as a pair PB =
(SB, Ω), where SB is a Bayesian diagnostic system and
Ω = IS ∪ OS denotes the set of observations.

3.2 P -consistency and P -inconsistency
In this section, we analyse how diagnoses can be expressed
in the context of Bayesian diagnostic problems.

Recall that in the consistency-based theory of diagnosis, a
diagnosis is a prediction, which (i) assumes either normal or
abnormal behaviour of each component in the system, that
(ii) satisﬁes the consistency condition.

Thus, according to the ﬁrst requirement, a diagnosis in
a Bayesian diagnostic system concerns the entire set of be-
havioural assumptions. To facilitate the establishment of a
connection between consistency-based diagnosis and diagno-
sis of a Bayesian diagnostic problem, the set of behavioural
assumption for each component is denoted by Δ. By the no-
tations ac and ¯ac are meant that component c is assumed to
function abnormally and normally, respectively. Clearly, Δ
can then be written as

Δ = {ac | c ∈ C} ∪ {¯ac | c ∈ (CMP \ C)}.

The second requirement above states that a consistency-
based diagnosis has to be consistent with the observations.
Note that this consistency condition implies that a diagno-
sis makes the observations possible. Translating this to our
probabilistic diagnostic theory, the consistency condition re-
quires that the probability of the occurrence of the observa-
tions given the diagnosis is non-zero; if this probability is
equal to 0, it implies inconsistency.

These issues are embodied in the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 2 (P -inconsistency and P -consistency) Let
PB = (SB, Ω) be a Bayesian diagnostic problem, then

• if P (Ω | Δ) = 0, PB is called P -inconsistent,
• otherwise, if P (Ω | Δ) (cid:8)= 0, PB is called P -consistent.
The concepts of P -consistency and P -inconsistency allows
us to establish a link to consistency-based diagnosis, shown
in the following theorem.
Theorem 1 Let PL = (SL, OBS) be a logical diagnostic
problem, let PB = (SB, Ω) be a Bayesian diagnostic problem

IJCAI-07

382

corresponding to this logical diagnostic problem. Let Δ be a
set of behavioural assumptions. Then,

P (Ω | Δ) (cid:8)= 0 ⇐⇒ SD ∪ Δ ∪ OBS (cid:2) ⊥ ,

(4)

thus, the existence of a consistency-based diagnosis corre-
sponds to P -consistency and vice versa.

Proof: [I. Flesch et al., 2006].

(cid:2)

Finally, we deﬁne P -consistent diagnosis, which enables

us to obtain diagnosis in a probabilistic way.
Deﬁnition 3 (P -consistent diagnosis) Let PB = (SB, Ω) be
a Bayesian diagnostic problem. Then, Δ is a P -consistent
diagnosis of PB iff P (Ω | Δ) (cid:8)= 0.
We would like to emphasise that the notion of P -consistent
diagnosis provides the basis for conﬂict-based diagnosis elab-
orated in the remainder of this paper.

4 Conﬂict Measure for Diagnosis

In the previous section, a Bayesian diagnostic problem was
deﬁned as a probabilistic framework that represents both
qualitative and quantitative relations of a corresponding logi-
cal diagnostic problem.

The aim of this section is to show that the conﬂict mea-
sure can be used to distinguish between various diagnoses of
a problem. In Section 4.1, we give the basic deﬁnition of the
conﬂict measure for Bayesian diagnostic problems, which is
made more speciﬁc in Section 4.2.
In Section 4.3, we in-
vestigate the capability of the conﬂict measure to distinguish
amongst various diagnoses. Finally, in Section 4.4, we derive
a rational form for the conﬂict measure that is computation-
ally simpler.

4.1 Basic Deﬁnition of the Conﬂict Measure

In this section, we deﬁne the conﬂict measure for Bayesian
diagnostic problems, which is used as a basis for conﬂict-
based diagnosis.

Intuitively, the conﬂict measure compares the probability
of observing the inputs and outputs in case these observa-
tions are independent versus the case where they are depen-
dent. If dependence between the observations is more likely
than independence given a diagnosis, the conﬂict measure
implies that there is no conﬂict. By Deﬁnition 2, however,
observations of a Bayesian diagnostic problem need to be P -
consistent with the problem for a given diagnosis. This im-
plies that the deﬁnition of the conﬂict measure only concerns
situations where the set of behavioural assumptions is equal
to a diagnosis, that is, P -consistency holds. This is expressed
in the following way.

Deﬁnition 4 (conﬂict measure for a Bayesian diagnostic
problem) Let PB = (SB, Ω) be a Bayesian diagnostic prob-
lem. Then, if P (Ω | Δ) (cid:8)= 0, then the conﬂict measure, de-
noted by conf Δ(·), is deﬁned as:

conf Δ(Ω) = log

P (IS | Δ)P (OS | Δ)

P (IS, OS | Δ)

,

(5)

with observations Ω = IS ∪ OS .

We compute P (IS, OS | Δ) instead of P (Δ | IS, OS), as
in consistency-based diagnosis, after which conﬂict-based di-
agnosis will be modelled, a diagnosis is a hypothesis that is
checked. In contrast, in probabilistic abductive diagnosis one
computes P (Δ | IS, OS), and Δ is a conclusion, not a hy-
pothesis. In this paper, we are only dealing with consistency-
based diagnosis.

4.2 Computation of the Conﬂict Measure

In this section, we derive formulae to compute the conﬂict
measure for Bayesian diagnostic problems.

In order to derive the formulae for the conﬂict measure,
the following assumptions are adopted. Normal behaviour is
simulated in the probabilistic setting by the assumption that a
normally functioning component takes an output value with
probability of either 0 or 1, thus, if ¯ac holds, then P (Oc |
πOc ) ∈ {0, 1}. Furthermore, the set of inputs and the set
of abnormality components are (marginally) independent of
each other.

From now on, we assume that the inputs are conditionally
independent of the output of an abnormally functioning com-
ponent, i.e. P (Oc | πOc ) = P (Oc | ac) if ac ∈ πOc . We
also assume that it holds that P (oc | ac) = α, i.e., a constant
probability is adopted for a given output oc if the component c
is functioning abnormally. This is a reasonable assumption in
applications usually tackled by consistency-based diagnosis.
Here, there is little to no knowledge of abnormal behaviour.
Thus, it will be impossible to assess P (oc | ac) for every
component; that can be resolved by assuming them all to be
equal. This approach is thus in line with previous research in
consistency-based diagnosis.

As a matter of notation, XV = ˆxV , or simply ˆxV , will
indicate in the following that the set of random variables XV
has observed values ˆxV . A partial assignment of values to
variables XV is written as XV = ˜xV , or simply ˜xV , and
includes observed and non-observed values.

Now, we are in the position to derive the necessary formu-
lae for the conﬂict measure as given in Deﬁnition 4. The three
factors of this formulae can be obtained by the application of
Bayes’ rule and the factorisation principle of Equation (2):

(cid:3)

1. P (IS | Δ) = P (IS)
2. P (OS | Δ) =
I P (I)
3. P (IS, OS | Δ) = P (IS)
(cid:3)

(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(cid:4)
(cid:4)

c∈CMP

OR

OR

c∈CMP

P (˜oc | πOc )
P (˜oc | πOc ).

Note that in the summation
OR we handle both observed
and remaining outputs in ˜oc, that is, some values of the taken
variables are ﬁxed and some values are non-ﬁxed.

Based on the equations above, we obtain

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(cid:3)
(cid:4)
OR

I P (I)

(cid:3)

conf Δ(Ω) = log

c∈CMP

P (˜oc | πOc )

.

(6)

OR

c∈CMP

P (˜oc | πOc )

EXAMPLE 3 Consider Figure 3, which models the logical
diagnostic system in Figure 1. Let OS = {¯o∧, o∨2}. The
values of the conﬂict measure for different diagnoses and in-
puts are shown in Table 1. Here, we can see that the diag-
nosis {¯a∧, ¯a∨1
}, which assumes that all components are

, ¯a∨2

IJCAI-07

383

SD

CMP

Bayesian diagnostic

system

Ω

Bayesian

diagnostic problem

P -inconsistency

P -consistent

diagnosis

conﬂict
measure

conﬂict-based

diagnosis

Figure 4: Framework of conﬂict-based diagnosis.

functioning normally, implies either P -inconsistency or P -
consistency depending on the value of input I2. Moreover,
for the P -consistent diagnoses, we obtain negative, zero and
positive conﬂict measures, indicating different relations be-
tween the observations and the patterns in the joint probabil-
ity distribution. The interpretation of these results is given in
Example 4.

4.3 Ordering Conﬂict-based Diagnoses
In this section, we show that a meaningful subset of P -
consistent diagnoses can be selected based on the conﬂict
measure; this subset of diagnoses is called conﬂict-based.
Subsequently, we also show how the conﬂict measure can be
used to order conﬂict-based diagnoses resulting in minimal
conﬂict-based diagnoses.

We start by introducing the various Bayesian diagnostic in-
terpretations of the conﬂict measure. In Example 3, it has
been shown that the conﬂict measure can take negative, zero
and positive values. Recall that in the case of a negative or
zero conﬂict measure the joint occurrence of the observations
is in accordance with the patterns in P . Therefore, in these
cases, a diagnosis is called strongly P -consistent. A posi-
tive conﬂict measure is interpreted the other way around, and
as it implies the existence of conﬂicts between the observa-
tions and P , the associated diagnoses are called weakly P -
consistent.

The Bayesian diagnostic interpretation of the conﬂict mea-
sure implies that the less the value of the conﬂict measure
the stronger P -consistent the diagnosis is, which can be un-
derstood as follows. The conﬂict measure favours one di-
agnosis above another if the behavioural assumptions of this
diagnosis provide more support for the observed output than
the behavioural assumptions of the other diagnosis. Since the
probability α expresses the likelihood of positive output given
abnormality, the conﬂict measure of a diagnosis may depend
on α.

This interpretation gives rise to the following deﬁnitions

and is subsequently illustrated by an example.
Deﬁnition 5 (conﬂict-based diagnosis) Let PB = (SB, Ω)
be a Bayesian diagnostic problem and let Δ be a P -consistent

minimal

conﬂict-based

diagnosis

⊆

conﬂict-based

diagnosis

⊆

P -consistent

diagnosis

Figure 5: Set-inclusion relation between notions of diagnosis.

diagnosis of PB. Then, Δ is called a conﬂict-based diagnosis
if it is strongly P -consistent, i.e. conf Δ(Ω) ≤ 0.
Deﬁnition 6 (minimal conﬂict-based diagnosis) Let Δ be
a conﬂict-based diagnosis of PB. Then, Δ is called min-
imal, if for each conﬂict-based diagnosis Δ(cid:2) it holds that
conf Δ(Ω) ≤ conf Δ(cid:2)(Ω).

A summary of the framework conﬂict-based diagnosis is
given in Figure 4, where the edges indicate how concepts are
combined in deﬁning conﬂict-based diagnosis.

EXAMPLE 4 We reconsider Table 1 in Example 3.

, a∨2

To start, we analyse the situation when α = 0.001. Di-
agnosis Δ = {¯a∧, a∨1
} is a weakly P -consistent di-
agnosis for the inputs {i1, i2, i3} with value 0.0002 and a
strongly P -consistent, also conﬂict-based, diagnosis for in-
puts {i1, ¯ı2, i3} with −3.0002. These results can be ex-
plained as follows. For both sets of inputs, with associated
outputs {¯o∧, o∨2
}, Δ is a possible diagnostic hypothesis ac-
cording to the associated probability distribution. However,
under the assumption that the AND gate is functioning nor-
mally, the input ¯ı2 among the inputs {i1, ¯ı2, i3}, offers a
good match to the observed output ¯o∧, whereas the match
is bad for the input i2 among the inputs {i1, i2, i3}. Thus,
for Ω = {i1, ¯ı2, i3, ¯o∧, o∨2
} the diagnosis Δ is a conﬂict-
based diagnosis, whereas it is not a conﬂict-based diagnosis
for Ω(cid:2) = {i1, i2, i3, ¯o∧, o∨2

The conﬂict measure for the diagnosis Δ(cid:2) = {a∧, ¯a∨1,
} remains unchanged for variation in input, because of
¯a∨2
the following reason. Since the output of the abnormally
functioning AND component is observed, the conﬂict mea-
sure establishes which inputs are consistent with the normally
functioning OR2 and then uniformly distributes the probabil-
ity over all possible inputs. There are 7 inputs that are possi-
ble of the total of 8 inputs, hence log 7/8 = −0.06.

}.

Let α = 0.001. Then, for Ω = {i1, ¯ı2, i3, ¯o∧, o∨2

} there
are three P -consistent diagnoses mentioned in Table 1, all of
them conﬂict-based. The minimal conﬂict-based diagnosis in
this case is Δ = {¯a∧, a∨1

, a∨2

}.

Finally, we compare conﬂict measure values for different
values of α. When the value of α decreases from 0.5 to
0.001, Δ = {¯a∧, a∨1
} offers increased support for the

, a∨2

¯o∧,o∨2
i1, i2, i3
i1, ¯ı2, i3
i1, i2, i3
i1, ¯ı2, i3
i1, i2, i3
i1, ¯ı2, i3

α

any
any
0.001
0.001
0.5
0.5

,¯a∨2

¯a∧,¯a∨1
−

−0.43

−

−0.43

−

−0.43

a∧,¯a∨1

,¯a∨2

−0.06
−0.06
−0.06
−0.06
−0.06
−0.06

¯a∧,a∨1
,a∨2
log 1−1/2α
1−α
log α−1
α2
0.0002
−3.0002

2

0.176
−0.426

Table 1: Examples of the results of the conﬂict measure.

IJCAI-07

384

observed outputs ¯o∧ and o∨2 , reﬂected by the values 0.176
and 0.0002, and −0.426 and −3.0002. The conﬂict mea-
sure takes into account the likelihood of the output values of
abnormally functioning components. Therefore, for the ob-
served output ¯o∧ more support is obtained if its inputs are
negative, thus the output of component OR1 takes on value
¯o∨1 . Since the OR1 gate is assumed to malfunction, this has
probability 1 − α. But then, this probability becomes larger
if the value of α decreases.

Figure 5 offers a summary of the set-inclusion relations

between various notions of diagnosis deﬁned in this paper.

4.4 A Rational Form
In this section, we show that the conﬂict measure can also
be written in rational form, that is easier for computational
purposes.

To start, we distinguish between several types of compo-
nents. The sets of normally and abnormally functioning com-
ponents will be denoted by C ¯a
, respectively. These
sets are separated into mutually disjoint sets of components,
related to observed and remaining outputs, yielding sets C ¯a
S,
C ¯a

R, Ca
The relation between the abnormally functioning system

S and Ca
R.

and Ca

components and the value α is as follows.
Lemma 1 The joint probability distribution of the output of
the abnormally functioning system components is equal to:

(cid:2)

P (ˆoc | πOc ) = αl

(1 − α)

m ,

c∈C a
S

where l and m are the total number of components in Ca
S
for which the observed output is positive or negative, respec-
tively.
Proof: See [I. Flesch et al., 2006].

(cid:2)

The conﬂict measure can be expressed in rational form.
Theorem 2 Let PB = (SB, Ω) be a Bayesian diagnostic
problem. Then, the conﬂict measure (6) is equal to:

conf Δ(Ω) = log

(cid:3)q
(cid:3)q

dk · αk(1 − α)q−k
ek · αk(1 − α)q−k

,

k=0

k=0

with P (oc | ac) = α, Ω = IS ∪ OS, q = |Ca
constants dk, ek.
Proof: Consider the numerator of the conﬂict measure:
P (IS | Δ)P (OS | Δ) =

P (I)

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

(cid:2)

P (˜oc | πOc )

R| and positive

P (˜oc | πOc )
(cid:2)

(cid:5)

c∈C a
S

I

(cid:2)
OR

c∈CMP

P (ˆoc | ac)

(cid:2)

P (˜oc | ac)

P (˜oc | πOc )

c∈C a
R

(cid:2)

P (˜oc | ac)

OR
(cid:5)

c∈C ¯a

c∈C a
R

ΨO ¯a

R(˜o¯a

R, πO ¯a

R )·

OR
P (˜oc | ac)

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

P (I)

(cid:2)

OR

(1 − α)

m

c∈C ¯a

(cid:5)

=

I
= αl

= αl

(1 − α)

m

I

(cid:5)

I

ΦO ¯a

S (ˆo¯a

S, πO ¯a
S )

P (I)

P (I)
(cid:2)

c∈C a
R

q(cid:5)

k=0

= αl

(1 − α)

m

dk · αk

(1 − α)

q−k ,

with Ψ(·, ·) and Φ(·, ·) Boolean functions. The derivation for
the denominator is similar. See [I. Flesch et al., 2006] for a
(cid:2)
full proof.

5 Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed a new notion of model-based di-
agnosis, where ideas from consistency-based diagnosis and
data conﬂict detection in statistics have been merged into
one coherent framework. The result is a theory of model-
based diagnosis offering features similar to those offered by
consistency-based diagnosis and more, as diagnoses can be
distinguished from each other using probabilistic informa-
tion. We also showed that conﬂict-based diagnoses can be
computed using a rational form.

Acknowledgements. This work has been partially funded by
NWO (ProBayes project, number 612.066.201).

References
[Console et al., 1990] L. Console, D. Theseider Dupr´e and
P. Torasso. On the relationship between abduction and de-
duction. J. Logic and Computation, 1(5):661–690, 1991.

[de Kleer et al., 1992] J. de Kleer, A. K. Mackworth, and
R. Reiter. Characterizing diagnoses and systems. AIJ,
52:197–222, 1992.

[de Kleer, 1990] J. de Kleer. Using crude probability esti-

mates to guide diagnosis. AIJ, 45:381–392, 1990.

[Genesereth, 1984] M. Genesereth. The use of design de-
scription in automated diagnosis. AIJ, 24:411–436, 1984.

[I. Flesch et al., 2006] I.

Flesch,

and
Th.P. van der Weide. Conﬂict-based diagnosis: Adding
uncertainty to model-based diagnosis. Technical Report
2006
(www.cs.ru.nl/∼ildiko/confMeas.pdf), Radboud
University Nijmegen, 2006.

Lucas

P.J.F.

[Jensen, 2001] F. V. Jensen. Bayesian Networks and Deci-

sion Graphs. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001.

[K¨ob and Wotawa, 2004] D K¨ob and F. Wotawa. Introducing
In Proc.

alias information into model-based debugging,
DX-04, Carcassonne, France, 2004.

[Kohlas et al., 1998] J. Kohlas, B. Anrig, R. Haenni, and
P.A. Monney. Model-based diagnosis and probabilistic
assumption-based reasoning. AIJ, 104:71–106, 1998.

[Lucas, 2001] P.J.F. Lucas. Bayesian model-based diagnosis.

Int. J. Approximate Reasoning, 27:99–119, 2001.

[Pearl, 1988] J. Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems:Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan Kauff-
man, San Francisco, CA, 1988.

[Poole, 1996] D. Poole. Probabilistic conﬂicts in a search al-
gorithm for estimating posterior probabilities in Bayesian
networks. AIJ, 88(1–2):69–100, 1996.

[Reiter, 1987] R. Reiter. A theory of diagnosis from ﬁrst

principles. AIJ, 32:57–95, 1987.

[Struss and Price, 2003] P. Struss and C. Price. Model-Based
systems in the Automative industry. AI Magazine, 24:17–
34, 2003.

IJCAI-07

385

