Consistency Checking of Basic Cardinal Constraints over Connected Regions

Isabel Navarrete, Antonio Morales, Guido Sciavicco

Department of Information Engineering, University of Murcia

Murcia, E-30100, SPAIN

email: {inava,morales,guido}@um.es

Abstract

In this paper we study a recent formal model for
qualitative spatial reasoning with cardinal direction
relations. We give an O(n4) algorithm to check
the consistency of a network of basic cardinal con-
straints with variables ranging over the set of con-
nected regions homeomorphic to the closed unit
disk (which includes a wide variety of irregular-
shaped regions). To the best of our knowledge, this
was an open problem. A previous algorithm for
a domain that includes also disconnected regions
works in O(n5), but, for the problem we consider
here, such an algorithm cannot be used. Using the
new algorithm we also show that the problem of
deciding the consistency of a network of disjunc-
tive cardinal constraints with variables ranging over
the set of connected regions is N P -Complete. Our
main contribution is based on results from the ﬁeld
of combinatorial geometry.

1 Introduction

It is widely accepted that spatial reasoning plays an impor-
tant role in various artiﬁcial intelligence applications, such
as geographic information systems (GISs), robot navigation,
computer vision, etc. Algebraic approaches formalize spa-
tial reasoning as constraint satisfaction problems (CSP s),
which can be classiﬁed depending on the type of relations
between variables representing objects of some topological
(or Euclidean) space. A ﬁrst broad distinction can be made
between quantitative and qualitative formalisms; we are in-
terested here in qualitative calculi for spatial reasoning [Cohn
and Hazarika, 2001; Sharma et al., 1994], which allow a ma-
chine to represent and reason with spatial objects making ab-
stractions from quantitative (or metric) knowledge. More-
over, qualitative spatial models can be classiﬁed in direc-
tional [Frank, 1996] and topological [Renz and Nebel, 1998];
the present work falls in the former category.

Different directional (or orientational) spatial reasoning
formalisms have been studied for different types of objects
(regions). Our work in based on a formalism, presented
in [Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2004], for cardinal di-
rection relations between connected and irregular-shaped re-

gions, which can be used to model areas in various interest-
ing applications [Goyal, 2000]. The model we consider is
very expressive since it overcomes some of the limitations
of point-based [Ligozat, 1998] and box-based [Mukerjee and
Joe, 1990; Balbiani et al., 1998] approximation formalisms
with cardinal directions [Frank, 1996]. As a practical exam-
ple [Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2005], in a point-based
approximation, Spain is northeast of Portugal, while in a
box-based model Portugal is contained in Spain; most peo-
ple would agree that none of this representation is accurate,
since Spain lies partially at the northwest, at the north, at the
northeast, at the east and at the southeast of Portugal.

The present work is organized as follows.

In Section 2
and 3 we brieﬂy introduce some deﬁnitions and an algorithm
(given in [Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2005]) which de-
cides the consistency of a network of basic cardinal con-
straints where variables represent either connected or discon-
nected regions of the Euclidean space R2. In Section 4 we
exploit some results from combinatorial geometry which are
essential for what we accomplish in Section 5; that is, the de-
sign of a consistency checking algorithm for a network of ba-
sic cardinal constraints over connected regions. We prove the
correctness of the algorithm, we analyze its complexity and
we show that the same problem for disjunctive constraints is
NP-complete, before concluding.

2 A Formal Model for Cardinal Relations
In this section, we shortly revise the main deﬁnitions of Ski-
adopoulos and Koubarakis’s formalism [2005] for qualitative
spatial representation and reasoning with cardinal direction
relations. The model is based on previous results for cardinal
relations [Goyal, 2000; Goyal and Egenhofer, 2000].

Let REG be the set of regions of R2 that are homeomor-
phic to the closed unit disk; each region is closed, connected
and have connected boundaries. The set of all ﬁnite unions
of regions in REG is denoted by REG∗; regions in REG∗
may be disconnected and have holes.

Let a = a1 ∪ · · · ∪ ak ∈ REG∗, such that each ai ∈ REG,
and consider the orthogonal axes of the space R2. The sym-
bols a−
y ) denote the inﬁmum
(resp., the supremum) of the projection of each region ai on
the x-axis and y-axis. The minimum bounding box of region
a, denoted mbb(a), is the box formed by the straight lines

y (resp., a+

x (resp., a+

x ) and a−

IJCAI-07

495

there are no regions a, b in REG such that a E:W b holds, so
E:W /∈ D. As in the previous case, 2D denotes the set of all
cardinal relations over REG.

In order to solve spatial reasoning tasks with cardinal con-
straints, one can use a binary constraint network [Dechter,
2003] with a set of variables V representing regions of REG∗
(resp., REG) and a set of constraints C based on the oppor-
tune set of cardinal relations between variables. The main
problem is, as usual, determining whether the network is con-
sistent or not. A network N with variables V = {a1, . . . , an}
over REG∗ (resp. REG) is consistent iff there exists a so-
lution given by an n-tuple (α1, . . . , αn) ∈ (REG∗)n
(resp.
) such that all cardinal constrains in C are satisﬁed by
REGn
the assignment ai = αi, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ n. In the next section
we deal with the “easiest” case consisting of a network with
BC-constraints only.

3 Consistency of BC-constraints over REG∗
In [Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2005] the authors present
an ad-hoc algorithm (which will be called here SK-CON) for
consistency checking of a network of basic cardinal con-
straints with variables ranging over REG∗. Such an algo-
rithm is quite complicated, and, in our view, it presents at
least two important problems: 1) its time complexity is high,
i.e, O(n5), and 2) it is not guaranteed to work when the do-
main is restricted to the set REG of connected regions. The
algorithm takes as input a network N with a set C of BC-
constraints from D∗, a set V with n variables (ranging over
REG∗), and it returns ‘Consistent’ if N is consistent; other-
wise it returns ‘Inconsistent’. Let us brieﬂy summarize the
idea of the three steps (S1, S2, S3) of the algorithm2.

Begin of SK-CON

S1 Translation:
• For each C b

(cid:4)

a into a set of order constraints Ob

a ∈ C of the form a R1: · · · :Rk b, consider
k}, and map
a between the endpoints
i ) for each component variable
a are logically im-

the set of component variables Sb
C b
of mbb(a), mbb(b) and mbb(ab
i ∈ Sb
ab
plied by the spatial conﬁguration expressed by C b
a;

a. Notice that the constraints in Ob

1, . . . , ab

a = {ab

• Form a point algebra CSP (P A-CSP ) with the set of
constraints C O =
a and the set of variables V O
deﬁned as the set of all endpoint variables obtained from the
previous step.
S2 Order constraint checking:

a,b∈V Ob

• Solve the P A-CSP with CSPAN algorithm [van Beek,
for the order con-

1992] and, if possible, obtain a solution σO
straints, otherwise return ‘Inconsistent’;

i ∈ Sb

• Derive a maximal solution μO

, by considering, for each
a, the solution-box αb
pair of variables a, b and each ab
i
for ab
i , and extending it in all possible directions until it touch
whatever line, from the solution-boxes for the mbbs of vari-
ables a and b, is closer to it. (See Example 1).
S3 Union constraint checking: Check if a solution
for the network N can be obtained upon the maximal

2It is worth noticing that this algorithm takes, with examples and
partial results, fourteen pages to be presented. We here introduce
some small changes in the original notation for the sake of clarity.

Figure 1: Tiles and mbb w.r.t. region b

x , a−

y , a+

x , a+

x , y = a−

y , y = a+

x , x = a+

x = a−
y . Any box with area
greater than 0 will be called non-trivial box. We will refer
y as the endpoints of mbb(a). By consider-
to a−
ing the axes of mbb(b), where b is called the reference re-
gion, the space is divided into 9 areas that are represented by
the tile-symbols B, S, SW, W, N W, N, N E, E, SE (see Fig-
ure 1). Tile-areas are closed, unbounded (except for B(b)),
pairwise disjoint (or with a non-trivial box intersection) and
their union is R2. An expression like R1:R2: . . . :Rk, where
1 < k ≤ 9 and such that each Ri is a tile-symbol will be
called a multitile-symbol, and it denotes the union of the cor-
responding tile-areas.

A basic cardinal relation (BC-relation, for short) is a bi-
nary relation, denoted by a tile or a multitile-symbol R =
R1: · · · :Rk, that is deﬁned as:
R = {(α, β) ∈ (REG∗)2 | α = α1 ∪ . . . ∪ αk ∧

α1 ∈ R1(β), . . . , αk ∈ Rk(β)}

A formula a R b where a, b are variables ranging over REG∗
and R is a BC-relation is a basic cardinal constraint (BC-
constraint, for short)1.

When R is a tile-symbol we have that a R b ⇔ a ∈ R(b),
which can be equivalently expressed as a conjunction of bi-
nary order constraints between the endpoints of mbb(a) and
mbb(b), that is, as a set of binary constraints of the point al-
gebra (P A) [van Beek, 1992]. This fact can be used to de-
ﬁne the satisﬁability of a BC-constraint, as follows. A BC-
constraint a R1: · · · :Rk b is satisﬁable iff there is an assign-
ment of regions in REG∗ to the primary variable a, the refer-
ence variable b and the component variables of a w.r.t. b, that
is, ab
k, in such a way that the following constraints
hold:

1, . . . , ab

k Rk b;

1 R1 b ∧ · · · ∧ ab
1 ∪ · · · ∪ ab
k.

• order constraints: ab
• union constraint: a = ab
The set of BC-relations over REG∗ is denoted by D∗ and
= 511 elements. Elements in the set 2D∗
contains Σ9
are called cardinal relations, and they can be used to repre-
sent indeﬁnite information, since they may be disjunctive.

i=1

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

9
i

An interesting restriction of this model can be obtained
by constraining regions variables to range over REG.
In
this case, the set of BC-relations is denoted by D, and con-
tains only 218 out of the 511 elements of D∗. For example,

1Sometimes we will use Ra,b for denoting the cardinal relation

between variables a and b.

IJCAI-07

496

.

This control

solution μO
is performed by using the
function GLOBALCHECKNTB, which decides if the set
derived from the set of BC-
of union constraints C U
constraints C can also be satisﬁed.
the algo-
rithm returns ‘Consistent’; otherwise it returns ‘Inconsistent’.

If so,

End of SK-CON

It is worth noticing that step S1 introduces new variables
in such a way that the P A-CSP works actually with O(n2)
variables. Thus, since CSPAN has quadratic time-complexity,
the complexity of step S2 is O(n4). At the same time, the
function GLOBALCHECKNTB takes into consideration each
variable a ∈ V in turn, and it checks if the sets Σb1
a , . . . , Σbm
a
of maximal solutions corresponding to each set Sbi
a of com-
ponent variables of a w.r.t any reference variable bi ∈ V ,
satisfy or not the following predicate:

Non-Trivial Box (NTB):
For all σ ∈ Σb1
(σ1, . . . , σm) ∈ Σb1
mbb(σ1) ∩ · · · ∩ mbb(σm) is a non-trivial box.

a ∪ · · · ∪ Σbm
a ×· · ·×Σbm

there exists a tuple
a
a such that mbb(σ)∩

function

CHECK-

Predicate N T B holds

NTB (Σb1

a , . . . , Σbm

iff
a ) returns ‘True’:
a , . . . , Σbm
a )

Function CHECKNTB (Σb1
For every s in Σb1

a ∪ · · · ∪ Σbm

a Do

Q = {s};
For every Σ(cid:2) in {Σb1

a , . . . , Σbm

a } Do

Q(cid:2) = ∅;
For every s(cid:2) in Σ(cid:2) and every q in Q Do

If mbb(s(cid:2)) ∩ mbb(q) is a non-trivial box Then
Q(cid:2) = Q(cid:2) ∪ {mbb(s(cid:2)) ∩ mbb(q)};

If Q(cid:2) = ∅ Return ‘False’
Q = Q(cid:2);

Return ‘True’;

This function works in O(n4) and it is called for each vari-
able a ∈ V . Hence step 3 of the SK-algorithm is O(n5),
which gives the overall time complexity of the algorithm.

1i = αbi

1i, . . . , abi

ki = αbi

1i ∪ · · · ∪ αbi

ki and the order constraints in Obi

Satisﬁability of N T B for variable a ∈ V supposes that
there is an assignment a = α so that for each reference
variable bi, with a R1i: · · · :Rki b, there is also an assign-
ment abi
ki for its component vari-
ables such that union constraint from C bi
a is satisﬁed, that is,
α = αbi
a are also
satisﬁed. GLOBALCHECKNTB guarantees that such an as-
signment is posible for any variable and hence, there is an
assignment ai = αi, (αi ∈ REG∗) for each ai ∈ V such
that order and union constraints in C O
are satisﬁed
and thereby all BC-constraints are satisﬁed and the network
is consistent.
Example 1 ([Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2005]) Let C
be the following set of BC-constraints on region variables
b SW c}. Figure
a, b and c:
2 shows mmb(α), mmb(β), mmb(γ) found for variables
a, b and c, respectively. When considering a B:N:E b the
maximal solutions for component variables of a is the set
a =
Σb
{αc

3} and when considering a B:S:W c is Σc

{a B:N:E b, a B:S:W c,

a = {αb
2, αc
1, αc

1, αb
3}.

and C U

2, αb

Figure 2: Σb

a and Σc

a of Example 1

4 Cardinal Constraints and Helly-type

theorems

In order to design a consistency algorithm for a network of
BC-constraints over REG we will keep the ﬁrst 2 steps of
the algorithm SK-CON, while we will substitute the last step
with a more efﬁcient method, which, as we will show, is suit-
able for constraints in D. We will accomplish such a result
with the help of Helly-type theorems of combinatorial geom-
etry [Eckoff, 1993].

Helly’s theorem (in its original formulation) states that
if F = {K1, . . . , Kn} is a family of convex sets in a d-
dimensional Euclidean space Ed, and for every choice of
(d + 1) of these sets, being (d + 1) ≤ n, there exists a point
that belongs to all the chosen sets, then there exists a point
F (cid:9)= ∅.
that belongs to all the sets K1, . . . , Kn, that is,
This result gave rise to a whole family of theorems (called
Helly-type theorems) that present the same logical structure,
and include those in which it is shown that the fact that every
subfamily of k sets meets a certain property P implies that
the whole family meets the same property P . The constant k
is called the Helly number.

(cid:5)

The key idea is to ﬁnd out whether our problem, that is,
the consistency of BC-constraints over REG, is expressible,
at least in part, as the problem of checking whether a fam-
ily of sets in R2, namely, the family Fa = {Σb1
a }
a , . . . , Σbm
of sets of maximal solutions for component variables of a
w.r.t any of its reference variables bi, satisﬁes the predicate
N T B, in such a way that a Helly-type theorem of number 3
is applicable. If it is so, one can ﬁnd an O(n3) function for
deciding if the whole family satisﬁes the predicate N T B, un-
der the hypothesis that such property can be checked, for any
3-members subfamily, in constant time. The following gen-
eralization of Helly’s theorem turned out to be a very useful
result:

Helly’s Topological Theorem: Let F be a ﬁnite
family of closed sets in Rd
such that the intersec-
tion of every k members of F is a cell, for k ≤ d,
and it is nonempty for k = d + 1. Then
F is a
cell.

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

F is a cell” means
For the case d = 2, the expression “
that the intersection is a region homeomorphic to the closed
unit disk, that is, it belongs to REG. Thus, before using this
theorem we need to prove a sufﬁcient condition to assure that
the intersection of any two sets of Fa belongs to REG.

A common technique in CSP is using composition of re-
lations for constraint propagation in order to decide consis-

IJCAI-07

497

tency or just to prune the search space. In [Skiadopoulos and
Koubarakis, 2004] a composition operation ◦ for cardinal re-
lations is deﬁned, but it turns out to be a weak composition,
in the sense that it only guarantees that, if a R1 b and b R2 c
holds, then a R1 ◦ R2 c also holds. An algebraic closure
algorithm for a network of binary constraints is essentially
a path-consistency algorithm based on a weak composition
operator [Renz and Ligozat, 2005]. Such an algorithm makes
the input network A-closed. Unfortunately, a BC-constraint
network over REG may be A-closed but not consistent3. The
following is an example (borrowed from [Skiadopoulos and
Koubarakis, 2004]) of an inconsistent BC-network which is
A-closed:

the

of BC-
Example 2 Consider
constraint
and
between
d: {a B:SW:W:N: NE b, a B:SW:W:E:SE c,a B:SW:W:E:
SE d,
d B:W:NW:N:
NE:E c}. This network is A-closed but inconsistent.

b B:S:SW:W:E:SE c, b S:SW d,

following

variables

a, b, c,

the

set

Nevertheless, an A-closure procedure can still be useful for
us, as we will see now. If the domain for regions is REG and
the set of constraints is D, then each set Σbi
a of the family Fa
obtained in step 2 of the algorithm SK-CON is, by construc-
tion, a region of REG (see again Example 1). Obviously, this
is not true if the constraints belong to (D∗ − D).
Lemma 1 If a network N with constraints in D is A-closed,
then for any variable a and any subset B ⊆ Fa with |B| = 2,
the intersection

B is a region of REG.

(cid:5)

Proof.

If N is A-closed, by deﬁnition, there is a so-
lution for any 3 variables (i.e., one can draw 3 regions sat-
isfying all the constraints), which, in general, does not im-
ply that a solution for any 2 variables can be extended to a
solution for 3 variables (this may not be true when using a
weak composition). In particular, there is a partial solution
for variable a and any other two bi, bj. Since Σbi
a is a max-
imal connected region w.r.t the relation Ra,bi between vari-
able a and variable bi, and similarly for Σbj
a w.r.t the relation
Ra,bj , then Σbi
a must be a region from REG, other-
a
= ∅, or
wise we would have that (Ra,bi
= ∅, which contradicts the assump-
(Ra,bj
tion of N being A-closed.
(cid:2)
Example 3 Consider the set of BC-constraint showed in Ex-
ample 1. The A-closure algorithm detects that such set is
inconsistent because (B:N:E ◦ SW) ∩ B:S:W = ∅. So
a B:S:W c is not feasible. Figure 2 shows that Σb
a is the
a
union of two disconnected regions I1 and I2.

) ∩ Ra,bj

) ∩ Ra,bi

◦ Rbi,bj

◦ Rbj ,bi

Σbj

Σc

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

Still, we cannot directly apply Helly’s topological theorem,
because we can prove that the intersection of two sets of the
family Fa is a region from REG but, when considering a
third set of the family, the nonempty intersection condition
only implies that the intersection of all sets of Fa is a region
of REG. What we need is that the intersection is a region not
only connected but also with a special shape compatible the
with binary constraints between primary variable a, and the
reference variables b1, . . . , bm. Nevertheless, we can state a

3The details on this point are omitted due to space limitation.

Helly-type theorem for the family Fa and the predicate N T B
with Helly number 3.
Theorem 1 Let Fa = {Σb1
a } be the family of sets
of the maximal solutions for component variables of a w.r.t
any of its reference variables bi in an A-closed BC-network
N over REG. If for every subfamily B ⊆ Fa, with |B| = 3,
N T B holds for B, then N T B holds for Fa.

a , . . . , Σbm

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

Proof. First, notice that, for every subfamily with |B| =
B ∈ REG, by Lemma 1, and when |B| =
2, we have that
B (cid:9)= ∅ then, by
3, since predicate N T B guarantees that
(cid:5)
Fa ∈ REG. It
Helly’s topological theorem, we have that
remains to show that N T B holds for Fa. Let us proceed by
induction.

a ∪ · · · ∪ Σbk

a × · · · × Σbk

a . Hence, if we add a new set Σbk+1

Suppose that N T B holds for every subfamily Bk =
a } of size k, and consider the intersection Ik =
{Σb1
a , . . . , Σbk
a ∩ · · · ∩ Σbk
a . By Helly’s topological theorem, Ik is a
Σb1
connected region and, since N T B holds for B by induc-
tion hypothesis, this implies that indeed Ik is the maximal
partial solution for variable a w.r.t variables b1, . . . , bk, so
a from the subnetwork N , with
that all BC-constraints C bi
variables a, b1, . . . , bk, are satisﬁed. This is true because Ik
is the non-disjoint union (since Ik is connected) of all tu-
ples (σ1, . . . , σk) ∈ Σb1
a for which mbb(σ) ∩
mbb(σ1) ∩ · · · ∩ mbb(σm) is a non-trivial box, for every
σ ∈ Σb1
to
Bk, forming a subfamily Bk+1, then we have that Ik ∩ Σbk+1
is also a connected region from REG (by Helly’s topological
theorem) and it also satisﬁes predicate N T B, since Ik is a
maximal partial solution for a w.r.t. variables b1, . . . bk, as
we said above. Otherwise Σbk+1
contains a convex subset σ(cid:4),
which corresponds to a maximal solution-box for some com-
ponent variable abk+1
of a w.r.t bk+1, so that that σ(cid:4) has not a
non-trivial box intersection with some solution-box of other
component variable abp
j of a w.r.t variable bp of the subnet-
work Nk restricted to variables a, b1, . . . bk. This means that
the constraints between 3 variables, namely a, bp and bk+1,
are not satisﬁed. But this is not possible under the assump-
tion that N is A-closed. Hence N T B holds for Bk+1, and so
N T B holds for the family Fa, as we wanted to prove.
(cid:2)

a

a

a

i

5 Consistency of BC-constraints over REG
In this section we present an O(n4) algorithm for consis-
tency checking of a BC-constraint network over the set of
connected regions REG. Such a problem, to the best of our
knowledge, was still open. A restricted case, solved in [Ci-
cerone and Felice, 2004], is the pairwise-consistency prob-
lem, that is, deciding if one relation Ri,j is consistent with
Rj,i, which has the primary and reference variables inter-
changed. We can solve here the consistency problem of the
overall network, not only the pairwise-consistency with two
variables. Our algorithm will make use of the following sub-
parts:
• An algebraic closure algorithm (AC, for short), which uses
the operations of (weak) composition, inverse, and intersec-
tion of relations [Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2004];
• Step 1 and 2 of the algorithm SK-CON (see Section 3).

IJCAI-07

498

• A procedure for the global check of NTB through the func-
tion CHECKNTB of SK-CON applied to every three sets, as
Theorem 1 suggests.

Our algorithm, called REG-BCON, takes as input a network
N with a set C of BC-constraints from D, and a set V with
n variables (ranging over REG), and it returns ‘Consistent’
if N is consistent; otherwise it returns ‘Inconsistent’. In what
follows, we brieﬂy summarize the structure of REG-BCON.

Begin of REG-BCON

S0 Preprocessing: Apply AC to N , and if N is not A-
closed return ‘Inconsistent’;
S1 Translation: (Step 1 of SK-CON).
S2 Order constraint checking: (Step 2 of SK-CON).
S3 Union constraint checking: Check if N T B holds for
any variable, that is,

For each variable a ∈ V Do

For every tuple (bi, bj, bk) of variables in V Do

If 3CHECKNTB (Σbi
Then Return ‘Inconsistent’;

a , Σbj

a , Σbk

a ) returns ‘False’

Return ‘Consistent’;

End of REG-BCON

Clearly, the function 3CHECKNTB has exactly the same
structure of function CHECKNTB (of the algorithm SK-
CON), with the only exception that it is called over 3 sets
instead of (at most) n sets.

Theorem 2 Algorithm REG-BCON correctly decides whether
a network of BC-constraints over REG is consistent.

Proof. The correctness of the algorithm follows from The-
orem 1 and from the correctness of algorithm SK-CON. The
latter establishes that the set of BC-constraints is consistent
if and only if 1) the set of order constraints C O
has a maximal
; 2) a solution for the network N can be obtained
solution μO
upon the maximal solution μO
, that is, the union constraints
in C U

are also satisﬁed.

We can now proceed exactly as in the case of SK-CON,
but for the case of a network of BC-constraints over REG.
In fact, if algorithm REG-BCON returns ‘Inconsistent’, then
there is no solution for the network. This may happen either
when the network is not A-closed (step 1), or when order con-
straints are not satisﬁed (step 2), or when union constraints
are not satisﬁed (step 3). Otherwise, the network is consistent
because there is a maximal solution that satisﬁes order and
union constraints by correctness of step 2 and by Theorem 1.
Indeed, for every variable a there is a consistent assignment,
which is precisely a =
Fa, since Theorem 1 guarantees
Fa is a region from REG for which N T B holds. (cid:2)
that
Theorem 3 Algorithm REG-BCON is O(n4).

(cid:5)

(cid:5)

Step 0 is O(n3) due to the time complexity of
Proof.
algorithm AC and the fact that all constraints are basic (see
[van Beek, 1992] for similar case). Step 1 is O(n2) and step
2 is O(n4), as we discuss in Section 3. But now step 3 is
O(n4) since 3CHECKNTB works in constant time. Hence
REG-BCON is O(n4).
(cid:2)

A deeper analysis would reveal that 3CHECKNTB per-
forms no more than 81 elementary operations of intersection
of boxes. So, to be precise, our algorithm is O(81 × n4),
but algorithm SK-CON is O(81 × n5). The constant k = 81
may be decreased taking into account that any region Σbi
a is
the union of at most 3 line-connected convex sets. By line-
connected we mean that there is a vertical or horizontal line
joining two regions. Step 2 of the algorithm can be modi-
ﬁed so that when it obtains a set of maximal solutions Σb
a,
the solution-boxes of Σb
a may be joined to form a new set
a of at most 3 convex sets. For instance, if a B:N:E b and
Γb
a = {αb
Σb
2 may be joined into
one convex set, since they corresponds to adjacent tiles B, N .
1),
This is just a matter of comparing the endpoints of mbb(αb
mbb(αb
2), as it is done for the intersection of boxes. Thereby,
step 3 only has to make 3 × 3 intersection operations.

3}, as in Figure 2, αb

1, αb

2, αb

1, αb

The process of joining adjacent tiles can also be exploited
to obtain a solution for any variable a. To do so, function
3CHECKNTB has to be redesigned so that a set data struc-
ture is used instead of the queue Q, which contains the inter-
sections of non-trivial boxes. This is possible because, as we
know by Theorem 1, the intersection of partial solutions for
any four variables is a region of REG.

We argue that there is no cubic time-complexity algorithm
that solves the same problem. This is due to the non-convex
nature of BC-constraints. A solution for the set of component
variables of a w.r.t variable b, i.e. Σb
a, may be concave, and
so, it is not representable as a set of point algebra constraints,
unless the region is partitioned in convex components, as it is
the case. Constraints of Example 2 represents a subnetwork
of four variables for which N T B predicate is false. A BC-
network of n variables may have a subnetwork like this, for
which there is no way of detecting the inconsistency trough
algebraic closure or checking the union constraints for any
subnetwork of three variables.

Finally, we focus our attention to the problem of deciding
the consistency of a network with (disjunctive) cardinal con-
straints over REG.

Theorem 4 The problem of deciding the consistency of a net-
work N with constraints in 2D
and region variables over
REG is N P -complete.

Deciding the consistency of N is in N P , since a
Proof.
nondeterministic algorithm ﬁrst guesses a basic constraint for
each disjunctive one appearing in N , obtaining a network N (cid:4)
where each constraint belongs to D, and then it applies our
polynomial algorithm REG-BCOM to check the consistency
of N (cid:4). In order to prove that our problem is N P -complete,
the reduction of the problem 3SAT to the problem of satis-
ﬁability of a set of cardinal constraints with variables over
REG∗, shown in [Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2005], will
sufﬁce, since in such a reduction only regions over REG and
constraints in 2D
(cid:2)

are used.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper we have considered a very expressive formal
model for spatial reasoning with cardinal relations. We have

IJCAI-07

499

presented an algorithm for consistency checking of a basic
cardinal constraint network over a set of connected regions.
Such a problem, to the best of our knowledge, was still open.
The consistency problem has been previously solved for the
case of region variables over the set of ﬁnite unions of con-
nected regions in time O(n5), but the method cannot be di-
rectly applied to the case considered here. We have devised
an O(n4) algorithm by adapting the existing one for discon-
nected regions and by exploiting Helly’s topological theorem,
which gives us the key to decide if a solution can be obtained
for a set of basic cardinal constraints. Moreover, the theo-
rem has also been useful for suggesting how to decrease the
time-complexity and for the task of ﬁnding a solution of the
network.

For future work, we ﬁrst point out that the following ques-
tion remains unanswered so far: given that the consistency
problem when considering the set of cardinal constraints is
NP-complete, as we have proved, is it possible to ﬁnd a sub-
class, which includes non-basic cardinal constraints, such that
the consistency problem is still tractable? In fact, a tractable
disjunctive subclass has been identiﬁed [Navarrete and Sciav-
icco, 2006] for the special case of rectangular cardinal rela-
tions, i.e., those that express relations between rectangles (a
type of convex region). It is interesting to know what happen
when the domain includes non-convex regions.

It is worth to observe that the same consistency problem
we have considered may be solved with a non-constructive
method, i.e., an algorithm that uses the operations of the alge-
bra. One of the problem of the model is that the underlaying
algebra has not some desirable properties for an Euclidean-
exact reasoning with cardinal relations [Frank, 1996]. Possi-
ble extensions of the model, which express more accurately
the exact position between two regions and includes the def-
inition of a relational algebra, would be interesting for some
applications.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Educa-
tion and Science (MEC) and the European Regional Devel-
opment Fund of the European Commission (FEDER) under
project MEDICI (TIC2003-09400-C04-01). Special thanks
to Miguela Iniesta and Francisco Balibrea for their comments
about the use of Helly’s topological theorem.

References

[Balbiani et al., 1998] P. Balbiani,

J.F. Condotta,

and
L. Fari˜nas del Cerro. A model for reasoning about
bidimsional temporal relations.
In Proc. of the Sixth
International Conference on Principles of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning (KR’98), pages 124–130,
1998.

[Cicerone and Felice, 2004] S. Cicerone and P. Di Felice.
Cardinal directions between spatial objects: the pairwise-
consistency problem.
Information Sciences, 164(1–
4):165–188, 2004.

[Cohn and Hazarika, 2001] A.G. Cohn and S.M. Hazarika.
Qualitative spatial representation and reasoning: An
overview. Fundamenta Informaticae, 46(1-2):1–29, 2001.
[Dechter, 2003] R. Dechter. Constraint Processing. Morgan

Kaufmann, 2003.

[Eckoff, 1993] J. Eckoff. Helly, radon, and carath´eodory
type theorems.
In P.M. Gruber and J.M. Wills, editors,
Handbook of Convex Geometry, volume A, pages 389–
448. Elsevier Science, 1993.

[Frank, 1996] A.U. Frank. Qualitative spatial reasoning:
Int. Journal of Geo-

Cardinal directions as an example.
graphical Information Science, 10(3):269–290, 1996.

[Goyal and Egenhofer, 2000] R. Goyal and M. Egenhofer.
Consistent queries over cardinal directions across differ-
ent levels of detail.
In Proc. of DEXA Workshop, pages
876–880, 2000.

[Goyal, 2000] R. Goyal. Similarity assessment for cardinal
directions between extended spatial objects. PhD thesis,
University of Maine, Dept. of Spatial Information Science
and Engineering, 2000.

[Ligozat, 1998] G. Ligozat. Reasoning about cardinal direc-
tions. Journal Visual Languages and Computing, 9(1):23–
44, 1998.

[Mukerjee and Joe, 1990] A. Mukerjee and G. Joe. A quali-
tative model for space. In Proc. of the 8th National Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-90), pages 721–727,
1990.

[Navarrete and Sciavicco, 2006] I. Navarrete and G. Sciav-
icco. Spatial reasoning with rectangular cardinal direction
relations.
In Proc. of the ECAI’06 Workshop on Spatial
and Temporal Reasoning, pages 1–10, 2006.

[Renz and Ligozat, 2005] J. Renz and G. Ligozat. Weak
composition for qualitative spatial and temporal reason-
ing. In Proc. of CP 2005, LNCS, pages 534–548. Springer,
2005.

[Renz and Nebel, 1998] J. Renz and B. Nebel.

Spatial
reasoning with topological information.
In C. Freksa,
C. Habel, and K.F. Wender, editors, An Interdiscipli-
nary Approach to Representation and Processing of Spa-
tial Knowledge, LNCS, pages 351–372. Springer-Verlag,
1998.

[Sharma et al., 1994] J. Sharma, M. Flewelling,

and
M. Egenhofer. A qualitative spatial reasoner. In Proc. of
the International Symposium on Sapatial Data Handling,
pages 665–681, 1994.

[Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2004] S. Skiadopoulos and
M. Koubarakis. Composing cardinal direction relations.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 152(2):143–171, 2004.

[Skiadopoulos and Koubarakis, 2005] S. Skiadopoulos and
M. Koubarakis. On the consistency of cardinal directions
constraints. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 163(1):91–135, 2005.

[van Beek, 1992] P. van Beek. Reasoning about qualitative
temporal information. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 58:297–326,
1992.

IJCAI-07

500

