Automated Heart Wall Motion Abnormality Detection From Ultrasound Images

using Bayesian Networks

Maleeha Qaziϕ, Glenn Fungϕ, Sriram Krishnanϕ, Romer Rosalesϕ, Harald Steckϕ, R. Bharat Raoϕ,

Dr. Don Poldermans¯h and Dhanalakshmi Chandrasekaran, RDCS, FIAE±
.

Siemens Medical Solutions, 51 Valley Stream Parkway, Malvern, PA, USA

ϕ

Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands¯h.

maleeha.qazi@siemens.comϕ, glenn.fung@siemens.comϕ

Bangalore, India±.

Abstract

Coronary Heart Disease can be diagnosed by mea-
suring and scoring regional motion of the heart wall
in ultrasound images of the left ventricle (LV) of
the heart. We describe a completely automated
and robust technique that detects diseased hearts
based on detection and automatic tracking of the
endocardium and epicardium of the LV. The local
wall regions and the entire heart are then classi-
ﬁed as normal or abnormal based on the regional
and global LV wall motion.
In order to leverage
structural information about the heart we applied
Bayesian Networks to this problem, and learned
the relations among the wall regions off of the data
using a structure learning algorithm. We checked
the validity of the obtained structure using anatom-
ical knowledge of the heart and medical rules as
described by doctors. The resultant Bayesian Net-
work classiﬁer depends only on a small subset
of numerical features extracted from dual-contours
tracked through time and selected using a ﬁlter-
based approach. Our numerical results conﬁrm that
our system is robust and accurate on echocardio-
grams collected in routine clinical practice at one
hospital; our system is built to be used in real-time.

1 Introduction

need for an automated “second-reader” system that can pro-
vide objective diagnostic assistance, particularly to the less-
experienced cardiologist.

In this paper, we address the task of building a computer-
aided diagnosis system that can automatically detect wall-
motion abnormalities from echocardiograms. Our goal is
to develop a real-time system to assist physicians to inter-
pret wall motion scores, and thereby reduce variability and
improve diagnostic accuracy of wall motion analysis. Sec-
tion 2 provides some medical background on cardiac ultra-
sound and the standard methodology used by cardiologists
to score wall-motion abnormalities.
In Section 3 we de-
scribe our real-life dataset, which consists of echocardio-
grams from leading healthcare institutions to diagnose wall-
motion abnormalities. Sections 4 and 5 provide an overview
of our proposed system which we built on top of an algo-
rithm that detects and tracks the inner and outer cardiac walls
[Georgescu et al., 2005; Zhou et al., 2005; Comaniciu, 2003;
Comaniciu et al., 2004]. It consists of a classiﬁer that classi-
ﬁes the local region of the heart wall (and the entire heart) as
normal or abnormal based on the wall motion. We describe
our methodology for feature selection and classiﬁcation, fol-
lowed in Section 6 by our experimental results. We refer-
ence some related work in Section 7, and conclude with some
thoughts about our plans for future research in Section 8.

2 Medical Background Knowledge

2.1 What is Coronary Artery Disease?

Early detection (along with prevention) is an excellent way
of controlling Coronary Heart Disease (CHD). CHD (along
with Congestive Heart Failure) can be detected by measuring
and scoring the regional and global motion of the left ventri-
cle (LV) of the heart; CHD typically results in wall-motion
abnormalities, i.e., local segments of the LV wall move ab-
normally (move weakly - known as hypokinesia, not at all -
known as akinesia, or out of sync with the rest of the heart -
known as dyskinesia), and sometimes motion in multiple re-
gions, or the entire heart, is compromised. The LV can be im-
aged in a number of ways. The most common method is the
echocardiogram – an ultrasound video of different 2-D cross-
sections of the LV. Echocardiograms are unfortunately noto-
riously difﬁcult to interpret, and even the best of physicians
can misdiagnose heart disease. Hence there is a tremendous

Coronary artery disease (CAD) results from the development
of plaque within one or several of the arteries that feed the
muscle surrounding the left ventricle of the heart. Early signs
of CAD include perfusion abnormalities which would indi-
cate the lack of oxygenated blood going to tissue. As CAD
progresses, it will manifest itself as wall motion abnormal-
ities, which can be detected by echocardiography. Finally,
CAD will lead to angina, or chest pain. This changing man-
[Picano et
ifestation of CAD is described by Picano et al.
al., 2001; Picano, 1997] as the “ischemic cascade”. Accurate
regional wall motion analysis of the LV is an essential com-
ponent of interpreting echos to detect this effect, particularly
for early disease.

Heart disease has no gender, geographic or socio-economic
boundaries. Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) is a global epi-

IJCAI-07

519

demic that is the leading cause of death worldwide (17 mil.
deaths per year) [World Health Organization, 2004]. Since
1900, CVD has been the No. 1 killer in the USA every year
except 1918. It claims more lives each year than the next 4
leading causes of death combined, which are cancer, chronic
lower respiratory diseases, accidents, and diabetes mellitus
[American Heart Association, 2006]. Coronary Heart Dis-
ease (CHD) accounts for more than half the CVD deaths
(roughly 7.2 mil. deaths worldwide every year, and 1 of
every 5 deaths in the US), and is the single largest killer in
the world. Accurate early diagnosis of CHD - primarily with
cardiac ultrasound - has been identiﬁed as a critical factor in
improving patient outcomes for CHD.

2.2 Divisions of the Heart

There are many imaging modalities that have been used to
measure myocardial perfusion, left ventricular function, and
coronary anatomy for clinical management and research; for
this project we chose to use echocardiography. The Cardiac
Imaging Committee of the Council on Clinical Cardiology of
the American Heart Association has created a standardized
recommendation for the orientation of the heart, angle selec-
tion and names for cardiac planes and number of myocardial
segments [Cerqueira et al., 2002]. This is the standardization
used in this project.

Echo images are collected from four standard views: apical
4 chamber (A4C, Figure 1(b)), apical 2 chamber (A2C, Fig-
ure 1(c)), parasternal long axis (PLAX) or apical 3 chamber
(A3C, Figure 1(d)), and parasternal short axis (PSAX, Figure
1(a.1,a.2)). These views result from cutting the heart along
different 2-D planes.

The left ventricle (LV) is divided into 17 myocardial seg-
ments, 16 of which are measurable. The short-axis view
which results in a circular view of the LV can be taken at
3 locations, near the apex (apical), at the middle (mid-cavity,
Figure 1(a.2)), or near the base (basal, Figure 1(a.1)). The
most desirable being the mid-cavity cut. If one lays these 3
resultant rings against one another, all segments of the heart
are visible in relationship to one another, as shown in Figure
2 (modiﬁed from reference [Cerqueira et al., 2002]). The left
anterior descending(LAD) feeds segments 1, 2, 7, 8, 13, 14
and 17, the right coronary artery (RCA) feeds segments 3, 4,
9, 10 and 15, and the left circumﬂex coronary artery (LCX)
feeds segments 5, 6, 11, 12 and 16.

3 Understanding the Data

The data is based on standard adult transthoracic B-mode ul-
trasound images collected from the four standard views de-
scribed previously. The echos are in 256 gray scale color,
with a resolution in the order of magnitude of about 2 mm.
Currently we utilize the three apical views - A2C, A3C, and
A4C - which show all 16 segments of interest These provide
all the information needed to achieve our goal of classifying
hearts.

Even though we have images at different levels of stress
(resting, low-dose stress, peak-dose stress, recovery) this
work is based on images taken when the patient was resting.
The goal is to automatically provide an initial score, or classi-

Figure 1: Echocardiographic views for wall motion evalua-
tion. In the short-axis view, at the base and midventribular
levels, the left ventricle is divided into anterior septum (2,8)
and anterior free wall (1,7), lateral (6,12), posterior (5,11),
inferior free wall (4,10), and posterior septal (3,9) segments.
These same wall segments are seen in apical views as indi-
cated, plus the anterior(13), septal (14), inferior (15), and lat-
eral (16) apical segments are seen. Modiﬁed from reference
“Textbook of Clinical Echocardiography” (segment numbers
have been corrected to reﬂect standard naming convention be-
ing used).

ﬁcation, to determine whether a heart is normal or abnormal
given the resting ultrasound.

The data consists of 345 cases for which we have asso-
ciated images as well as ground truth and 2216 cases for
which we only have ground truth (no images); all of which
were generated using pharmacological stress, which allows
the physician to control the amount of stress a patient expe-
riences (in this case induced by dobutamine). All the cases
have been labeled at the segment level by a group of trained
cardiologists; this is what we refer to as “ground truth”. Each
of the 16 segments were labeled 1 - 5 (1 = normal, 2 = hypo-
kinetic, 3 = akinetic, 4 = dyskinetic, 5 = aneurysm), for sim-
pliﬁcation purposes we converted this 5-class problem to a
binary class problem (1 = normal, 2 - 5 = abnormal).

4 Preparation of the Data

Our application consists of two main parts: image process-
ing, and classiﬁcation. In this paper we will focus only on the
classiﬁcation portion, details of the image processing part can
be found in the referenced papers. The echos are run through
an algorithm which detects and automatically tracks both the
interior (endocardial) and exterior (epicardial) borders of the
LV [Comaniciu, 2003; Comaniciu et al., 2004]. Motion inter-
ferences (e.g. probe motion, patient movement, respiration,
etc.) are compensated for by using global motion estimation
based on robust statistics outside the LV, this is done so that
only the heart’s motion is analyzed. Then numerical feature

IJCAI-07

520

Figure 2: Display, on a circumferential polar plot, of the 17
myocardial segments and the recommended nomenclature for
tomographic imaging of the heart. Modiﬁed from reference
“Standardized Myocardial Segmentation and Nomenclature
for Tomographic Imaging of the Heart”.

Figure 3: One frame from an A4C image clip with the outer
and inner contour control points shown. The (red) vertical
line shows use of global motion compensation, and the two
squares denote the centers of the individual contours.

vectors, which are extracted from the dual-contours tracked
through time, form the basis for the regional wall motion clas-
siﬁcation.

Image processing

4.1
The ﬁrst step toward classiﬁcation of the heart involves con-
tour generation of the LV [Georgescu et al., 2005]. Ultra-
sound is known to be noisier than other common medical
imaging modalities such as MRI or CT, and echocardiograms
are even worse due to the fast motion of the heart muscle and
respiratory interferences. The framework used by our algo-
rithm is ideal for tracking echo sequences since it exploits het-
eroscedastic (i.e.
location-dependent and anisotropic) mea-
surement uncertainties.

The algorithm takes a hand-initialized border and tracks it
from one frame to the next through the entire video clip. The
inner and outer contours are treated as a single shape for cou-
pled double-contour tracking. “Intuitively, a double-contour
approach can propagate information from the endocardium
to guide the localization of the epicardium (or vice versa),
thus achieving more robust tracking of the two borders than
tracking them independently” (details in [Zhou et al., 2005]).
The global motion estimation can be seen in Figure 3 as a
vertical line near the center of the image. After tracking, nu-
merical features are computed from the dual-contours tracked
through time. The features extracted are both global (involv-
ing the whole LV) and local (involving individual segments
visible in the image), and are based on velocity, thickening,
timing, volume changes, etc.

4.2 Extracted Features
A number of features have been developed to characterize
cardiac motion in order to detect cardiac wall motion ab-
normalities, among them: velocity, radial and circumferen-
tial strain, local and global Simpson volume, global and local

ejection fraction (EF) ratio, and segmental volume. Some of
these features, including velocity, circumferential strain, and
local EF ratio, are based on the inner (endocardial) contour.

Due to the patient examination protocol, only the systole
(i.e. contraction phase of the heart) is recorded for some
patients. In order for the features to be consistent, the sys-
tole is extracted from each patient based on the cavity area
change. For each frame, the LV cavity area can be estimated
accurately based on the inner (endocardial) contour of that
frame. The frame corresponding to the maximal cavity area
that is achieved at the end of diastolic phase (expansion phase
of the heart) is the frame considered to be the beginning of
systole. The frame corresponding to the minimal cavity area
(achieved at the end of systolic phase) is the frame assumed to
be the end of systole. For the time being, all features are com-
puted based only on the systolic phase. However, the methods
used to calculate the features are generally applicable for the
diastolic phase as well. The following is a basic description
of some of the features:

• Velocity features: determines how fast any pair of con-
trol points change in the x and y coordinate system per
frame.

• Circumferential strain features: also called Fractional
Shortening, measures how much the contour between
any two control points shrinks in the systolic phase. This
is measured along the parameter of the contour.

• Radial strain features: also called Thickening, measures
how much the contour shrinks for each control point be-
tween any two time frames. This is measured along the
radius from a calculated “center” of the LV.

• Local and Global Simpson Volume features: determine
the volume as computed by the Simpson rule (with 50
disks) for each frame, and for the systolic phase of the
heart as a whole (this gives the global EF, which captures
the whole heart’s contraction abnormalities).

IJCAI-07

521

• Segmental Volume features: determine the volume per
segment per frame, and the segmental EF values (i.e lo-
cal EFs, which aim to capture the local cardiac contrac-
tion abnormalities).

In general, the global version of certain features (e.g. radial
strain, circumferential strain, etc) can be calculated by taking
the mean, or standard deviation, of the 6 segment’s respective
feature values from any one view. All in all we had 120 local
and global features for each of the 3 views (360 total), all of
which were continuous. The limitations of present wall mo-
tion analysis programs, e.g. color kinesis and blood pool, is
that they only evaluate wall motion and not heart wall thick-
ening, which is the hallmark of ischemia. Our program takes
both into account.

Segment Classiﬁcation

5
Our data mining process which starts with the raw data (ultra-
sound videos) and ends with a robust classiﬁer that predicts/
assesses heart wall motion for the 16 segments of the heart,
can be summarized as follows:

1. The image sequences are pre-processed to extract the
the LV). Intensity Normalization

area of interest (i.e.
and an appropriate resizing are applied.

2. Given the initial contour, the border tracking is per-

formed as described in section 4.1, item 2.

3. A set of features is extracted from the tracked contours

as described in section 4.2.

4. Using the provided Ground Truth (assessments from the
doctors), a network structure is learned that represents
the correlations among segments, this process is ex-
plained in detail in section 5.2.

5. For each segment, a subset of relevant features for classi-
ﬁcation is selected (section 5.1), as a result the classiﬁers
we obtain only depend on a small number of numer-
ical features extracted from the dual-contours tracked
through time. Having classiﬁers depending on a small
number of features not only improves performance time
but also results in better generalization.

6. This subset of numerical features is provided as evidence
for the networks’ variables of interest (the 16 heart seg-
ments) to provide classiﬁcation for each segment and the
whole heart. The entire process is diagrammed in ﬁgure
4.

5.1 Feature Selection
One of the difﬁculties in constructing a classiﬁer for this task
is the problem of feature selection. It is a well-known fact that
a reduction on classiﬁer feature dependence can improve the
classiﬁer’s generalization capability. However, the problem
of selecting an “optimal” minimum subset of features from
a large pool (in the order of hundreds) of potential original
features is known to be NP-hard. In this paper we use a very
simple but efﬁcient ﬁlter-based approach. In general, Filter-
based methods aim to select features based on simple auxil-
iary criteria, such as feature correlation, to remove redundant
features. We used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (KS-test)

Figure 4: Diagram of process, from raw data to ﬁnal classiﬁer.

[Biesiada J., 2005; Chakravarti and Roy, 1967] to measure
the maximum difference between the empirical cumulative
distributions of the two classes according to a given feature,
in other words, the KS-test measures the difference between
the two histograms of the two classes with respect to all the
available features. This test is a nonparametric method and
it makes no assumptions about the underlying distributions
of the two classes being tested .All the available features are
ranked by the score given by the KS-test and only the fea-
tures at the top of the list are selected for classiﬁcation. Note
that a high rank according to the KS-test implies that the
corresponding empirical cumulative distributions of the two
classes according to these features are considerably different,
making these features desirable for discrimination between
the two classes.

5.2 Bayesian Networks

Bayesian Networks or Belief Networks (BNs) are directed
graphical models (e.g., see [Cowell et al., 1999] for an
overview):
the BN structure is a directed acyclic graph
(DAG), and the BN parameters are conditional probabilities,
represented by a contingency table in case of discrete vari-
ables. The directed edges in the graph can often be interpreted
in an intuitive way, namely as causal relationships (requiring
additional assumptions) [P. Spirtes and Scheines, 2000].

We applied BNs to automatically detecting heart abnor-
malities to utilize the structural knowledge of the heart seg-
ments in hopes of improving the classiﬁcation accuracy for
the whole heart. In this paper, the following representation
will be used

• numbers between 1 and 16 will be used to name the re-

spective heart segment being referred to.

• arrows (for example: ← , →) are used to denote the
direction of causality. An arrow is drawn from the cause
(parent) node to the effect (child) node. Example: 5 ←
6 should be read as 6 causes/inﬂuences 5, here 5 is the
child node and 6 is the parent node.

• Two segments are called “neighbors” if they share a

IJCAI-07

522

Figure 5: Structure learned by BNT using multi-class labels.

common boundary. For example: the neighbors of 1 are
6, 7, and 2 (as shown in Figure 2). 8 and 12 are not
neighbors since they lie diagonal to 1 and share only a
point of contact with 1. They could only be inﬂuenced
by 1 via one of the neighbors.

Prior Domain Knowledge expressed as Rules
We derived prior knowledge from prior clinical research –
Moir & Marwick [Moir and Marwick, 2004] are well-known
cardiologists who have provided some basic rules about read-
ing echos in standard views. According to our cardiologist
collaborators, two rules of thumb that most doctors use while
reading a patient’s echos have to do with neighboring seg-
ments and shared coronary artery territory. Neighboring seg-
ments inﬂuence each others behavior. And if two segments
are fed by the same coronary artery, one is abnormal and the
other unknown, then it is better to err on the side of caution
and classify the unknown segment as abnormal.

Learning Bayesian Network structure from data
To ﬁnd a network structure that represents the relations
among the heart segments from the data, we used Kevin Mur-
phy’s BNT algorithm [Murphy, 2001]. We applied a structure
discovery method because creating a structure by hand using
only physical knowledge of the heart would have resulted in
a cyclic graph. For learning the structure we used the GT
from both the training cases and the 2216 non-image cases.
It is important to note that the structures that we found using
the data, actually mirrored the physical relationships within
the heart but without creating cycles, furthermore, the result-
ing structure coincides with our cardiac knowledge extracted
from literature. The obtained structure can be seen in Figure
5. Overlaying the structural relationships learned on the cir-
cular diagram of the heart segments (see Figure 6) shows the
logical sense of them with respect to the physical heart.

6 Testing Learned BN Models

To test the BNs we learned, we transferred the ﬁnal net-
works to a well-known Bayesian networks commercial soft-
ware, Netica [Norsys: Software corp., 2000] and did parame-
ter training using 220 training cases with images, and 2216
cases without images (i.e. a subset of the same cases used

Figure 6: Structural relationships learned by BNT using
multi-class labels overlayed on physical heart diagram

to do structure learning; note that the 2216 cases without im-
ages were only used during training since they incorporated
the relationship between segments in their GT). The test set
was 125 cases, with images, held out speciﬁcally for this
purpose. The testing process involved entering all available
evidence into the compiled network, running inference, and
querying all variables of interest simultaneously. In our case,
the evidence given to the network were the 6 best segment
speciﬁc features found by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (all
continuous attributes), and the variables of interest that were
queried were the nodes that represented each heart segment
(S1, S2, ...
, S16; all discrete attributes). After the struc-
ture between the segments was learned off of data via the
BNT method described above, we manually added the evi-
dence variables using a naive Bayesian methodology (each
node representing a segment speciﬁc feature was inﬂuenced
only by the corresponding segment’s node in the network, e.g.
S2 → s2 A3C segvol ef).

As an alternative to this naive Bayes method, we also tried
to learn a general Bayes net (i.e., without any constraints on
the network structure), allowing a feature node to be possibly
connected to several segment nodes. However, when learn-
ing the structure between the imaging-feature nodes and the
segment nodes, the number of available training cases with
images, namely 220, was very small compared to the number
of 96 feature nodes in the Bayes net. This let to large uncer-
tainty concerning the learned structure, and possibly to over-
ﬁtting. Not surprisingly, we found that, on the test set, the
general Bayes net learned from this small amount of train-
ing data actually gave results inferior to the ones of the naive
Bayes method

All continuous valued features were discretized using
Recursive Minimal Entropy Partitioning [Dougherty et al.,
1995], a method based on minimal entropy heuristic, pre-
sented in [Catlett, 1991; Fayyad and Irani, 1993]. This is a
supervised algorithm that uses class information entropy of
candidate partitions to select bin boundaries for discretiza-
tion. We tested the network using a subset of selected features

IJCAI-07

523

y
t
i
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
s

y
t
i
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
s

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

S13

S14

0.5

1−specificity

S15

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

y
t
i
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
s

1

0

0

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

y
t
i
v
i
t
i
s
n
e
s

0.5

1−specificity

S16

0.5

1−specificity

1

0

0

0.5

1−specificity

1

1

Figure 7: Test ROC curves for segments 13 through 16: BNT.

described above.

6.1 Numerical Experiments

Since the trade-off between false positives (FP, i.e. wrongly
labeling the heart abnormal) versus false negatives (FN, i.e.
wrongly labeling the heart normal) depends on the clinical
context were the system is being used, we decided that the
more objective way to measure the performance of our clas-
siﬁer is to measure the area under the ROC curve (AUC).

Our classiﬁer was trained using 220 cases, and was tested
on 125 cases. It’s result can be seen in the ROC curves of
four segments in Figure 7. Our feature selection resulted in
each segment being dependent on six features (both global
and local). Table 1 shows the AUCs for the testing set. As the
results show, the classiﬁer did well on each segment, and on
the whole achieved high sensitivity, between 80% and 90%,
for 80% speciﬁcity on most segments.

Segment

Table 1: AUCs for test set
16 seg BNT Segment

16 seg BNT

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8

0.90883
0.89617
0.96779
0.91673
0.84806
0.98374
0.86453
0.8208

S9
S10
S11
S12
S13
S14
S15
S16

0.96474
0.92763
0.84508
0.98374
0.97168
0.92552
0.94818

0.945

7 Related Work

There is currently no system that tries to do a similar sort of
analysis as our system; our approach is novel in this regard.
In the past, systems have attempted to extract and display

only one parameter of interest. For example, the current state-
of-the-art Hewlett-Packard’s Acoustic Quantiﬁcation extracts
and displays volume, and their Color Kinesis system displays
motion. The problems with both these systems are that their
segmentation is unreliable and they only display one feature,
which is insufﬁcient to capture wall motion. Our work has
robust segmentation and is the ﬁrst to combine all features of
interest. There is only one other paper that mentions similar
work: “Automated Classiﬁcation of Wall Motion Abnormali-
ties by Analysis of Left Ventricular Endocardial Motion Pat-
terns” by Johan G. Bosch, Francisca Nijland Ph.D., Steven
C. Mitchell, G. van Burken, Boudewijn P.F. Lelieveldt Ph.D.,
Otto Kamp Ph.D, Milan Sonka Ph.D., and Johan H.C. Reiber
Ph.D in the Journal of the American Society of Echocardio-
graphy (ASE), 2003. But they had very limited results with
their system. Due to the limited nature of past systems, we
do not have any numerical results that compare our system to
other approaches.

8 Future work

In the future we plan on expanding our classiﬁcation to iden-
tify different levels of CHD severity at the segment level, in-
corporating the use of other standard echocardiography views
and including images from other levels of stress (e.g.: peak
dose). We would also like to apply a ranking algorithm to
take advantage of multi-class scores for classiﬁcation. We
are currently studying the effects of perturbation of the bor-
der initialization on the ﬁnal predictions. We also hope to
address the question of the sensitivity of results to errors in
the border initialization.

9 Conclusion

In this paper we address the task of building an objective clas-
siﬁcation application for heart wall motion analysis, based on
features calculated off of echocardiograms. The simple but
effective feature selection technique that was used results in a
classiﬁer that depends on only a small subset of the calculated
features, and their limited number makes it easier to explain
the ﬁnal classiﬁer to physicians in order to get their feedback.
Although we only had a relatively small number of cases with
images and ground truth, we were able to leverage a large
number of additional cases - namely data without images, but
with ground truth only - to improve performance. And the
learned structure that resulted showed that it was possible to
learn the same relationships as described in literature. Using a
simple and publically available algorithm we achieved sensi-
tivity performance in the mid-80’s. Currently we are looking
into how these encouraging results can help less-experienced
cardiologists improve their diagnostic accuracy; as it stands
now, the agreement between less-experienced cardiologists
and the experts is often below 50%. As a top cardiologist put
it: “It is AWESOME! This will be a major advance to patient
care... This will be a REAL killer application...!”.

IJCAI-07

524

[Moir and Marwick, 2004] Stuart Moir and Thomas H. Mar-
wick.
Combination of contrast with stress echocar-
diography: A practical guide to methods and inter-
pretation.
Cardiovascular Ultrasound, 2:15, 2004.
URL: http://cardiovascularultrasound.com/content/2/1/15;
accessed Nov 5, 2004.

[Murphy, 2001] Kevin P. Murphy. The bayes net toolbox for

MATLAB: http://bnt.sourceforge.net, 2001.

[Norsys: Software corp., 2000] Norsys: Software corp. Net-

ica, 2000.

[P. Spirtes and Scheines, 2000] C. Glymour P. Spirtes and
R. Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. Adaptive
Computation and Machine Learning. MIT Press, second
edition, 2000.

[Picano et al., 2001] Eugenio Picano, Attila Palinkas, and
Robert Amyot. Diagnosis of myocardial ischemia in hy-
pertensive patients. Journal of Hypertension, 19:1177 –
1183, 2001.

[Picano, 1997] Eugenio Picano. Stress Echocardiography.

Springer Verlag, 1997. ISBN: 3540626204.

[World Health Organization, 2004] World Health Organiza-
tion.
2004.
http://www.who.int/cardiovascular diseases/resources/ at-
las/en/index.html.

The atlas of heart disease and stroke.

[Zhou et al., 2005] Xiang Sean Zhou, Dorin Comaniciu, and
Alok Gupta. An information fusion framework for robust
shape tracking. IEEE Trans. on Pattern Anal. and Machine
Intell., 27, NO. 1:115 – 129, January 2005.

References
[American Heart Association, 2006] American

Association.
statistics
–

Heart
stroke
URL:http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?
identiﬁer=1200026.

disease

and
2006.

Heart

2006

update.

[Biesiada J., 2005] Duch W. Biesiada J.

Feature selec-
tion for high-dimensional data: A kolmogorov-smirnov
correlation-based ﬁlter solution. CORES 2005 4th Inter-
national Conference on Computer Recognition Systems.,
pages 95 – 105, 22-25 May 2005. Rydzyna. Advances in
Soft Computing, Computer Recognition Systems.

[Catlett, 1991] J. Catlett. On changing continuous attributes
into ordered discrete attributes. Proceedings of the Eu-
ropean Working Session on Learning, Berlin, Germany,
pages 164 – 178, 1991.

, and Mario S. Verani.

[Cerqueira et al., 2002] Manuel D. Cerqueira, Neil J. Weiss-
man, Vasken Dilsizian, Alice K. Jacobs, Sanjiv Kaul,
Warren K. Laskey, Dudley J. Pennell, John A. Rum-
berger, Thomas Ryan,
Stan-
dardized myocardial segmentation and nomenclature
for tomographic imaging of the heart: A statement
for healthcare professionals from the cardiac imag-
ing committee of the council on clinical cardiology
of the american heart association.
American Heart
Association Circulation, 105:539 – 542,
Jan 2002.
http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/105/4/539; ac-
cessed Dec 8, 2004.

[Chakravarti and Roy, 1967] R. Laha I. Chakravarti and
J. Roy. Handbook of Methods of Applied Statistics. John-
Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1967.

[Comaniciu et al., 2004] D. Comaniciu, X. S. Zhou, and
S. Krishnan. Robust real-time tracking of myocardial bor-
der: An information fusion approach. IEEE Trans. Med-
ical Imaging, 23, NO. 7:849 – 860, 2004.

[Comaniciu, 2003] D. Comaniciu. Nonparametric informa-
tion fusion for motion estimation. Proc. IEEE Conf. Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, I:59 – 66, 2003.

[Cowell et al., 1999] R. G. Cowell, A. P. Dawid, S. L. Lau-
ritzen, and D. J. Spiegelhalter. Probabilistic Networks and
Expert Systems. Springer, 1999.

[Dougherty et al., 1995] James Dougherty, Ron Kohavi, and
Mehran Sahami. Supervised and unsupervised discretiza-
tion of continuous features. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 194–202, 1995.

[Fayyad and Irani, 1993] U. M. Fayyad and K. B. Irani.
Multi-interval discretization of continuous-valued at-
tributes for classiﬁcation learning. Proceedings of the 13th
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
pages 1022 – 1027, 1993.

[Georgescu et al., 2005] B. Georgescu, X. S. Zhou, D. Co-
maniciu, and A. Gupta. Database-guided segmenta-
tion of anatomical structures with complex appearance.
IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR’05), San Diego, CA, 2005, 2005.

IJCAI-07

525

