A Size-Based Qualitative Approach to the Representation of Spatial Granularity∗

Hedda R. Schmidtke and Woontack Woo†
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology

{schmidtk,wwoo}@gist.ac.kr

Abstract

A local spatial context is an area currently under
consideration in a spatial reasoning process. The
boundary between this area and the surrounding
space together with the spatial granularity of the
representation separates what is spatially relevant
from what is irrelevant at a given time. The ap-
proach discussed in this article differs from other
approaches to spatial granularity as it focusses not
on a partitioning of the spatial domain, but on the
notions of grain-size and the limited extent of a spa-
tial context as primary factors of spatial granularity.
Starting from a mereotopological characterization
of these concepts, the notions of relevant and irrel-
evant extension in a context are deﬁned. The ap-
proach is qualitative in the sense that quantitative,
metric concepts are not required. The axiomatic
characterization is thoroughly evaluated: it is com-
pared to other mereotopological characterizations
of spatial granularity; soundness is proven with
an example model; and applicability for Knowl-
edge Representation is illustrated with deﬁnitions
for common sense conceptualizations of sameness,
and adjacency of locations.

Introduction

1
Representation of local, granular spatial contexts is crucial
for reducing complexity of reasoning in AI applications, such
as mobile robots or spatial conﬁguration systems. Via the no-
tion of spatial context-awareness, this topic has gained impor-
tance also in other ﬁelds of research, such as research on im-
proved human-computer-interfaces, ubiquitous computing,
and location-based augmented reality [Chen and Kotz, 2000;
Dey and Abowd, 2000; Kanter, 2003; Schilit et al., 1994].

A local spatial context is understood in this article as an
area currently under consideration in a spatial reasoning pro-
cess. The boundary between this area and the surrounding
space together with the spatial granularity of the representa-
tion separates what is relevant at a given time from what is
This work was supported by Seondo project of MIC, Korea, by
the UCN Project, the MIC 21st Century Frontier R&D Program in
Korea, and by the BK 21 Project in 2006.

∗

†

Corresponding author

irrelevant: to a mobile robot, e.g., near objects may be of im-
mediate relevance, and information about what is near is of-
ten more certain, more reliable, and more detailed than about
what is further away; for planning ahead, however, details
about the immediate vicinity are secondary, and a less de-
tailed representation of the wider surroundings is needed. As
Hobbs [1985] pointed out, the ability to switch between rep-
resentations of different granularity may be one of the funda-
mental characteristics of intelligence.

This article discusses a qualitative account of spatial gran-
ularity in which the notions of proximity and grain-size,
which are formally both related to distance, are combined
into a characterization of spatial granularity and local spa-
tial context. In contrast to the geometric approach presented
in [Schmidtke, 2003; 2005a], the concepts are axiomatically
characterized in a way so as to be compatible with mereotopo-
logical axiomatic systems and reasoning mechanisms. The
notion of grain-size is formalized using relations of compar-
ison; quantitative, metric concepts are not necessary. The
approach differs from other mereotopological approaches to
spatial granularity, such as the stratiﬁed rough sets of [Bit-
tner and Stell, 2003] or the granular partitions of [Bittner and
Smith, 2003], as it focusses on the notions of grain-sizes and
the limited extent of a spatial context as primary factors of
spatial granularity. These notions can be used to organize the
spatial locations of a domain into levels of granularity, with-
out requiring partitioning of the domain.

Ways for applying our approach in the representation of
spatial context for ubiquitous computing environments, and
issues of vagueness and change of granularity have been dis-
cussed in [Schmidtke, 2005b; Schmidtke and Woo, 2006]. In
this article, we give a model as a proof of soundness for a sim-
pliﬁed axiomatic characterization, show its formal relation to
other approaches on spatial granularity, and demonstrate its
applicability for representing common sense concepts.

Starting from a mereotopological framework, the notion
of spatial granularity is speciﬁed based upon special regions,
called extended locations, which are characterized so as to
serve as both grain-regions and context-regions (Sect. 2). An
extended location can be a region, such as, e.g., a room in
a building, that—on a coarse level of granularity—is con-
ceived to be a point-like location, whose extension is irrele-
vant, or—on a ﬁner level of granularity—the spatial extension
of a context, which delimits what is relevant in the context.

IJCAI-07

563

The approach is thoroughly evaluated in Sect. 3 with respect
to related works, soundness, and expressive power. An ex-
ample for modeling of a domain in two scenarios is sketched.
Applicability for common sense Knowledge Representation
is demonstrated with formal speciﬁcations of otherwise dif-
ﬁcult notions involving a concept of granularity-dependent
relevance of extension, namely: point-like locations, as re-
gions with an irrelevant extension, adjacency of locations as
overlap in an area of irrelevant extension, and spatial indis-
tinguishability of locations as sameness up to irrelevant parts.

2 Characterization of Spatial Granularity
In this section, the mereotopological framework for a qualita-
tive, size-based axiomatization of spatial granularity is pre-
sented. After the rudimentary relations of connection and
part are speciﬁed, extended locations can be characterized as
linearly ordered by an ordering relation smaller (Sect. 2.1).
This latter relation is the central tool for the formalization of
size-based granularity in Sect. 2.2.

In contrast to the axiomatic characterization presented in
[Schmidtke and Woo, 2006], we do not distinguish in this
article between arbitrary regions and extended locations, i.e.
regions which can be grains and context regions. This choice
simpliﬁes the discussion in Sect. 3, but would severely re-
strict the possibilities for representing the location of objects.
As Sect. 3.3 illustrates, extended locations can justiﬁably be
termed point-like locations. For an application in which both
point-like, coarse locations, and detailed shape information
about objects is to be represented, extended locations could
be modeled in a sorted logic as a subtype of regions.
2.1 Extended Locations
A mereotopological basis was chosen for the characteriza-
tion of extended locations. Extended locations fulﬁll basic
requirements for regions [Casati and Varzi, 1999; Asher and
Vieu, 1995; Randell et al., 1992]: connection C is a reﬂexive
(A1) and symmetric relation (A2); the relation (cid:3) (part of )
can be deﬁned in terms of C (D1): x is part of y, iff every
region that is connected to x is also connected to y.1

∀x : C(x, x)

x (cid:3) y

∀x, y : C(x, y) → C(y, x)

def⇔ ∀z : C(x, z) → C(y, z)

(A1)
(A2)
(D1)
It can be shown that (cid:3) is a reﬂexive, antisymmetric rela-
tion. For a thorough treatment of mereotopological ontolog-
ical questions, however, a more elaborate framework would
be needed [Casati and Varzi, 1999; Asher and Vieu, 1995;
Randell et al., 1992].

In contrast to general regions, extended locations have a
unique size, i.e. can be ordered uniquely according to their
size. More precisely, the notion of size, and thus size-based
granularity, can be derived from a linear ordering ≤ (smaller
or of equal size) on extended locations. The relation ≤ is a
1In order to abbreviate formulae, the scope of quantiﬁers is to
be read as maximal, i.e. until the end of a formula, or until the
ﬁrst unmatched closing bracket after a quantiﬁer. Additionally, the
following precedence is used: ¬,∧,∨,→,↔, def⇔.

reﬂexive (A3), transitive (A4), and linear (A5) relation, and
all parts of a location are smaller or of the same size as the
location (A6).

∀x : x ≤ x

∀x, y, z : x ≤ y ∧ y ≤ z → x ≤ z

(A3)
(A4)
(A5)
(A6)
The relation ≤ can be used to deﬁne an equivalence relation
of congruence of size ≡ (same size) and an asymmetric sub-
relation < (smaller).

∀x, y : x ≤ y ∨ y ≤ x
∀x, y : x (cid:3) y∧ → x ≤ y

x ≡ y
x < y

def⇔ x ≤ y ∧ y ≤ x
def⇔ x ≤ y ∧ ¬y ≤ x

(D2)
(D3)
The equivalence classes with respect to ≡ correspond to the
possible sizes in a domain. However, this notion of size does
not necessarily correspond to a notion of distance supporting
the axioms of a metric. Further restrictions would be neces-
sary to ensure this. Stronger geometric characterizations of a
region-based notion of size are given in [Dugat et al., 2002;
Borgo et al., 1996], in which a relation similar to ≤ is the
basis for characterizing spheres; a weak geometric character-
ization of region-based size for which the triangle inequal-
ity of a metric is not a consequence has been presented in
[Schmidtke, 2003; 2005a]. An advantage of a less restric-
tive formalization is that it is gives more representational
freedom for modelling a domain and choosing an appropri-
ate granulation. The notion of size characterized with the
relation ≤ does not need to correspond to a purely spa-
tial notion of size as derived from, e.g., the Euclidean met-
ric, but could, for instance, also include functional aspects:
a small kink in the blade of a knife could thus be mod-
eled as being more important than in its handle.2 This
notion of size and relevance is compatible with the above
axiomatization, but would not be supported by the more
restrictive geometric characterizations [Dugat et al., 2002;
Schmidtke, 2003].
2.2 Grain Regions and Context Regions
Granularity, as characterized by [Hobbs, 1985] is a means to
retrieve simpliﬁed, ﬁltered representations of a domain from
more complex, richer representations. Spatial and temporal
granularity are closely related to the concept of grain-size in
a local spatial or temporal context [Schmidtke, 2005b]. Parts
of an object that are smaller than the grain-size can be disre-
garded as unimportant details; objects beyond the range of the
area of the local context are not in the focus of current consid-
erations; and objects which extend beyond this range likewise
need not be represented as a whole, representing local parts
would be sufﬁcient for many purposes in this case. If objects
beyond this range or objects smaller than the grain-size need
to be accessed, a change of context has to be initiated: as we
zoom out a larger area is covered, but small details are lost,
zooming into a scene, smaller details are focussed, and ob-
jects further away become irrelevant. This photo metaphor

2This example has been suggested to us by a reviewer.

IJCAI-07

564

of spatial granularity has been discussed by [Galton, 2000,
§1.6]; the results of [Kosslyn, 1980] can be understood as
supporting evidence for granularity phenomena in spatial im-
agery.

The notion of an extended location being a grain location
relative to a context location is axiomatically characterized
using a relation |(cid:2) , with x |(cid:2) y denoting that x is a grain
location of the context location y. Zooming out then is an
operation of changing from a context location c1 to a larger
location c2 containing c1, with the grains of c2 also being
larger than the grains of c1. Axiom A7 formally characterizes
this property: grains are ordered in the same way as their
respective context locations and vice versa.

For a given domain, it might be useful to have atomic loca-
tions that do not have any parts and thus no grain locations ei-
ther. We accordingly deﬁne as proper context locations those
extended locations which have grain locations (D4); and de-
mand that such locations are covered by grains without any
gaps (A8): any location that is connected to a proper context
location c is connected to some grain of c. It is worth not-
ing that this axiom is the only ontological axiom in a narrow
sense, as it actually guarantees existence of locations under
certain conditions. The last axiom (A9) states that the grains
of a context are proper parts of the context.

∀c1, c2, g1, g2 : g1 |(cid:2) c1 ∧ g2 |(cid:2) c2 →
[c1 < c2 ↔ g1 < g2]

(A7)

(D4)

(A8)

CL(x) def⇔ ∃g : g |(cid:2) x
∀c, x : C(x, c) ∧ CL(c) →
∃g : g |(cid:2) c ∧ C(x, g)
∀c, g : g |(cid:2) c → g (cid:3) c ∧ g (cid:13)= c
∀c, x, y : x |(cid:2) c ∧ y |(cid:2) c → x ≡ y
∀g, x, y : g |(cid:2) x ∧ g |(cid:2) y → x ≡ y

(A9)
(1)
(2)
Since (A7) demands that grain locations are ordered with re-
spect to ≤ in the same way as their respective context loca-
tions, we obtain from (A7) with c1 = c2 that all grains of
a context location have equal extension (1). For g1 = g2
in (A7), it follows accordingly that all context locations of
a grain have equal extension (2). The range of sizes cor-
responding to the sizes equal to or smaller than a given
proper context location and equal to or larger than its grains
thus can function as a level of spatial granularity in accor-
dance with the axiomatization of levels of granularity given
in [Schmidtke, 2005b]. In particular, it is possible to charac-
terize a corresponding ordering on levels of spatial granular-
ity with relations ≺ and ≈: c1 is of ﬁner granularity than c2,
iff there is a grain of c2 that is larger than c1 (D5); c1 is of
compatible granularity with c2, iff c1 is not smaller than any
grain of c2 and c2 is not smaller than any grain of c1 (D6).

c1 ≺ c2

def⇔ ∃g : g |(cid:2) c2 ∧ c1 < g

(D5)

c1 ≈ c2

def⇔ ∀g1, g2 : g1 |(cid:2) c1 ∧ g2 |(cid:2) c2
→ g1 ≤ c2 ∧ g2 ≤ c1

(D6)
It can be shown that, if restricted to the class of CL-locations
(D4), ≺ is a semiorder with ≈ as a relation of indistinguisha-
bility. The proof follows along the lines of those given in

[Schmidtke, 2005b; Schmidtke and Woo, 2006]. Semiorders
and non-transitive indistinguishability play an important role
in the mathematical modeling of vagueness in perceptual
classiﬁcation [Suppes and Zinnes, 1963], e.g., of lengths or
colors in psychophysical experiments [Palmer, 1999, p. 671]:
if direct comparison is not possible, subjects may judge two
lengths A and B to be the same, and the length B to be
the same as C, without necessarily judging A and C to be
the same lengths. A composition table for reasoning about
semiorders has been given in [Schmidtke and Woo, 2006].
The mechanisms for managing contextual change of granu-
larity as described in [Schmidtke, 2005b] for the case of tem-
poral granularity can be applied accordingly.

3 Evaluation
In this section, the approach is evaluated with respect to re-
lated works, soundness, and expressive power. A formal
comparison between the chosen size-based approach and the
partitioning approach of [Bittner and Smith, 2003] is pre-
sented in Sect. 3.1. Soundness of the axiomatic characteri-
zation is proven with an example model of an ofﬁce scenario
(Sect. 3.2), which also serves to illustrate application of the
concepts in standard scenarios in the ﬁelds of robotics and
ubiquitous computing. The gained expressive power is illus-
trated in Sect. 3.3 with granularity-dependent speciﬁcations
for otherwise difﬁcult common sense notions involving the
concept of irrelevant extension in a context.
3.1 Comparison to Partitioning Approaches to

Granularity

The above axioms are neutral with respect to the question
whether space is partitioned by the extended location regions.
Axiom A8 demands that space is completely covered by ex-
tended locations on every given level of granularity, but al-
lows for locations to overlap. Axiom A7 does not restrict this
either. However, it may be desirable for some applications
to impose stronger restrictions, in order to increase inferen-
tial power. A partitioning of context regions, i.e. that each
context-region is completely partitioned by its grains, can be
enforced with (P): a grain does not overlap another grain of
the same context region.

∀c, x, y : x |(cid:2) c ∧ y |(cid:2) c ∧ x (cid:13)= y
→ ¬∃z : z (cid:3) x ∧ z (cid:3) y

(P)

This formalization only restricts grains of the same context-
region, but not, e.g., grains of different sizes, which are still
allowed to also partially overlap. A stronger restriction is
stated in the axiom MA4 in the theory of granular partitions
[Bittner and Smith, 2003, p. 119]: “If two cells within a parti-
tion overlap, then one is a subcell of the other.” This require-
ment can be formulated in the given theory by demanding that
two locations can only overlap if one is contained in the other
(C).
∀x1, x2, z : z (cid:3) x1 ∧ z (cid:3) x2 → x2 (cid:3) x1 ∨ x1 (cid:3) x2
(C)
A consequence of (C) with (1) is that every context-region
is partitioned by its grains (P). Actually, (C) is stronger than
(P): (P) concerns only locations of the same size, whereas (C)

IJCAI-07

565

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Situation (a), showing two overlapping grains of
a context, is permitted by neither (P) nor (C). Situation (b),
depicting locations of different sizes overlapping each other,
can occur with (P) but not with (C).

Figure 2: The simple layout of an ofﬁce domain as an exam-
ple of a model for the axiomatic system.

additionally demands that the locations of one size group into
the locations of a larger size, i.e., that locations of different
sizes are not permitted to overlap, as illustrated in Fig. 1b.
This restriction is too strong for the intended modeling in
Sect. 3.3. The more general approach suggested here allows
for different partitions to be modeled as belonging to the same
granularity if they agree with respect to (cid:3) and <.
3.2 An Example Model
In order to show soundness of the characterization and as
an example for illustration of the concepts to be deﬁned in
Sect. 3.3, a simple model for the axiomatic system is provided
2: the space
in terms of point sets in the coordinate space R
is given by the quadratic area A covering a simple layout of
ofﬁces (Fig. 2); it is interpreted by the point set AI = [0, 1]2.
Connection C is interpreted by non-empty intersection, and
(cid:3), by the subset relation (⊆). The set LI interpreting the
domain of extended locations consist of AI, the set of ar-
} containing the
eas R = {HI , O1I , O2I , O3I , O4I , O5I , O6I
point sets corresponding to the seven regions of the hallway
H and of the rooms O1–O6 (including the walls separating
them and any door spaces, see Sect. 3.3), and the set of cir-
cular discs (with respect to a presupposed distance function
δ and a certain ﬁxed maximal radius rmax, smaller than half
the width of a room) around points lying in AI.

LI = {AI} ∪ R ∪

{D(P, r) | P ∈ AI ∧ r ∈ R ∧ 0 < r ≤ rmax}

where D(P, r) is the disc of radius r ∈ R around the point
P ∈ AI:3 D(P, r) = {Q ∈ AI | δ(P, Q) ≤R r}. The re-
lation ≤ is interpreted by the transitive closure of the relation
3More precisely, D(P, r) is the intersection of AI with the disc

around P .

≤∗ containing the relation (cid:3) (interpreted by ⊆) as demanded
by (A6), the elements of R as being of the same granularity
according to above assumption, and the ordering on the discs
in LI derived from the ordering ≤R on the radii of discs.
≤∗ = {(M1, M2) | M1, M2 ∈ LI , M1 ⊆ M2} ∪ R

2

∪ {(D(P1, r1), D(P2, r2)) | r1 ≤R r2}

With ⊆ and ≤R being ordering relations that do not conﬂict
with each other, (A3)–(A5) follow accordingly.
For the axioms in Sect. 2.2, an interpretation for |(cid:2) is
needed: the grains of A are the rooms and the hallway; the
grains of a disc of radius r can be set to always have the size
c , for a certain ﬁxed factor c > 1;4 and the grains of rooms
r
c < rg ≤ rmax.
are discs of a certain ﬁxed radius rg, with rmax
|(cid:2) I = {(M, AI) | M ∈ R} ∪

{(D(P, r1), D(Q, r2)) | D(P, r1), D(Q, r2) ∈ LI
∧ D(P, r1) ⊆ D(Q, r2) ∧ r1 = r2/c} ∪
{(D(P, rg), M) | M ∈ R ∧ D(P, rg) ⊆ M}

c < r2

Axiom A8 holds since R was deﬁned so as to cover AI, and
there is a disc D(P, r) for every size 0 < r ≤ rmax around
every point of AI. All grains are subsets of their respective
context regions and elements of LI, and no context is its own
grain (A9). Axiom A7 can also be shown: the regions in R
are contained in AI; for every disc, there is a disc of the same
size contained in a region of R since rmax was required to be
smaller than half of the width of a room; and for the ordering
on discs, we obtain that r1

c , iff r1 < r2.

A similar structure, with a restricted minimum size for the
discs, could be the result of representing a certain ofﬁce envi-
ronment for an application in robotics or ubiquitous comput-
ing. In a scenario of a service robot moving through an ofﬁce
environment, the level of granularity of the ofﬁces could be
used, e.g., for possible addresses in commands to the robot,
whereas the level of granularity corresponding to discs hav-
ing the diameter of the robot can serve as the level of exact
point-like locations of the robot. For planning local motion,
e.g., a robot may employ numeric relative coordinates, whose
accuracy varies with the speed of motion. Discs of larger
sizes can be used to represent such vague coordinates. As
errors add up, a computationally more expensive logic-based
reasoning process for relocalization can be triggered. The for-
malism thus allows for reasoning about qualitative long range
navigation as well as quantitative short range navigation in a
unifying manner. A similar interpretation can be given for a
ubiquitous computing scenario, as location sensing technolo-
gies differ with regard to accuracy and type of sensed location
[Hightower and Borriello, 2001].

3.3 Deﬁnition of Granularity-Dependent Concepts
Granularity-dependent and context-dependent concepts such
as spatial indistinguishability and adjacency of locations can
be described with reference to an underlying partitioning of

4This simple characterization sufﬁces for the purpose of con-
structing an example model and illustrating the concepts. For actual
applications, however, limitations of accuracy have to be considered.

IJCAI-07

566

• To which ofﬁce a certain wall belongs does not have to
be decided. The walls can be modeled as boundaries
with irrelevant extension.
• The relation of relevant overlap can be used to model
• The discrete representation of space on the level of gran-
ularity of the ofﬁces can be combined with a dense or
continuous conceptualization of space on ﬁner levels.

accessibility, and to describe the viable paths.

The example also shows how a modeling using extended lo-
cations can offer beneﬁts over a modeling based on points.
For the possible positions of a robot moving through the do-
main, only the unoccupied locations of sufﬁcient size are pos-
sible locations: the robot could be localized by a location of
at least the size of its extent, a coarser location would be the
room it is currently in. From the perspective of a perceiv-
ing mobile robot, its location on the ﬁnest level is determined
only relative to a larger surrounding context region. Its abso-
lute position in the domain can be inferred by combining this
local relative position with knowledge about its position on a
coarser granularity. Self-localization thus is meaningful only
as localization relative to a larger context.5

Given different levels of temporal granularity, the move-
ment of a robot on a trajectory can be discretized into a se-
quence of extended locations (cid:21)x1, x2, . . . , xn(cid:22) representing
the robot’s position at different times:
• on a very ﬁne level of temporal granularity, no relevant
motion is perceivable: consecutive positions xi and xi+1
are indistinguishable: xi ⊃⊂ xi+1,
• on an intermediate level of temporal granularity, consec-
utive positions can additionally be adjacent or relevantly
overlapping, depending on the velocity of the robot.
• for a coarse level of temporal granularity, consecutive
positions have to be of a coarser spatial granularity, in
order to be related.

The example of motion shows another advantage for the rep-
resentation with extended locations over the representation
by points. The different cases listed above cannot be dis-
tinguished in a point-based representation: two points on a
trajectory can only be identical or disjoint. A region-based
representation without granularity adds additional relations,
such as overlap and external connection [Galton, 2000, §6.3].
Spatial granularity, as characterized here, encoding strata of
basic sizes, adds further concepts of approximate location.
The relation ⊃⊂, like ≈, is symmetric and reﬂexive, but transi-
tive only if space is partitioned by the extended locations.

4 Outlook and Conclusions
In this article, an approach to spatial granularity was dis-
cussed in which granularity is represented as based on the
sizes of certain regions, called extended locations. The
mereotopological basis for the axiomatic characterization
allows for combination and comparison with related ap-
proaches. The axiomatized theory could be shown to be a

5Closely related to this conclusion is the question whether the
statement “I am now here” should be a tautology in a logic for spatial
and temporal context, cf. [Forbes, 1989].

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Adjacency and relevant overlap in the ofﬁce sce-
nario of Fig. 2: the hallway and the ofﬁce share a relevant
(and viable) sublocation, adjacent ofﬁces share sublocations
of irrelevant size.

the plane. So it remains to show, how these notions can be ex-
pressed in the size-based approach and in which way the two
approaches differ as regards expressiveness. The key concept
to achieve this is the distinction between relevant and irrel-
evant locations contained in a context-region: a location x
is a relevant sublocation of a context region xc if it is com-
pletely contained in the context-region and has at least grain-
size (D7).
x (cid:2) xc

def⇔ x (cid:3) xc ∧ ∀xg : xg |(cid:2) xc → xg ≤ x

(D7)
This notion can be used to distinguish between different types
of overlap between two size-congruent locations: if two lo-
cations are distinguishable only by sublocations of irrelevant
size, they can be called spatially indistinguishable ⊃⊂ (D8);
two locations relevantly overlap ⊃⊂ (D9), iff they share a com-
mon relevant sublocation, but are not indistinguishable; and
locations having only common sublocations of irrelevant ex-
tension are called granularly adjacent ⊃|⊂ (D10).

x1 ⊃⊂ x2

def⇔ x1 ≡ x2 ∧ ∀x : (x (cid:2) x1 ∨ x (cid:2) x2)
→ C(x, x2) ∧ C(x, x1)

x1 ⊃⊂ x2

def⇔ x1 ≡ x2 ∧ ¬x1 ⊃⊂ x2 ∧
∃x : x (cid:2) x1 ∧ x (cid:2) x2

(D8)

(D9)

(D10)

x1 ⊃|⊂ x2

def⇔ x1 ≡ x2 ∧ ¬x1 ⊃⊂ x2 ∧ ¬x1 ⊃⊂ x2 ∧

∃x : x (cid:3) x1 ∧ x (cid:3) x2

These relations can be used to model granularity-dependent
adjacency and vague identity of locations as well as modes
of movement of objects.
In Fig. 3, the extended locations
corresponding to ofﬁces are determined by the region an of-
ﬁce occupies including the walls and any door spaces. If the
parameter rg in the model is chosen so that the grains of the
context regions of ofﬁces are larger than the width of the walls
but smaller than the door spaces, e.g. as corresponding to the
size of possible positions of a service robot, then we obtain
that an ofﬁce is classiﬁed

• as adjacent to the ofﬁces with which it shares a wall,
• as relevantly overlapping the hallway.
The example illustrates that space can be structured with
the proposed characterization of granularity in a similar way
as with a partitioning, but without imposing unnecessary re-
strictions, thus opening additional options for representation:

IJCAI-07

567

generalization of existing approaches to spatial granularity.
The analysis in Sect. 3 illustrated that the proposed approach
gives more representational freedom for structuring applica-
tion spaces in comparison to approaches proposing a parti-
tioning of the domain.

In order to derive reasoning mechanisms, such as com-
position tables for the relations described in Sect. 3.3, the
characterization would have to be restricted with additional
assumptions about the underlying space. However, the as-
sumption that space is partitioned by the locations is a very
restrictive one, as the relations of indistinguishability and ad-
jacency would be collapsed to identity and sharing of portions
of the boundary, respectively. The example model illustrated
that a whole range of possible alternatively structured spaces
can be characterized, including spaces partitioned in a less
strict way. These alternative characterizations can be useful
to avoid ad-hoc decisions, e.g., in modeling boundaries, as
the example of the representation of the walls between ofﬁces
showed. It is likely that this increased expressiveness comes
at a price. Future work will accordingly include investigating
questions of completeness and complexity.

References
[Asher and Vieu, 1995] N. Asher and L. Vieu. Toward a
geometry for common sense: A semantics and a com-
plete axiomatization for mereotopology.
In Proceedings
of IJCAI’95, pages 846–852, San Francisco, 1995. Mor-
gan Kaufmann.

[Bittner and Smith, 2003] T. Bittner and B. Smith. A theory
of granular partitions. In M. Duckham, M.F. Goodchild,
and M.F. Worboys, editors, Foundations of Geographic In-
formation Science, pages 117–151. Taylor & Francis, Lon-
don, 2003.

[Bittner and Stell, 2003] T. Bittner and J.G. Stell. Stratiﬁed
rough sets and vagueness. In W. Kuhn, M.F. Worboys, and
S. Timpf, editors, Spatial Information Theory: Founda-
tions of Geographic Information Science, pages 270–286,
Heidelberg, 2003. Springer.

[Borgo et al., 1996] S. Borgo, N. Guarino, and C. Masolo.
A pointless theory of space based on strong connection
and congruence. In L.C. Aiello, J. Doyle, and S. Shapiro,
editors, Proceedings of KR’96, pages 220–229, San Fran-
cisco, 1996. Morgan Kaufmann.

[Casati and Varzi, 1999] R. Casati and A.C. Varzi. Parts
and places: the structure of spatial representations. MIT
Press, 1999.

[Chen and Kotz, 2000] G. Chen and D. Kotz. A survey of
context-aware mobile computing research. Technical Re-
port TR2000-381, Dept. of Computer Science, Dartmouth
College, November 2000.

[Dey and Abowd, 2000] A.K. Dey and G.D. Abowd. To-
wards a better understanding of context and context-
awareness. In Workshop on The What, Who, Where, When,
and How of Context-Awareness, as part of CHI 2000,
2000.

[Dugat et al., 2002] V. Dugat, P. Gambarotto, and Y. Larvor.
Qualitative geometry for shape recognition. Applied Intel-
ligence, 17:253–263, 2002.

[Forbes, 1989] G. Forbes.

In D. Gabbay and
F. Guenther, editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic,
volume IV, pages 463–490. D. Reidel, 1989.

Indexicals.

[Galton, 2000] A.P. Galton. Qualitative Spatial Change. Ox-

ford University Press, 2000.

[Hightower and Borriello, 2001] J. Hightower and G. Bor-
riello. A survey and taxonomy of location systems for
ubiquitous computing. Computer, 34(8):57–66, 2001.

[Hobbs, 1985] J.R. Hobbs. Granularity. In Proceedings of
IJCAI’85, pages 432–435, San Francisco, 1985. Morgan
Kaufmann.

[Kanter, 2003] T. Kanter. Attaching context-aware services
to moving locations. IEEE Internet Computing, 7(2):43–
51, 2003.

[Kosslyn, 1980] S.M. Kosslyn. Image and Mind. The MIT

Press, Cambridge, MA, 1980.

[Palmer, 1999] S.E. Palmer. Vision science—photons to phe-

nomenology. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999.

[Randell et al., 1992] D.A. Randell, Z. Cui, and A.G. Cohn.
A spatial logic based on region and connection. In Pro-
ceedings of KR’92, pages 165–176. Morgan Kaufmann,
1992.

[Schilit et al., 1994] B.N. Schilit, N.I. Adams, and R. Want.
Context-aware computing applications. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applica-
tions, pages 85–90. IEEE Computer Society, 1994.

[Schmidtke and Woo, 2006] H.R. Schmidtke and W. Woo. A
formal characterization of vagueness and granularity for
context-aware mobile and ubiquitous computing. In H.Y.
Youn, M. Kim, and H. Morikawa, editors, Proc. of the
International Symposium on Ubiquitous Computing Sys-
tems, pages 144–157, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer.

[Schmidtke, 2003] H.R. Schmidtke. A geometry for places:
Representing extension and extended objects. In W. Kuhn,
M.F. Worboys, and S. Timpf, editors, Spatial Information
Theory: Foundations of Geographic Information Science,
pages 235–252, Berlin, 2003. Springer.

[Schmidtke, 2005a] H.R. Schmidtke. Aggregations and con-
stituents: geometric speciﬁcation of multi-granular ob-
jects.
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing,
16(4):289–309, 2005.

[Schmidtke, 2005b] H.R. Schmidtke. Granularity as a pa-
rameter of context.
In A.K. Dey, B.N. Kokinov, D.B.
Leake, and R.M. Turner, editors, Modeling and Using
Context, pages 450–463, Heidelberg, 2005. Springer.

[Suppes and Zinnes, 1963] P. Suppes and J.L. Zinnes. Ba-
sic measurement theory.
In R.D. Luce, R.R. Bush, and
E. Galanter, editors, Handbook of Mathematical Psychol-
ogy, pages 1–76. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1963.

IJCAI-07

568

