Resource Constraints on Computation and Communication in the Brain

Sashank Varma

Stanford Center For Innovations in Learning

450 Serra Mall, Building 160

Stanford, CA 94305-2055

sashank@stanford.edu

Abstract

This paper contributes to the emerging literature at
the border between AI and cognitive neuroscience,
analyzing the resource constraints that shape brain
function. The brain is conceptualized as a set of ar-
eas that collaborate to perform complex cognitive
tasks. Both (1) computation within individual areas
and (2) communication between collaborating ar-
eas are viewed as resource-consuming activities.
The efficient deployment of limited resources is
formalized as a Linear Programming problem
which the brain is hypothesized to solve on a mo-
ment-by-moment basis. A model of language proc-
essing is analyzed within this framework and found
to exhibit resource utilization profiles consistent
with those observed in functional neuroimaging
studies of humans.

1 Introduction

In his 2002 AAAI presidential address, Tom Mitchell called
for a rapprochement between AI and the rapidly emerging
discipline of cognitive neuroscience. AI researchers have
begun to answer this call. Some are modeling the function
of brain areas, e.g., Dean [2005] modeled primary visual
cortex as a hierarchical Bayesian network. Others are apply-
ing classification algorithms to functional Magnetic Reso-
nance Imaging (fMRI) data to predict cognitive states, e.g.,
which word a person is thinking of [Mitchell et al., 2004].
Still others are using clustering algorithms [Dimitriadou et
al., 2004] and multi-agent approaches [Richard et al., 2004]
to find patterns in large fMRI data sets.

The research reported in this paper contributes to this
effort. It focuses on the resource constraints that shape brain
function. Specifically, the brain is viewed as a set of areas
that collaborate to perform complex cognitive tasks such as
language processing, problem solving, and spatial reason-
ing. There are limitations on the computational power of
individual brain areas and on the communication bandwidth
between different brain areas. Both kinds of limitations can
be conceptualized as resource constraints, and the brain can

be seen as allocating resources in a way that respects these
constraints while maximizing cognitive throughput.

This view is developed and evaluated below. First, re-
source constraints on brain function are formalized using the
machinery of operations research. Second, this machinery is
analyzed and three canonical patterns of resource allocation
are identified. Third, this machinery is applied to a model of
language processing. The model is shown to exhibit the pat-
terns and to account for brain activations as measured by
fMRI. Finally,
future research are
sketched.

three avenues

for

2 Formalizing Resource Constraints

Cognition is the emergent product of multiple collaborating
brain areas. It is profoundly shaped by resource constraints
on computation within individual brain areas and communi-
cation between brain areas. These resource constraints can
be formalized as a linear programming (LP) problem.

Each brain area is termed a center. Each center is an
encapsulated production system containing declarative ele-
ments and production rules. Declarative elements are lists of
attribute-value pairs annotated with continuous activation
levels. They are processed by productions, which have acti-
vation thresholds on their condition sides and whose pri-
mary action is to direct activation from one declarative ele-
ment to another modulo a weight that is either positive (rep-
resenting excitation) or negative (representing inhibition or
suppression). The control structure is fully parallel: at each
point in time, all productions are matched against all de-
clarative elements in all centers and fired. We assume a de-
composition of the brain into M centers.

A function is a primitive cognitive process, such as de-
tecting an edge or retrieving the meaning of a word. Func-
tions are abstractions that enable a higher level of descrip-
tion; each is implemented by a combination of declarative
elements and productions. We assume a decomposition of
cognition into N functions.

Each center is specialized for multiple functions, and
conversely, each function can be performed by multiple
centers. This proposal is intermediate between a pure modu-
larity that maps functions one-to-one to centers and a pure
distributivity that maps every function to every center. The

IJCAI-07

611

specialization of center i for function j is denoted Sij, where
Sij[1,). It specifies the amount of the center’s resources
(i.e., activation, the common currency of storage and proc-
essing) that are required to perform one unit of the function.
A value of 1.0 represents perfect specialization, larger val-
ues represent lesser specializations, and a value of  repre-
sents a complete inability of center i to perform function j
(because resources are limited, as we will see below).

At each point in time during task performance, there ex-
ist a number of functions to be performed. The amount of
function j performed by (i.e., assigned to) center i is denoted
Aij. The assignment problem is to determine the Aij.

The assignment problem is a constraint satisfaction
problem. One set of constraints specifies the resource de-
mands of the functions to be performed. Specifically, the
resource demands of function j are denoted Rj and the fol-
lowing constraint is enforced at all times:

M

  R j

Aij

(1)

i=1

It ensures that the resources supplied by all centers to the
function are as close as possible to the resources demanded.
Another set specifies intra-center constraints on computa-
tion within individual centers. Specifically,
the resource
supply of center i is denoted Ci and the following constraint
is enforced at all times:

N



(

j=1

Aij

 Sij

)

 Ci

(2)

It ensures that the resources supplied by the center to all
functions do not exceed its resource supply. The final set
specifies inter-center constraints on the joint resource con-
sumption of multiple centers, which are interpreted as
bandwidth limitations on communication between these
centers. The number of inter-center constraints and the na-
ture of each one (i.e., the centers whose resource supplies it
jointly constrains) are empirical matters. For ease of exposi-
tion, we assume a single inter-center constraint on the joint
resource consumption of all centers:

N



M



(

i=1

j=1

Aij

 Sij

)  CCORTEX

(3)

It ensures that the resources supplied by all centers to all
functions do not exceed the resource supply of the entire
cortex, denoted CCORTEX.

The constraints (1), (2), and (3) only partially determine
the assignment of functions to centers because they are sat-
isfied by many different assignments, e.g., Aij=0 for all i and
j. This ambiguity is resolved by defining a measure of the
goodness of an assignment, expressed as a linear combina-
tion of the Aij, to be maximized:

M

N





(
Wij

 Aij

)

(4)

i=1

j=1

Defining Wij:=1/Sij ensures that all other things being equal,
function j will be assigned to the center i most specialized
for it (i.e., whose Sij is minimal and Wij is maximal).

(1), (2), (3), and (4) define an LP problem that the brain is
hypothesized to solve at each point in time. The result is an
assignment of functions to centers that (1) satisfies the re-
source demands of functions to be performed (to the degree
possible), (2) respects resource constraints on computation
within individual centers, (3) respects resource constraints
on communication between centers, and (4) maximizes cog-
nitive throughput. The simplex algorithm is used to solve
the assignment problem.

This account of the resource constraints on brain func-
tion can be empirically evaluated via the following meas-
urement assumption: The capacity utilization of center i,
denoted CUi, is the proportion of its resources currently
being used.

N



(

j=1

Aij

 Sij

)

Ci

CUi :=

(5)

The capacity utilization of a center will be used to predict
activation (as measured by fMRI) in the corresponding brain
area. This is a reasonable assumption because the fMRI sig-
nal reflects the vascular response to the consumption of neu-
robiological resources [Logothetis, 2003].

3 Three Patterns of Resource Allocation

Solving the assignment problem produces three canonical
patterns of resource allocation. This section describes and
illustrates them in the context of a toy model. Specifically,
consider the case of two centers with equal resource sup-
plies (C1=C2=6) where the first center is more specialized
for a function 1 than the second center (S11=1 and S21=2).
Further assume that the resource demands of the function
are relatively light (e.g., R1=3). This defines the LP prob-
lem:

maximize: A11 + 1/2A21
subject to:

A11 + A21  3
A11  6
2A21  6
A11, A21  0

(objective function)
(function)
(first center)
(second center)
(default LP constraints)
depicted in Figure 1a. The constraints, shown as dashed
lines, demarcate the boundaries of the shaded feasibility
region – the set of satisfactory assignments (A11, A21). The
simplex algorithm effectively positions the objective func-
tion line, shown as a solid line, so that it touches a vertex of
the feasibility region. This vertex represents the values of
A11 and A21 that maximize the objective function. When the
resource demands are relatively light, the objective function
is maximized at a vertex that assigns the function entirely to
the well-specialized first center (i.e., A11=3 and A21=0).

3.1 Pattern 1

As task difficulty increases from low to moderate, task per-
formance consumes an increasing amount of resources. For
example, as the resource demands of the function (R1) in-
crease from 4 to 5 to 6 units, the shape of the feasibility re-
gion changes, and consequently so does the vertex at which
the objective function is maximized, as shown in Figure 1b.

IJCAI-07

612

Over this range of task difficulty, the well-specialized first
center continues to possess a resource supply sufficient to
satisfy the increasing resource demands, and therefore con-
tinues to be assigned all of the function (i.e., A21=0).

A11+A213

2A216

1

A11+

/2A21

A116

3.3 Pattern 3

The vertex that maximizes the objective function assigns 6
units to the well-specialized first center and 1 unit to the
less-specialized second center. In other words, resource de-
mands now exceed the resource supply of the first center,
and excess processing spills over to the second center.

When resource demands decrease following some peak,
performance of the function will revert entirely to the first
center. This corresponds to a transition back to pattern 1
shown in Figure 1b.

Finally, consider the case of a focal lesion to a brain area,
which is simulated by drastically reducing the resource sup-
ply of the corresponding center. As a result, even easy tasks
will result in the spillover of excess resource demands to
less-specialized centers. For example, if the resource supply
of the first center is reduced from 6 units to 2 units, then
even light resource demands (R1=3) will require recruitment
of the second center to help perform the function. This is
shown in Figure 1d, and it stands in contrast to pattern 1
shown in Figure 1a, where in the undamaged system the
same resource demands can be entirely satisfied by the first
center.

It should be noted that all patterns are bottom-up con-
sequences of solving the assignment problem on a moment-
by-moment basis. There is no executive making resource
allocation decisions in a top-down fashion.

4 Application to Language Processing

This section situates the discussion in the context of a model
of language processing. The model is shown to exhibit the
three resource allocation patterns and to provide a good ac-
count of relevant fMRI data.

The model is composed of four centers. Left posterior
superior temporal gyrus (L. STG; Wernicke’s area) and left
inferior frontal gyrus (L. IFG; Broca’s area) are the core
components of the human language network. They are well-
specialized for
lexical, syntactic, and semantic/thematic
functions. The homologous areas in the right hemisphere, R.
STG and R. IFG, also belong to the language network. They
are less-specialized for these functions (although they are
well-specialized for linguistic functions not considered here,
such as prosodic processing). The four centers collaborate to
process language. It is beyond the scope of this paper to
describe the model any further; the interested reader is di-
rected to Just and Varma (2006) for the details.

4.1 Patterns 1 and 2

The time to comprehend a sentence is an increasing function
of its length, of course, but also of its structural complexity.
For example, consider the following three sentences:

• Conjoined Actives: [clause-1The senator attacked the

reporter] [clause-2and admitted the error].

• Subject-Relative: [main-clauseThe senator [relative-clausethat

attacked the reporter] admitted the error].

• Object-Relative: [main-clauseThe senator [relative-clausethat

the reporter attacked] admitted the error].

A21

a)

b)

c)

d)

(3,0)

A11

(6,1)

A112

(2,1)

Figure 1. (a) Low resource demands. (b) Pattern 1: moderate re-
source demands. (c) Pattern 2: high resource demands. (d) Pattern
3: reduced resource supply following lesion.

3.2 Pattern 2

Next, consider a task of high difficulty. If the resource de-
mands of the function (R1) increase to 7 units, the feasibility
region will change shape yet again, as shown in Figure 1c.

IJCAI-07

613

They contain the same number of words (nine) and clauses
(two). The conjoined actives sentence concatenates the two
clauses.
Its resource demands are relatively light because
when the second clause begins, the first clause has been
completely processed, and therefore no associated declara-
tive elements must be maintained. By contrast, the other
sentences embed one clause (the “relative clause”) within
the other (the “main clause”). This imposes additional re-
source demands because the declarative elements associated
with the main clause must be maintained while the relative
clause is comprehended. The object-relative sentence is
more resource demanding than the subject-relative sentence
because the declarative elements associated with the relative
clause must be maintained deeper into this clause (until the
verb attacked) before thematic representations can be com-
puted.

Figure 2. (top) Sentence comprehension data (Just et al. 1996).
(bottom) Model capacity utilizations.

Just et al. [1996] had participants read sentences of the
three types and answer comprehension questions. They col-
lected activations in the four brain areas simulated by the
model: left and right STG and IFG. These activations are
shown in the top panel of Figure 2. There are two patterns to

notice. First, for the well-specialized left-hemisphere areas,
activation increases from moderate to high levels with in-
creasing syntactic complexity. This is an example of pattern
1 illustrated in Figure 1b. Second, for the less-specialized
right-hemisphere areas, activation is initially negligible, but
increases to a moderate level with increasing syntactic com-
plexity. This is an example of pattern 2 illustrated in Figure
1c. The capacity utilizations of the corresponding model
centers while processing the three sentence types are shown
in the bottom panel of Figure 2. (Four free parameters – the
resource supplies of the four centers – were estimated to
maximize the fit to the human data.) The model correctly
displays pattern 1 in its left-hemisphere centers and pattern
2 in its right-hemisphere centers. This qualitative corre-
spondence is confirmed by the 0.98 (p<.01) correlation be-
tween human and model performance.

4.2 Pattern 3

An often-observed phenomenon in patients with stroke-
induced lesions is contralateral takeover: when a brain area
is damaged, the functions it used to perform migrate perma-
nently to the homologous area in the other hemisphere. This
was observed in a patient tested by Thulborn et al. [1999]
who had suffered a stroke six months earlier that damaged
his L. IFG. The patient initially experienced a dense expres-
sive aphasia but subsequently recovered much of his lan-
guage function. Activation was measured in left and right
STG and IFG, the four brain areas simulated by the model,
while he read simple five- and six-word sentences. These
data are shown in the top panel of Figure 3. The patient
showed the normal pattern in STG, with much more activa-
tion in the well-specialized left area than the less-specialized
right area. Strikingly, this pattern reversed in IFG: there was
no activation in the damaged left area and substantial activa-
tion in the healthy right area. This is an example of pattern 3
illustrated in Figure 1d. Thulborn et al. interpreted this as
evidence that R. IFG had taken over the functions of the
damaged L. IFG. To simulate the L. IFG lesion, the corre-
sponding model center was stripped of its resources. The
model processed the same sentences the patient read. The
capacity utilizations of its four centers are shown in the bot-
tom panel of Figure 3. (Three free parameters – the resource
supplies of the undamaged centers – were estimated to
maximize the fit to the human data.) The model correctly
displays pattern 3, with normal left-lateralization in STG
and striking right-lateralization in IFG. Its capacity utiliza-
tions provide a good quantitative account of the observed
activations (r=0.99, p<.01).

4.3 Inter-Center Resource Constraints

The fits to the data reported thus far have been due to intra-
center resource constraints, i.e., limitations on computation
within individual centers. We turn now to inter-center re-
source constraints, which are interpreted as bandwidth limi-
tations on communication between different centers. Inter-
center constraints do not normally operate during language
processing because it recruits a relatively small number of
collaborating centers. However, they do operate when lan-

IJCAI-07

614

guage processing is paired with a second task such as spatial
reasoning because this greatly increases the number of col-
laborating centers, and therefore the joint resource demands
on the system.

The goal was to evaluate the necessity of inter-center
constraints for accounting for the Just et al. [2001] data by
comparing the fits of the base and augmented models. The
capacity utilizations of the bilateral STG and SPL centers of
the base model during the single-task and dual-task condi-
tions are shown in the middle panel of Figure 4; those of the
augmented model are shown in the bottom panel. (The free
parameters are the intra-center resource supplies of the indi-
vidual centers and, in the case of the augmented model, the
inter-center resource supply.) Qualitatively speaking, only
the augmented model correctly exhibits the observed un-
deradditivity during dual-tasking. Quantitatively speaking,
the augmented model accounts for reliably more variance
than the base model, 95% vs. 79% (p<.01).

5 Future Directions

The research described here represents a promising first step
towards formalizing the resource constraints that shape
brain function. It also suggests a number of avenues for fu-
ture exploration.

5.1 The Assignment Problem

Figure 3. (top) Lesion patient data (Thulborn et al., 1999). (bottom)
Lesioned model capacity utilizations.

For example, Just et al.

[2001] had participants per-
form sentence comprehension and mental rotation tasks
individually as single-tasks and concurrently as dual-tasks.
(The mental rotation task required rotating 3D figures to
determine whether they are the same or mirror-images
[Shepard and Metzler, 1972].) The activations in one com-
ponent of the language network, bilateral STG, and one
component of the spatial network, bilateral superior parietal
lobule, during the single-tasks and dual-task are shown in
the top panel of Figure 4. The striking result is underaddi-
tivity: the activations during dual-tasking are less than the
sum of the activations during the single-tasks (even though
behavioral performance remains at high levels).

In separate work, we developed a model of mental rota-
tion consisting of centers corresponding to bilateral superior
parietal lobule (SPL) and bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex. (The implementation details are found in Just and
Varma [2006].) The sentence comprehension and mental
rotation models were paired to form a base model of dual-
tasking. This model contains only intra-center constraints on
resource consumption within individual centers. An aug-
mented model was also constructed by adding to the base
model a single cortex-wide inter-center constraint on the
joint resource consumption of all centers.

The assignment problem is currently formalized as an LP
problem and currently solved using the simplex algorithm.
However, the centralized nature of simplex is neurally im-
plausible. One avenue for future research is therefore to
develop algorithms that solve the assignment problem in a
de-centralized manner. Such algorithms will likely lack the
optimality of simplex but will be more neurally plausible. A
number of promising candidates have been proposed by
computer scientists interested in the parallel solution of LP
problems [Alon and Megiddo, 1994; Lustig and Rothberg,
1996; Maros and Mitra, 2000] and by AI researchers inter-
ested
resource-
constrained agents [Wooldridge and Dunne, 2006; Well-
man, 1993].

computation

among

in

cooperative

5.2 Inter-Center Communication

The communications infrastructure of the human brain is
slowly being revealed by diffusion tensor imaging studies of
the white matter tracts through which neural information
flows. This infrastructure is currently modeled by inter-
center resource constraints on the joint computation of mul-
tiple centers. The benefit of this approach is a unified ac-
count of intra- and inter-center resource constraints. The
drawback is that it is conceptually too far from the point-to-
point communication network of the brain. Therefore, an
avenue for future research is to directly capture the connec-
tivity between brain areas. Luckily, this can be done within
the LP formalism. Specifically, the transshipment problem
is an LP problem for the optimal transport of goods over
routes of varying carrying capacity. By formalizing intra-
center computation as a conventional LP problem and inter-
center communication as a transshipment problem, a unified
and neurally-plausible account of resource constraints on
brain function should still be possible.

IJCAI-07

615

ference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-05), pages 938-
943, Cambridge, MA, 2005. MIT Press.

[Dimitradou et al., 2004] Evginia Dimitriadou, Markus
Bart, Christian Windischberger, Kurt Hornik, and Ewald
Moser A quantitative comparison of functional MRI
cluster analysis. Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine,
31:57-71, 2004.

[Just et al., 1996] Marcel A. Just, Patricia A. Carpenter,
Timothy A. Keller, William F. Eddy, and Keith R. Thul-
born. Brain activation modulated by sentence compre-
hension. Science, 274:114-116, 1996.

[Just et al., 2001] Marcel A. Just, Patricia A. Carpenter,
Timothy A. Keller, Lisa Emery, Holly Zajac, and Keith
R. Thulborn. Interdependence of non-overlapping corti-
cal systems in dual cognitive tasks. NeuroImage, 14:417-
426, 2001.

[Just and Varma, 2006] Marcel A. Just and Sashank Varma.
The organization of thinking: What functional brain im-
aging reveals about the neuroarchitecture of complex
cognition. CMU Center for Cognitive Brain Imaging
Technical Report CCBI-2006-1.

[Logothetis, 2003] Nikos K. Logothetis. The underpinnings
of the BOLD functional magnetic resonance imaging
signal. The Journal of Neuroscience, 23:3963-3971,
2003.

[Lustig and Rothberg, 1996] I. J. Lustig and E. Rothberg.
Gigaflops in linear programming. Operations Research
Letters, 18:157-165, 1996.

[Maros and Mitra, 2000] I. Maros and G. Mitra. Investigat-
ing the sparse simplex algorithm on a distributed mem-
ory multiprocessor. Parallel Computing, 26:151-170,
2000.

[Mitchell

et al., 2004] Tom M. Mitchell, Rebecca
Hutchinson, Radu S. Niculescu, F. Pereira, Xuerui
Wang, Marcel Just, and Sharlene Newman. Learning to
decode cognitive states from brain images. Machine
Learning, 57:145-175, 2004.

[Richard et al., 2004] Nathalie Richard, Michel Dojat, and
Catherine Garbay. Automated segmentation of human
brain MR images using a multi-agent approach. Artifi-
cial Intelligence in Medicine, 30:153-175, 2004.

[Shepard and Metzler, 1971] Roger Shepard and Jacqueline
Metzler. Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects.
Science, 171:701-703, 1971.

[Wellman, 1993] Michael P. Wellman. A market-oriented
programming environment and its application to distrib-
uted multicommodity flow problems. Journal of Artifi-
cial Intelligence Research, 1:1-23, 1993.

[Wooldridge and Dunne, 2006] Michael Wooldridge and
Paul E. Dunne. On the computational complexity of coa-
litional resource games. Artificial Intelligence, 170:835-
871, 2006.

Figure 4. (top) Dual-task data (Just et al., 2001). (middle) Base
model capacity utilizations. (bottom) Augment model capacity
utilizations.

References

[Alon and Meggido, 1985] Noga Alon and Nimrod
Megiddo, N. Parallel linear programming in fixed di-
mension almost surely in constant time. Journal of the
ACM, 41:422-434, 1994.

[Dean, 2005] Thomas Dean. A computational model of the
cerebral cortex. In Proceedings of the 20th National Con

IJCAI-07

616

