Collective AI: context awareness via communication

S. Kornienko, O. Kornienko, P. Levi

Institute of Parallel and Distributed Systems, University of Stuttgart,

Universit¨atsstr. 38, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany

Abstract

Communication among participants (agents, ro-
bots) is central to an appearance of Collective AI.
In this work we deal with the development of lo-
cal communication mechanisms for real microro-
botic swarms. We demonstrate that despite of very
limited capabilities of the microrobot, the speciﬁc
construction of communication hardware and soft-
ware allows very extended collective capabilities of
the whole swarm. We propose mechanisms provid-
ing information content and context for collective
navigation, coordination and spatial perception in a
group of microrobots.

Introduction

1
Communication is the central issue in collective systems such
as collective/swarm robotics, multi-agent systems, sensor net-
works and so on. Communication provides and supports
(among others) ”awareness” about relevant events, collec-
tive decision making and coordination in a group, execution
of cooperative activities, etc. Due to communication all ro-
bots/agents behave in a coordinated way like one ”organism”,
they can even emerge new behavior types [Kornienko et al.,
2004]. There are many phenomena that appear in this way; in
the vast literature they are denoted as collective/swarm intel-
ligence [Bonabeau et al., 1999].

In this paper we investigate the communication mecha-
nisms for large microrobotic swarm [I-Swarm, 2003 2007].
Due to very small size and limited capabilities of microrobots,
swarm robotics differs from other collective robotic systems
in a couple of essential points [Sahin, 2004]. The most im-
portant are inaccessibility of global coordinates, global per-
ception and global communication. Despite of the ”very lim-
ited intelligence” of individual microrobots, the collective in-
telligence of the whole swarm does not change essentially.
The swarm is still able for distributed spatial sensing, collec-
tive decision making, building spatial formation, coordinated
acting and so on. This swarm intelligence primarily appears
due to speciﬁc communication between robots. We are in-
terested in the following question: ”Which communication
mechanisms among microrobots do allow emerging collective
properties of a swarm ?”

Generally for AI and especially for ”swarm intelligence”
not only the transferred message is important (”I ﬁnd some-
thing”), but also the context of the message (”where is it
found”) [Doyle and Dean, 1996]. One robot cannot provide
this context, because e.g.
it does not know its own posi-
tion. Retrieving and providing this context represents also the
collective task performed during communication. However
not all communication approaches can provide the context of
information and can generally be implemented in a swarm.
In this paper we demonstrate that the well-known package-
based routing is not useful for swarms and suggest instead an
approach that ”diffuses” information with its context.

Achieving collective capabilities in real microrobotic sys-
tems, we are very limited by hardware. Therefore not all
approaches from AI domain are feasible here. The sec-
ond question of this paper is ”Which collective capabilities
a swarm are feasible by very limited communication hard-
ware ?” We demonstrate that the speciﬁc composition be-
tween multi-directional communication hardware and ”dif-
fusing” software protocols allows emerging some interesting
spatial and functional collective capabilities of a swarm.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we investigate the local communication between robots. Sec-
tions 3, 4 and 5 are devoted for describing the hardware plat-
form, logical protocols and communication context. Finally,
in Section 6 we discuss some preliminary experiments and
conclude our work.

2

Information diffusion, swarm density and
communication radius

For collective systems a communication plays the role of ner-
vous system in human body. Since microrobots in a swarm
can communicate only locally with their neighbors, such a
”swarm nervous system” can be produced only by a mech-
anism that propagates information through multiple robot-
robot connections. Parameters of a global circulation of in-
formation (like global propagation speed or global propaga-
tion time) depend on characteristics of local communication
(communication radius Rc, the number of robots within Rc).
In this section we derive this relation, which is necessary for
further development of the robot’s communication hardware.
Since parameters of local communication between robots
depend on their behavior, we differentiate three following be-

havioral cases:
1. Robots move only in small areas, so called clusters. In this
case robots are situated more or less closely to each other, so
that swarm peer-to-peer network (SPPN) is created ”automat-
ically”. The main problem is a communication between such
clusters.
2. Robots move in large areas (typical swarm scenario). Ro-
bots exchange information only when they meet each other.
The inter-cluster communication belongs to this case.
3. Part of robotic swarm purposely creates and supports the
SPPN. This is the most interesting case, that provide stable
communication in swarm (see more in Section 6).
In the further calculation we consider the most hardest case
of a large-area swarm. We can intuitively assume that the
communication radius Rc, the swarm density Dsw, the ro-
bots motion velocity v and the time t are closely related in
propagating the information. For deriving a relation between
them, we take several analogies to molecular-kinetic theory
of ideal gas, more exactly diffusion in ideal gas (by these
analogies we denote also a ”diffusion of information”). We
introduce the following notions: the sensor radius Rs, where
a collision-avoiding procedure is started; lc the length of free
path from the start of motion till the ﬁrst communication con-
tact; ls the length of free path from the start of motion till
the ﬁrst collision-avoiding contact; nc and ns are correspond-
ingly the number of communication and collision-avoiding
contacts; Sc and Ss are the area of the ”broken” rectangles
built by a motion in some time interval t with Rc and Rs. In
Figure 1(a) we sketch our consideration. Firstly, we are in-

cS

sS

5

4

200

150

100

3

2

50

1

.
c
e
s
 
,
l
a
t
o
t
t

0
5

1: v=1 , N=100
2: v=1 , N=
3: v=5, N=
4: v=5,   N=
5: v=5,   N=

50
100
50
25

sl

cR

sR2
cl

(a)

0

40

60

80

100

140

120
,cR mm

160

180

200

(b)

Figure 1:
(a) Motion path of a robot with communication and
collision-avoiding contacts; (b) Total propagation time ttotal as a
function of communication distance Rc with different values of ve-
locity v and the number of robots N.

terested in the number of communication contacts nc happen
during the motion. This value is equal to the average num-
ber of robots in the area Sc, nc = ScDsw, where Dsw is the
swarm density. We assume that the collision avoiding radius
and the robot’s rotation radius are small so that we can ne-
glect the area of fractures. In this case Sc = 2Rcυt. Dsw can
be calculated as the number of robots N in swarm divided by

the area available for the whole swarm Ssw:

Dsw =

N
Ssw → nc =

2RcυtN

Ssw

.

(1)

In the relation (1) we assume only one robot moves whereas
other are motionless. More exact relation, when all robots
move, differs from (1) only by the numeric coefﬁcient √2
(as proved by Maxwell for a diffusion in ideal gas). For the

further calculation we use nc =
. Now we have
to estimate how the information will be propagated after the
ﬁrst communication contact. This propagation dynamics is
similar to ”epidemic infection” dynamics, estimated as the
series:

Ssw

2√2RcυtN

[nc + 1] + nc[nc + 1] + nc[nc + 1 + nc(nc + 1)] + ... (2)
and written iteratively as

kn = nckn−1 + kn−1 = kn−1(nc + 1),

k0 = 1.

(3)

that is the ”standard” exponential form (nc + 1)n. We are in-
terested in the case when all robots are ”infected” (nc+1)n ≥
N or n = log(nc+1)N. From real experiments we know that
for establishing a communication contact and transmitting
messages, robots need some time pt, that can be measured
experimentally. The information transfer starts when the ﬁrst
robot ”infects” one additional robot(nc = 1); the time till the
ﬁrst infection tf irst and the total time ttotal = n tf irst + N pt
for infecting the whole swarm can be obtained as:

Ssw

Ssw

,

tf irst =

ttotal = N pt +

2√2RcυN

2√2RcυN

log2(N ).
(4)
In the performed simulations (pt = 0), the swarm areal is
800 × 650 pixels2, N = 50 with Dsw ≈ 10 pix./sec.,
Rc = 40 pix. Formula (4) gives us ttotal ≈ 52 sec.. In many
performed simulation cycles we observed ttotal between 30
and 90 sec. Formula (4) is also useful in estimating the en-
ergy needed for each robot. For example, swarm during the
running time has to propagate 100 different messages; it takes
about 2 hours in the mentioned example. So the power supply
should provide energy at least for 2 hours.

For developing a real microrobotic swarm we can take
Ssw = 1000 × 1000 mm2, N = 50 and assume ﬁrst pt = 0
(see Section 6 for the real pt). In Figure 1(b) we plot ttotal de-
pending of Rc with different values of N and v. We see, that
for the average propagation time 1 min, the Rc for N = 50
lies between 50 mm and 140 mm. Thus, for the targeted ro-
bots body of 23 mm, the communication radius Rc is of 4-5
times larger then the size of the robot.

At the end of this section we discuss such an important
point as the critical swarm density Dcrit
sw . The critical swarm
density and the ”coefﬁcient of swarm efﬁciency” (the rela-
tion between the number of robots with useful/desired and
useless/undesired activities) determine the minimal number
of robots Nmin in some areal Sws required to perform some
operation successfully. For the considered example with
the given Ssw = 1000 × 1000 mm2, ttotal = 30 sec.,
Rc = 100 mm and v = 20mm/sec. (related to the random
motion), the minimal number Nmin ≈ 29 and the critical

swarm density Dcrit
sw = 28.46−6. This relation is not exact,
because it does not involve the size of a robot into this calcu-
lation, however in the microrobotic case with Srobot ≪ Ssw,
it can serve as a good approximation.

3 Requirements and restrictions imposed on

communication in real swarms

The requirements concern choosing the transmission equip-
ment, the number of directional communication channels,
communication radius and the hardware reduction of com-
munication deadlocks. The communication equipment of a
microrobot should consume as less energy as possible and be
of small size (the robot’s size is 23x23x28 mm). Finally, the
communication equipment should include, as far as possible,
other functions, like proximity or distance measurement. The
communication radius Rc = 50 − 140 mm can be imple-
mented in the radio-frequency (RF) and infrared (IR) way.
The RF provides two-way communication channel, the
communication radius Rc is of several meters and modern
one-chip RF modules, even 802.11b/802.11g modules, con-
sume energy in mW area. However we have a serious ob-
jection against RF in microrobotic swarms. Firstly, a simul-
taneous transmission of many (80-150) microrobots leads to
massive RF-interferences. Secondly, the RF-system (with the
large Rc) transmits local information exchange between ro-
bots globally in a swarm. This local information does not
have too much sense for all robots, so that we have high com-
munication overhead in this case.

The IR communication is recently dominant in the so-
called small-distance-domain, as e.g. for communication be-
tween laptops, hand-held devices, remote control and others.
In IR domain we can choose between several different tech-
nologies, like IrDA1, 34-38 Khz PCM-based devices and so
on. Additional advantage of the IR-solution consists in com-
bining communication equipment with sensors; we can think
about proximity or distance sensors on the base of IR re-
ﬂection. The IR-solution is not new in robotic domain (see
e.g. [Kube, 1996], [Suzuki et al., 1995]), however there are
almost no solutions that combine perception, proximity sens-
ing and communication.

The IR-equipment has also the problem of interferences.
They appear, like in RF case, when several neighbor robots
transmit simultaneously. The problem of IR-interferences
can be avoided by restricting an opening angle of a pair IR-
receiver-transmitter. For four communication channels, the
opening angle of each channel is 90o. In this case we have 2-
and 3-robots IR-interferences even in the ”closest” radius (50
mm). Reducing the opening angle to 60o or to 40o allows
avoiding IR-interferences in the ”close” and ”near” radius
(100 mm) (Figure 2(a)). Since many microcontrollers have
8-channel ADC (one ADC input is used by the distance sen-
sor), we choose 6-channel directional communication (Fig-
ure 2(b)).

Directional communication is extremely important in a
swarm also from another reason. The point is that a robot

1IrDA requires additional chips, and if we think about 4-6 chan-
nels communication, this solution is not really suitable for the im-
plementation in microrobots.

has to know not only a message itself, but also the context of
this message (e.g.
the direction from which the message is
received, intensity of signal, communicating neighbor and so
on). Without directional communication hardware, we can-
not implement algorithms providing a spatial context. From
many software requirements the communication radius Rc
and the number of directional communication channels are
the most important ones. From this viewpoint, the IR is
more suitable for robot-robot communication than the RF.
The host-robot communication can also be implemented with
IR (a sensor with PCM-ﬁlter for receiving global modulated
signal). Such a signal can be thought as of a remote control
or a global information exchange between robots and host.

I

VI

“close”

robot

50mm

II

V

100mm

Deadlock

“near”

free

150mm

50% 2R Deadlocks

“far”

50% 2R Deadlocks

III

IV

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) Problem of IR-interferences in the ”close”, ”near”
(b) The sensors board with
and ”far” communication zones;
Megabitty board that supports 6-x directional robot-robot and host-
robot communication, proximity sensing and perception of surfaces
geometry.

Speaking about IR communication we have to mention
the problem of ambient light. It represents generally a very
critical issue, because it can essentially distort or even com-
pletely break IR-communication/sensing. We performed ex-
periments with luminescent lamps, ﬁlament lamps and day-
light. Even for IR-receivers with daylight ﬁlter, swarm has
to be protected against a light of ﬁlament lamps. As far as
possible, the direct daylight should be also avoided. Use
of modulated light can essentially improve communication
against ambient light, however this solution is not always ac-
ceptable/feasible.

The ﬁlament lamps can be used as a global pheromone to
control a swarm [Bonabeau et al., 1999]. When it is emitted
simultaneously with luminescent light, the robot reacts more
intensively on ﬁlament light. This effect can be utilized in
many purposes, like ﬁnding the food source, navigation or
even a quick message about some global event. This commu-
nication way does not require any additional sensors, however
should be used only as an exception, because it essentially
distorts a regular communication.

In the following we brieﬂy describe the developed hard-
ware solution for the directional IR-communication and sens-
ing. More details for hardware can be found in [Kornienko
et al., 2005]. In the hardware we do not use such popular
sensors as IS471F or Sharp’s GP2Dxxx with binary output,
because they do not assume active control needed for com-

munication. We encountered that small integrated transistor-
diode pairs like SFH9201, TCNT1000, TCRT 1000/1010,
GP2D120, QRB1134 are not suitable as distance, proximity
and communicating sensors for Rc of 130-150 mm. There
are also several problems with spectral matching of some
receiver-emitter pairs, despite they use the same wavelength.
In the tested phototransistors with 60o angle, we choose
TEFT4300 (60o, collector light current 3,2 mA, 875...1000
nm), TSKS5400-FSZ as IR-emitter for proximity measure-
ment and communication (60o, 950 nm, 2-7 mW/sr) and
GaAs/GaAlAs IR-emitter TSAL6100 (20o, 950 nm, >80
mW/sr) for distance measurement. This pair is very small
(emitter 5x5x2.65 mm and receiver 4,5xφ3 mm) so that they
can easily be integrated in the sensors board. In experiments
the current IF of IR-emitters was limited to 20 mA, that
corresponds to I/O port of the microcontroller. For control-
ling we use the Megabitty board (23×23×2 mm) with At-
mel AVR Mega 8 microcontroller with 8 kB ROM and 1 kB
RAM [Megabitty, 2005]. The sensors board and Megabitty
board are assembled in one chassis with accumulators and 2
DC motors as shown in Figure 3. The tested communication

Figure 3: The prototype of the ”Jasmine” microrobot.

speed is about 1000 bit/sec with low error rate, so that an ap-
plication of error-correction approaches is not required.

4 Communication and Intelligence: logical

protocols

After a description of the communication hardware of the mi-
crorobot, we return to our original question about Collective
Intelligence. The question is ”which degree of collective in-
telligence is still feasible in the group of microrobots ?” and
”How to implement it ?” In Table 1 we collect some ”swarm
activities” that microrobots can collectively perform. These
collective activities build a basis of swarm intelligence. We
take the most simple example of spatial orientation. Let us
assume, a robot has found a ”food source” being relevant for
the whole swarm. It sends the message ”I, robot X, found
Y, come to me”. When this message is propagated through
a swarm, each robot knows there is a resource Y at the ro-
bot X. However robots cannot ﬁnd it because they do not
know a coordinate of this ”food source”. The robot X cannot
provide these coordinates because it does not know its own
position. Therefore even for the simple collective feature of
spatial orientation, a local context of messages determines
a global capability of the whole group. Collective systems
often have many different contexts, so that we have a context
hierarchy.

Context

Spatial

Information

Functional

Swarm Capability
Spatial orientation
Building spatial structures
Collective movement
Building informational structures
Collective decision making
Collective information processing
Collective perception/recognition
Building functional structures
Collective task decomposition

N
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 Collective planning
11 Group-based specialization

Table 1: Some collective activities performed by the whole swarm.

The main point of this work is that the required context can
be processed/provided by communication. However which
level of communication can do it ? After hardware level, there
are four such levels:
level of physical signal transmission,
level of communication protocols and level of informational
structures, that require communication. In swarm-based sys-
tems we have the additional level concerned to the robot’s be-
havior for creating and supporting required communication.
the prob-
lem of communication is related to a choice of modula-
tion/transmission approaches suitable for the IR-based sig-
nal transmission. On this level such properties of signals as
strength, IR-interferences, directions can be extracted and in-
corporated into high-level protocols (it is closely related with
the robot embodiment).

1. On the level of physical

transmission,

2. Level of communication protocols concerns the propa-
gation of information in a swarm. Generally, there are only
two main ways of such a propagation:
- each robot routes communication packages from other ro-
bots without any changes (package-based communication);
- each robot processes the information from other low-level
packages and sends only its own messages further.
In the package-based communication each package consists
of a header with IDs of sender and receiver, routing informa-
tion and the package content. The package ID can be coded
by 10 bits, IDs of sender/receiver by 12 bits (6 bit each), so
the header is of 22 bits, the package content is only of 8 bits.
For recording the package history each robot needs about 900
bytes RAM only for routing 300-600 packages within a few
minutes (N = 50 robots, each sends max. 1-2 messages
each 10 sec, propagation time of 1 min.). In order to use the
(spatial) context of message (e.g. the spatial location of the
sender), the robots can follow the propagation way by using
ID-history. However since all robots are continuously mov-
ing, the propagation way does not exist a long time. In the
simulation, when a particular robot tries to achieve the source
of a message by following the propagation way, it fails in 80-
90% ! After many experiments we came at the conclusion,
that pure routing is not really suitable for propagating infor-
mation thought a swarm (however package-based communi-
cation is used for local communication between neighbor ro-
bots). Thus, the second approach represents the main way of

incorporating the information context into communication.

3,4. Levels of informational structures and speciﬁc collec-
tive behavior belong to the high level of information process-
ing in a swarm. These levels deal with optimal representa-
tion of information, a minimization of communication ﬂow,
availability of information and supporting multiple peer-to-
peer connections for a large-distance information transmis-
sion. We demonstrate some ideas in Section 6, but generally,
these levels overstep the framework of swarm-based commu-
nication.

5 Diffusion of messages context
As presented in the previous section, the context of message
cannot be extracted from the message itself. This point has
been discussed many time in collective AI community. In ”AI
world” there exist some approaches to retrieve the required
context, however the microrobots are too limited to use them.
Our proposal is that robots work with communication context
during communication.

There are many different approaches to work with mes-
sages context. One of them is to incorporate the embod-
ied information (signal intensity, direction, neighbors) into
non-routed packages. The robots during ”normal” com-
munication process this context, so that it diffuses over a
swarm. In this way a speciﬁc collective activity can be co-
ordinated/created/controlled (see Section 6).

Another approach is a pheromone-based communication,
well-known in natural [Bonabeau et al., 1999] as well as in
technical/robotic systems [Payton et al., 2001]. Pheromone-
based communication can be divided into two main groups:
with pheromone leaved on immovable objects (ground, ﬂoor
and so on) and pheromone leaved on moving objects like ro-
bots. Whereas the ﬁrst type of pheromone assumes usually
real (physical) pheromone, like chemical substances or elec-
tromagnetic marks, the second type of pheromone can also
have some virtual nature. For instance, robots exchange the
values of some variables, these variables are ”located” on a
robot and we can speak about ”virtual pheromone”.

Basic idea of pheromone-based communication is quite
simple. Let assume that the information source, robot X,
sends a message, say ”I found Y”. This message is binary,
however the robot X represents it by some integer value. This
value is maximal at the origin. Any other robot, when getting
this value, subtracts some constant and sends it further. In this
way, the far away from the source the value is propagated, the
less is its intensity. Based on this gradient every robot can
conclude about the source Y and its origin (Figure 4). In this
way not only a content of information (”something is found”)
is propagated, but also a spatial context (spatial origin of this
”something”). More generally, different temporary, spatial or
functional context can be provided by this ”ﬁeld”.

Independently of the implemented mechanism, the ”diffu-
sion ﬁeld” can be of four different types: non-gradient (used
simply for transmitting some signals), gradient (to provide
spatial context of a message), oriented (some speciﬁc direc-
tion), functional (e.g. repelling or attracting). The values of
this ﬁeld can be calculated as a function of connectivity (the
number of neighbors, see [Nembrini et al., 2002]), time, spe-

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 4: Propagation of the pheromone ﬁeld from the initial to
the ﬁnal states. (a) Initial state of pheromone ﬁeld; (b,c) Intermedi-
ate states where propagation of ﬁeld is not ﬁnished; (d) Final state
of pheromone ﬁeld, where all robots get the message and know its
spatial origin.

ciﬁc input (e.g. only robots that see something transmit a
pheromone), embodied information. Diffusion ﬁeld can con-
sist of many different subﬁelds, i.e. with hierarchical struc-
ture.

1. Diffusion of the size context. The diffusion ﬁeld is
a function of the connectivity degree: Φn+1 = f (Pi Φi
n)
where i goes over all local neighbors. The more large is the
group of robots, the more higher is the value, so that a context
is the size of the whole group.

2. Diffusion of the spatial context. The source emits
a constant value. All other robots subtract some con-
stants Ci from this value (see Figure 4): Φsource
n+1 = C1,
n) − C2 and transmit it further. Disadvan-
Φn+1 = f (Pi Φi
tage of this relation is that robots can move in clusters, so that
we can have local maximums of the diffusion ﬁeld. Instead
n, )) − C2. In this case
we can use Φn+1 = f (max(Φ1
the clusterization effect is removed (however it cannot be
completely removed from a swarm).

n, ..., Φi

3. Diffusion of the directional context. As already
mentioned, robots support directional communication. The
source emits a speciﬁc signal only in one direction. All other
robots transmit this signal also only in one direction, as op-
posite to a receiving direction (received on ”north”, send to
”south”). In this way, ”communication streets” appear, that
can be used for e.g. navigation.

4. Diffusion of the temporal context. The diffusion ﬁeld
is a function of time: Φn+1 = f (max(Φ1
n, )) − f (t).
This can be useful for coordinating some temporary event (ac-
tivities) in a swarm.

n, ..., Φi

5. Diffusion of the activity context. This kind of ﬁeld
transmits a stimulus for a speciﬁc activity. Since all robots are
heterogenous, a robot can need an assistance of only speciﬁc
robots (with some speciﬁc functionality). Field can have a
gradient and non-gradient character.

6. Multiple diffusion. The context, especially spatial one,
can be useful not only for information transfer, but also for
many other spatial operations like navigation, localization

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) Initial location of 3 different ﬁeld sources; (b) Final
distribution of 3-ﬁelds.

and so on. In the most simple form there are two or three
ﬁeld sources that are propagated in a swarm (Figure 5). Three
ﬁelds are more preferable, because in this case robots can per-
form triangulation, like GPS.

6 Preliminary experiments and discussion
We performed two series of preliminary experiments with a
small group of microrobots ”Jasmine” and the goal of collec-
tive perception and spatial information processing (Figure 6).
Some parameters and conditions of experiments and imple-

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Preliminary experiments with 10 microrobots; (a) Col-
lective perception; (b) Building a ”communication street”.

mented local protocols are collected in Table 2. The main

Parameter
Swarm areal

Signal transmission

Logical protocols
Coding/decoding
Low-level packages
Sending/receiving

Value
∼ 3.5m2, white plastic covering,
only with a luminescent light
PCM, 2 ms - logical ”1”
1 ms - logical ”0”, 1 ms - pause
with and without conﬁrmation
Atmel’s 16 MHZ Timer, divider 1024
8 bit with one parity bit
sequential on all channels
sending - 38 ms on one channel
listening - 3 ms on one channel

different at emitters and receivers). We estimate that in aver-
age ∼ 10% − 15% of the 360◦ communication areal is lost;
- nonlinear radiation patterns (Figure 2(a)). For bidirec-
tional communication contact, both radiation patterns have
to match. Comparing to one-directional communication, the
probability of bidirectional contact on any arbitrary channel
is 0.5-0.25 (according to the communication distance);
- the microrobot can send and receive only sequentially
by all channels. In order to send a message, sending and re-
ceiving channels have to be ”synchronized” (the number of a
”sending” channel has to correspond to the number of a ”lis-
tening” channel). The probability that both channels ”meet”
is 1/6*1/6=1/36.

As shown in Table 2, sending on one channel continues
∼ 38ms for 8 bit package and is repeated each 10 − 100ms
(depend on the currently executed activities). With the proba-
bility of 1/36, the communication contact will be established
within pt =∼ 1s−1, 5s and a transmission of message (with-
out conﬁrmation) with 10 robots takes N pt =∼ 10 − 15s.
The transmission of messages with the conﬁrmation proto-
col takes 20 − 60s. These data are conﬁrmed by experi-
ments [Pradier, 2005], [Fu, 2005], as shown in Figure 8(b)
and Table 3. To improve matching of nonlinear radiation pat-
terns, the robots can slowly rotate during ”looking/listening
phase”. In Table 3 we demonstrate the results of these ex-
periments for 6 robots (from [Fu, 2005]). Generally, we are

Receiver

Sender

—

6◦ per cycle
6◦ per cycle

6◦ per cycle

—

6◦ per cycle

Propagation Time
not always stable
stable, 7.36 s.
stable, 5.98 s.

Table 3: Rotation of robots during ”looking/listening phase”.

developing the second version of the sensors board, where at
least a part of problems will be solved in hardware way.

The ﬁrst series of experiments concerns collective percep-
tion. For that, all robots surround an object and scan the cor-
responding object’s surfaces (Figure 7). The scan data pro-
vide information about surface’s geometry and allow classi-
fying the type of surface (ﬂat, concave, convex; size of sur-
face and so on). The classiﬁcation data are exchanged be-

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

C
D
A

r
e
t
f
a
 
s
e
u
l
a
V

angle to
surface

peak intensity

nonlinearity:
"too close"

lS

rS

nonlinearity:
"fuzzy edge"

d

lg

rg

a

Table 2: Some parameters and conditions of the experiments.

(a)

0

-60

-40

40

60

-20

0

20
Rotation angle
(b)

problem we encountered is a poor probability of bidirectional
communication contact in the prototype’s multi-channel com-
munication system. The reasons for that are:
- appearance of communication-dead-zones (primarily cor-
ners of the chassis) and the problem of emitter-receiver opti-
cal isolation that additionally increases these zones (they are

Figure 7:
(a) Scanning of the ﬁnite-size surface; (b) The IR-
diagram for ﬁnite-size surface and the used features of IR-diagrams
relevant for identifying the surfaces.

tween robots and matched with the distributed model of the
object. However for a particular robot is important not only

to recognize an object, but also to know its own position in
relation to this object. This positional context cannot be ob-
tained from the sensor data of individual robot (Figure 7(b)).
The idea here is that during local communication, all robots
know their neighbors, and this ”embodied” information can
be used for estimating a position. When sequences of con-
nected particular observations are matched with models (e.g.
the model A-B-C-A-C-D and the connected particular obser-
vation A-B), these connected observations can be located in
the model. In this way the robots can collectively estimate
their own spatial context (see more in [Pradier, 2005]). As

f

e

i
l

e
B

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

5

N of Hypotheses
Correct estimation
Wrong class
Wrong pose

15

10
Received messages

20

25

i

s
 
,
e
m
T
n
o
i
t
a
g
a
p
o
r
P

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

30

Optimal Communication

Distance

5

10

15

20

25

Distance btw. robots, cm

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: (a) Estimation of spatial context during collective per-
ception; (b) Dependence between global information propagation
time and the distances between robots (6 robots).

demonstrated by experiments, even for uncomplete observa-
tions, this approach allows deriving the positions, as shown
in Figure 8(a).

The second series of experiments concerns the spatial in-
formation processing, like distance/area measurement over a
swarm, collective calculation of the swarm’s center of gravity
and so on. To perform these operations, the robots have to
create the SPPN so that a part of them is continuously con-
tained within the communication radius of each other. In this
way they build a collective information system, that we call a
”communication street”.

To maintain the desired distances in SPPN, the moving ro-
bots can periodically scan the neighborhood. However this
consumes energy/time and essentially distorts the currently
executed activities. The idea is to use the local communica-
tion context provided by the IR-signal strength, which nonlin-
early decreases with the distance. During PCM encoding, the
robots measure the amplitude of received from different di-
rections PCM-signals and control the motion so that to main-
tain SPPN. In this way they not only support an optimal dis-
tance for global information propagation (Figure 8(b)), but
also can collectively perform different spatial computation
(distances, areas, centers of gravity and so on). The details
of the experiments can be found in [Fu, 2005].

The performed experiments are too preliminary to be gen-
eralized, however the processing of context information dur-
ing communication works, videos can be downloaded from
the project home page (contact authors). During experiments
we encountered several undesired effects, one of them con-
sists in clusterization. This phenomenon appears when robots
fall to groups so that any communication between groups is
broken down. When the detached group is small, these robots
usually lose ”orientation” and are ”lost” for swarm.

Generally, we have shown that despite the limited hardware
capabilities of microrobots, the speciﬁc construction of hard-
ware and software parts make feasible many collective prop-
erties. We also demonstrated that some features of collective
AI can essentially be ”improved” when using context-based
communication. Context-awareness is closely related with
physical processes (e.g. IR-signals transmission) and hard-
ware/software components, i.e. with robotic embodiment.
However the concept, or at least a systematic approach, that
connects the embodiment, context-aware communication and
collective intelligence still remains open and represents future
works.

We are grateful to our students Mauricio Fern´andez Pradier

and Zheng Fu for performing several experiments.

References
[Bonabeau et al., 1999] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Ther-
aulaz. Swarm intelligence: from natural to artiﬁcial systems.
Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.

[Doyle and Dean, 1996] J. Doyle and Th. Dean. Strategic direc-
tions in artiﬁcial intelligence. ACM Comput. Surv., 28(4):653–
670, 1996.

[Fu, 2005] Zh. Fu. Swarm-based computation and spatial decision
making. Master Thesis, University of Stuttgart, Germany, 2005.
[I-Swarm, 2003 2007] I-Swarm. I-Swarm: Intelligent Small World
Autonomous Robots for Micro-manipulation, 6th Framework
Programme Project No FP6-2002-IST-1. European Communi-
ties, 2003-2007.

[Kornienko et al., 2004] S. Kornienko, O. Kornienko, and P. Levi.
About nature of emergent behavior in micro-systems. In Proc.
of the Int. Conference on Informatics in Control, Automation and
Robotics (ICINCO 2004), Setubal, Portugal, 2004.

[Kornienko et al., 2005] S. Kornienko, O. Kornienko, and P. Levi.
Ir-based communication and perception in microrobotic swarms.
In submitted to IROS 2005, Canada, 2005.

[Kube, 1996] C.R. Kube. A minimal infrared obstacle detection

scheme. The Journal for Robot Builders, 2(2):15–20, 1996.

[Megabitty, 2005] Megabitty.

http://groups.yahoo.com/group/megabitty/. 2005.

see

[Nembrini et al., 2002] J. Nembrini, A. Winﬁeld, and C. Mel-
huish. Minimalist coherent swarming of wireless connected au-
tonomous mobile robots. In Proc. Simulation of Artiﬁcial Behav-
iour, Edinburgh, 2002.

[Payton et al., 2001] D.W. Payton, M. Daily, R. Estowski,
M. Howard, and C. Lee. Pheromone robotic. Auton. Robots,
11(3):319–324, 2001.

[Pradier, 2005] M. Pradier. Collective Classiﬁcation in a Swarm of
Microrobots. Master Thesis, University of Stuttgart, Germany,
2005.

[Sahin, 2004] E. Sahin. Swarm Robotics: From sources of inspi-
ration to domains of application. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg,
Germany, 2004.

[Suzuki et al., 1995] S. Suzuki, H. Asama, A. Uegaki, S. Kotosaka,
T. Fujita, A. Matsumoto, H. Kaetsu, and I. Endo. An infra-red
sensory system with local communication for cooperative multi-
ple mobile robots. In Proc. of International Conference on Intel-
ligent Robots, pages 220–225, 1995.

