Privacy and Artificial Agents, or, Is Google Reading My Email?

Department of Computer and Information Science

Samir Chopra

Brooklyn College

Brooklyn, NY 11210

Laurence White
Rue Franklin 157
Brussels B-1000

Belgium

schopra@sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu

laurencefwhite@gmail.com

Abstract

We investigate legal and philosophical notions of privacy in
the context of artificial agents. Our analysis utilizes a nor-
mative account of privacy that defends its value and the
extent to which it should be protected: privacy is treated as
an interest with moral value, to supplement the legal claim
that privacy is a legal right worthy of protection by society
and the law. We argue that the fact that the only entity to
access my personal data (such as email) is an artificial agent
is irrelevant to whether a breach of privacy has occurred.
What is relevant are the capacities of the agent: what the
agent is both able and empowered to do with that informa-
tion. We show how concepts of legal agency and attribution
of knowledge gained by agents to their principals are crucial
to understanding whether a violation of privacy has oc-
curred when artificial agents access users’ personal data. As
natural language processing and semantic extraction used in
artificial agents become increasingly sophisticated, so the
corporations that deploy those agents will be more likely to
be attributed with knowledge of their users’ personal infor-
mation, thus triggering significant potential legal liabilities.

1

Introduction

Privacy’s philosophical history dates back to Aristotle’s
famous distinction between the public sphere of political
activity and the private sphere of domestic life. Philosophi-
cal debates since then have distinguished between descrip-
tive (what is worthy of being kept private) and prescriptive
(what is of normative value in privacy) accounts of privacy.
Of particular interest in this rich discussion [Paul et. al
2000; Schoeman, 1984; Agre & Rotenberg, 1997] is the
normative concept of informational privacy. This notion is
increasingly threatened by the colossal amounts of personal
information collected as individuals participate in online
activities that identify them, and stored in commercial on-
line databases whose access policies may not be sufficiently
respectful of individual privacy, or in insecure databases
maintained by federal, state, and local governments
[Garfinkel, 2004].

Concerns over the violation of privacy by technological
advances are not new; the first expression of concern in this
regard dates back to 1890. There is a new wrinkle in the

landscape however: the collection and use of information by
programs such as Google’s AdSense scanning technology,
which when applied to Google’s Gmail system leads to the
generation of advertisements (ads) that are relevant to iden-
tified keywords in message bodies1. Google conducts auc-
tions of each keyword, so that the highest bidders have the
right to have their ads linked to that keyword.

Google has sought to assuage concerns over this putative
violation of privacy by pointing to the non-involvement of
humans in the process. In the coming decades, we may ex-
pect increasing use of this technology and artificial agents,
such as data-miners and bots, which scan online databases
for profiling purposes. And we may see an increasing usage
of the so-called Google defense: if humans do not read your
private communications, your privacy has not been violated.
This raises a question for concerned citizens and designers
of autonomous artificial agents: to what extent should these
agents have access to personal information? Does it matter
that a human is not reading my email? Should it concern us
that information we would not entrust to a human willingly,
citing privacy concerns, is collected, stored and analyzed by
‘a mere program’? We will argue that it should; it is the
technical capacities of this program that are relevant.

The outline of this paper is as follows: in Section 2, we
argue for privacy as a moral value; in Section 3 we intro-
duce the general theory of artificial agents and attribution of
knowledge to their principals; in Section 4 we address
whether Google is ‘reading my mail’, and in Section 5 we
inquire into the legal implications for Google if that is the
case. Our conclusions are set out in Section 6.

2 The Value of Privacy

In their seminal 1890 paper “The Right to Privacy”, Samuel
Warren and Louis Brandeis argued that “political, social,
and economic changes” and “the right to be let alone” en-
tailed that the law offer privacy protection to individuals.
Responding to technological changes in the media, such as
the advent of photography, Warren and Brandeis noted the
invasion of privacy brought about by release of details per-
taining to a person’s private life. They argued that a general

1 AdSense technology is described in US Patent Applications

20040059712, 20040093327 and 20040167928.

IJCAI-07

1245

right to privacy would protect the extent to which one’s in-
nermost mental life could be shared with others, afford
“peace of mind”, and be grounded in a general right of im-
munity of the person, “the right to one’s personality” (inter-
pretable as protection of an individual’s autonomy). While
existent US law offered protection—via the Fourth
Amendment—for homes and their interiors against searches,
they argued that new, potentially intrusive, technology made
it necessary to formalize this protection under the rubric of
privacy.

This formulation of the right to privacy is known as
“control over information about oneself”; it says nothing
about the identity of the agent gaining control over informa-
tion. Thus, photographs taken by an automated camera
mounted outside someone’s home entail a loss of privacy
even if the photographs had not yet been viewed by humans:
the person inside would have had no control over the release
of this information. The ‘information leakage’ would be
enough violation of privacy; the violation would take place
at the moment the photograph was taken, not when they
were viewed. For Warren and Brandeis, the right to privacy
is a moral value worthy of protection under law, with no
concessions made to contingent violations.

To echo Warren and Brandeis’ concerns, three landmark
cases established that privacy needed protection from tech-
nological invasions. In the first electronic surveillance case,
Olmstead v. United States (1928)2, the US Supreme Court
ruled that warrants were not necessary in order for federal
agents to carry out phone-taps. The Court ruled that the
Fourth Amendment only protected against “physical inva-
sions” by law enforcement officers. Dissenting from the
majority, Justice Brandeis argued for a reconfigured notion
of privacy to accommodate new technology. In 1967, the
Supreme Court overruled this decision in deciding Katz v.
United States3, judging that tapping phone conversations in
a public phone booth was a violation of the Fourth Amend-
ment. The court ruled that there is a “reasonable expectation
of privacy” in public spaces: “[T]he Fourth Amendment
protects people, not places. [What a person] seeks to pre-
serve as private, even in an area accessible to the public,
may be constitutionally protected.” Finally, in 1995, a US
Military Court, citing the Katz decision, ruled that an indi-
vidual has a reasonable expectation of privacy in his private
e-mail, even if stored and sent using an online service4. The
right to informational privacy then, has been understood as
protecting not just against surveillance, monitoring and war-
rantless searches, but also against appropriation and misuses
of one’s communications. Again, these rulings did not make
their judgments contingent upon the nature of the agent that
violates a citizen’s right to privacy.

2 277 U.S. 438; 48 S. Ct. 564; 72 L. Ed. 944
3 389 U.S. 347; 88 S. Ct. 507; 19 L. Ed. 2d 576
4 U.S. v. Maxwell, 42 M.J. 568 (USAF Crim.App. 1995), rev'd

in part, 45 M.J. 406 (1996). However the mainstream academic
assumption is that the Fourth Amendment does not protect email
stored by third parties see, e.g., [Schwartz et al, 2005] at p. 602.

Theorizing since then has reflected this concern with in-
formational privacy5 and continues to link the notion of per-
sonal autonomy to it. [Westin, 1967] describes privacy as
the ability to determine for ourselves when, how, and to
what extent information about us is communicated to others;
while [Parent, 1983] describes privacy as, “the condition of
not having undocumented personal information known or
possessed by others”. Common to these analyses is the no-
tion of the loss of autonomy when the agents’ privacy is
breached; each problematic appropriation of an agent’s per-
sonal information takes place without his or her consent.
Westin’s analysis raises the issue of autonomous determi-
nation of the release of information, while Parent notes that
information may only be released when the individual has
itself documented it publicly. These analyses suggest a
moral wrong occurs with the uncontrolled, non-autonomous
release of information pertaining to an individual.

More recently, [Lessig, 2000] argues that the right to pri-
vacy provides a measure of dignity, and tests our intuitions
with a hypothetical situation. The US National Security
Agency (NSA) releases a worm over the Internet in an effort
to try and find a file missing from their servers. This pro-
gram enters every US resident’s computer and scans its
hard disk; if it finds the file, it sends a report to the NSA; if
not, it moves on. The program is smart enough to only use
idle CPU cycles on each machine. No intrusion then, that
bothered me, took place; nothing was disturbed; the contents
of my hard disk were not reported to the government (even
my illegal collection of copyrighted music). An artificial,
not human, agent went through my files (only their names,
not their contents); no human eyes have seen my data; yet
our intuitions pertaining to our sense of dignity and personal
autonomy are offended, for we were not asked for permis-
sion, our belongings were searched, and we were held po-
tentially suspect until searched. Privacy law finds its foun-
dations in the intuition that we experience moral injury in
situations like those in Lessig’s example.

Claims for full-blown rights to privacy then, regardless of
the nature of the agent engaged in the violation, can be un-
derstood as carrying normative weight: dignity is a moral
good, as is individual autonomy. Understanding informa-
tional privacy as an expression of autonomy [Michelfelder,
2001; Scanlan, 2001; Corlett, 2002], and dignity, in addition
to viewing it as a constitutional limitation on governmental
or corporate power, enables an understanding of it as a
moral good, worthy of protection from the assaults of the
legal and penal systems, and from changes in technological
capacities that
increase the potential for the invasive
searches of, and the increasing access to, our personal in-
formation that artificial agents will come to have. As we
will see, when an artificial agent and its principal can be
said to ‘know’ something is crucial in determining whether
a breach of privacy has occurred on its accessing our data.

5 See discussions concerning medical data e.g., [Tavani, 2004;

Lankshear & Mason 2001].

IJCAI-07

1246

3 Attribution of Knowledge held by Agents

[Chopra & White 2004, 2005] argued for a development of
legal doctrine, whereby artificial agents are assimilated to
human agents for the purposes of entering into contracts and
for the purposes of accumulating knowledge that could le-
gally be attributed (or ‘imputed’) to their principals (the
legal persons, human or corporate, on whose behalf they
act). Artificial agents, on this analysis, would be akin to
slaves under Roman law, not legal persons in their own
right, but with power to enter into binding arrangements,
and receive information, on behalf of their owners, in cir-
cumstances where their owners would be bound by those
arrangements or that knowledge.

[Chopra & White, 2005] showed that the law of imputed
knowledge, whereby the knowledge of a (human or corpo-
rate) agent gained within the scope of the agent’s employ-
ment is imputed to its principal, does not rest on a presump-
tion that the agent has carried out its duty to inform its prin-
cipal. Rather, they postulate that it is the ability of the agent
to convey the requisite information to the principal—that
knowledge is ready to hand—that is crucial. They further
argue that artificial agents, just like human ones, should be
considered to be repositories of legally relevant knowledge
on behalf of their principals, a compelling approach when
most information held by corporations is in the form of
electronic records. They suggest a distinction between elec-
tronic records, which are ready-to-hand and should be con-
sidered to be part of the knowledge of the corporation
whether or not any human agent knows their contents, and
paper records which the corporation controlling them cannot
be presumed to know the contents of, in the absence of a
human or artificial agent that does. Attribution then, does
not depend on a notional passing of knowledge up the man-
agement hierarchy; rather, attribution of knowledge held by
an agent to the principal depends on the functions granted
to the agent, i.e., the existence and scope of the agency re-
lationship.

What of ‘horizontal’ information barriers, which prevent
management from gaining access to the knowledge held by
agents lower down the corporate hierarchy? These issues are
important in medical situations, where patient confidential-
ity means that management and others not directly con-
cerned with the patient’s clinical care may have no right to
particular patients’ records. Yet the law will attribute doc-
tors’ knowledge to an employing hospital or practice, for
instance in the context of a medical negligence case. The
fact that knowledge is not ready-to-hand to the management
does not mean that it is not counted as the corporation’s
knowledge for legal purposes.

Furthermore, the corporation itself legally is attributed
with that knowledge. If, for example, the employer made a
misleading public statement about the number of patients it
had treated who had had a certain medical condition, it
could not plead in its defense its lack of knowledge of its
patients’ medical conditions. The proper response would be
for the employer to establish a system whereby patient sta-
tistics—properly anonymized—would be collected and re-
ported accurately. Hence, knowledge can be attributed from

an agent to a corporate principal even when the agent is
under an obligation not to convey the knowledge to other
agents of the corporate principal.6

4

Is Google Reading My Email?

The launch of Gmail was attended by considerable disquiet
among commentators to the effect that Google’s screening
methodology amounted to a breach of the user’s privacy.
One response was that users are free to give up their own
privacy, and are asked to do so on a regular basis, in ex-
change for receiving certain services. However, Google’s
response was instructive: there was no issue of a breach of
privacy because humans were not reading the users’ mail:7

1. Is Google reading my email?

No. Google scans the text of Gmail messages in order to filter spam

and detect viruses, just as all major webmail services do. Google…uses
this scanning technology to deliver targeted text ads and other related

information. This is completely automated and involves no humans.

However, thirty-one worldwide privacy bodies were quick
to point out:8

… a computer system, with its greater storage, memory, and associative

ability than a human’s, could be just as invasive as a human listening to

the communications, if not more so.

We agree with the privacy bodies that the mere fact that
humans are not involved is not relevant to either the legal or
moral dimensions of Google’s behavior. However, the lim-
ited functionality of the software agents used to process the
mail, and the limits on what is done with the information
extracted, gives the user sufficient comfort that intimate
details are not available for others to peruse. For many us-
ers, including these authors, the trade-offs are worthwhile.

Significantly, Google does not itself place complete faith

in the automated nature of the scanning process:9

All major email services…automatically scan email content for the

benefit of users. When email messages are fully protected from un-

wanted disclosure, the automatic scanning of email does not amount to
a violation of privacy. [emphasis added]… [D]elivering information

gathered through email scanning to a third party would be a violation of

privacy. Google does not do this. Neither email content nor any personal

information is ever shared with other parties...

Google then, implicitly acknowledges that, however auto-
mated the process, if details were forwarded on to third par-
ties, a violation of privacy would occur. Thus, Google rec-
ognizes that the automated nature of the process, while of
comfort to users who are grateful their personal messages
are not being read by human strangers, is not a defense to

6 In this respect, corporate principals may be different than

other kinds of principal. See [Langevoort, 2003]

7 http://mail.google.com/mail/help/about_privacy.html
8 http://www.privacyrights.org/ar/GmailLetter.htm
9 http://mail.google.com/mail/help/more.html

IJCAI-07

1247

the charge of a violation of privacy. Their defense is that no
onward disclosure takes place. However, the fact that the
software agents cannot do anything more with the informa-
tion extracted than generate advertisements to place along-
side those mails is not, by itself, sufficient to dispel the legal
and ethical dilemmas at play.

Right now, Google’s system is able to identify users who
have an interest—innocent or otherwise—in terrorism, Na-
zism or child pornography. Many people interested in these
topics would have innocent motives, whether they are aca-
demics, law enforcement officials or curious citizens. But a
small but relatively high percentage (compared with the
total user group) would have a less innocent interest. Infor-
mation of this type is a valuable commodity in a world
gripped by fears of terrorism and Internet pedophilia. Goo-
gle was recently ordered by the US District Court to hand
over anonymized information about URLs returned by user
searches,10 and it and other online companies have been
asked by the US Justice Department to retain records of
users’ search queries for as long as two years.11

If Google were to find itself the subject of a valid sub-
poena relating to email content, and the court were to find
the request not over-broad, it would be of no comfort to
users that no human had read their mail. Google notes that it
is subject to authorized requests for information:12

Many of the concerns around Gmail have centered on the use of auto-

matic scanning technology to deliver relevant ads and related informa-
tion….These concerns are misdirected. Automatic scanning technology

alone does not make it any easier for a government to obtain or access

your…private information. …Google does…comply with…search war-

rants, court orders, or subpoenas seeking account information. These

same processes apply to all law-abiding companies….[T]he primary

protections you have against intrusions by the government are the laws
that apply to where you live. [Emphasis added]

Google’s assertion emphasized above is questionable. While
the huge Gmail databases could be queried under a sub-
poena using custom-built filters to track down ‘bad guys’,
Gmail’s development work is self-evidently eliminating the
need to custom-build equivalent filters, and accelerating the
development of more sophisticated filters that can build on
their functionality.

So, Is Google reading my mail? At present, we conclude
not: AdSense software does not currently appear to possess
the semantic analysis capacity that we could call ‘reading’.
We would argue it knows what we are talking about and in
some circumstances that may be compromising enough. But
it does not, crucially, appear to know what we are saying
and what emotions we are expressing about what we are
talking about.

Google could however, continue to refine its software’s
sophistication, so that the semantic content of the mails be-
ing scanned becomes increasingly known to the software

10 United States v Google, Inc., 234 F.R.D. 674.
11 http://tinyurl.com/f5u5q
12 Google Inc., ‘More on Gmail and privacy’, note 9, op. cit.

deployed. Its system might categorize mail according to
what the mail was about, and which emotion concerning the
subject matter of the email was being expressed. Advertisers
might find this useful. More invasively, Google might want
to build a profile of users’ tastes, habits and characteristics
(such as sex, race, religion, income); advertisers would find
that kind of information interesting too. When that technol-
ogy eventuates, it would be natural to say that Google is
‘reading’ my mail, just as we speak of computers ‘knowing’
that summer time has started. Intentional attributions in the
former case are even more plausible than the latter.

5 Legal Implications for Google

Even if Google could then be said to be ‘reading’ its users’
mail in a loose sense, it would not attain the level of seman-
tic understanding of the mail that a human would. Never-
theless, the fact that Google has some (if not complete)
knowledge of the contents of its users’ emails has potential
legal implications, which need to be kept in mind by de-
signers of artificial agents.

Firstly, ‘reading’ its users’ mail could have legal implica-
tions for Google under a US and a Californian statute relat-
ing to wiretapping. The US Wiretap Act13 criminalizes a
person who “intentionally intercepts” any “electronic com-
munication”, subject to certain exceptions14, and who sub-
sequently uses or discloses the contents of the electronic
communication, having reason to know that the information
was obtained in violation of the provision15. It also provides
for civil damages for a person whose electronic communi-
cation is intercepted, disclosed, or intentionally used in vio-
lation of the chapter.16

It has been suggested [Miller, 2005] that Google’s de-
ployment of the AdSense technology in its Gmail service
could violate the Wiretap Act as the scanning of each email
on its first opening would constitute an ‘interception’ for the
purposes of the Act.17 It could also be argued that its use of
the contents of an email by the AdSense program would be
a use by a person having reason to know that the informa-
tion was obtained in violation of the provision, contrary to
the statute.

However, there is a specific exception in the Wiretap Act
where “one of the parties to the communication has given
prior consent to such interception”.18 Google could argue
that it is protected by the consent that its users give to its
terms of use. But, as [Miller, 2005] points out, Google’s
terms of use are made known after the user has signed up to
the Google account, and its privacy policies, which can be
accessed before registration, are not specific on the issue.
So, arguably, Google is intercepting its users’ emails with-
out their consent. Nevertheless, it seems that its users are

13 18 USC Chapter 119—Wire And Electronic Communica-

tions Interception And Interception Of Oral Communications

14 18 USC § 2511(1)(a)
15 18 USC § 2511(1)(c) and (d)
16 18 USC § 2520(a)
17 United States v Councilman (2005) 418 F.3d 67.
18 18 USC § 2520(2)(d)

IJCAI-07

1248

content to trade-off the loss of privacy suffered for the con-
venience of a capacious, free online email storage system.
Implicit consent or consent by conduct might well be found
by a court that had to decide the issue. Were the issue to
become a critical one Google could review its registration
process to ensure adequate consent was obtained.

One privacy interest that is not protected by this conclu-
sion, however, is that of the sender of email to a Gmail ac-
count. Unless it is assumed that all senders are aware of the
details of Google’s AdSense software, it seems there would
be no protection for the sender of an email to a Gmail ac-
count from having her mail ‘read’ by Google.

Once opened, email retained on the Gmail server may19
be subject to a separate body of law relating to unauthorized
access to stored electronic communications in the facilities
of an electronic communications service provider.20 [Miller,
2005] argues that Google would be in danger of violating
this rule. However, even if this body of law is applicable,
there are defenses that would be potentially applicable to
Google where the conduct complained of is authorized by:

• ‘the person or entity providing a[n] … electronic com-

munications service’; or

• ‘a user of that service with respect to a communication

of or intended for that user’21.

While [Miller, 2005] argues that the first of these excep-
tions is too broad, it would seem to be squarely applicable
on the law as it stands. Furthermore, Google could argue
that it has the authorization of its users to engage in scan-
ning. On this point, the argument about consent set out
above would be equally applicable.

California Penal Code § 631 establishes expansive pro-
tections for “communications”, which includes e-mail mes-
sages. This provision establishes a criminal offence where
any person:

…willfully and without the consent of all parties to the communication,

or in any unauthorized manner, reads, or attempts to read, or to learn

the contents or meaning of any message, report, or communication

while the same is in transit or passing over any wire, line, or cable, or is

being sent from, or received at any place within this state; or who uses,
or attempts to use, in any manner, or for any purpose, or to communi-

cate in any way, any information so obtained, … [emphasis added]

Central to any argument that Google is in violation of the
provision is the proposition that Google is ‘reading or
learning the contents or meaning of any message’ within
Gmail.

On 3rd May 2004, the Electronic Privacy Information
Centre (EPIC) wrote—on behalf of two other privacy orga-
nizations and itself—to California Attorney General Lokyer

arguing that Google was in breach of §631(a).22 We agree
with the EPIC that Google should be treated as ‘learning the
contents’ of the mails in the Gmail system and therefore in
prima facie violation of the statute. Further, it appears to be
using information so obtained, again in prima facie viola-
tion of the statute. If the AdSense technology is developed
further, Google may violate the prohibition against ‘reading’
its users’ mail. The provision raises a host of legal issues
that would need to be demonstrated in practice in order to
prove a violation on the part of Google. For example,
whether the email was in ‘transit’ for the purposes of the
provision, and whether senders had consented to the appli-
cation of AdSense technology. In the event, the Californian
Attorney-General failed to give any definitive response to
the allegations therein.23

Leaving aside questions of liability under these particular
statutes, there is the issue of potential liability for knowledge
that Google might gain from users' mail. Let us suppose that
Google’s AdSense semantic extraction technology contin-
ued to be developed. Suppose the system becomes aware,
not only of what my email is about, what emotion or attitude
is being expressed, but starts to model in detail what is be-
ing said. Such a system could become a kind of ‘personal
assistant’, managing my diary and automatically answering
some emails. In such a situation we would find it com-
pletely natural to say the system was ‘reading’ my mail. But
the knowledge gained by such a system might lead Google
to gain ‘unwanted’ knowledge.

Suppose, for example, that terrorists detonate a weapon of
mass destruction in a major city causing great loss of life,
that the terrorists used Gmail to plot the attack, and the ‘per-
sonal assistant’ functionality was switched on. Let us also
suppose (contrary to current fact) that Google was subject to
a law which required all persons (including companies) to
report knowledge of intended terrorism to the authorities.
(In some jurisdictions, a person who merely knows of an
intended act of treason is required to inform the authorities
and commits a crime if she fails to do so; in the US, an ad-
ditional act of concealment is currently required.24)

In this scenario, on the legal analysis above, Google
could be attributed with knowledge gained by its agent that
a terrorist plot had been planned: a failure to warn the
authorities of such a plot could, we maintain, be cause for
prosecution of Google itself. Furthermore, if Google failed
to issue a warning about a planned terrorist attack, the firm
might even be sued in a civil action by the families of the
dead, by injured survivors and by owners of damaged prop-
erty, for breach of its statutory duty to warn the authorities.

Thus, if firms such as Google wish to ‘read’ users’ mail,
they would (absent shield laws such as are put in place for
‘common carriers’) need to establish systems whereby sus-
picious mails are routinely alerted to the police and other
authorities. As in the example of medically confidential

19 There is a body of case law that holds that only an Internet
service provider is capable of the provision of an ‘electronic com-
munication service’ [Goldberg, 2005]. If true, webmail services
would not qualify, and the prohibition would not apply.

20 18 USC § 2701 et seq.
21 18 USC § 2701(c)(1) and (2)

22 See http://www.epic.org/privacy/gmail/agltr5.3.04.html.
23 See http://www.epic.org/privacy/gmail/caagack.pdf
24 Criminal Code (Australia) s. 9A(2)(b); this is a crime at

common law in the UK. Compare 18 USC § 2382.

IJCAI-07

1249

information, the fact that the information should not ordi-
narily25 be shared with employees of Google does not mean
it can not be legally attributed to Google. However, requir-
ing Google to have the capacity to warn of possible terrorist
offences would require Google to re-engineer its systems so
as to better suit it to a quasi-law enforcement role.

We acknowledge that resolution of the policy question
whether this would be justified would depend not only on
legal notions of attribution of knowledge, but as well on
policy and cost-benefit grounds. It might be resolved in
legislatures rather than in courts, given the stakes involved.
Such a fundamental policy question would need to be sensi-
tive to issues such as the costs of building such an alert sys-
tem, whether building such as system would be effectual
(given the ability of terrorists to set up email accounts with-
out such intrusive scanning and their access to strong en-
cryption), and so on. One defensive strategy Google might
employ would be to design the system in such a way that the
‘personal assistant’ functionality was exclusively the agent
of the user and not of Google itself. The law of attribution in
cases of dual agency is a very complex area and outside the
scope of this paper. We hope to address it in a future work.

6 Conclusion

We have a provided a legal and philosophical analysis of
issues regarding access to our personal data by artificial
agents and its implications for our privacy. After arguing for
the moral value of privacy, we pointed out how the concepts
of legal agency and attribution of knowledge gained by
agents to their principals are crucial
to understanding
whether a violation of privacy has occurred. Designers of
artificial agents which access users’ personal information or
private communications need to be mindful of possible pri-
vacy implications: the more sophisticated their systems be-
come, the more likely it is that corporations that deploy
those agents will be attributed with knowledge of their us-
ers’ personal information, possibly triggering significant
legal liability. As natural language processing and semantic
extraction used in artificial agents becomes increasingly
sophisticated, it will be harder to use the Google defense;
that no humans are involved in ‘reading’ our email does not
mean that our privacy has not been, and can not be, violated.

References

[Agre and Rotenberg, 1997] P. Agre and M. Rotenberg,
(Eds.). Technology and Privacy: The New Landscape.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1997.

[Chopra and White, 2004] Samir Chopra and Laurence
White. Artificial Agents – Personhood in Law and Phi-
losophy. Proceedings of ECAI 2004, IOS Press, Amster-
dam, Netherlands, 635–639, 2004. .

[Chopra and White, 2005] Samir Chopra and Laurence
White. Attribution of Knowledge to Artificial Agents

25 (i.e., in the absence of a duty to inform the authorities)

and their Principals. Proceedings of IJCAI 2005, Profes-
sional Book Center, 1175-1180, 2005.

[Corlett, 2002] Angelo J Corlett. The Nature and Value of
the Moral Right to Privacy. Public Affairs Quarterly,
16(4):329–350, 2002.

[Garfinkel, 2004] Simson Garfinkel. Database Nation: The
Death of Privacy in the 21st Century. O'Reilly, Sebas-
topol, 2004.

[Goldberg, 2005] M.A. Goldberg. The Googling of Online
Privacy: Gmail, Search–Engine Histories and the New
Frontier of Protecting Private information on the Web.
Lewis & Clark Law Review, 9:249–272, Spring 2005.

[Hollander and Salzedo, 2004] Charles Hollander and
Simon Salzedo. Conflicts of Interest and Chinese Walls
(2nd Edition). Sweet & Maxwell, London, 2004.

[Langevoort, 2003] Donald C. Langevoort. Agency law
Inside the Corporation: Problems of Candor and Knowl-
edge. University
of Cincinnati Law Review,
71:1187–1231, Summer, 2003.

[Lankshead and Mason, 2001] Gloria Lankshead and David
Mason. Technology and Ethical Dilemmas in a Medical
Setting: Privacy, Professional Autonomy, Life and
Death. Ethics
Technology,
3(3):225–235, 2001.

Information

and

[Lessig, 2000] Lawrence Lessig. Code and Other Laws of

Cyberspace. Basic Books, New York, 2000.

[Michelfelder, 2001] Diane P. Michelfelder. The Moral
Value of Informational Privacy in Cyberspace. Ethics
and Information Technology, 3(2):129–135, 2001.

[Miller, 2005] J.I. Miller. “Don’t Be Evil”: Gmail’s Rele-
vant Text Advertisements Violate Google’s Own Motto
and Your E–mail Privacy Rights. Hofstra Law Review,
33:1607–1641, Summer, 2005.

[Paul et al., 2000], J. Paul, F. Miller, E. Paul, (Eds.). The
Right of Privacy. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 2000.

[Scanlan, 2001] Michael Scanlan. Informational Privacy and
Moral Values. Ethics and Information Technology,
3(1):3–12, 2001.

[Schoeman, 1984] F. Schoeman (Ed.). Philosophical Di-
mensions of Privacy: An Anthology. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, 1984.

[Schwartz et al, 2005] Aris Schwartz, Deirdre Mulligan,
Indrani Mondal. Storing Our Lives Online: Expanded
Email Storage Raises Complex Policy Issues. I/S: A
Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society.
1:597–617, Spring/Summer, 2005.

[Tavani, 2004] Herman T Tavani. Genomic Research and
Data–Mining Technology: Implications for Personal Pri-
vacy and Informed Consent. Ethics and Information
Technology. 6(1): 15–28, 2004.

IJCAI-07

1250

