Sharing the Road: Autonomous Vehicles Meet Human Drivers

Kurt Dresner and Peter Stone
Department of Computer Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin

1 University Station C0500
Austin, Texas 78712-0233

{kdresner,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu

http://www.cs.utexas.edu/∼{kdresner,pstone}

Abstract

In modern urban settings, automobile trafﬁc and
collisions lead to endless frustration as well as sig-
niﬁcant loss of life, property, and productivity. Re-
cent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence suggest that
autonomous vehicle navigation may soon be a real-
ity. In previous work, we have demonstrated that
a reservation-based approach can efﬁciently and
safely govern interactions of multiple autonomous
vehicles at intersections. Such an approach allevi-
ates many traditional problems associated with in-
tersections, in terms of both safety and efﬁciency.
However, the system relies on all vehicles being
equipped with the requisite technology — a restric-
tion that would make implementing such a sys-
tem in the real world extremely difﬁcult.
In this
paper, we extend this system to allow for incre-
mental deployability. The modiﬁed system is able
to accommodate traditional human-operated vehi-
cles using existing infrastructure. Furthermore, we
show that as the number of autonomous vehicles on
the road increases, trafﬁc delays decrease monoton-
ically toward the levels exhibited in our previous
work. Finally, we develop a method for switch-
ing between various human-usable conﬁgurations
while the system is running, in order to facilitate an
even smoother transition. The work is fully imple-
mented and tested in our custom simulator, and we
present detailed experimental results attesting to its
effectiveness.

1 Introduction
In modern urban settings, automobile trafﬁc and collisions
lead to endless frustration as well as signiﬁcant loss of
life, property, and productivity. A recent study of 85 U.S.
cities [Texas Transportation Institute, 2004] put the annual
time spent waiting in trafﬁc at 46 hours per capita, up from
16 hours in 1982. A recent report puts the annual soci-
etal cost of automobile collisions in the U.S. at $230 bil-
lion [National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, 2002].
Meanwhile, advances in artiﬁcial intelligence suggest that au-
tonomous vehicle navigation may soon be a reality. Cars
can now be equipped with features such as adaptive cruise
control, GPS-based route planning [Rogers et al., 1999;

Schonberg et al., 1995], and autonomous steering [Pomer-
leau, 1993]. As more and more cars become autonomous, the
possibility of autonomous interactions among multiple vehi-
cles becomes a more realistic possibility.

Multiagent Systems (MAS) is the subﬁeld of AI that aims
to provide both principles for construction of complex sys-
tems involving multiple agents and mechanisms for coordi-
nation of independent agents’ behaviors [Wooldridge, 2002].
In previous work, we demonstrated a novel MAS-based ap-
proach to alleviating trafﬁc congestion and collisions, specif-
ically at intersections cite2005aamas-dresner. However, the
system relied on all vehicles being equipped with the requi-
site technology — a restriction that would make implement-
ing such a system in the real world extremely difﬁcult.

This paper makes two main contributions. First, we show
how to augment this intersection control mechanism to al-
low use by human drivers with minimal additional infrastruc-
ture. Second, we show that this hybrid intersection control
mechanism offers performance and safety beneﬁts over tradi-
tional trafﬁc light systems. Thus, implementing our system
over an extended time frame will not adversely affect over-
all trafﬁc conditions at any stage. Furthermore, we show that
at each stage the mechanism offers an incentive for individ-
uals to use autonomous-driver-agent-equipped vehicles. Our
work is fully implemented and tested in a custom simulator
and detailed experimental results are presented.
2 Reservation System
Previously, we proposed a reservation-based multi-agent
approach to alleviating trafﬁc,
intersec-
tions [Dresner and Stone, 2005]. This system consists of two
types of agents: intersection managers and driver agents. For
each intersection, there is a corresponding intersection man-
ager, and for each vehicle, a driver agent. Intersection man-
agers are responsible for directing the vehicles through the
intersection, while the driver agents are responsible for con-
trolling the vehicles to which they are assigned.

speciﬁcally at

To improve the throughput and efﬁciency of the system,
the driver agents “call ahead” to the intersection manager and
request space-time in the intersection. The intersection man-
ager then determines whether or not these requests can be
met based on an intersection control policy. Depending on
the decision (and subsequent response) the intersection man-
ager makes, the driver agent either records the parameters of
the response message (the reservation) and attempts to meet

IJCAI-07

1263

them, or it receives a rejection message and makes another
request at a later time. If a vehicle has a reservation, it can re-
quest that its reservation be changed or can cancel the reserva-
tion. It also sends a special message when it ﬁnishes crossing
the intersection indicating to the intersection manager that it
has done so.

The interaction among these agents is governed by a shared
protocol [Dresner and Stone, 2004a]. In addition to message
types (e.g. REQUEST, CONFIRM, and CANCEL), this pro-
tocol includes some rules, the most important of which are
(1) a vehicle may not enter the intersection unless it is within
the parameters of a reservation made by that vehicle’s driver
agent, (2) if a vehicle follows its reservation parameters, the
intersection manager can guarantee a safe crossing for the ve-
hicle, and (3) a driver agent may have only one reservation at
a time. While some may argue that insisting a vehicle ad-
here to the parameters of such a reservation is too strict a re-
quirement, it is useful to note that vehicles today are already
governed by a similar (although much less precise) protocol;
if a driver goes through a red light at a busy intersection, a
collision may be unavoidable. Aside from this protocol, no
agent needs to know how the other agents work — each ve-
hicle manufacturer (or third party) can program a separate
driver agent, each city or state can create its own intersection
control policies (which can even change on the ﬂy), and as
long as each agent adheres to the protocol, the vehicles will
move safely through the intersection. This system is a true
multiagent system, integrating heterogeneous, complete, au-
tonomous agents.

2.1 First Come, First Served (FCFS)
To determine if a request can be met, the intersection man-
ager uses what we call the “ﬁrst come, ﬁrst served” (FCFS)
intersection control policy which works as follows:

• The intersection is divided into a grid of n × n tiles, where n

is called the granularity.

• Upon receiving a request message, the policy uses the parame-
ters in the message to simulate the journey of the vehicle across
the intersection. At each time step of the simulation, it deter-
mines which tiles the vehicle occupies.

• If throughout this simulation, no required tile is already re-
served, the policy reserves the tiles for the vehicle and conﬁrms
the reservation. Otherwise, it rejects it.

We name the policy based on the fact that it responds to ve-
hicles immediately when they make a request, conﬁrming or
rejecting the request based on whether or not the space-time
required by the vehicle is already claimed. If two vehicles
require some tile at the same time, the vehicle which requests
the reservation ﬁrst is given the reservation (provided there
are no conﬂicts in the rest of the required space-time). Fig-
ure 1 shows a successful reservation (conﬁrmed) followed by
an unsuccessful reservation (rejected).

Our previous work demonstrated that an intersection man-
ager using the FCFS policy enabled vehicles to cross the
intersection while experiencing almost no delay (increase
in travel time over optimal) [Dresner and Stone, 2004b;
2005]. When compared with a standard trafﬁc light, the
FCFS policy not only decreased delay, but also tremendously
increased the throughput of the intersection. For any realistic

(a) Successful

(b) Rejected

Figure 1: A granularity-8 FCFS policy. In 1(a), vehicle A’s re-
quest reserves tiles at time t. In 1(b), vehicle B’s request is rejected
because it requires a tile used by A at t.

intersection control policy, there exists an amount of trafﬁc
for which vehicles arrive at the intersection more frequently
than they can leave the intersection. At this point, the average
delay experienced by vehicles travelling through the intersec-
tion grows without bound — each subsequent vehicle will
have to wait longer than all the previous cars. The point for
which this occurs in the FCFS policy is several times higher
than for the trafﬁc light.
2.2 Other Intersection Control Policies
While the reservation system as originally proposed [Dres-
ner and Stone, 2004b] uses only the FCFS policy, it can ac-
commodate any intersection control policy that can make a
decision based on the parameters in a request message. This
includes policies that represent familiar intersection control
mechanisms like trafﬁc lights and stop signs. Because the
reservation system can behave exactly like the most common
modern-day control mechanisms, the reservation mechanism
can perform as well as current systems, provided it uses a
reasonable control policy.

Trafﬁc lights are a ubiquituous mechanism used to control
high-trafﬁc intersections. In our previous work, we describe
a policy that emulates real-life trafﬁc lights by maintaining a
model of how the lights would be changed, were they to ex-
ist. We name this policy TRAFFIC-LIGHT. Upon receiving a
request message, the policy determines whether the light cor-
responding to the requesting vehicle’s lane would be green. If
so, it sends a conﬁrmation, otherwise, it sends a rejection. In
this paper, we extend this work to include a new policy that
covers the area between TRAFFIC-LIGHT and FCFS, thereby
enabling interoperability with human drivers as well as pro-
viding a smooth transition as autonomous vehicles become
more prevalent.

3 Incorporating Human Users
While an intersection control mechanism for autonomous ve-
hicles will someday be very useful, there will always be peo-
ple who enjoy driving. Additionally, there will be a fairly
long transitional period between the current situation (all
human drivers) and one in which human drivers are a rar-
ity. Even if switching to a system comprised solely of au-
tonomous vehicles were possible, pedestrians and cyclists
must also be able to traverse intersections in a controlled and
safe manner. For this reason, it is necessary to create inter-
section control policies that are aware of and able to accom-
modate humans, whether they are on a bicycle, walking to
the corner store, or driving a “classic” car for entertainment
purposes. Allowing both humans and autonomous vehicles

IJCAI-07

1264

in the same intersection at the same time presents an inter-
esting technical challenge. In this section we explain how we
have extended the FCFS policy and reservation framework to
allow for human drivers.

3.1 Using Existing Infrastructure
To add human drivers, we ﬁrst need a reliable way to com-
municate information to them. Fortunately, we can use a
system that drivers already know and understand — trafﬁc
lights. The required infrastructure is already present at many
intersections and the engineering and manufacturing of trafﬁc
light systems is well developed. For pedestrians and cyclists,
standard “push-button” crossing signals can be used that will
give enough time for a person to cross as well as alerting the
intersection manager to their presence.

3.2 Light Models
If real trafﬁc lights are going to be used to communicate to hu-
man drivers, they will need to be controlled and understood
by the intersection manager. Thus, we add a new component
to each intersection control policy, called a light model. This
model controls the actual physical lights as well as provid-
ing information to the policy with which it can make deci-
sions.
In more complicated scenarios, the light model can
be modiﬁed by the control policy, for example, in order to
adapt to changing trafﬁc conditions. The lights are the same
as modern-day lights: red (do not enter), yellow (if possible,
do not enter; light will soon be red), and green (enter). Each
control policy needs to have a light model so that human users
will know what to do. For instance, the light model that would
be used with ordinary FCFS would keep all the lights red at
all times, informing humans that at no time is it safe to enter.
The TRAFFIC-LIGHT policy, on the other hand, would have
lights that corresponded exactly to the light system the policy
is emulating. Here, we describe a few light models used in
our experiments.

ALL-LANES
In this model, which is very similar to some current traf-
ﬁc light systems, each direction is successively given green
lights in all lanes. Thus, all north trafﬁc (turning and going
straight) is given green lights while the east, west, and south
trafﬁc all have red lights. The green lights then cycle through
the directions. Figure 2 shows a graphical depiction of this
light model.

Figure 2: The ALL-LANES light model. Each direction is given all
green lights in a cycle: north, east, west, south. During each phase,
the only available paths for autonomous vehicles are right turns.
SINGLE-LANE
In the SINGLE-LANE light model, the green lane rotates
through the lanes one at a time instead of all at once. For
example, the left turn lane of the north trafﬁc would have a
green light, while all other lanes would have a red light. Next,
the straight lane of the north trafﬁc would have a green light,

then the right turn. Next, the green light would go through
each lane of east trafﬁc, and so forth. The ﬁrst half of the
model’s cycle can be seen in Figure 3. This light model does
not work very well if most of the vehicles are human-driven.
However, we will show that it is very useful for intersections
which control mostly autonomous vehicles but also need to
handle an occasional human driver.

Figure 3: The ﬁrst half-cycle of the SINGLE-LANE light model.
Each lane is given a green light, and this process is repeated for each
direction. A small part of the intersection is used by turning vehicles
at any given time.

3.3 The FCFS-LIGHT Policy
In order to obtain some of the beneﬁts of the FCFS policy
while still accommodating human drivers, a policy needs to
do two things. First, if a light is green, it must ensure that it is
safe for any vehicle (autonomous or human-driven) to drive
through the intersection in the lane the light regulates. Sec-
ond, it should grant reservations to driver agents whenever
possible. This would allow autonomous vehicles to move
through an intersection where a human driver couldn’t —
similar to a “right on red”, but extended much further to other
safe situations.

The policy we have created which does both of these is
called FCFS-LIGHT. As with FCFS, the intersection is di-
vided into a grid. When it receives a request, FCFS-LIGHT
immediately grants a reservation if the corresponding light
will be green at that time. Otherwise, it simulates the vehi-
cle’s trajectory as in FCFS. If throughout the simulation, no
required tile is reserved by another vehicle or in use by a lane
with a green light the policy reserves the tiles and conﬁrms
the reservation. Otherwise, the request is rejected.

Off-Limits Tiles
Unfortunately, simply deferring to FCFS does not guaran-
tee the safety of the vehicle. If the vehicle were granted a
reservation that conﬂicted with another vehicle following the
physical lights, a collision could easily ensue. To determine
which tiles are in use by the light system at any given time,
we associate a set of off-limits tiles with each light. For exam-
ple, if the light for the north left turn lane is green (or yellow),
all tiles that could be used by a vehicle turning left from that
lane are off-limits. While evaluating a reservation request,
FCFS also checks to see if any tiles needed by the requesting
vehicle are off limits at the time of the reservation. If so, the
reservation is rejected. The length of the yellow light is ad-
justed so that a vehicle entering the intersection has enough
time to clear the intersection before those tiles are no longer
off limits.

FCFS-LIGHT Subsumes FCFS
Using a trafﬁc light-like light model (for example ALL-
LANES), the FCFS-LIGHT can behave exactly like TRAFFIC-
LIGHT on all-human driver populations. With a light model
that keeps all lights constantly red, FCFS-LIGHT behaves ex-
actly like FCFS. If any human drivers are present it will leave

IJCAI-07

1265

Arrive before
?
no

last(P1)

yes

P1 approves?
yes

no

P2
yes

Reject

Accept

Ends after
last(P1) ?
yes

no

approves?

no

Reject

Reject

Accept

Figure 4: The decision mechanism during a switchover from
policy P 1 to policy P 2.

them stuck at the intersection indeﬁnitely. However, in the
absence of human drivers, it will perform exceptionally well.
FCFS is, in fact, just a special case of FCFS-LIGHT. We can
thus alter FCFS-LIGHT’s behavior from TRAFFIC-LIGHT at
one extreme to FCFS at the other.
3.4 Policy Switching
Policies based on certain light models may be more effective
at governing particular driver populations. In order to further
reduce delay, we have developed a way in which the intersec-
tion manager can smoothly switch between different policies
— the intersection need not bring all the vehicles to a halt
and clear out the intersection. The switching mechanism re-
quires every policy to keep track of the last time for which it
has authorized a vehicle to be in the intersection. This could
be either the last moment of a reservation or the last moment
that a vehicle passing through a green light can be in the in-
tersection. Once the intersection manager decides to make
the switch, it freezes the current policy. When a policy is
frozen, it rejects all requests that would cause it to increase
the “last reserved” time. Once the current policy is frozen,
the intersection manager accesses the last reserved time and
henceforth delegates all reservation requests that begin after
that time to the new policy. All requests that begin before that
time are still processed by the current policy. Because all re-
quests are handled entirely by one policy, if two policies P 1
and P 2 are safe (vehicles granted reservations by it are guar-
anteed not to collide), the same will be true for the period
during which the intersection manager is making the switch.
A diagram illustrating this compound decision mechanism is
shown in Figure 4.

4 Experimental Results
We test the efﬁcacy of the new control policies with a custom-
built, time-based simulator. Videos of the simulator in ac-
tion can be viewed at http://www.cs.utexas.edu/
∼kdresner/aim/. The simulator models one intersection
and has a time step of .02 seconds. The trafﬁc level is con-
trolled by changing the spawn probability — the probabil-
ity that on any given time step, the simulator will attempt to
spawn a new vehicle. For each experiment, the simulator sim-
ulates 3 lanes in each of the 4 cardinal directions. The total
area modelled is a square with sides of 250 meters. The speed

limit in all lanes is 25 meters per second. For each intersec-
tion control policy with reservation tiles, the granularity is set
at 24. We also conﬁgured the simulator to spawn all vehi-
cles turning left in the left lane, all vehicles turning right in
the right lane, and all vehicles travelling straight in the center
lane, in order to make the comparison between ALL-LANES
and SINGLE-LANE more straightforward. During each simu-
lated time step, the simulator spawns vehicles (with the given
probability), provides each vehicle with sensor data (simu-
lated laser range ﬁnder, velocity, position, etc.), moves all the
vehicles, and then removes any vehicles that have completed
their journey. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, each data point rep-
resents 180000 time steps, or one hour of simulated time.

In previous work, we demonstrated that once all vehi-
cles are autonomous, intersection-associated delays can be
reduced dramatically. By using the light models presented
earlier, we can obtain a stronger result: delays can be reduced
at each stage of adoption. Furthermore, at each stage there
are additional incentives for drivers to switch to autonomous
vehicles.

4.1 Transition To Full Implementation
The point of having a hybrid light/autonomous intersection
control policy is to confer the beneﬁts of autonomy to passen-
gers with driver-agent controlled vehicles while still allowing
human users to participate in the system. Figure 5(a), which
encompasses our main result, shows a smooth and monotoni-
cally improving transition from modern day trafﬁc lights (rep-
resented by the TRAFFIC-LIGHT policy) to a completely or
mostly autonomous vehicle mechanism (FCFS-LIGHT with
the SINGLE-LANE light model).
In early stages (100%-
10% human), the ALL-LANES light model is used. Later
on (less than 10% human), the SINGLE-LANE light model
is introduced. At each change (both in driver populations and
light models), delays are decreased. Notice the rather drastic
drop in delay from FCFS-LIGHT with the ALL-LANES light
model to FCFS-LIGHT with the SINGLE-LANE light model.
Although none of the results is quite as close to the mini-
mum as pure FCFS, the SINGLE-LANE light model allows
for greater use of the intersection by the FCFS portion of the
FCFS-LIGHT policy, which translates to more efﬁciency and
lower delay.

)
s
(
 
y
a
e
D

l

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

 0

5%

100%

10%

1%

Autonomous

 0

 0.01

 0.02
 0.03
Traffic Load

 0.04

 0.05

)
s
(
 
y
a
e
D

l

 24

 22

 20

 18

 16

 14

100%
50%
10%

 0

 0.005

 0.01

 0.015

Traffic Load

(a) Delays decrease with decreasing pro-
portions of human drivers.

(b) A closeup of the ALL-LANES re-
sults.

Figure 5: Average delays for all vehicles as a function of trafﬁc
level for FCFS-LIGHT. ALL-LANES is well-suited to high percent-
ages of human drivers (100%-10%), while SINGLE-LANE works
well with few humans (10%-0%).

For systems with a signiﬁcant proportion of human drivers,
the ALL-LANES light model works well — human drivers

IJCAI-07

1266

Incentives For Individuals

have the same experience they would with the TRAFFIC-
LIGHT policy, but driver agents have extra opportunities to
make it through the intersection. A small amount of this ben-
eﬁt is passed on to the human drivers, who may ﬁnd them-
selves closer to the front of the lane while waiting for a red
light to turn green. To explore the effect on the average vehi-
cle, we run our simulator with the FCFS-LIGHT policy, the
ALL-LANES light model, and a 100%, 50%, and 10% rate
of human drivers: when a vehicle is spawned, it receives a
human driver (instead of a driver agent) with probability 1,
.5, and .1 respectively. As seen in Figure 5(b), as the propor-
tion of human drivers decreases, the delay experienced by the
average driver also decreases. While these decreases are not
as large as those brought about by the SINGLE-LANE light
model, they are at least possible with signiﬁcant numbers of
human drivers.
4.2
Clearly there are incentives for cities to implement the FCFS-
LIGHT policy — the roads will be able to accommodate more
trafﬁc and vehicles will experience lower delays. However,
we have also shown that these beneﬁts only materialize when
a signiﬁcant portion of the vehicles are autonomous. Here we
demonstrate that the system creates incentives for individuals
to adopt autonomous vehicles as well, in the form of lower
delays for autonomous vehicles. Shown in Figure 6(a) are the
average delays for human drivers as compared to autonomous
driver agents for the FCFS-LIGHT policy using the ALL-
LANES light model. In this experiment, half of the drivers
are human. Humans experience slightly longer delays than
autonomous vehicles, but not worse than with the TRAFFIC-
LIGHT policy (compare with Figure 5(b)). Thus, by putting
some autonomous vehicles on the road, all drivers experience
equal or smaller delays as compared to the current situation.
This is expected because the autonomous driver can do ev-
erything the human driver does and more.

Once the reservation system is in widespread use and au-
tonomous vehicles make up a vast majority of those on the
road, the door is opened to an even more efﬁcient light model
for the FCFS-LIGHT policy. With a very low concentration
of human drivers, the SINGLE-LANE light model can drasti-
cally reduce delays, even at levels of overall trafﬁc that the
TRAFFIC-LIGHT policy can not handle. Using the this light
model, autonomous drivers can pass through red lights even
more frequently because fewer tiles are off-limits at any given
time. In Figure 6(b) we compare the delays experienced by
autonomous drivers to those of human drivers when only 5%
of drivers are human and thus the SINGLE-LANE light model
can be used. While the improvements using the ALL-LANES
light model beneﬁt all drivers to some extent, the SINGLE-
LANE light model’s sharp decrease in average delays (Fig-
ure 5(a)) appears to come at a high price to human drivers.

As shown in Figure 6(b), human drivers experience much
higher delays than average. For lower trafﬁc levels, the de-
lays are even higher than they would experience with the
TRAFFIC-LIGHT policy. However, ﬁgure 5(a) shows that de-
spite this, at high levels of trafﬁc, the humans get a perfor-
mance beneﬁt. Because these intersections will be able to
handle far more trafﬁc than TRAFFIC-LIGHT, the fact that the
human delays are kept more or less constant (as opposed to

)
s
(
 
y
a
e
D

l

 35
 30
 25
 20
 15
 10
 5
 0

Humans
Autonomous

 0

 0.005

 0.01

 0.015

 0.02

Traffic Load

(a)

)
s
(
 
y
a
e
D

l

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20

 10

 0

Humans
Autonomous

 0

 0.005

 0.01

 0.015

 0.02

Traffic Load

(b)

Figure 6: Average delay for humans and autonomous vehicles as a
function of trafﬁc level for FCFS-LIGHT with 5% human, SINGLE-
LANE(a) and 50% human, ALL-LANES(b).

the skyrocketing delay of Figure 5(a)), means this is actually
a win for the human drivers.

The SINGLE–LANE light model effectively gives the hu-
mans a high, but fairly constant delay. Because the green
light for any one lane only comes around after each other lane
has had a green light, a human-driven vehicle may ﬁnd itself
sitting at a red light for some time before the light changes.
Because this light model would only be put in operation once
human drivers are fairly scarce, the huge beneﬁt to the other
95% or 99% of vehicles far outweighs this cost.

These data suggest that there will be an incentive to both
early adopters (persons purchasing vehicles capable of inter-
acting with the reservation system) and to cities or towns.
Those with properly equipped vehicles will get where they
are going faster (not to mention more safely). Cities and
towns that equip their intersections to utilize the reservation
paradigm will also experience fewer trafﬁc jams and more
efﬁcient use of the roadways (along with fewer collisions,
less wasted gasoline, etc.). Because there is no penalty to
the human drivers (which would initially be a majority), there
would be no reason for any party involved to oppose the intro-
duction of such a system. Later, when most drivers have made
the transition to autonomous vehicles, and the SINGLE-LANE
light model is introduced, the incentive to move to the new
technology is increased — both for cities and individuals. By
this time, autonomous vehicle owners will far outnumber hu-
man drivers, who will still beneﬁt as trafﬁc volumes continue
to increase.

5 Related Work
Rasche and Naumann have worked extensively on decen-
tralized solutions to intersection collision avoidance prob-
lems [Naumann and Rasche, 1997; Rasche et al., 1997]. Oth-
ers focus on improving current technology (systems of traf-
ﬁc lights). For example, Roozemond allows intersections
to act autonomously, sharing the data they gather [Rooze-
mond, 1999]. The intersections then use this information to
make both short- and long-term predictions about the trafﬁc
and adjust accordingly. This approach still assumes human-
controlled vehicles. Bazzan has used an approach using both
MAS and evolutionary game theory which involves multiple
intersection managers (agents) that must focus not only on
local goals, but also on global goals [Bazzan, 2005].

Hall´e and Chaib-draa have taken a MAS approach to col-
laborative driving by allowing vehicles to form platoons,
groups of varying degrees of autonomy, that then coordi-

IJCAI-07

1267

nate using a hierarchical driving agent architecture [Hall´e and
Chaib-draa, 2005]. While not focusing on intersections, Mo-
riarty and Langley have shown that reinforcement learning
can train efﬁcient driver agents for lane, speed, and route se-
lection during freeway driving [Moriarty and Langley, 1998].
On real autonomous vehicles, Kolodko and Vlacic have cre-
ated a small-scale system for intersection control which is
very similar a reservation system with a granularity-1 FCFS
policy [Kolodko and Vlacic, 2003].

Actual systems in practice for trafﬁc light optimization
include TRANSYT [Robertson, 1969], which is an off-line
system requiring extensive data gathering and analysis, and
SCOOT [Hunt et al., 1981], which is an advancement over
TRANSYT, responding to changes in trafﬁc loads on-line.
However, all methods for controlling automobiles in practice
or discussed above still rely on traditional signalling systems.

6 Conclusion
We have extended an extremely efﬁcient method for control-
ling autonomous vehicles at intersections such that at each
phase of implementation, the system offers performance ben-
eﬁts to the average driver. Autonomous drivers beneﬁt above
and beyond this average improvement, which creates addi-
tional incentives for individuals to adopt autonomous vehicle
technology. We also showed how the system can move be-
tween different control policies smoothly and safely.

This work opens up the possibility of creating light models
that use less of the intersection than ALL-LANES, but don’t
restrict human drivers as much as SINGLE-LANE. These in-
termediate models would provide the needed ﬂexibility to
let autonomous vehicles traverse the intersection using the
FCFS portion of FCFS-LIGHT more frequently, decreasing
delays relative to ALL-LANES. Additionally, adaptive light
models could ameliorate the delays for human drivers associ-
ated with the SINGLE-LANE light model. If an intersection
manager can receive a reward signal based on delays expe-
rienced by vehicles, the manager can learn light models and
adapt on-line.

A science-ﬁction future with self-driving cars is becoming
more and more believable. As intelligent vehicle research
moves forward, it is important that we prepare to take advan-
tage of the high-precision abilities autonomous vehicles have
to offer. Efﬁcient, fast, and safe automobile transporation is
not a fantasy scenario light-years away, but rather a goal to-
ward which we can make worthwhile step-by-step progress.

References
[Bazzan, 2005] Ana L. C. Bazzan. A distributed approach for coor-
dination of trafﬁc signal agents. Autonomous Agents and Multi-
Agent Systems, 10(2):131–164, March 2005.

[Dresner and Stone, 2004a] Kurt Dresner and Peter Stone. Multi-
agent trafﬁc management: A protocol for deﬁning intersection
control policies. Technical Report UT-AI-TR-04-315, The Uni-
versity of Texas at Austin, Department of Computer Sciences, AI
Laboratory, December 2004.

[Dresner and Stone, 2004b] Kurt Dresner and Peter Stone. Multia-
gent trafﬁc management: A reservation-based intersection con-
trol mechanism.
In The Third International Joint Conference
on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pages 530–537,
New York, New York, USA, July 2004.

[Dresner and Stone, 2005] Kurt Dresner and Peter Stone. Mul-
tiagent trafﬁc management: An improved intersection control
mechanism.
In The Fourth International Joint Conference on
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pages 471–477,
Utrecht, The Netherlands, July 2005.

[Hall´e and Chaib-draa, 2005] Simon Hall´e and Brahim Chaib-draa.
A collaborative driving system based on multiagent modelling
and simulations.
Journal of Transportation Research Part C
(TRC-C): Emergent Technologies, 13:320–345, 2005.

[Hunt et al., 1981] P B Hunt, D I Robertson, R D Bretherton,
and R I Winton. SCOOT - a trafﬁc responsive method of co-
ordinating signals. Technical Report TRRL-LR-1014, Transport
and Road Research Laboratory, 1981.

[Kolodko and Vlacic, 2003] Julian Kolodko and Ljubo Vlacic. Co-
operative autonomous driving at the intelligent control systems
laboratory.
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 18(4):8–11, July/August
2003.

[Moriarty and Langley, 1998] David Moriarty and Pat Langley.
Learning cooperative lane selection strategies for highways. In
Proceedings of the Fifeenth National Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence, pages 684–691, Madison, WI, 1998. AAAI Press.

[National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, 2002] National

Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration. Economic impact of
U.S. motor vehicle crashes reaches $230.6 billion, new NHTSA
study shows. NHTSA Press Release 38-02, May 2002. Available
at http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov.

[Naumann and Rasche, 1997] Rolf Naumann and Rainer Rasche.
Intersection collision avoidance by means of decentralized secu-
rity and communication management of autonomous vehicles. In
Proceedings of the 30th ISATA - ATT/IST Conference, 1997.

[Pomerleau, 1993] Dean A. Pomerleau. Neural Network Perception
for Mobile Robot Guidance. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.
[Rasche et al., 1997] R. Rasche, R. Naumann, J. Tacken, and
C. Tahedl. Validation and simulation of decentralized intersec-
tion collision avoidance algorithm. In Proceedings of IEEE Con-
ference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC 97), 1997.

[Robertson, 1969] D I Robertson. TRANSYT — a trafﬁc network
study tool. Technical Report TRRL-LR-253, Transport and Road
Research Laboratory, 1969.

[Rogers et al., 1999] Seth Rogers, Claude-Nicolas Flechter, and Pat
Langley. An adaptive interactive agent for route advice. In Oren
Etzioni, J¨org P. M¨uller, and Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Conference on Autonomous
Agents (Agents’99), pages 198–205, Seattle, WA, USA, 1999.
ACM Press.

[Roozemond, 1999] Danko A. Roozemond.

Using intelligent
agents for urban trafﬁc control control systems. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Trans-
portation Systems and Science, pages 69–79, 1999.
[Schonberg et al., 1995] T. Schonberg, M. Ojala,

J. Suomela,
A. Torpo, and A. Halme. Positioning an autonomous off-road ve-
hicle by using fused DGPS and inertial navigation. In 2nd IFAC
Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Vehicles, pages 226–231,
1995.

[Texas Transportation Institute, 2004] Texas Transportation Insti-
tute. 2004 urban mobility report, September 2004. Accessed
at http://mobility.tamu.edu/ums in December 2004.
[Wooldridge, 2002] Michael Wooldridge. Introduction to MultiA-

gent Systems. John Wiley & Sons, February 2002.

IJCAI-07

1268

