A Multi-agent Medical System for Indian Rural Infant and Child Care 

1Department of Computer Science, DAV College, Jalandhar, India. 

2Department of Computer Science and Applications, Punjab University, Chandigarh, India. 

Vijay Kumar Mago1 and M. Syamala Devi2 

v_mago@yahoo.com. syamala@pu.ac.in. 

Abstract 

In  this  paper,  a  Multi-agent  System  (MAS)  is 
presented for providing clinical decision support to 
healthcare practitioners in rural or remote areas of 
India for young infants or children up to the age of 
5 years. The government is unable to appoint child 
specialists  in  rural  areas  because  of  inadequate 
number of available pediatricians. It leads to a high 
Infant  Mortality  Rate  (IMR).  In  such  a  scenario, 
software  agents  provide  a  realistic  solution.  The 
agent-based  prototype  has  been  developed  that 
involves  a  knowledge  component  called  an 
Intelligent  Pediatric  Assistant  (IPA);  and  User 
Agents  (UA)  along  with  their  Graphical  User 
Interfaces  (GUI).  The  GUI  of  UA  provides  the 
for 
interface 
the  healthcare  practitioner 
submitting  sign-symptoms  and  displaying 
the 
expert  opinion  as  suggested  by  IPA.  Depending 
upon 
the 
diagnosis and the treatment plan. The UA and IPA 
form  client-server  architecture  for  knowledge 
sharing. 

the  IPA  decides 

the  observations, 

to 

1  Introduction 
A  majority  of  the  Indian  population  is  living  in  rural  or 
remote areas. The healthcare practitioners in these areas are 
not specialized in dealing with infant or childhood diseases. 
They simply refer child related critical cases to specialized 
doctors  in  urban  areas.  There  is  also  an  acute  shortage  of 
funds  and  adequate  trained  child  specialists  in  India. 
According  to  the  National  Commission  on  Population 
(India),  in  2002,  approximately  Rs.  643.1  million  were 
needed  for  infrastructure  and  services  of  1,774  more 
pediatricians  were  required.  Hence,  the  government  is 
unable  to  appoint  child  specialists  in  rural  areas.  All  this 
leads to high Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) i.e. 68/1000 live 
births. 
  The  National  Commission  on  Population  observes  that 
main  contributors  to  high  IMR  in  India  are  states  having 
majority  of  population  residing  in  rural  areas  as  shown  in 
Table 1.   

STATES 

Orissa 

IMR 

98 

Madhya 
Pradesh 

98 

Uttar 
Pradesh 

85 

Rajasthan 

83 

Table 1. IMR within Indian States (1999) per thousand 

The  responsibility  of  providing  treatment  to  young 
infants/children in rural India is with the general health care 
practitioner posted in Primary Health Center (PHC) or rural 
dispensaries.  Because  of 
the  shortage  of  funds  and 
inadequate  trained  specialists,  the  government  appoints  a 
child  specialist  at  Community  Health  Care  Center  (CHC) 
only.    Therefore,  CHC  serves  as  a  first  referral  center  to 
PHC  and  dispensaries.  At  some  rural  places,  even  less 
qualified  health  care  professionals  are  somehow  managing 
the situation. They lack proper knowledge to diagnose and 
treat the patient.  Whenever they face any critical problem 
related  to  childhood  diseases,  they  refer  these  patients  to 
CHC.  This  increases  the  number  of  patients  for  the  child 
specialist at CHC. The main diseases that young infants and 
children suffer from include: Pneumonia, Diarrhea, Measles, 
and  Malaria  etc.  These  are  often  curable  at  local  levels  if 
proper  diagnosis  and  treatment  plans  are  administered 
timely. 

The situation demands a system that works beyond these 
limitations.  One  can  think  of  incorporating  the  concept  of 
client-server  architecture  with  an  expert  system  on  the 
server and a dumb client or a telemedicine system. But the 
problem  with  client-server  architecture,  without 
the 
involvement  of  agents,  is  the  loss  of  collaborative  and 
proactive behavior that is often required in such cases and 
limits the scope for future expansions. The problem with the 
telemedicine  is  that,  it  needs  direct  involvement  of  a 
pediatrician  to  diagnose  the  disease.  Because  of  these 
limitations software agents are more suitable in this domain. 
A  number  of  research  papers  supporting  the  usage  of 
software  agents  to  handle  such  circumstances  have  been 
produced 
the  health  care 
applications  based  on  agent  metaphor  are  discussed  in 
section 2. 

in  recent  years.  Some  of 

In this paper, a Multi-agent system (MAS) is presented to 
help  healthcare  professionals  to  diagnose  the  disease  of 
young infant/child, classify it (severe, moderate, mild), and 
treatment  plan.  The  Intelligent  Pediatric 
identify 

the 

 

IJCAI-07

1396

Assistant  (IPA)  has  been  developed  for  deciding  the 
diagnosis  as  per  the  sign-symptoms  provided  by  the 
healthcare professional. It also keeps track of the number of 
diseases diagnosed  from a particular rural/remote site. The 
GUI  of  User  Agent  (UA)  provides  the  practitioner  a  user 
interface  to  feed  in  the  measured  values  and  observations. 
The UA and IPA use the disease ontology that specifies the 
vocabulary  and  semantics  for  understanding  the  child 
related  diseases.  The  GUI  of  IPA  is  used  to  display  the 
activity of PHC practitioners. The system works without the 
direct involvement of a pediatrician as IPA is responsible to 
emulate  a  child  specialist  in  dealing  with  some  childhood 
diseases.  The  system  has  been  designed  to  support  even  a 
naïve healthcare practitioner in dealing with child diseases. 

to 

improve  or  optimize 

2  Related Work 
Software  agents  are  proving  to  be  promising  because  of 
their  reactive,  proactive,  autonomous,  collaborative  and 
knowledge-sharing capabilities. 
 
[Nealon and Moreno, 2002] have discussed the potential 
and  application  of  agents  to  assist  in  a  wide  range  of 
activities  in  health  care  environments.  [Lieberman  and 
Mason,  2002]  discuss  a  browsing  assistant  agent  ‘Letizia’ 
that  has  been  developed  to  find  serendipitous  connections 
when a user searches something related to medicine, and a 
software  agent  ‘Aria’  that  has  been  developed  to  integrate 
the  annotation  and  retrieval  of  images  into  a  single, 
integrated application. [Heine et al, 2004] simulate an agent 
oriented  environment  for  German  hospitals  with 
the 
objective 
the  appointment 
scheduling  system,  resource  allocation  and  cost  benefit  of 
clinical  trials.  [Mabry  et  al,  2004]  employ  the  Multi  agent 
system  for  providing  diagnosis  and  advice  to  health  care 
personnel dealing with traumatized patients. An Emergency 
Medical  Assistant  (ERMA)  using  Intelligent  Monitoring 
agents has been developed to demonstrate the system for the 
trauma  environment  with  particular  emphasis  on  types  of 
shock and stabilization of arterial blood gases. [Zachewitz, 
2004] develops agent based system to improve vaccination 
rates in Germany. Agents have been developed to maintain 
consistency  of  patient’s  medical  record  at  pharmacy  level, 
specialist level and at family doctor level. [Greenwood et al, 
2003]  are  concerned  with  the  accurate  dosage  advice  for 
diabetic  patients  and  aim  to  produce  a  Personal  Digital 
Assistant  based  system  into  which  patients  enter  various 
details  about  their  diet  and  physical  condition.[Nealon  and 
Moreno,  2003]  discuss  various  applications  of  MAS  in 
health  care  e.g.,  coordination  of  organ  transplants  among 
Spanish hospitals, patient scheduling, senior citizen care etc. 
[Riaño  et  al,  2002]  have  worked  on  a  research  project, 
called PalliaSys. It incorporates information technology and 
multi-agent systems to improve the care given to palliative 
patients. 
TOMAS 
(Telemedicine-Oriented  Medical  Assistant  )  which  is  used 
by each specialist to transfer microscopic images and data of 

developed 

[Mea, 

2001] 

has 

for  dynamic  knowledge  gathering, 

a  patient  for  collaborative  diagnosis  in  the  department  of 
pathology. [Iqbal et al, 2002] have developed an Intelligent 
Healthcare  Knowledge  Assistant  which  uses  multi  agent 
system 
filtering, 
adaptation  and  acquisition  from  Health  care  Enterprise 
Memory  unit. [Koutkias et al, 2005] created a Multi agent 
system  that  aims  to  enhance  monitoring,  surveillance  and 
educational service of a Medical Contact Center (MCC) for 
chronic disease management in Greece. [Tian and Tianfield, 
2003]  discuss  a  case  study  involving  various  agents  for 
providing  consultation  and  therapy  to  patients  suffering 
from diabetes. 

The  works  mentioned  above  are  domain  specific,  e.g. 
catering to special types of patients or providing assistance 
to  patients  for  appointments  or  supporting  doctors  in 
diagnosing  specific  diseases,  etc.  These  systems  are 
therefore, not capable of handling problems related to young 
infants/children,  especially  in  Indian  scenario  as  presented 
in  section  1.  More  precisely,  the  efficacy  of  agents  in  this 
application  area  has  still  not  been  explored.  So,  in  the 
subsequent sections we are introducing and highlighting the 
concept of using agent technology in this regard 

3  Multi Agent System for Infant and Child 

Care 

is  concerned  with 

A  multi  agent  system 
intelligent 
connected  systems  that  interact  and  decide  for  themselves 
what  they  should  do  in  order  to  achieve  the  design 
objectives.  Agents  with  specific  abilities  can  be  developed 
and  deployed  in  the  domain  of  our  problem.  In  the 
following  section,  the  functionality  of  the  proposed  MAS 
model is presented to provide an overview of the system. 
3.1  Functional Model 
The  MAS  is  designed  according  to  the  requirements  for 
effective  diagnosis  and  delivering  the  treatment  plans  for 
young infant/child in the child-care setting described above. 
It  provides  an  interaction  mechanism  with  the  healthcare 
professional  at  a  rural  site  and  delivers  diagnosed  disease 
and  suggests  treatment  plans  as  per  the  supplied  sign-
symptoms. Figure 1 illustrates the abstract interaction model 
of  the  system.  The  UA  is  located  at  PHC  while  IPA  is 
located  at  CHC.  The  IPA  is  behaving  as  a  server  to  User 
Agents.  The  sequence  of  interactions  that  takes  place 
between the UA and IPA is discussed below: 

The main problem is posed before the patient in the form 

of questions denoted as  

qi ∈ Q , where Q = {q1, q2… qk}, set of all possible 

questions. 

The  qi  is  passed  by  the  UA  to  the  IPA.  ‘S’  is  a  set  that 
contains all possible symptoms that a child may be suffering 
from. i.e. 

S= {Symptom1, Symptom2… SymptomN} 

Now depending on qi, IPA intelligently selects some of the 
sign-symptoms to be answered by the health care  

 

IJCAI-07

1397

Figure 1 An abstract agent-based interaction model. 

User Agent 

qi 

s 

v 

Rk 

 

 α
 
 

 
 
 
 
Intelligent 
Pediatric 
 Assistant 

 

β

χ 

KB 

professional by observing and or querying the patient. α is 
a function responsible for selection of sign-symptoms from 
S depending upon qi. 

α(qi ) = s where s  ⊆ S  

 

(1) 

where s = { Symptom1, Symptom2… SymptomM} , M<=N. 
The relation between qi and selected set of sign symptoms is 
R. 
  R: Q → 2S (This relation is a mapping from set of 
questions to power-set of sign-symptoms.) 

UA  responds  back  with  values  for  these  sent 

symptoms as a vector   

v = {val1, val2,….,valM} 

IPA maps all this processed data with the KB using β, that 
contains (s,v) ordered pair of symptoms and their possible  
value/range. 

β(qi, s, v) = (dk, tpk) 

 

 

(2) 

β returns  information  regarding  disease  and  its  treatment 
plan on the basis of following relations: 

P

{

: 2 s v

× → , (many-to-one relation)  
}

D

This governs the rule for assigning priority. 

where D is a set containing treatable diseases 
T:D → TP (one-to-one relation), where 

D = {d1, d2,….dp} 

TP={tp1,tp2,…..tpp} 

dk  is  the  diagnosed  disease  and  tpk  is  its  corresponding 
treatment plan. 
dk∈D and  tpk ∈TP.  
The  function  χ is  used  to  generate  a  report,  Rk,  that 
contains the diagnosed disease and its treatment plan. This 
is sent back to UA. 

χ(dk, tpk) = Rk  

 

 

(3) 

The  report,  Rk,  also  contains  the  level  of  severity  for  the 
diagnosed disease. 
3.2  Application Scenario 
The  MAS  provides  a  clinical  decision  support  to  a 
healthcare professional dealing with the child diseases. For 

that 

indicate  possible  diseases 

instance,  a  mother  brings  her  one  year  old  child  with 
complaints of loose motions and fever. After observing the 
child health, if the rural health practitioner feels the need of 
assistance  of  a  child  specialist,  he  uses  the  GUI  of  UA 
located  at  his  site  to  pass  the  sign-symptoms  and  other 
observations  to  the  IPA.  The  IPA  uses  (1)  to  generate 
related  questions 
like 
bacterial  infection,  viral  disease,  malaria,  malnutrition  or 
food  allergy.  In  the  second  phase,  UA  supplies  back  the 
observed  and  measured  values  corresponding 
the 
questions  generated  earlier  by  IPA.  UA  answers  the 
questions 
signs 
(convulsions y/n; unconsciousness y/n) bloody diarrhea y/n; 
Sunken eyes  y/n; able  to drink  y/n; stiff  neck  y/n; bulging 
fontanelle  y/n  etc.    IPA  uses  (2)  to:  decide  the  possible 
disease,  choose 
the  degree  of  severity  and  generate 
treatment plan. Figure 2 depicts a hypothetical case scenario 
of a child suffering from moderate dehydration. 
Symptom/ 

for  general  danger 

like:  checking 

Treatment 

Severity 

Disease 

to 

Sign 

Restlessness, 

irritable 

Sunken eyes 

Some de-
hydration 

Oral treatment with 

ORS solution 

according to WHO 
treatment guidelines 

 

level 

 

Moderate 

Figure 2 Disease Identification and Treatment Plan. 

The  presence/absence  or  values  of  some  of  the  sign-
symptoms  need  due  importance.  That  is  why,  some  sign-
symptoms are given more priority than others. For example 
presence of ‘lethargy or unconsciousness’ is assigned higher 
priority  than  ‘sunken  eyes’.  This  will  help  to  classify  the 
disease  into  very  severe  (requires  urgent  treatment  & 
referral)  or  less  severe  (requires  conservative  treatment 
without referral) category.  The summary report is then sent 
back  to  UA  for  actions  to  be  taken  by  the  healthcare 
professional. 
3.3  Architecture 
The  proposed  MAS  requires  delegation  of  task  to  various 
agents  in  the  system.  In  the  following  section,  we  will 
describe the organization of different agents of the system. 
GUI for health care practitioner 
The  GUI  for  PHC  practitioner  has  been  designed  for 
providing  an  interface.  It  is  being  used  for  the  following 
purposes: 
••••  Displaying the account identification issued by IPA,  
••••  Feeding  the  main  problem,  sign–symptoms,  and 
observations of the ailing child,  
••••  Passing the information to the UA and; 
••••  Displaying the diagnosed disease and treatment plans. 

User Agent 
The User Agent interacts with the GUI on the client side and 
the IPA on the server side. The UA  uses the child disease 
ontology  for  understanding  the  meanings  of  the  messages 
sent  by  GUI  and  the  IPA.  The  ontology  is  based  on 

 

IJCAI-07

1398

protocols  provided  by  [WHO,  2003]  for  understanding 
neonatal  and  childhood  illness.  This  agent  exhibits  the 
reactive  and  autonomous  attributes  as  UA  reacts  to  a 
question supplied by GUI and forwards it to the IPA for an 
appropriate decision-making without human intervention. It 
is located at PHC along with its GUI. 
The Intelligent Pediatric Assistant 
The IPA, located at CHC, interacts with the UA to receive 
the main problem and asks some more related questions that 
help  in  deciding  the  disease  and  generating  the  treatment 
plan. IPA and UA share common child disease ontology and 
vocabulary for interactions. The vocabulary for diseases like: 
Jaundice,  Dehydration,  Diarrhea,  Pneumonia,  Malaria, 
Measles,  Mastoiditis,  and  Anemia  has  been  created.  The 
IPA interacts with its GUI to display the PHC practitioners 
seeking  help  currently.  This  information  can  be  useful  in 
accessing the performance of a PHC. 
 
.It 
responds/reacts to questions asked by UA and decides about 
the disease and the appropriate treatment plan autonomously 
without  the  direct  intervention  of  human  being.  The  said 
behaviors have been implemented using JADE. 
GUI for Pediatrician 
The  GUI  of  IPA  has  been  designed  for  providing  an 
interface to the Pediatrician, situated at CHC. The purpose is 
to  monitor  the  condition  at  the  calling  rural  site.  It  also 
displays the total number of cases that have been tackled for 
a particular PHC. 

reactive  and  autonomous 

IPA’s  behaviour 

is 

Primary Health Care Center  
 

 

 

 
GUI  
UA  

Child 
Disease 
Ontology

Network  
Connection 

Community Health Care Center  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
GUI  
IPA 

compliance  with  specifications  laid  by  FIPA  (Foundation 
for  Intelligent  Physical  Agents).  Communication  between 
different  agent  platforms  that  are  executed  as  per  system 
requirement is achieved through the FIPA-compliant HTTP 
Protocol  that  JADE  supports.  [Bellifemine  et  al,  1999] 
discussed the FIPA compliance of JADE.  

 

Figure 4.1 Intelligent Pediatric Assistant. 

In this section, we shall discuss some of the interfaces and 
working  of  the  system.  The  rural  healthcare  practitioner, 
using  interface  of  UA,  registers  himself  with  the  IPA. 
Account identification is being allocated by IPA. Figure 4.1 
depicts active PHC practitioners with IPA. 
  The  communicative  act  for  registration  to  the  IPA  is  a 
‘Request’ as shown below: 
(REQUEST 
 :sender  ( agent-identifier :name 
Health_Prac2@vijay:6677/JADE ) 
 :receiver  (set ( agent-identifier :name 
Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE  :addresses (sequence 
IOR:0000000….00026000000020002 )) ) 
 :content  "((action (agent-identifier :name 
Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE :addresses (sequence 
IOR:0000000000....00026000000020002)) (\"Register 
Doctor\" :name \"Dr. Vijay\" :password max)))"  
 :language  fipa-sl  
 :ontology  Disease_Ontology ) 

Figure 3 Basic Architecture of the system. 

 

 In the following section, the development of these agents 

 
 The  Figure  3  shows  the  location  of  different  agents 
discussed  so  far.  The  GUI’s  are  meant  to  provide  the 
interfaces while UA and IPA use a common vocabulary to 
diagnose  the  disease  and  generate  treatment  plans  suitable 
for various severity levels. 
 
with their specification will be discussed.  
3.4  Implementation 
For construction and execution of the  system, JADE (Java 
Agent  DEvelopment  Framework)  is  adopted.  JADE  is  an 
open-source  software  framework,  aiming  to  assist  the 
in 
development  and  execution  of  agent  applications 

 

Figure4.2a GUI at Primary Healthcare Center 

 

 

IJCAI-07

1399

Figure  4.2a  shows  the  inputs  being  filled  by  the  PHC 
practitioner  using  the  interface  of  UA.  It  also  displays  the 
diagnosed disease and its treatment plan as suggested by the 
IPA. 

 
Figure 4.2b Values of the sign-symptoms asked by IPA 

The PHC practitioner simply supplies the main problem for 
which the child has been brought to the dispensary/  health 
facility. The UA sends this information to the IPA, who in 
turn  sends  some  more  questions  before  reaching  to  a 
conclusion, as shown in figure 4.2b. 

Figure 4.3a displays diagnosing of a critical case where a 
patient, who is more than 2 months old but less than 5 year, 
arrives  with  a  problem  of  ‘difficult  breathing’.  This 
information  is  passed  to  the  UA  which  in  turn  sends  it  to 
IPA. The IPA asks more question, as listed in Figure 4.3b, 
to  be  answered  by  the  PHC  practitioner.  The  diagnosis  is 
being shown in the Figure 4.3a. 

Figure 4.3a GUI at Primary Healthcare Center 

Figure 4.3b Sign-symptoms asked by IPA 

 

 

An agent communication act adopted by IPA to respond 
back  after  diagnosis  of  the  disease  and  deciding  the 
treatment plan is shown below: 
( INFORM 
 :sender  ( agent-identifier :name 
Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE  :addresses (sequence 
IOR:0000000000000011…00000020002 )) 
 :receiver  (set ( agent-identifier :name 
Health_Prac1@vijay:6677/JADE ) ) 
 :content  "((result (action (agent-identifier :name 
Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE :addresses (sequence 
IOR:0000000000000011494...0000020002)) 
(Problem_4 :A_4_1 20 :A_4_2 65 :A_4_3 false :A_4_4 
true :A_4_5 true)) (solution :disease \"SEVERE 
PNEUMONIA OR VERY SEVERE DISEASE.\" :results 
\"Give pre-referral treatment. Give oxygen if present. Abort 
convulsion if present 
 Refer the client URGENTLY to hospital.\")))"  
 :reply-with  
Health_Prac1@vijay:6677/JADE1140246218296   
:language  fipa-sl   
:ontology  Disease_Ontology ) 

4  Discussion and Scope for Future Work 
The  rural  healthcare  delivery  system  in  India  can  be 
improved  by  integrating  it  with  the  advancements  of 
information  technology.  For  that  we  need  a  system  that 
reasoning, 
demonstrates 
knowledge-sharing  and  cooperation.  A  promising  solution 
to this requirement is agent-based system. The system based 
on agent metaphor can be used to sense a particular situation, 
analyze it and make a search for the desired goals. 

features  such  as,  autonomy, 

The  prototype  system  that  has  been  discussed  above  is 
suitable  to  the  prevailing  situation  of  healthcare  in  rural 
India  for  tackling  some  diseases  being  handled  by  a 
pediatrician  at  CHC.  This  system  can  be  enhanced  to 
incorporate  some  more  expert  agents.  There  are  situations 
where  a  pediatrician  seeks  help  from  other  domain 
specialists  like  Neonatologist,  Cardiologist,  Neurologist, 
and  Endocrinologist.  The 
the 
incorporation  of  such  agents.  To  incorporate  reasoning 
capabilities,  Java  Expert  System  Shell  (JESS)  that  works 
well with JADE can also be considered.  

future  work 

includes 

To make the system fault tolerant, a replication or cloning 
of  IPA  will  also  be  considered  in  future.  A  higher  level 
health care center, e.g. Civil Hospital at district level, can be 
kept in mind for replication and monitoring purposes. JADE 
supports cloning as  well as  mobility of agents. Porting the 
system to mobile devices is also an attractive option 

5  Conclusion  

The prototype MAS medical system will assist the PHC 
practitioner  in  tackling  cases  that  are  outside  his/her 
expertise. It will also help the rural patients to reduce their 
traveling efforts to visit CHC at long distances.  

 

IJCAI-07

1400

The objective of this system is to exhibit the strength of 
agent technology in handling healthcare problems of young 
infants/children. The system is to provide assistance to the 
PHC  practitioner  for  diagnosis  of  childhood  diseases  and 
generation of timely treatment plan so as to reduce the IMR. 
The medical personnel at PHC are supposed to treat most of 
the cases themselves effectively, and not refer them to CHC 
unnecessarily.  The  pediatrician  at  CHC  can  monitor  the 
specific cases at PHC also. 

Acknowledgement 
We wish to acknowledge the efforts of Dr. Ravinder Mehta, 
Consultant  Pediatrician,  at  Vijayanand  Diagnostic  Center, 
Ludhiana,  India  for  providing  his  valuable  assistance  in 
developing ontology for childhood diseases.  

References 
[WHO,  2003]World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  and 
Government  of  India,”  Students’  Handbook  for  IMNCI 
(Integrated  Management  of  Neonatal  and  Childhood 
Illness)”, 2003. 

technology 

[Nealon and Moreno, 2002]Nealon, J. and Moreno, A., “The 
to  health  care”, 
application  of  agent 
Proceedings  of  the  Workshop  AgentCities:  Research  in 
Large-scale  Open  Agent  Environments,  in  the  1st 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Autonomous  Agents 
and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS ‘02), pages 169-73, 
Bologna, Italy, 2002. 

[Lieberman, and Mason, 2002]Lieberman, H. and Mason, C. 
, “Intelligent agent software for medicine”, Stud Health 
Technol Inform ‘02, No. 80, pages 99-109, 2002. 

“Agent-based  Optimization 

[Heine  an  et  al,  2004]Heine,  Christian  ,  Kirn,  Stefan,  and 
Herrler,  Rainer, 
and 
Management of Clinical Processes”, Proceedings of the 
16th  European  Conference  on  Artifical  Intelligence 
(ECAI’04)-The  2nd  Workshop  on  Agents  Applied  in 
Health Care, 2004. 

[Mabry et al, 2004]Susan L. Mabry, Caleb R. Hug, Russell 
C. Roundy. "Clinical Decision Support with IM-Agents 
and  ERMA  Multi-agents,"  cbms,  page.  242,  17th  IEEE 
Symposium  on  Computer-Based  Medical  Systems 
(CBMS'04), 2004.  

[Zachewitz,  2004]  Ludger  Zachewitz,  “  A  multi-agent 
system for Establishing electronics Healthcare record “, 
ECAI  2004  16th  European  Conference  on  Artificial 
Intelligence  -  Workshop  7:  Agents  Applied  in  Health 
Care , pages. 31-37, August 2004. 

[Greenwood  et  al,  2003]  Greenwood,  S.,  Nealon,  J.L.  and 
Marshall, P., "Agent-Based User Interface Adaptivity in 
a Medical Decision Support System" in Applications of 
Software Agent Technology in the Health Care Domain, 
Whitestein  Series  in  Software  Agent  Technologies, 
Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, pages 35-48, 2003. 

[Nealon  and  Moreno,2003]  Nealon,  J.L.  and  Moreno,  A., 
"Agent-Based  Applications 
in 
Applications  of  Software  Agent  Technology  in  the 
Health  Care  Domain  ,  Whitestein  Series  in  Software 
Agent Technologies, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, pages 3-
18, 2003. 

in  Health  Care" 

[Riaño  et  al,  2002]  Riaño,  David,  Prado,  Susana,  Pascual, 
Antonio  and  Martín,  Silvestre,  “A  Multi-Agent  System 
Model to Support Palliative Care Units”, Proceedings of 
the 15th IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical 
Systems, 2002. 

in  healthcare  scenario:  a  paradigm 

[Mea,  2001]  Vincenzo  Della  Mea,  “Agents  acting  and 
moving 
for 
telemedical  collaboration”, 
IEEE  Transaction  on 
Information  Technology  in  Biomedicine.  pages  10-13, 
2001 

[Iqbal et al, 2002] Hashmi, Zafar Iqbal , Abidi, Syed Sibte 
Raza  and  Cheah,  Yu-N  ,    “An  Intelligent  Agent-based 
Knowledge  Broker 
for  Enterprise-wide  Healthcare 
Knowledge  Procurement”,  pages.  173,  Proceedings  of 
the 15th  IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical 
Systems, 2002. 

[Koutkias  et  al,  2005]  Vassilis  G.  Koutkias,  Ioanna 
Chouvarda,  and  Nicos  Maglaveras,  “A  Multiagent 
System  Enhancing  Home-Care  Health  Services  for 
Chronic  Disease  Management”,  IEEE  Transaction  on 
Information  Technology  in  Biomedicine.  Volume  9, 
issue 4, pages 528-537, December 2005. 

[Tian  and  Tianfield,  2003]  Tian,  Jiang  and  Tianfield  , 
Huaglory, “A Multi-agent Approach to the Design of an 
E-medicine System”,  MATES 2003, LNAI 2831, pages 
85–94, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg ,2003 

[Bellifemine et al,1999]Fabio Bellifemine, A. Poggi, and G. 
Rimassi,  "JADE:  A  FIPA-compliant  agent  framework," 
in  Proceedings  of 
the  Practical  Applications  of 
Intelligent  Agents  and  Multi-Agents,  pages  97-  108, 
April 1999. 

 

IJCAI-07

1401

