Routing Mediators

Ola Rozenfeld and Moshe Tennenholtz
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology

Haifa 32000, Israel

Abstract

We introduce a general study of routing mediators.
A routing mediator can act in a given multi-agent
encounter on behalf of the agents that give it the
right of play. Routing mediators differ from one an-
other according to the information they may have.
Our study concentrates on the use of routing media-
tors in order to reach correlated strong equilibrium,
a multi-agent behavior which is stable against de-
viations by coalitions. We study the relationships
between the power of different routing mediators in
establishing correlated strong equilibrium. Surpris-
ingly, our main result shows a natural class of rout-
ing mediators that allow to implement fair and ef-
ﬁcient outcomes as a correlated super-strong equi-
librium in a very wide class of games.

Introduction

1
In many multi-agent systems it makes little sense to assume
that agents will stick to their parts when provided with sug-
gested strategies, if a deviation can increase their payoffs.
While for any multi-agent encounter, represented as a strate-
gic form game, there always exists a strategy proﬁle for which
unilateral deviations are not beneﬁcial, requirements regard-
ing the deviation of multiple players are rarely satisﬁed. In
order to tackle this issue we consider in this paper the use
of routing mediators, extending upon previous work in game
theory and AI.

A mediator is a reliable entity that can interact with the
players, and potentially act on behalf of the players that give
him a permission to do so. However, a mediator can not en-
force behavior. Indeed, an agent is free to participate in the
game without the help of the mediator. This notion is highly
natural; in many systems there is some form of reliable party
that can be used as a mediator. In particular, brokers in ﬁnan-
cial markets, bidding club organizers in auctions, as well as
routers in communication networks, can be viewed as medi-
ators. Notice that we assume that the multi-agent interaction
(formalized as a game) is given, and all the mediator can do
is to perform actions on behalf of the agents that explicitly
allow it to do so. The mediator’s behavior on behalf of the
agents that give it the right of play is pre-speciﬁed, and is

conditioned on the information available to the mediator on
all agents’ actions.

This natural setting is different from the one discussed in
the theory of mechanism design (see [Mas-Colell et al., 1995;
Jackson, 2001] for an introduction) where a designer de-
signs a new game from scratch in order to yield some de-
sired behavior. The simplest form of mediator discussed
in the game theory literature is captured by the notion of
correlated equilibrium [Aumann, 1974]. This notion was
generalized to communication equilibrium by [Forges, 1986;
Myerson, 1986]. Another type of mediators is discussed in
[Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2004]. However, in all these set-
tings the mediator cannot act on behalf of the agents.

A more powerful type of mediators, which can perform
actions on behalf of the agents who give the mediator the right
of play is considered in [Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2006].
This type of mediators turns out to be a speciﬁc case of the
mediators discussed in this paper. Namely, in this restricted
setting the agents need to decide whether to give the mediator
the right of play, while the mediator does not possess any
further information on the agents’ actions.

In order to illustrate the power of a reliable mediator con-

sider the famous prisoners dilemma game:

In this classical example we get that in the only equilibrium
both agents will play D, yielding both of them a payoff of 1.
However, this equilibrium, which is also a dominant strat-
egy equilibrium, is inefﬁcient; indeed, if both agents deviate
from D to C then both of them will improve their payoffs.
Formally, (D, D) is not a strong equilibrium; it is not stable
against deviations by coalitions. Indeed, there is no strong
equilibrium in the prisoners dilemma game.

Consider now a reliable mediator who offers the agents the
following protocol: if both agents agree to use the mediator
services then he will play C on behalf of both agents. How-
ever, if only one agent agrees to use his services then he will
play D on behalf of that agent. Notice that when accepting
the mediator’s offer the agent is committed to actual behavior
as determined by the above protocol. However, there is no

IJCAI-07

1488

way to enforce the agents to accept the suggested protocol,
and each agent is free to play C or D without using the me-
diator’s services. Hence, the mediator’s protocol generates
a new game, which we call a mediated game, where a new
strategy M is available for using the mediator services:

The mediated game has a most desirable property: in this
game there is a strong equilibrium; that is, an equilibrium
which is stable against deviations by coalitions. In this equi-
librium both agents will use the mediator services, which will
lead them to a payoff of 4 each!

Although the above example illustrates the potential power
of a mediator who can act on behalf of agents who give him
the right of play, the above mediator was very restricted. In
general, a routing mediator possesses information about the
actions taken by the agents. Consider a router in a typical
communication network. Assume that messages submitted
to the system must pass through this router. In addition, the
router can suggest a protocol to the agents who may wish to
use its services also in selecting appropriate routes. Hence, in
this situation it is most natural to assume that the router can
observe selected actions of all agents, and not only of those
who give it the right of play. In order to illustrate the power
of such routing mediator consider the following example:

Given the above game, assume we are interested in obtain-
ing a socially optimal outcome, in which each agent gets a
payoff of 6.
It is easy to see that the column player can
guarantee himself an expected payoff of 6.5 by playing B
or C with probability 0.5 each. As a result, a routing medi-
ator who is not informed about the pure realizations of the
column player’s strategies cannot implement any outcome in
which that player gets a payoff less than 6.5. However, a
routing mediator who can see the pure realizations of the de-
viating player and choose the punishment appropriately can
enforce the outcome (6, 6) as a strong equilibrium! This can
be achieved, for example, by the following protocol: If only
agent i selects the mediator’s services, the mediator will copy
the action of the other player, j, on behalf of i; if both agents
select to use the mediator’s services then the mediator will
perform C on behalf of both agents.

This example illustrates the important role of information
in the deﬁnition of a routing mediator. Indeed, routing me-
diators can be classiﬁed based on the information they can
access about the agents’ actions. In this paper, we formally
deﬁne routing mediators as a function of their available infor-

mation. We distinguish between two types of available infor-
mation:

1. Information about the actual action instantiations.
2. Information about the agents’ programs (i.e. correlated

strategies).

As we will show, having access to the agents’ actions may
sometimes be more powerful than having access to their pro-
grams, and vice versa.

Given the general setting of routing mediators, we prove
that they can indeed signiﬁcantly increase the set of de-
sired outcomes that can be obtained by multi-agent behaviors
which are robust against deviations by coalitions. Namely, we
show that any minimally fair game possesses a fair and efﬁ-
cient correlated super-strong mediated equilibrium. In a cor-
related super-strong equilibrium, correlated deviations by any
subset of agents can not beneﬁt one of them without hurting
another. A minimally fair game is a game in which all actions
are available to all agents, and agents who select identical ac-
tions get identical payoffs. A particular example of minimally
fair games are the symmetric games, but the family of min-
imally fair games is much wider.
In particular, our results
are applicable to congestion games and job-shop scheduling,
two major topics of study in the interface between computer
science and game theory.

a

in

strategic

form is

2 Preliminaries
2.1 Games in strategic form
A game
=
(cid:2)N, (Xi)i∈N , (ui)i∈N(cid:3), where N is a ﬁnite set of play-
ers, Xi is the strategy set of player i, and ui : X → (cid:5) is
the payoff function for player i, where X = ×i∈N Xi.
If
|N| = n, whenever convenient we assume N = {1,··· , n}.
Γ is ﬁnite if the strategy sets are ﬁnite.
For every S ⊆ N we denote XS = ×i∈SXi. When the set
N is clear, XN\S will be also denoted by X−S, and moreover,
X−{i} will be also denoted by X−i.

tuple Γ

When we discuss subsets of a given set we implicitly as-
sume non-emptiness unless we specify otherwise. Let Y be
a set. The set of probability distributions with ﬁnite support
over Y is denoted by Δ(Y ). That is, every c ∈ Δ(Y ) is a
(cid:2)
function c : Y → [0, 1] such that {y ∈ Y |c(y) > 0} is ﬁnite,
y∈Y c(y) = 1. For every y ∈ Y we denote by δy the
and
probability distribution that assigns probability 1 to y. Let I
be a ﬁnite set, and let ci ∈ Δ(Yi), i ∈ I, where I is a ﬁnite
set of indexes, and Yi is a set for every i ∈ I. We denote by
×i∈I ci the product probability distribution on Y = ×i∈I Yi
that assigns to every y ∈ Y the probability
Let Γ = (cid:2)N, (Xi)i∈N , (ui)i∈N(cid:3) be a game in strategic
form, and let S ⊆ N. Every c ∈ Δ(XS) is called a cor-
related strategy for S . A correlated strategy for the set of all
players N is also called a correlated strategy, and for every
i, a correlated strategy for {i} is also called a mixed strategy
for i. Let c ∈ Δ(X) and let S ⊆ N, the marginal probability
induced by c on XS is denoted by c[S]. That is,

i∈I ci(yi).

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

c[s](xS) =

c(xS, x−S)

x−S∈X−S

IJCAI-07

1489

(cid:4)

x∈X

Ui(c) =

ui(x)c(x)

The expected payoff of i with respect to a correlated strat-

egy c is denoted by Ui(c). That is,

For every i, and for every xi ∈ Xi, the mixed strategy δxi

is called a pure strategy.
2.2 Strong equilibrium concepts
Let Γ = (cid:2)N, (Xi)i∈N , (ui)i∈N(cid:3) be a game in strategic form,
and let x ∈ X. We say that x is a pure strong equilibrium
[Aumann, 1959] in Γ if the following holds:
For every subset, S of players and for every yS ∈ XS there
exists i ∈ S such that ui(yS, x−s) ≤ ui(x).
Let c ∈ Δ(X). We say that c is a correlated strong equi-
librium (see [Rozenfeld and Tennenholtz, 2006]), if for every
subset of players S , and for every correlated strategy for S,
ξS ∈ Δ(XS) there exists i ∈ S such that Ui(ξS × c[−S]) ≤
Ui(c).

The notion of pure strong equilibrium is the one typically
studied in the game theory literature when considering devia-
tions by coalitions. The concept of correlated strong equilib-
rium considers also correlated deviations. Of course, a pure
strong equilibrium is not necessarily a correlated strong equi-
librium. Correlated strong equilibrium is a very natural re-
quirement. In an environment in which the players fear/hope
that correlated deviations are possible, we expect a strategy
proﬁle to be a correlated strong equilibrium in order to be be-
lieved/played by the players. In the scope of this article, we
will consider such correlation possible, and therefore when
we use the term strong equilibrium, we refer to correlated
strong equilibrium.

The above deﬁnitions assumed that a player would agree to
join a deviating coalition only if the deviation would result in
a strict improvement of his payoff. A much stronger stability
concept is needed if we fear that players may be persuaded to
join a deviating coalition also in cases where such deviation
would leave their payoff unchanged, but would increase the
payoff of at least one of the other coalition members.
We say that c ∈ Δ(X) is a correlated super-strong equi-
(cid:6) ≥
librium (or super-strong equilibrium) if there is no S ⊆ N
and ξS ∈ Δ(XS), such that: for all i ∈ S, Ui
ξS, c[−S]
Ui (c), and for at least one i ∈ S the inequality is strict.

(cid:5)

A super-strong equilibrium is, in particular, a strong equi-

librium, but not vice versa.
2.3
Information sets
Let Y be a set. We say that Ω is an information set on Y if Ω
is a partition of Y .
Let y ∈ Y . By ω(y) we refer to the equivalence class of y
in Ω, i.e. to P ∈ Ω s.t. y ∈ P .
We use these deﬁnitions in order to model situations in
which an element y ∈ Y is chosen, and an agent has only
partial information about the chosen element. It is assumed
that, if Ω is the information set that is available to such agent,
the agent is informed of ω(y).
Let Ω1, Ω2 be information sets on Y . We say that Ω1
reﬁnes Ω2 if for all y1, y2 ∈ Y if ω1(y1) = ω1(y2) then

ω2(y1) = ω2(y2). That is, an agent with available informa-
tion Ω1 is informed at least as well as an agent with Ω2.

The above relation is a partial ordering of the information
sets, which forms a lattice: the maximal possible informa-
tion on Y is Ωf ull = {{y}|y ∈ Y }; having such information
means that for any choice of y ∈ Y , , the agent knows ex-
actly which element was chosen. The minimal possible infor-
mation on Y is Ω∅ = {Y }; that means that the agent has no
information at all about any chosen element y ∈ Y .

3 Routing mediators
We now introduce routing mediators, a general tool for coor-
dinating and inﬂuencing agents’ behavior in games. A rout-
ing mediator is always assumed to be reliable, and he is en-
dowed with a single ability: to play for the players who ex-
plicitly give him the right to play for them. The mediator
cannot enforce the players to use his services, neither can he
affect the players’ utility values. However, routing media-
tors differ in the information they have on the strategy proﬁle
which is being chosen by the players.
Let Γ be a game in strategic form. A routing mediator for
Γ is a tuple (cid:2)m, Ω, Ψ, (cω,ψ)ω∈Ω,ψ∈Ψ(cid:3), where the following
holds:
• m /∈ Xi for all i ∈ N. m denotes the new strategy
that is now available to each player: to send a message
to the mediator, indicating that the player agrees to give
the mediator the right of play for him.1
• Ω is an information set on Z, where Z = ×i∈N Zi, and
Zi = Xi ∪ {m}. Ω represents the information avail-
able to the mediator about each pure realization of the
players’ correlated strategy.
Ω reﬁnes Ωbasic, which is deﬁned as follows:
Given z ∈ Z, let T (z) denote {j ∈ N|zj = m}. That
is, T (z) denotes the players who agree to give the medi-
ator the right of play for them in z. Then, Ωbasic is the
partition induced by the following equivalence relation
on Z: z1 ≡ z2 iff T (z1) = T (z2) (For ω ∈ Ω we will
use T (ω) to denote T (z) for some z ∈ ω).
That is, we demand that in each pure realization of the
agents’ strategy the mediator knows exactly which play-
ers give him the right of play for them.
• Ψ is an information set on Δ(Z), which represents the
information available to the mediator about the corre-
lated strategy of the players. We place no restrictions on
Ψ, in particular Ψ may equal Ψbasic = {Δ(Z)}, mean-
ing that the mediator has no such information.
XT (ω)

• For every ω ∈ Ω, ψ ∈ Ψ, cω,ψ ∈ Δ

. That is,
c is the conditional contract that is offered by the medi-
ator: it speciﬁes exactly which actions the mediator will
perform on behalf of the players who agree to use his
services, as a function of the information available to it
about the strategy proﬁle chosen by the agents.

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

1[Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2006] show that no power is added
if the communication between the mediator and the players includes
more than one message type.

IJCAI-07

1490

Every mediator M for Γ induces a new game Γ(M) in
strategic form in which the strategy set of player i is Zi. The
payoff function of i is deﬁned for every c ∈ Δ(Z) as follows:

UM

i

(c) =

c(z)Ui(cω(z),ψ(c), z[−T (z)])

(cid:4)

z∈Z

The above deﬁnitions express the following interaction be-
tween the mediator and the players:
1. The players choose a proﬁle c ∈ Δ(Z)
2. A joint coin ﬂip is issued, determining a pure realization

z ∈ Z of c

3. The mediator is informed of ω(z) and ψ(c)
4. The mediator issues a coin ﬂip to determine a pure real-

ization δT (z) of cω(z),ψ(c)

5. The payoff of each player i is given according to

(cid:5)

(cid:6)

ui

δT (z), z[−T (z)]

The payoffs of the players from the proﬁle c are assumed
to be their expected payoffs from both coin ﬂips in steps 2,4.
The mediator is guaranteed to behave in a pre-speciﬁed
way, however this behavior is conditional on the actions of
the other agents. For this reason, although Ui(c) is well de-
ﬁned for any proﬁle c ∈ Δ(Z), in particular for pure proﬁles
z ∈ Z, Ui(c) does not necessarily equal
z∈Z Ui(z)c(z),
unless Ψ = Ψbasic. Nevertheless, the concepts of strong
equilibrium can still be applied to Γ(M).

(cid:2)
Let Γ be a game in strategic form, m /∈ (cid:7)

i∈N Xi, Ω
an information set on Z, Ψ an information set on Δ(Z).
Let mN denote the pure strategy proﬁle ×i∈N m ∈ Z. A
correlated strategy c ∈ Δ(X) is a strong mediated equi-
librium relatively to Ω, Ψ if there exists a mediator for Γ,
M = (cid:2)m, Ω, Ψ, (cω,ψ)ω∈Ω,ψ∈Ψ(cid:3), with cω(mN ),ψ(mN ) = c,
for which mN is a correlated strong equilibrium in Γ(M).
The notion of super-strong mediated equilibrium can be de-
ﬁned similarly.

Note that the above deﬁnition coincides with the one of
[Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2006] in the case where Ω =
Ωbasic, Ψ = Ψbasic; i.e. they considered the case in which
the mediator is only informed of the players that chose to del-
egate him the right to play for them in step 2; he has no infor-
mation about the actions of the other players, neither about
the correlated strategy that was chosen in step 1.
Situations which can be modelled by Ψ = Ψf ull =
{{c}|c ∈ Δ(Z)} are situations in which the mediator doesn’t
decide/reveal its action before the players choose theirs. For
example, in a computerized setting, where the correlated de-
viation is implemented using a program which is submitted
and executed on a server, and the mediator is located on this
server, the mediator is fully informed about the correlated
strategy of the players. In another example, even if the me-
diator is not informed about correlated deviations, the play-
ers might fear that such information leak is possible. Lastly,
the players may consider a worst case behavior of the media-
tor, and therefore would agree to deviate only if the mediator
can’t possibly harm any one of them.
Ω (cid:12)= Ωbasic can be used to model all the situations in which
the mediator does indeed, as the name implies, ”stand be-
tween” the players and the actual game, e.g. situations in

which the play is only available through the mediator. For
example, if the players’ strategies are messages in a network
and the mediator sits on the router, it might be reasonable to
assume that Ω = Ωf ull.
Observations: Suppose c ∈ Δ(X) is a strong (super-strong)
mediated equilibrium relatively to Ω, Ψ.

1. Let w(c) = (w1, . . . , wn) be the payoff vector induced
by c. Then, for any c(cid:4) ∈ Δ(X) such that w(c(cid:4)) = w(c),
c(cid:4) is a strong (resp. super-strong) mediated equilibrium
relatively to Ω, Ψ. In light of this, we will sometimes use
the following notation: a payoff vector w can be imple-
mented as a strong (super-strong) mediated equilibrium
relatively to Ω, Ψ if there exists c ∈ Δ(X) such that
w(c) = w and c is a strong (resp. super-strong) medi-
ated equilibrium relatively to Ω, Ψ.

2. If Ψ = Ψf ull, c can be implemented as a strong (resp.
super-strong) mediated equilibrium relatively to Ω, Ψ
even if the mediator is restricted to use only pure actions
(i.e. satisﬁes cω,ψ ∈ XT (ω)).
3. If Ω(cid:4) reﬁnes Ω, then c is also a strong mediated equilib-
rium relatively to Ω(cid:4), Ψ
4. If Ψ(cid:4) reﬁnes Ψ, then c is also a strong mediated equilib-
rium relatively to Ω, Ψ(cid:4)

Observations 3, 4 show that the possible values of Ω, Ψ
induce a four-end lattice of strong mediated equilibrium con-
cepts, where the strongest (most stable) concept is obtained
from Ωbasic, Ψbasic (since it assumes nothing on the infor-
mation available to the mediator), and the weakest concept
is obtained from Ωf ull, Ψf ull. Part of this lattice is depicted
below (arrows mean increase in stability):

A natural question to ask is whether there exists a general
relationship between the strong mediated equilibria concepts
induced by Ωbasic, Ψf ull and Ωf ull, Ψbasic. The question is,
what empowers the mediator more – increasing the informa-
tion available to him on each pure outcome, or increasing the
information about the correlated strategies?

As it turns out, this question does not have a general an-

swer:
Proposition 1 There exists a game Γ and a strategy pro-
ﬁle c which is a strong mediated equilibrium relatively to
Ωf ull, Ψbasic, but not a strong mediated equilibrium rela-
tively to Ωbasic, Ψf ull.

An example of such game and such proﬁle appears in the

introduction. A less intuitive result is the following:
Proposition 2 There exists a game Γ and a strategy pro-
ﬁle c which is a strong mediated equilibrium relatively to
Ωbasic, Ψf ull, but not a strong mediated equilibrium rela-
tively to Ωf ull, Ψbasic.

IJCAI-07

1491

every player i, for every action proﬁle x ∈ X and for every
permutation π.

Needless to say that symmetric games are most popular in
computerized settings. For example, the extremely rich lit-
erature on congestion games in computer science deals with
particular form of symmetric games [Papadimitriou, 2001].
However, our main result requires a weaker notion of sym-
metry:
Let Γ be a game in strategic form. Γ is a minimally fair
game if for all i, j ∈ N, Xi = Xj and for every action proﬁle
x ∈ X, xi = xj implies that ui(x) = uj(x).
That is, a game is minimally fair if players who play the
same strategy get the same payoff. The exact value of the
received payoff may depend on the identities of the players
who chose the strategy, as well as on the rest of the proﬁle. In
particular, every symmetric game is a minimally fair game;
however, minimally fair games capture a much wider class of
settings. For example, typical job-shop scheduling games are
minimally fair games.

Note that in a minimally fair game, unlike in a symmetric
game, the symmetric socially optimal payoff is not necessar-
ily feasible. In order to capture our notion of fair and efﬁcient
outcomes in such games, we need to deﬁne the notion of lex-
icographic ordering on vectors of payoffs:
Let sort : (cid:5)n → (cid:5)n be a function that sorts the elements
of real vectors in increasing order. Given two vectors w, w(cid:4) ∈
(cid:5)n we say that w ≺l w(cid:4) (w is lexicographically smaller than
w(cid:4)) if there exists 1 ≤ i ≤ n such that sort(w)i < sort(w(cid:4))i
and for all 1 ≤ j < i
Let Γ be a minimally fair game. We say that a vector
w ∈ (cid:5)n is the max-min fair payoff of Γ if w is the lexico-
graphically maximal feasible payoff vector in Γ. It is easy to
see that such vector always exists, and is unique. Also, such
vector is, by deﬁnition, Pareto optimal.

sort(w)j = sort(w(cid:4))j.

The fairness criterion we use is in fact the well-known
max-min fairness criterion, as discussed in the communi-
cation networks literature (see e.g. [Kumar and Kleinberg,
2000]).

We are now ready to state our main result:

Theorem 1 Let Γ be a minimally fair game. Then, the max-
min fair payoff of Γ can be implemented as a super-strong
mediated equilibrium relatively to Ωf ull, Ψbasic.
Proof: Let w be the max-min fair payoff vector of Γ. Sup-
Let m /∈ (cid:7)
that the vector w is sorted in increasing order
pose w.l.o.g.
and the players in N are renamed appropriately.
i∈N Xi. We deﬁne a routing mediator
(cid:3) as follows:
M = (cid:2)m, Ωf ull, Ψbasic, (cω,ψ)ω∈Ωf ull,ψ∈Ψbasic
Ψbasic contains a single element, therefore it sufﬁces to deﬁne
cω(z) for all z ∈ Z. Let z ∈ Z. If T (z) = N, we deﬁne cω(z)
to be the strategy proﬁle that implements w. Otherwise, let
T = T (z), let i = max{N \ T} (i.e. i is the highest indexed
player among those who don’t cooperate with the mediator in
z), and let a = zi. We then deﬁne cω(z) = ×i∈T δa.
That is, the action of the mediator for each pure realization
(cid:6)
of the correlated proﬁle is to have all the cooperating players
copy the action of the deviator with the highest payoff in w.
be
the proﬁle in Γ (M) that is obtained from the deviation of S

Let S ⊆ N, ξS ∈ Δ (ZS). Let ξ = ξS ×(cid:5)×i∈N\Sδm

Proof: (sketch) Let Γ be the 3-person game depicted above,
and let c = (C, C, A). In order to see that c is not a strong
mediated equilibrium in Γ relatively to Ωf ull, Ψbasic, con-
sider the possible actions of the mediator on behalf of player
3 given the proﬁle (A, A, m) ∈ Z. The mediator has to
choose a strategy on behalf of player 3 without knowing the
correlated strategy of players {1, 2} that caused the realiza-
tion (A, A). No matter what distribution between A and B
will the mediator choose, the total payoff of the deviators
will be 12, with player 1 getting more than player 2; note
that the pure proﬁle (B, B) guarantees the deviators the pay-
offs (0, 12); therefore, no matter what strategy the mediator
will choose, players {1, 2} will be able to randomize between
(A, A) and (B, B) so that each of them will get a payoff of 6,
making the deviation beneﬁcial for them.

However, note that the players 1, 2 were able to guarantee
themselves the payoffs (6, 6) as a response to any contract of-
fered by the mediator. In a sense, the information set Ψbasic
means that the players are more informed than the mediator –
the strategy of the mediator in this setting is ﬁxed, and cannot
depend on the correlated strategy chosen by the players; while
their correlated strategy can be a best response to the media-
tor’s strategy. When the information set Ψf ull is considered,
the mediator becomes more informed than the players: he can
devise a response based on their correlated strategy. In this
example, a mediator who is aware of the exact probabilities
that the players 1, 2 assign to the proﬁles (A, A) and (B, B)
can always respond by a pure strategy A or B on behalf of
the third player in a way that will cause one of the players to
get a payoff less than 5, making the deviation not beneﬁcial
for them.

A formal proof of the above intuition is technically cum-

bersome, and therefore is left to the full version.

4 The existence of strong mediated

equilibrium

In this section we present our main result. We show a natural
class of routing mediators that allow to implement fair and
efﬁcient outcomes as a correlated super-strong equilibrium in
a very wide class of games.

Some deﬁnitions are needed:
A permutation of the set of players is a one-to-one function
from N to N. For every permutation π and for every action
proﬁle x ∈ X we denote by πx the permutation of x by π.
That is, (πx)πi = xi for every player i ∈ N.
Let Γ be a game in strategic form. Γ is a symmetric game
if Xi = Xj for all i, j ∈ N and ui (x) = uπ(i) (πx) for

IJCAI-07

1492

to ξS. Suppose, for contradiction, that S weakly beneﬁts from
deviating to ξS in Γ (M) relatively to mN ; that is, ∀i ∈ S
Ui (ξ) ≥ wi and ∃i ∈ S Ui (ξ) > wi.
Let k be the highest indexed player in S. In every pure
realization z of ξ, all the players in N \S play the same action
as k: either because k ∈ T (z), or because k is, in particular,
the highest indexed player in N \ T (z). Therefore, Uj (ξ) =
Uk (ξ) for every player j ∈ N \ S; therefore, for every j ∈
{1, ..., k} \ S, Uj (ξ) ≥ wk ≥ wj, which means that all the
players in S(cid:4) = {1, ..., k} can deviate to the correlated proﬁle
ξ(cid:4), in which the players in S play by ξ and the players in
S(cid:4)\S copy the strategy of player k, and S(cid:4) would also weakly
beneﬁt from this deviation.
Therefore, we can assume w.l.o.g. that S = {1, . . . , k} for
some 1 ≤ k < n. Let w(cid:4) be the payoff vector that is induced
k ≥ wk.
by ξ. We know that for every k ≤ j ≤ n, w(cid:4)
Since w is Pareto optimal, we know that k < n (otherwise,
w(cid:4) would Pareto dominate w); w.l.o.g. we can assume that
wk < wk+1.

j = w(cid:4)

We deﬁne a payoff vector w(cid:4)(cid:4) as follows:
i} ≤ w(cid:4)
(cid:10)

w(cid:4) if max
i∈S
εw(cid:4) + (1 − ε) w otherwise

(cid:8)
(cid:9)

{w(cid:4)

w(cid:4)(cid:4)

=

k

where ε ∈ arg min
>w(cid:2)

i:w(cid:2)

i

k

w(cid:2)

i

wk+1−wi

−wi+wk+1−w(cid:2)
1 , ..., w(cid:4)(cid:4)

(w(cid:4)(cid:4)

k+1

.

First, we note that

k) Pareto dominates
(w1, ..., wk): if w(cid:4)(cid:4) = w(cid:4) this follows from the fact that S
weakly beneﬁts from the deviation that results in w(cid:4); in the
other case, the same holds since ε > 0.
i ≤ w(cid:4)(cid:4)
for j ≤ k, i > k; combined with our previous observation,
this implies that w ≺l w(cid:4)(cid:4), contradicting our choice of w.

Next, we note that the choice of ε ensures that w(cid:4)(cid:4)

j

Below we present two additional results, that can be proven
using similar logic as behind the proof of Theorem 1. The
proofs of these results are therefore omitted due to lack of
space. Both results attempt to relax the requirements on the
information set Ω, at the price of restricting attention to the
class of symmetric games (Theorem 2) or considering strong
instead of super-strong equilibrium (Theorem 3).

Formally, Ω must satisfy the following:

The relaxation of the requirements on Ω is based on the
idea that in order to ”punish” a set of deviating agents, we
don’t have to see the actions of all of them; it sufﬁces, un-
der some conditions, to observe only the action selected by a
single deviator.
there exists
an ordering <P on N such that for all z, z(cid:4) ∈ Z if
{N\T (z)} then ω (z) (cid:12)= ω (z(cid:4)).
zmax<P
That is, Ω allows to distinguish between different actions of
the highest ranked player (by <P ) among the deviators.
Theorem 2 Let Γ be a symmetric game, and suppose than an
information set Ω on Z satisﬁes the above property.

{N\T (z)} (cid:12)= z(cid:4)

Then, the symmetric optimal payoff vector w = (V, . . . , V )
in Γ can be implemented as a super-strong mediated equilib-
rium relatively to Ω, Ψbasic.
Theorem 3 Let Γ be a minimally fair game, and suppose
than an information set Ω on Z satisﬁes the above property.

max<P

Then, the max-min fair payoff of Γ can be implemented as

a strong mediated equilibrium relatively to Ω, Ψbasic.

5 Further work
The general aim of this research is to ﬁnd rich settings in
which routing mediators can help to achieve stability and/or
efﬁciency. In this paper we concentrated on achieving sta-
bility against deviations by coalitions via the concept of
correlated strong equilibrium; other desirable solution con-
cepts can be of interest, e.g. pure equilibria concepts (Nash,
strong), weakly dominant strategies, and coalition proof equi-
librium [Bernheim et al., 1987].

Other models of multi-agent interaction, e.g.

repeated
games, or games with incomplete information, are also un-
der consideration.

References
[Aumann, 1959] R.J. Aumann. Acceptable points in general
cooperative n-person games.
In A.W. Tucker and R.D.
Luce, editors, Contribution to the Theory of Games, Vol.
IV, Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40, pages 287–324.
1959.

[Aumann, 1974] R.J. Aumann. Subjectivity and correlation
in randomized strategies. Journal of Mathematical Eco-
nomics, 1:67–96, 1974.

[Bernheim et al., 1987] B. D. Bernheim, B. Peleg, and
M. Whinston. Coalition proof Nash equilibrium: I con-
cepts. Journal of Economic Theory, 42(1):1–12, 1987.

[Forges, 1986] F. M. Forges. An approach to communication

equilibria. Econometrica, 54(6):1375–85, 1986.

[Jackson, 2001] M. Jackson. A Crash Course in Implemen-
tation Theory. Social Choice and Welfare, 18(4):655–708,
2001.

[Kumar and Kleinberg, 2000] A. Kumar and J. Kleinberg.
Fairness measures for resource allocation. In Proc. 41th
IEEE Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science, 2000.
[Mas-Colell et al., 1995] A. Mas-Colell, M.D. Whinston,
and J.R. Green. Microeconomic Theory. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1995.

[Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2004] D. Monderer

and
M. Tennenholtz. K-Implementation. Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research (JAIR), 21:37–62, 2004.

[Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2006] D. Monderer

M. Tennenholtz.
Proceedings of AAAI-06, 2006.

Strong Mediated Equilibrium.

and
In

[Myerson, 1986] R. B. Myerson. Multistage games with

communication. Econometrica, 54(2):323–358, 1986.

[Papadimitriou, 2001] C. H. Papadimitriou.

rithms,Games,and the Internet. In STOC 2001, 2001.

Algo-

[Rozenfeld and Tennenholtz, 2006] O.

and
M. Tennenholtz. Strong and Correlated Strong Equilibria
in Monotone Congestion Games.
In Proc. of 2nd inter-
national Workshop on Internet & Network Economics,
2006.

Rozenfeld

IJCAI-07

1493

