An Efﬁcient Protocol for Negotiation over Multiple Indivisible Resources

Sabyasachi Saha and Sandip Sen

Department of Mathematical & Computer Sciences

The University of Tulsa

{sabyasachi-saha, sandip}@utulsa.edu

Abstract

We study the problem of autonomous agents ne-
gotiating the allocation of multiple indivisible re-
sources. It is difﬁcult to reach optimal outcomes
in bilateral or multi-lateral negotiations over mul-
tiple resources when the agents’ preferences for
the resources are not common knowledge. Self-
interested agents often end up negotiating inefﬁ-
cient agreements in such situations. We present a
protocol for negotiation over multiple indivisible
resources which can be used by rational agents to
reach efﬁcient outcomes. Our proposed protocol
enables the negotiating agents to identify efﬁcient
solutions using systematic distributed search that
visits only a subspace of the whole solution space.

1 Introduction

Negotiation is the most preferred approach for resolving con-
ﬂicts in human and agent societies. Automated negotiation
is being increasingly used in different multiagent domains
including robotics, network bandwidth allocation, space ap-
plications, etc. where agents need to reach agreements on
the allocation of one or more shared resources [Chevaleyre et
al., 2006; Endriss et al., 2006]. In multi-issue negotiation1,
agents with divergent preferences can cooperate to reach
agreements beneﬁcial for both agents. But when the prefer-
ences are not common knowledge, self-interested agents of-
ten fail to explore win-win possibilities using existing proto-
cols and end up with inefﬁcient agreements. Hence, there is a
need for negotiation protocols which can lead rational agents
to mutually preferred agreements. By efﬁcient or optimal so-
lution, we refer to a solution which is Pareto optimal [Brams
and Taylor, 1996]. An outcome is Pareto-optimal or Pareto-
efﬁcient if there exists no other outcome which is at least as
good as this outcome for both agents and strictly better for at
least one agent. Another desirable property of an agreement
is its fairness. An agreement can be considered to be fair if it
is envy-free. An agreement is envy-free iff each agent’s utility
for its own share is at least as much as its utility for the share
allocated to the other agent [Brams and Taylor, 1996]. Often

no envy-free agreement exists when resources are indivisible.
We, therefore, argue that the goal of the negotiation process
should be to produce Pareto optimal agreements that maxi-
mizes egalitarian social welfare, the minimum utility of the
negotiating agents.

When agents’ preferences are common knowledge, nego-
tiating agents can reach an efﬁcient point of agreement us-
ing distributed protocols like one-step monotonic concession
protocol or monotonic concession protocol [Rosenschein and
Zlotkin, 1994] where each agent searches the entire space of
possible agreements. Most negotiations in real life, however,
take place under incomplete information where agents do not
have complete knowledge about the preferences of the other
agent. Negotiation protocols for such negotiation scenarios
are proposed by Brams and Taylor [Brams and Taylor, 2000].
But their protocols do not guarantee optimality for allocation
of indivisible resources. These protocols produce close to op-
timal agreements only for negotiations involving uncorrelated
resources, i.e., situations where the utility of possessing two
resources is the sum of the utilities of possessing each indi-
vidual resource. But real-life negotiations typically involve
correlated resources. These protocols can produce very inef-
ﬁcient agreements for such negotiations.

Our objective is to design a protocol for negotiation over
multiple indivisible resources, both correlated or uncorre-
lated, which can lead participating agents to efﬁcient out-
comes, without any prior information about opponent’s pref-
erences. This situation is common in E-commerce domains,
where the number and diversity of agents is so large that an
agent may not have any knowledge of the preferences of any
particular agent it has to negotiate with. We present a three-
phase protocol that guarantees Pareto optimal agreements be-
tween rational agents and ensures that the agreement reached
will be at least as fair as the agreements reached by the pro-
tocols proposed by Brams and Taylor2.

Our work has some similarity with the work on contract
negotiation by Sandholm [Sandholm, 1998] and Endriss et
al [Endriss et al., 2003; 2006] in the context of task alloca-
tion, where agents negotiate to reallocate tasks. But these
approaches are geared towards identifying, under complete
information, necessary deals or exchanges required among

1We identify negotiation over multiple resources as a special case

2We discuss the protocol for two agents and prescribe its exten-

of multi-issue negotiation.

sion for multiple agents in Section 8.

IJCAI-07

1494

agents to reach efﬁcient allocation from an arbitrary initial
allocation. We, on the contrary, want to ﬁnd mechanisms that
lead agents, without any prior information about opponent’s
preferences, to efﬁcient outcomes revealing as little informa-
tion as possible.

Another advantage of our proposed protocol is that each
agent is required to search only a subset of the whole set of
possible allocations. Even under complete information, ﬁnd-
ing out necessary exchanges required to reach Pareto optimal
solution requires O(2n) computations, where n is the num-
ber of issues [Chevaleyre et al., 2006]. Fortunately, in most
negotiations, the number of issues is not very high (less than
20). Although the worst case complexity of our algorithm is
O(2n), it requires signiﬁcantly less search compared to ex-
haustive search in most negotiation instances.

2 Related research

We consider the problem of designing a negotiation protocol
for two or more agents so that they can reach a mutually ac-
ceptable allocation of multiple indivisible resources or tasks
without any external intervention. When agents’ preferences
are common knowledge, each agent can search the entire
space of allocations and ﬁnd out possible points of agreement.
In case of multiple points there can be a problem of selecting
the point of agreement. However, using distributed proto-
cols like one-step monotonic concession protocol negotiating
agents can reach an efﬁcient point of agreement [Rosenschein
and Zlotkin, 1994]. According to this protocol, both agents
simultaneously make an offer. The offer that maximizes the
product of the agents utilities will be chosen as the point of
agreement. It can be shown that rational agents will reach
Pareto optimal solution using this protocol. Here, each agent
will choose the offer that has maximal product of utilities. So,
each agent needs to know the other agent’s complete prefer-
ences and search for all possible allocations. This protocol
fails when agents do no have complete knowledge of other
agent’s preferences. Similar is the case with monotonic con-
cession protocol. Most of the negotiations in real life, how-
ever, take place under incomplete information where agents
do not have complete knowledge about the preferences of the
other agent.
In this paper, we focus on negotiations under
incomplete information settings.

In similar research on multiagent resource allocation
(MARA), researchers have investigated the efﬁciency of al-
locations of multiple tasks or resources among multiple
agents [Endriss et al., 2003; 2006]. Existing research have
focused on identifying necessary exchanges, under complete
information, to reach Pareto optimal solution from an initial
allocation. In our research, agents do not have any informa-
tion about the other agent’s preferences and our objective is
to design a protocol using which agents can reach an optimal
agreement.

3 Negotiation framework

We formally describe a representative negotiation scenario
for allocation of multiple indivisible resources as a 3-tuple
(cid:2)A, R, U(cid:3), where A = {1, 2} is the set of agents, R =
{r1, r2, . . . , rH }, H ≥ 2, is the set of H indivisible resources

whose allocation are being negotiated, and U = {U1, U2} is
the set of utility functions, where Ui is the utility function of
agent i. Each resource is considered as a negotiation issue.
The negotiating agents must agree on the allocation of the re-
sources. We assume a monotonic scenario, where an agent’s
utility increases if it possesses one more resource. Therefore,
each agent wants to obtain each of the resources and for dif-
ferent bundles of resources, it has different utilities. The val-
uations for all possible bundles of resources is known as the
agent’s complete preference, which is not known to the other
agent.

We now deﬁne some terms formally:

Outcome: An outcome O is an allocation of the resources to
different agents. Formally, O : R (cid:5)→ R2×H
{0,1}, where
R2×H
{0,1} is a 2 × H matrix, whose (i, j) cell content,
ij ∈ {0, 1}, presents agent i’s allocation of the jth
xO
re-
source. xO
resource is allocated to agent i,
2 )(cid:2),
otherwise xO
where RO
is the column vector repre-
senting the allocation of resources to agent i under out-
come O.

ij = 0. We can write R2×H

{0,1} as (RO

ij = 1 if jth

i1, . . . , xO

i = (xO

1 , RO

iH )(cid:2)

Utility: For agent i, utility of an outcome O is deﬁned as:
(cid:5)→ R+, where R+ is the set of non-negative

: RO
i

U O
i
real numbers.

Pareto optimality: An outcome O is Pareto optimal if there
exists no other outcome O(cid:2)
such that all agent’s utility in
O(cid:2)
is at least as good as their utility in O and at least
one agent’s utility is more in O(cid:2). If outcome O is Pareto
optimal, there cannot exist any outcome O(cid:2)
such that,
U O(cid:2)
i > U O
for at least
i
one i.

for both i = 1, 2 and U O(cid:2)

i ≥ U O
i

Individually rational agent: An

agent i will accept an agreement O(cid:2)
U O(cid:2)

i ≥ U O
i .

individually

rational
instead of O only if

Egalitarian social welfare: For an outcome O, egalitar-
ian social welfare, ESW (O), is deﬁned as the mini-
mum utility among the agents under that outcome, i.e.,
ESW (O) = mini∈A{U O

i }.

We now present an example of a bilateral negotiation sce-
nario involving 4 indivisible resources: A, B, C, and D. The
utilities of the two agents for different allocations are given
in Table 1. Both agents want to maximize their individual
utilities.

4 Existing negotiation protocols
In this section, we present existing negotiation protocols for
allocation of indivisible resources among agents when agents
do not have any knowledge of the preferences of the other
agents:

Strict alteration: In this protocol, agents take alternate turns
and in each turn an agent selects one resource from the
set of resources not yet allocated. After an agent se-
lects a resource, the resource will be removed from the
set [Brams and Taylor, 2000]. The advantage of this pro-
tocol is its simplicity and the time required to reach an

IJCAI-07

1495

Allocation

({},{ABCD})
({A},{BCD})
({B},{ACD})
({C},{ABD})
({D},{ABC})
({AB},{CD})
({AC},{BD})
({AD},{BC})
({BC},{AD})
({BD},{AC})
({CD},{AB})
({ABC},{D})
({ABD},{C})
({ACD},{B})
({BCD},{A})
({ABCD},{})

U1 U2
20
0
6
12
14
8
16
5
18
7
9
8
9
10
8
11
8
10
13
11
12
15
6
12
7
14
7
16
14
8
0
20

Table 1: Utilities of two agents for different allocations where
(x,y) represents allocation of item sets x and y to agent 1 and
2 respectively.

agreement. The agreements reached, however, are often
very inefﬁcient.

Balanced alteration: This protocol is used to improve fair-
ness. Here it is assumed that an agent who ﬁrst chooses
a resource has an advantage over the agent who chooses
second. Hence, the second agent will have the oppor-
tunity to choose third, and so on [Brams and Taylor,
2000]. Therefore, one agent gets to choose in turns
1, 4, 5, 8, . . . , and the other agent in turns 2, 3, 6, 7, . . . .
This protocol has similar advantages and disadvantages
as the strict alternate protocol.

Exchange auctions: This protocol is an exchange-based ex-
tension of the Contract-Net protocol [Golfarelli et al.,
1997]. This protocol assumes an initial allocation of the
resources to the agents. The protocol allows the agents
to exchange resources to improve the allocation. An
agent announces one or more resources for exchanges
and other agents bid one or more resources that they are
ready to exchange. But this protocol does not guarantee
Pareto optimality unless repeated inﬁnitely.

5 Our proposed negotiation protocol

In this section we present our proposed protocol: Protocol
to reach Optimal agreement in Negotiation Over Multiple In-
divisible Resources (PONOMIR). We ﬁrst deﬁne some con-
cepts required to describe our protocol.

Negotiation tree: We assume that the issues or resources
are ordered in some way, e.g., lexicographically. In this
paper, we conceptualize the allocations of the resources
as a tree, known as negotiation tree. For a negotiation
over H resources, the maximum possible depth of the
negotiation tree is H, the root being at level 0. The root
node represents a null allocation to the agents and then
each successive level represents allocation of the next

level imply that the lth

resource in the order chosen. For a bilateral negotia-
tion, the negotiation tree is a binary tree3. The left and
right branches at the lth
resource
will be allocated to agent 1 and 2 respectively. Each leaf
node at level H represents one possible allocation of the
resources and the path to reach that leaf node from the
root speciﬁes the allocation of all the resources. Such a
negotiation tree is shown in Figure 1 for the negotiation
scenario presented in Table 1. A negotiation tree is cre-
ated by the negotiating agents in a distributed manner. It
starts with a root with id = 04. The tree is then created in
a top-down process, where at any level agent 1 can only
create the right child of a node in the previous level of
the tree. Similarly, agent 2 can only create the left child
nodes. Each agent, however, may choose not to create
any node, which it can, at any level. If an agent does not
create a node, that node will be marked as black node
and no further sub-tree will be created from that black
node. Therefore, a black node prunes that node and its
descendants. The distributed formation of a negotiation
tree can be implemented using message-passing. At any
level, each agent knows the nodes created at the previous
level and the nodes that either of the agents can create at
this level. Hence both agents can send a message to the
other agent stating the nodes it has created at this level
before proceeding to the next level.

Best possible agreement (BPA): At each node of the nego-
tiation tree, each agent has a best possible agreement
which is the allocation where the resources until the cur-
rent level are allocated according to the path from the
tree root to this node and the remaining resources are
allocated to this agent.

Now we present our three-phase protocol, PONOMIR.
The ﬁrst phase of PONOMIR consists of a primary allocation
procedure using any one of strict alteration or balanced
alteration protocol. We have used strict alteration protocol
in this paper. The second phase consists of distributed
formation of the negotiation tree by the negotiating agents.
After the second phase, the agents will be left with few
probable agreements.
In the third phase, agents reach the
ﬁnal Pareto optimal solution by exchanging offers.

First phase of PONOMIR:

Step 1: A random device chooses one of the two agents and
marks this agent as S. Denote the set of resources yet to
be negotiated by G. Initially, G = R.

Step 2: Now, S will choose one of the remaining resources,

C ∈ G. C is allocated to S.

Step 3: Mark the other agent as S and update G to G − {C}.

If |G| > 1 return to Step 2, otherwise stop.

After the ﬁrst phase, there is an initial allocation, L, of
the resources as suggested by the strict alteration protocol.

3If n agents are negotiating, the tree will be n-ary.
4The node id of any other nodes in the tree will be 2 ×
id(parent) + 1 if it is a left node and 2 × id(parent) + 2 if it
is a right node.

IJCAI-07

1496

For this allocation L, agents have corresponding utilities
U L
i , i = 1, 2. If no mutual improvement is possible in
the subsequent phases, agents will have to agree on this
allocation5. This phase ensures that the agreement reached
will be at least as good as L.

Second phase of PONOMIR: This phase involves the
distributed generation of the negotiation tree by the negotiat-
ing agents.
Step 1: Let l denotes the level of the negotiation tree. Set

l = 0. The root node is created with id(root) = 0.

Step 2: Agents 1 and 2, respectively, can create the right and
left child nodes of each node in the level, l, of the tree
and send a message to the other agent.

Step 3 Increase l by one. If l < H and no node is created at
level l, the negotiation terminates and the ﬁnal allocation
will be L. If l < H and there is at least one node in
this level of the tree, go to Step 2. If l = H, stop the
second phase, collect all the allocations corresponding
to the nodes at level H and proceed to the third phase.
We refer to this set of leaf nodes (or allocations) as Q.

After this phase, the agents will be left with a small number
of probable agreements in Q. The ﬁnal agreement will be
chosen in the third phase. Note that, at each level agent
1 can create only right child nodes and agent 2 can create
only left child nodes. A right child implies that the resource
representing that level is allocated to agent 2. Since we
assume a monotonic scenario, the utility of the BPA of agent
2 will not decrease for allocating a resource to agent 2, but
the utility of the BPA of agent 1 may decrease. So, it is
sufﬁcient if agent 1 only checks whether if it is interested
in expanding this right subtree.
Similarly agent 2 only
needs to check the left child.
If the utility of the BPA for
an agent at any node is less than its utility under the initial
allocation, L, it is sure that any allocation under the subtree
starting at that tree node will always produce utility less
than its utility under initial allocation L. An individually
rational agent has no incentive to create that node.
If a
node is not created at any level by the corresponding agent,
no further subtree will be generated from it. This implies
that all the allocations under that subtree are discarded. If
agents are individually rational, for each allocation in Q,
the utilities of both agents are at least as much as their
corresponding utilities in L. This is because all allocations
which produce less utility to any of the agents will be dis-
carded by that agent in the distributed tree generation process.

Third phase of PONOMIR: In this phase, agents will
select the ﬁnal agreement from allocations in the set Q. Let
us deﬁne a set F, as the set of ﬁnal agreements. Initially, it
contains only the initial allocation L, i.e., F = {L}.

Step 1: One agent is chosen randomly to start. Mark this
agent as S and the other agent as S(cid:2). Now, S needs to
propose an allocation q from Q.

5We assume that both agents prefer to agree on this allocation

over disagreement.

Step 2: S(cid:2)

can remove any other allocation O from the set Q

and F if U O

S (cid:2) ≤ U q

S (cid:2) . Update F to F ∪ {q}.

Step 3: If Q is not empty, then swap the agents S and S(cid:2)
and go to Step 2. Otherwise, the set F contains the set
of ﬁnal agreements. If only one element remains in F,
it will be selected as the ﬁnal agreement. Otherwise,
any one of them will be chosen randomly as the ﬁnal
agreement.

6 Properties of PONOMIR

The objective of an efﬁcient protocol is to lead rational agents
to efﬁcient agreements. As we have discussed earlier, our
goal is to obtain Pareto optimal agreements and to increase
fairness as much as possible. As a measure of fairness, we
use egalitarian social welfare.

Our proposed negotiation protocol, PONOMIR, is not
strategy-proof and does not guarantee Pareto optimal agree-
ments if agents are arbitrarily risk seeking. However, in this
paper we consider a completely uncertain negotiation sce-
nario where participating agents do not have any knowledge
about the preferences of the other agents and agents do not
want to reveal their utilities for different allocations. The
rational behavior of the agents, under such complete uncer-
tainty, depends on their risk attitudes. Bossert introduced and
argued for uncertainty aversion for decision making under
such complete uncertain scenarios [Bossert, 1997]. In this ne-
gotiation scenario, we assume that the rational agents will be
cooperative-individually rational. An agent is cooperative-
individually rational if it satisﬁes two properties: i) it does
not take any risky action that can lead to an agreement which
produces less utility than what it is already assured of, and,
ii) if there exists two agreements which produces same utility
to it but different utility to the opponent, then it will agree
to accept any of the agreement proposed by the opponent.
PONOMIR guarantees Pareto optimal agreements if the par-
ticipating agents are cooperative-individually rational. The
agreements reached also guarantees at least as much egalitar-
ian social welfare as the agreements reached by the existing
protocols. Since the agents are individually rational, both of
them will discard all agreements that produce utilities less
than the utility from the initial allocation, L, obtained in the
ﬁrst phase and hence the egalitarian social welfare will never
decrease.

Proposition 1: The agreement reached by cooperative-
individually rational agents using the PONOMIR pro-
tocol is Pareto optimal.

To prove this proposition, we ﬁrst prove the following lem-
mas:
Lemma 1: An allocation O will not be discarded in the sec-
i , ∀i = 1, 2, where, L is the

ond phase, only if U O
initial allocation after ﬁrst phase.

i ≥ U L

Proof: There are two parts of this proof. In the ﬁrst part we
will prove that any allocation O(cid:2), for which there is at
least one agent i such that U O(cid:2)
i , will be discarded
in the second phase. In the second part we will show
that the remaining allocations will not be discarded. For

i < U L

IJCAI-07

1497

i < U L

an allocation like O(cid:2), such that U O(cid:2)
i , there will
be at least one level in the distributed tree construction
process when agent i will realize that its utility from the
BPA at that node is less than U L
i . Therefore, the agent
has no incentive to create that node and hence the alloca-
tion will be discarded. The proof of the next part of the
lemma is clear from the properties of the agents. Since
they are cooperative-individually rational, they do not
want to discard any possibility which can lead to an al-
location which produces utility at least as much as the
utility produced by the initial allocation.

Lemma 2: While proposing an allocation in the third phase,
an agent always propose the allocation that produces
highest utility among the set of remaining allocations Q.
Proof: In a complete uncertain environment, the likelihood
of the opponent accepting any allocation is not known
a priori. Hence, an allocation of higher utility to an
agent should be proposed before an allocation with a
lower utility. Therefore, a cooperative-individually ra-
tional agent proposes the allocation with the highest util-
ity from the set of remaining allocations Q.

Lemma 3: After an agent proposes an allocation in the third
phase, the other agent will remove all allocations which
produce less utility to it from the sets Q and F.

Proof: An individually rational agent will remove all alloca-
tions that produce less utility to it compared to the offer
proposed by the other agent as it is guaranteed to get the
allocation proposed by the other agent. But if it does
not remove any one of those it may end up with one
of them which will not be individually rational. It will
also remove the allocations which produce equal utility
to it. According to the previous lemma a rational oppo-
nent proposes the offer which produces highest utility to
the opponent. This implies that an allocation which is
not offered by the opponent produces less than or equal
utility to the opponent. Therefore even if it produces
equal utility to this agent, it is either equivalent or Pareto
dominated by the allocation proposed by the opponent.
So, the agent should remove this from the set.
Also, the agent will not remove other allocations with
higher utility as this may eliminate possible agreements
which have better utility for it.

Proof of Proposition 1: From Lemmas 1, 2, and 3, it is
evident that any allocation in the ﬁnal set F is not
Pareto dominated by any of the other possible alloca-
tions. Therefore, each of the allocations is Pareto opti-
mal.

7 Experiments
In this section, we present experimental results to show the
effectiveness of PONOMIR to reduce search requirement for
the negotiating agents. Before that we present an illustration
of our proposed protocol.

7.1 An illustration
In this
subsection, we demonstrate the execution of
PONOMIR on the example presented in Table 1. In the ﬁrst

Root

1

2

(14,  )

1

2

(  ,14)

(12,  )

1

2

(11,  )

(  ,16)

1

2

(7,  )

(  ,8)

1

2

1

2

(  ,13 )

(8,  )

(  ,15)

(5,  )

Level 1:
(Resource A)

(  ,12)

Level 2:
(Resource B)

Level 3:
(Resource C)

Level 4:
(Resource D)

Figure 1: Negotiation tree formed for example in Table 1.

phase, agents take alternate turns to choose one resource. Let
us assume that an agent, at ﬁrst, chooses the resource which
produces highest utility to it among the resources yet to be
allocated. Then onwards, it will choose the resource, from
the set of resources not yet allocated, which produce high-
est utility together with other resources already allocated to
it. Agents with this strategy produce an initial allocation, L,
where L = ({B, D}, {A, C}), i.e., resources B and D are
allocated to agent 1 and resources A and C are allocated to
agent 2. The corresponding utilities to the agents are 11 and
13 respectively.

Figure 1 shows the formation of the negotiation tree in the
second phase. For example, consider the formation at level 1.
While verifying the left child of the root node, which implies
that the resource A is allocated to agent 1 (as shown in the
corresponding edge of the graph), agent 2 observes that if re-
source A is allocated to agent 1, the best possible agreement
for agent 2 will be ({A},{B, C, D}) where all other resources
will be allocated to it and the corresponding utility is 12, less
than U L
2 , its utility from the initial allocation, L. So, it de-
cides not to create the left child and therefore it is marked
as a black node and no subtree will be generated from it.
Hence, all allocations under this subtree are discarded from
the set of possible agreements. Note that in the Figure 1,
only one utility is given at each node which is the utility of
the BPA of the agent who is deciding whether to create that
node. The corresponding utility for the other agent is blank
as it is not known to the deciding agent. At the end of the sec-
ond phase only two allocations are chosen for the third phase:
O1 = ({B, D}, {A, C}) and O2 = ({C, D}, {A, B}). Ob-
serve that both agents need to ﬁnd the utility for only 6 nodes,
instead of 24 = 16 nodes.
In the third phase one agent
is chosen to propose one allocation. The chosen agent pro-
poses the second allocation, O2, as that produces highest util-
ity to it and the other agent will remove O1 from the ﬁnal
set of chosen agreements, F. So, the ﬁnal agreement will be
({C, D}, {A, B}), which is Pareto optimal and with an egal-
itarian social welfare 12, which is the highest possible egali-
tarian social welfare in the entire space of allocations.

IJCAI-07

1498

7.2 Experimental results
We tested PONOMIR on a large number of scenarios varying
agents’ preferences and number of issues. We show the aver-
age reduction in the search effort required by each agent. We
consider monotonic utility scenarios, which implies that for
any agent the utility of a bundle of n resources is more than
any of the n possible subsets of (n − 1) resources. We vary
the number of resources n. For each n, we generate 10, 000
random examples of agent preferences and execute the ne-
gotiations using the PONOMIR protocol. We observed that
they always reach Pareto optimal agreements and signiﬁcant
percentage of these produce maximum possible egalitarian
social welfare. For the agreements where the fairness are
not maximum, they are close to this maximum value. But,
this result depends on the strategies used by the agents in the
ﬁrst phase of PONOMIR. It is, however, guaranteed that the
agreement reached will be Pareto optimal. We have also cal-
culated the average percentage of allocations that each agent
searched during each negotiation process compared to all al-
locations that an agent needs to search to ﬁnd a Pareto optimal
outcome using protocols like one-step monotonic concession
protocol under complete information. Table 2 shows signif-
icant reduction in average search by each individual agents
using PONOMIR.

# of resources % of allocations searched by each agent

4
8
12
14
16

53.8
50.4
47.4
45.9
44.1

Table 2: Reduction in search by agents

8 Conclusion and Future work
Existing research in multiagent systems for allocating multi-
ple indivisible resources have focused on identifying neces-
sary exchanges, under complete information, to reach Pareto
optimal agreements. In a large number of real-world nego-
tiations, however, agents are required to negotiate under a
completely uncertain environment. In this paper, we propose
an efﬁcient three-phase negotiation protocol, PONOMIR, for
negotiation over multiple indivisible resources when an agent
does not know the preferences of the other agents. We have
shown that PONOMIR leads rational agents to Pareto optimal
agreements and the negotiating agents do not need to explic-
itly reveal their utilities for different allocations. The agree-
ment reached depends on the initial allocation after phase 1,
but will always be Pareto optimal if the negotiating agents are
cooperative-individually rational.

The last two phases of PONOMIR can also be used sepa-
rately for producing Pareto optimal outcomes given any ini-
tial allocation of the resources to the agents. This is a useful
property of PONOMIR as in several multiagent resource allo-
cation problems the negotiating agents may initially possess
some resources. The second and third phase of PONOMIR
guarantees Pareto optimal outcome in such situations.

We have also experimentally shown the effectiveness of
the PONOMIR protocol for reducing the search costs of the
participating agents. PONOMIR, however, cannot guaran-
tee a timely agreement if the number of resources is very
high, e.g., 100. Fortunately most real-life negotiations do
not involve very high number of resources and PONOMIR
produces agreements quickly for 20 resources or less. We
are currently working on improving the time complexity of
our protocol to address the problem of negotiations over very
large number of resources.

A major advantage of PONOMIR is its extensibility to
multilateral negotiation. We have presented PONOMIR for
bilateral negotiation, but this can be extended to multilateral
negotiation with minor modiﬁcations.

We have experimentally observed that the fairness of the
agreements reached using this protocol are high. But we can
only guarantee that the fairness will not be reduced after the
ﬁrst phase. We are working to develop a novel ﬁrst phase
of our protocol to ensure increased guaranteed fairness of the
negotiation outcome.
Acknowledgments: This work has been supported in part by
an NSF award IIS-0209208 and an NASA EPSCoR RIG.

References
[Bossert, 1997] Walter Bossert. Uncertainty aversion in non-
probabilistic decision models. Mathematical Social Sci-
ences, 34(3):191–203, 1997.

[Brams and Taylor, 1996] Steven J. Brams and Alan D. Tay-
lor. Fair Division: From cake-cutting to dispute resolution.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: UK, 1996.

[Brams and Taylor, 2000] Steven J. Brams and Alan D. Tay-
lor. The Win-Win Solution: Guaranteeing Fair Shares to
Everybody. W. W. Norton and Company, 2000.

[Chevaleyre et al., 2006] Yann Chevaleyre, Paul E. Dunne,
Ulle Endriss, Jerome Lang, Michel Lemaitre, Nicolas
Maudet, Julian Padget, Steve Phelps, Juan A. Rodriguez-
Aguilar, and Paulo Sousa. Issues in multiagent resource
allocation. Informatica, 30:3–31, 2006.

[Endriss et al., 2003] Ulle Endriss, Nicolas Maudet, Fariba
Sadri, and Francesca Toni. On optimal outcomes of ne-
gotiations over resources. In AAMAS-03, pages 177–184,
New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM Press.

[Endriss et al., 2006] Ulle Endriss, Nicolas Maudet, Fariba
Sadri, and Francesca Toni. Negotiating socially optimal
allocations of resources. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research, 25:315–348, 2006.

[Golfarelli et al., 1997] Matteo Golfarelli, Dario Maio, and
Stefano Rizzi. A task-swap negotiation protocol based
on the contract net paradigm. Technical Report 005-97,
CSITE, University of Bologna, 1997.

[Rosenschein and Zlotkin, 1994] Jeffrey S. Rosenschein and

Gilad Zlotkin. Rules of Encounter. MIT Press, 1994.

[Sandholm, 1998] Tuomas W. Sandholm. Contract types for
satisﬁcing task allocation: I theoretical results. In AAAI
Spring Symposium on Satisﬁcing Models, 1998.

IJCAI-07

1499

