           Logic Programs for Consistently Querying Data Integration Systems 

                           Loreto Bravo Leopoldo Bertossi 
            Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile Carleton University 
           Departamento de Ciencia de Computation School of Computer Science 
                          Santiago, Chile. Ottawa, Canada 
                        lbravo@ing.puc.cl bertossi ©scs.carleton.ca 


                        Abstract                               that are described by the view definitions V\ (X, Y) <— R(X, 
                                                               Y); V   {X,Y) - R{X,Y). The global functional depen•
     We solve the problem of obtaining answers to                      2
                                                               dency (FD) R: X —> Y is violated through the pair of tuples 
     queries posed to a mediated integration system un­
                                                               {(a,b),(a,c)}. □ 
     der the local-as-view paradigm that are consistent 
     wrt to certain global integrity constraints. For this,    In a virtual integration system, the mediator should solve po­
     the query program is combined with logic program­         tential inconsistencies when the query plan is generated. In 
     ming specifications under the stable model seman­         [Bertossi et a/., 2002], under the LAV approach, a methodol­
     tics of the class of minimal global instances, and of     ogy for generating query plans to compute answers to limited 
     the class of their repairs.                               forms of queries that are consistent wrt an also restricted class 
                                                               of universal ICs was presented. The limitation comes from a 
                                                               first step where a query transformation for consistent query 
1 Introduction 
                                                               answering (CQA) is performed [Arenas et al, 1999]. Next, 
For several reasons a database may become inconsistent wrt     query plans are generated for the transformed query. How­
certain integrity constraints (ICs). In such a situation, possi­ ever, [Bertossi et al, 2002] provides the right semantics for 
bly most of the data is still consistent. In [Arenas et al., 1999] CQA in mediated integrated systems (see Section 2). 
consistent data in a single relational database is characterized 
                                                               Example 2 (example I continued) If we pose to the global 
as the data that is invariant under all minimal restorations of 
                                                               system the query Q : Ans(X,Y) <— R(X,Y), we obtain 
consistency, i.e. true in all repaired versions of the original 
                                                               the answers {Ans(a,b),Ans(c,d),Ans(a, c),Ans(d,c)}. 
instance (the repairs). In that paper and others [Arenas et al, 
                                                               However, only the tuples Ans(c, d), Ans(d, e) should be re-
2000; Greco etal, 2001], some mechanisms have been devel­
                                                               turned as consistent answers wrt the FD R: X —> Y. D 
oped for retrieving consistent answer when queries are posed 
to such an inconsistent database.                                In this paper, under the LAV approach and assuming that 
   When independent data sources are integrated, inconsisten­  sources arc open (or incomplete) [Abiteboul et al, 1998], we 
cies wrt to global ICs are likely to occur, specially when the solve the problem of retrieving consistent answers to global 
sources are virtually integrated by means of a mediator, be­   queries. We consider arbitrary universal ICs and referential 
cause the data sources are kept completely independent. The    ICs, in consequence all the ICs that are used in database 
mediator provides a global schema as an interface, and is re­  praxis [Abiteboul et al, 1995]. View definitions are conjunc­
sponsible for generating query plans to answer global queries  tive queries, and global queries are expressed in Datalog and 
by retrieving data sets from the sources and combining them    its extensions with negation. The methodology can be sum­
into a final answer set for the user.                          marized as follows. First, in Section 3, the minimal legal 
                                                               global instances of a mediated system are specified by means 
   "Local-as-view" (LAV) is a common paradigm for data in­
                                                               of logic programs with a stable model, or answer sets, seman­
tegration that describes each data source as a set of views over 
                                                               tics. Next, in Section 4, the repairs of the minimal global in­
the global schema. Another one, "global-as-view" (GAV), 
                                                               stances are specified as the stable models of disjunctive logic 
defines every global relation as a view of the set of relations 
                                                               programs. Those programs contain annotation constants, like 
in the sources ([Lenzerini, 2002] is a good survey). Query 
                                                               those used to specify repairs of single relational databases for 
answering is harder in LAV [Abiteboul et al., 1998]. On the 
                                                               CQA [Barcelo et ai, 2002]. Finally, in Section 5, consistent 
other side, the LAV approach allows more flexibility when 
                                                               answers to queries are obtained by running a query program 
new sources are integrated into an existing system. However, 
                                                               in combination with the previous two specification programs. 
the flexibility to add new sources, without having to consider 
the other sources in the system, makes inconsistencies wrt 
global ICs more likely.                                        2 Preliminaries 
Example 1 Consider the LAV based global integration sys•       2.1 Global schemas and view definitions 

tem G1 with a global relation R(X, Y) and two source rela•     A global schema R is modeled by a finite set of relations 

tions v1 = {Vi(a,6), V1(c,d)} and v2 = {V2{a,c),V2{d,e)}       {R1,R2, ...,Rn} over a fixed domain U. With these relation 


10                                                                                          AI AND DATA INTEGRATION Al AND DATA INTEGRATION                                                                                                11 12                                                                                          Al AND DATA INTEGRATION                                                                          a propagation of changes is triggered (rule 2. below). The 
                                                                         annotations t** and f** are just used to read off the literals 
                                                                         that are inside (resp. outside) a repair. This is achieved by 
                                                                         means of rules 6. below, that are used to interpret the models 
                                                                         as database repairs. The following is the program: 


                                                                         Only rules 2. depend on the ICs. They say how to repair them 
                                                                         when violations are found. Rules 3. contain the database 
                                                                         atoms. Rules 4. capture the CWA. Rules 5. are denial pro-
                                                                         gram constraints to discard models that contain an atom an•

                                                                         notated with both ta and fa. The program has two stable 


                                                                         The next definition combines into one program the specifica­
                                                                         tion of the minimal legal instances and their repairs. 

4 Specification of Repairs of a Global System 

In [Barcelo etal, 2002] repairs of single relational databases 
are specified using disjunctive logic programs with stable 
model semantics. The approach works for arbitrary universal 
and referential ICs in the sense that the repairs of the database 
correspond to the stable models of the program. We briefly 
explain these programs, because they will be used to specify 
repairs of integration systems. 
   First, the database predicates in the program are expanded 
with an extra argument to be filled with one of a set of new an­
notation constants. An atom in (outside) the original database 

is annotated with ta (fd). Annotations ta and fa are consid­
ered advisory values, to solve conflicts between the database 

and the ICs. If an atom gets the derived annotation fa, it 
means an advise to make it false, i.e. to delete it from the 

database. Similarly, an atom that gets the annotation ta must 
be inserted into the database.                                           where X is the tuple of all variables appearing in database 
                                                                         atoms in the rule. 
Example 11 Consider the integrity constraint I —> 
R(x)), and the inconsistent database instance r = {P(a)}. 
The logic program should have the effect of repairing the 
database. Single, local repair steps are obtained by deriv•

ing the annotations ta or fa. This is done when each IC is 
considered in isolation, but there may be interacting ICs, and 
the repair process may take several steps and should stabilize 
at some point. In order to achieve this, we use annotations t*, 
f *. The latter, for example, groups together the annotations 

fd and fa for the same atom (rules 1 and 4. below). These 
derived annotations are used to give a feedback to the bodies 
of the rules that produce the local, single repair steps, so that 


Al AND DATA INTEGRATION                                                                                                                    13                                                                then to the certain answers if Q is monotone. If we are inter­
                                                               ested in just the minimal answers to Q, without considering 
                                                               consistency issues, then they can be computed as above, but 
 Rules 6. repair referential ICs by deletion of tuples or inser­
 tion of null values that are not propagated through other ICs 
 (.Barcelo et al, 2003]. For this purpose, we consider that the 
                                                               6 Conclusions 

                                                               We have presented the most general approach so far to spec­
                                                               ifying, by means of disjunctive logic programs with a sta­
                                                               ble model semantics, the database repairs of a mediated in­
 Definition 11 The instance associated to a choice model M.    tegration system with open sources under the LAV approach. 
                                                               Then, consistent answers to queries posed to such a system 
                                                               are computed by running a query program together with the 
                                                               specification of database repairs under the skeptical or cau­
                                                               tious stable model semantics. The specification of the repairs 
                                                               is achieved by first specifying the class of minimal global le­
                                                               gal instances of the integration system. To the best of our 
5 Consistent Answers 
                                                               knowledge, this is also the first specification, under the LAV 
                                                               paradigm, of such global instances in a logic programming 
                                                               formalism. This specification is inspired by the inverse rules 
                                                               algorithms, where auxiliary functions are replaced by auxil­
                                                               iary predicates that are forced to be functional by means of 
ements of the global schema R. Each positive occurrence of     the non deterministic choice operator. 
those predicates, say P(t), is replaced by P(t, t**); and each   The methodology works for conjunctive view definitions, 
negative occurrence, say not P(t), by P(i, f**). This pro­     but can be extended to disjunctive views using the corre­
gram has a query predicate Ans that collects the answers to    sponding extension of the inverse rules algorithm [Duschka, 
Q. In particular, first order queries can be expressed as strati- 1997]. Wrt the ICs and queries it can handle, the approach 
                                                               works for arbitrary universal and referential integrity con­

                                                               strains and queries expressed as Datalognot programs. In 
                                                               consequence, the current approach to consistent query an­
                                                               swering (CQA) subsumes and extends the methodologies pre­
                                                               sented in [Bertossi et al, 2002] for integration systems, and 
                                                               the one in [Barcelo et al., 2002] for stand alone relational 
                                                               databases. 
                                                                 For reasons of space, we just mention a few optimiza­
                                                               tions of the specification programs and their execution. The 
                                                               materialization of the CWA present in can be 
                                                               avoided by program transformation. Classes of common 
                                                               ICs can be identified for which becomes 
                                                               head-cycle-free, and in consequence, can be transformed 
                                                               into a non disjunctive program [Ben-Eliyahu et al., 1994; 
                                                               Barcelo et al., 2003]. The program for CQA can be split [Lif-
                                                               schitz et al., 1994] into the program that specifies minimal 
                                                               legal instances, the program that specifies their repairs and 
                                                               the query program. The first is non stratified, but its models 
                                                               can be computed bottom-up as fixpoints of an iterative op­
                                                               erator [Giannotti et al., 2001]; and the second one is locally 
                                                               stratified [Przymusinski, 1991]. Finally, if the query program 
                                                               is stratified, e.g. if the original query is first-order, then the 
                                                               consistent answers can be eventually computed by a bottom-
                                                               up evaluation mechanism. 
                                                                 For CQA we have successfully experimented with DLV 
                                                               [Eiter et al., 2000]. The current implementations of the dis­
                                                              junctive stable models semantics would be much more effec­
                                                               tive in database applications if it were possible to evaluate 
                                                               open queries in a form that is guided by the query rather than 
                                                               based on, first, massive grounding of the whole program and, 
                                                               second, considering what can be found in every (completely 
                                                               constructed) stable model of the program. 


14                                                                                          Al AND DATA INTEGRATION 