         Integrating Multiple Internet Directories by Instance-based Learning 

                          Ryutaro Ichise, Hiedeaki Takeda, Shinichi Honiden 
                                     National Institute of Informatics 
                         2-1-2 Hitotsubashi Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 101-8430 Japan 
                                    {ichise,takeda,honiden}@nii.ac.jp 


                     Abstract                          being registered in the search engine's archive. Directory-
                                                       based search engines provide knowledge of WWW naviga•
     Finding desired information on the Internet is be• tion. Users reach the desired information by going up and 
     coming increasingly difficult. Internet directories down the directories. 
     such as Yahoo!, which organize web pages into hi•   Although pages are carefully selected and well-organized, 
     erarchical categories, provide one solution to this a single Internet directory is not sufficient because the In•
     problem; however, such directories are of limited ternet directory tends to have some bias in both collecting 
     use because some bias is applied both in the col• and categorizing pages. In order to solve these problems, 
     lection and categorization of pages. We propose   we herein propose a method that coordinates multiple In•
     a method for integrating multiple Internet directo• ternet directories by estimating directory similarities. The 
     ries by instance-based learning. Our method pro•  proposed method does not simply merge multiple directories 
     vides the mapping of categories in order to trans• into a larger directory, but instead determines the relationship 
     fer documents from one directory to another, in•  between directories. Many public Internet directories exist. 
     stead of simply merging two directories into one. Some are designed to cover wide domains, while others fo•
     We present herein an effective algorithm for de•  cus on special domains. Such Internet directories are diffi•
     termining similar categories between two directo• cult to merge. Moreover, these directories should not be inte•
     ries via a statistical method called the k-statistic. grated, because the existing differences in concept hierarchies 
     In order to evaluate the proposed method, we con• among the directories is important when selecting and using 
     ducted experiments using two actual Internet direc• directory-based search engines. In this paper, we propose a 
     tories, Yahoo! and Google. The results show that  method to solve this problem by determining the rules for 
     the proposed method achieves extensive improve•   mapping categories in a directory to those in another direc•
     ments relative to both the Naive Bayes and En•    tory. Our solution can be applicable not only to the Internet 
     hanced Naive Bayes approaches, without any text   directory problem, but also to the integration of web market•
     analysis on documents. 
                                                       place catalogs [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001]1 and ontology in•
                                                       tegration in general. 
                                                         The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
1 Introduction                                         Section 2, we define the problem of coordinating multiple In•
The World-Wide Web (WWW) is now used not only by com•  ternet directories. In Section 3, we discuss related studies. In 
puter specialists, but by all sorts of people, from children Section 4, we propose a new machine learning method for the 
to businessmen and businesswomen, which has resulted in above-mentioned problem. Next, in Section 5, we compare 
an enormous quantity of web pages available on the Inter• the performance of the proposed method to that of the En•
net. This makes finding pages containing the desired infor• hanced Naive Bayes approach [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001] 
mation rather difficult. Search engines are requisite for find• for an integration problem using real Internet directories. Fi•
ing the desired information. In general, current search en• nally, in Section 6, we present our conclusions. 
gines perform their functions via one of two methods: a key•
word search and a directory search. A keyword search en• 2 Integration of Multiple Internet Directories 
gine performs searches by means of user-specified keywords. 
Keyword-based search engines like Google can reliably find In order to state the problem, we introduce a model for the 
pages containing the specified keywords. However, if the Internet directories we intend to integrate. We assume there 
user does not have a thorough knowledge of his/her search are two Internet directories: a source directory and a target 
domain and cannot choose the appropriate keywords, the directory. The documents in the source Internet directory are 
search engine is useless. In such a situation, directory-based 
search engines do a good job. In a directory-based search 'For example, the integration of a distributor's catalog and a web 
engine, pages are evaluated and organized by humans before marketplace. 


22                                                                              Al AND DATA INTEGRATION expected to be assigned to categories in the target Internet di• is constructed using the words in the documents. However, 
rectory. This produces a virtually integrated Internet directory this classification scheme ignores the hierarchical structure of 
in which the documents in the source directory are expected classes and, moreover, cannot use the categorization informa•
to be members of both the source and target directories. This tion in the source directory. Enhanced Naive Bayes [Agrawal 
integrated directory inherits the categorization hierarchy from and Srikant, 2001], hereafter referred to as E-NB, is a method 
the target Internet directory.                         which does use this information. E-NB will be discussed 
  The Internet directory model for the source and target is as in the next section. GLUE [Doan ct al., 2002] is another 
follows:                                               type of system employing NB. To improve accuracy, GLUE 
                                                       combines NB and a constraint optimization technique called 
  • The source Internet directory, Sp contains a set of cate•
                                                       relaxation labeling. However, the general performance of 
    gories, C , C , • • •, C , that are organized into an "is-
            s1  S2      sn                             the system depends on that of NB. Unlike NB, the systems 
    a" hierarchy. Each category can also contain documents. 
                                                       in [Koller and Sahami, 1997], [Wang et al., 1999] classify 
  • The target Internet directory Tp contains a set of cate• documents into hierarchical categories, and these systems use 
    gories, C11, C12, • • • , Ctm that are organized into an "is- the words in the documents for classification rules. However, 
    a" hierarchy. Each category can also contain documents. these systems cannot use the categorization information in the 
  The proposed model permits documents to be assigned to source directory. 
intermediate categories. This model is similar to the catalog Another type of approach is ontology merging/alignment 
model in lAgrawal and Srikant, 2001], except that the cate• systems. These systems combine two ontologies, which 
gories are organized into a conceptual hierarchy. Since the are represented in a hierarchal categorization. Chi-
catalog model ignores hierarchy structure and therefore can• maera [McGuinness et al., 2000] and PROMPT [Noy and 
not assign documents to an intermediate category, our Inter• Musen, 2000] are examples of such systems and assist in the 
net directory model is more general than the catalog model. combination of different ontologies. However, such systems 
  The problem addressed in this paper is finding an appro• require human interaction for merging or alignment. In ad•
                                                       dition to this requirement, these systems are based on the 
priate category Ct in the target directory Tp for each docu•
ment D   in the source directory Sp. An example is shown similarity between words, which introduces instability. The 
      s1                                               dictionaries used for such systems often have word similarity 
as the mapping of a black box Dx in Figure 1, where the 
black circles indicate categories and the hollow boxes indi• bias. FCA-MERGE [Stumme and Madche, 2001] is another 
cate documents. What we need to do is determine an appro• type of ontology merging method. It uses the attributes of 
priate category in Tp for a document which appears in Sp concepts to merge different ontologies. As a result, it cre•
                                                       ates a new concept without regarding the original concepts in 
but not in TD, because mapping is not necessary if the doc•
ument is included in both the source and the target directo• both ontologies. Calvanese et al. [Calvanese et al, 2001] also 
                                                       discussed an ontology integration framework with respect to 
ries. Documents D1 and D2 in Figure 1 are examples of such 
documents. This mapping can have several possibilities, e.g., global ontology and local ontology. 
                                                         As mentioned before, we also tackled the similar problem 
Dx can be mapped to an upper left category or to a lower left 
category, etc.                                         of catalog integration. An approach, besides E-NB, is to con•
                                                       struct the abstract-level structure of two hierarchies [Ome-
                                                       layenko and Fensel, 2001]. This approach does not direct 
                                                       the transformation of source and target information, but trans•
                                                       forms via the abstract-level structure. It is relatively easy to 
                                                       transfer information through many hierarchical structures, but 
                                                       it is hard to create a common structure for those hierarchies. 
                                                         The bookmark-sharing systems of Siteseer [Rucker and 
                                                       Polanco, 1997] and Blink [Blink, 2000] also deal with a 
                                                       similar problem. These systems attempt to share URL in•
                                                       formation which appears in the source bookmark but not in 
                                                       the target bookmark. These systems flatten the categoriza•
                                                       tion of bookmarks in the same manner as NB and deter•
                                                       mine the mapping of categories in each bookmark, based on 
                                                       the shared URL information. Such systems are problematic 
                                                       when a given URL does not fit into an exact category. kMe-
                                                       dia [Takeda et al, 2000] is another bookmark-sharing system 
3 Related Work                                         that uses hierarchical structures explicitly, but is dependent 
One popular approach to this kind of problem is to apply on the similarity of the words within pages. 
standard machine learning methods [Langley, 1996]. This  In the context of information retrieval, Stucken-
requires a flattened class space having one class for ev• schmidt [Stuckenschmidt, 2002] has coordinated the formal 
ery leaf node. The problem can then be considered to   model of hierarchies with multiple classification hierarchies. 
be a normal classification problem for documents. Naive In our paper, since the upper and lower boundaries of concept 
Bayes(NB) [Mitchell, 1997] is an established method used for mapping can be determined by subsumption relationships, 
this type of document classification framework. A classifier we can infer the boundary of valid mapping and also check 


A! AND DATA INTEGRATION                                                                                 23  whether or not the given mapping is consistent. In our as our measurement standard. If many documents in category 
 problem, since we have only partial evidence of classes and Csi also appear in category Ctj at the same time, we consider 
 do not know the definitions of classes, we can not apply this these two categories to be similar, because the ways of cate•
 method directly.                                      gorization in Csi and Ctj are supposed to be similar, i.e., if 
                                                       another document D comes in Csi, it is likely that D will be 
 4 Learning the Relationship between                   also included in CtJ. This method avoids both the keyword 
                                                       extraction process and the handling of word meaning. The 
    Categories of Two Internet Directories             example shown in Figure 2 illustrates that documents in the 
 In this section, we explain our method to determine the rela• bottom category in the source Internet directory can be trans•
 tionship between categories in two Internet directories. One ferred to a similar category in the target Internet directory. 
 characteristic of the proposed method is to use the hierarchi•
 cal structure "as is." We use all categories including inter•
 mediate categories and leaf categories, because information 
 for categorization can also be obtained from these categories. 
 Another characteristic of the proposed method is the exclu•
 sive reliance on the categorization structure of both directo•
 ries, i.e., with no reliance on the semantic information of the 
documents. We can determine the relationship between cat•
egories of the two directories by statistically comparing the 
membership of the documents to the categories. 

4.1 Basic Concept 
Although E-NB was developed for a very similar problem, 
it is missing an important feature: categorization hierarchy. Figure 2: Document transfer from source Internet directory 
According to [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001], the initial defini• to target Internet directory. 
tion of the problem is identical to that of this paper. However, 
the previous paper assumes that "any documents assigned to 
an interior node really belong to a conceptual leaf node that 
is a child of that node," and concludes from this assumption 4.2 k-Statistic 
that "we can flatten the hierarchy to a single level and treat The remaining problem is how to determine the pairs of simi•
it as a set of categories." However, the conclusion overlooks lar categories. We adopt a statistical method to determine the 
the categorization hierarchies. The categorizations are not in• degree of similarity between two categorization criteria. The 
dependent of each other. The categorization hierarchies are K-statistic method [Fleiss, 1973] is an established method for 
usually structured using an "is-a" or another relationship. If a evaluating the similarity between two criteria. Suppose there 
document is categorized in a lower category in the categoriza• are two categorization criteria, Csi in SD and Ctj in TD. We 
tion hierarchy, then the document should also be categorized can determine whether or not a particular document belongs 
                                                       to a particular category . Consequently, documents are di•
in the upper categories 2. If we flatten the categories, such in•          3
formation regarding the relationships between categories will vided into four classes, as shown in Table 1. The symbols 
be lost.                                               N11, N12, -N21 and N22 denote the numbers of documents for 
  Another problem associated with NB is its sensitivity to these classes. For example, N11 denotes the number of doc•
the words in documents. For example, if a document con• uments which belong to both Csi and Ctj. We may logically 
tains the word bank, the category for the document could be assume that if categories Csi and Ctj have the same criterion 
a financial category; however, the category could also be a of categorization, then N12 and N21 are nearly zero, and if 
construction category. The quality of categorization with NB the two categories have a different criterion of categorization, 
is thus not stable according to the contents of documents, due then N11 and N22 are nearly zero. The k-statistic method 
to the natural language techniques of processing words. It uses this principle to determine the similarity of categoriza•
is critical to integrate Internet directories because mixing re• tion criteria. 
liable Internet directories maintained by human editors with 
less reliable and less stable machine-generated classifiers will 
confuse users and decrease their confidence. In addition to 
the problem of sensitivity, analysis of a document to extract 
words is expensive. 
  Our method focuses on the similarity of the way of catego•
rization, not the similarity of documents. Then, how do we 
measure the similarity of categorization? We utilize shared 
documents in both the source and target Internet directories In the k-statistic method, we calculate the probability P, 

   2Note that the reverse is not always true, because documents can 3 Remember that categorization in a directory is determined using 
be categorized into intermediate categories.           the nodal structure of the categorization hierarchy. 


24                                                                              Al AND DATA INTEGRATION which denotes the percentage of coincidence of the concep•
tual criteria, and the probability P' which denotes the per•
centage of coincidence of the conceptual criteria by chance. 


  As such, the value of the K-statistic is represented as the 
following equation: 


  Next, we examine whether we can assume the K = 0, 
which indicates that the percentage of coincidence for the 
two conceptual criteria is zero. We therefore calculate the 
test statistic Z according to the following equation. 


  The value Z follows a normal distribution. A null hypothe•
sis is considered to occur when the percentage of coincidence 
of the concept criteria is zero. When we assume a signifi•
cance level of 5% and the following equation is satisfied, we 
can dismiss the null hypothesis. 


  When the null hypothesis can be dismissed, the criteria are 
determined to be the same. 

4.3 Determination of Pairs of Similar Categories 
The relationship between the two categorization criteria is ex•
                                                                 Figure 3: Algorithm to determine similar category pair. 
amined from top to bottom. This algorithm is shown in Fig•
ure 3. First, the most general categories in the two catego•
rization hierarchies are compared using the K-statistic. If the 
comparison confirms that the two categories are similar, then is likely unnecessary5. This is another benefit of using the ''as 
the algorithm outputs this pair of categories. At the same    is" hierarchy, in contrast to the flattening approach. 
time, the algorithm generates all possible pairs of their chil•
dren categories. It generates two lists of categories each of 4.4 Application Policy of Rules 
which is a list of the confirmed category and its children cat•
egories. Then, the algorithm picks one category from each     Since the proposed method uses categorization similarity, if 
list and makes a pair, except for the original pair. This new a category in the source Internet directory does not have a 
pair is then evaluated recursively using the K-statistic method. similar category in the target directory, then those documents 
When a similar pair is not generated, the algorithm outputs   cannot be categorized in the target Internet directory. In order 
the pairs of similar concepts between the two categorization  to avoid this problem, we once again use the categorization 
hierarchies. They are used as mapping rules from the source   hierarchy. If the system cannot find a similar category pair 
directory to the target directory4.                           for the category containing the document, it applies the rule 
  This top-down comparison approach attempts to reduce the    generated for the parent category instead. 
exploration space, using the structure of both directories as a 
guide. Assuming that similar categories include similar sub•
categories, we can skip the combination of categories which      5This assumption may sometimes be too strong, e.g., a child cat•
                                                              egory of a category is not so relevant, whereas its child category (a 
   4The rules do not guarantee the consistency of the mappings, grandchild category of the original category) is relevant. In such 
because category hierarchies have the possibility of inconsistency cases, we should relax this constraint when exploring future candi•
with regard to similar relationships.                         dates. 


Al AND DATA INTEGRATION                                                                                               25 4.5 Computational Complexity                                    • Yahoo! : Arts / Visual-Arts / Photography 
                                                                  Google : Arts /Photography 
                                                                • Yahoo! : Computers_and_Internet / Software 
                                                                  Google : Computers / Software 
                                                                Table 2 shows the numbers of categories, the links in each 
                                                             Internet directory and the links included in both Internet di•
                                                             rectories. Links are considered to be the same when the URLs 
                                                             in both directories are identical. 


                                                                We conducted ten-fold cross validations for the shared 
                                                             links. The shared links were divided into ten data sets; nine 
                                                             of these sets were used to construct rules, and the remaining 
                                                             set was used for testing. Ten experiments were conducted for 
                                                             each data set, and the average accuracy is shown in the re•
                                                             sults. In order to compare our proposed method to the E-NB 
                                                             approach, the classifiers are assumed to correctly assign doc•
                                                             uments when the document is categorized cither in the same 
                                                             category as the test data or in the parent categories of the test 
                                                             data. E-NB constructs classifiers for only the first-level cat•
                                                             egories in the experimental domain, whereas the proposed 
                                                             method uses all of the categories from top to bottom. The 
                                                             significance level for the K-statistic was set at 5%. 

                                                             5.2 Experimental Results 
                                                             The experimental results are shown in Tables 3 and 4. Ta•
                                                             ble 3 shows the results obtained using Yahoo! as the source 
                                                             Internet directory and Google as the target Internet directory, 
                                                             and Table 4 shows the results obtained using Google as the 
                                                             source Internet directory and Yahoo! as the target Internet 
5 Experiments Using Internet Directories                     directory. For comparison, these tables also include the re•
5.1 Experimental Settings                                    sults of [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001]. E-NB denotes the 
                                                             method of [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001] and SBI denotes the 
In order to evaluate the proposed algorithm, we conducted 
                                                             similarity-based integration method that is proposed in this 
experiments using data collected from the Yahoo! [Yahoo!, 
                                                             paper. The data obtained for the proposed method and that 
2001] and Google [Google, 2001]   Internet directories. The 
                                6                            presented in [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001] are not truly com•
data was collected in the fall of 2001. In order to compare 
                                                             parable because the collection date is different . 
the proposed method to that in [Agrawal and Srikant, 2001],                                             7
                                                               The proposed algorithm did well compared to E-NB, per•
we selected the same locations in Yahoo! and Google for the 
                                                             forming more than 10% better in accuracy on the averages. In 
experimental data. The locations are as follows: 
                                                             the Movies domain, the proposed algorithm performs much 
  • Yahoo! : Recreation / Automotive                         better in accuracy than E-NB. One reason for this is that the 
     Google : Recreation / Autos                             pages related to movies contain various words that indicate 
  • Yahoo! : Entertainment / Movies_and_Film                 numerous movie settings, making classification using word-
     Google : Arts / Movies                                  based systems difficult. On the other hand, in the Outdoors 
                                                             domain, performance is similar for both methods because the 
  • Yahoo! : Recreation / Outdoors 
     Google : Recreation / Outdoors                             7In addition, differences may have occurred due to data selec•
                                                             tion. For example, Yahoo! has links that use @(the at mark). The 
   6Since the data in Google is constructed by the data in   treatment of such links was not discussed in [Agrawal and Srikant, 
dmoz [dmoz, 2001], we collected data through dmoz.           2001]. In the present study, we did not use such links. 


26                                                                                        Al AND DATA INTEGRATION 