               A semantic framework for multimedia document adaptation 

                              Jerome Euzenat, Nabil Layaida, Victor Dias 
                                           INRIA Rhone-Alpes 
                     655 avenue de I'Europe, 38330 Montbonnot Saint-Martin, France 
                              {Jerome.Euzenat,Nabil.Layaida}@inrialpes.fr 


                     Abstract                          1.1 Multimedia documents 
     With the proliferation of heterogeneous devices   A multimedia document is a digital document composed of 
     (desktop computers, personal digital assistants,  objects of different nature: text, sound, image, animation, 
     phones), multimedia documents must be played un•  etc. These objects and their compositions are called multime•
     der various constraints (small screens, low band- dia objects. Multimedia documents are traditionally analysed 
     width). Taking these constraints into account with following four dimensions [Layaida, 1997]: 
     current document models is impossible. Hence,       • logical (organisation into chapters, shots, etc.), 
     generic source documents must be transformed        • spatial (graphic layout), 
     into documents compatible with the target contexts. • hypermedia (relations between documents and docu•
     Currently, the design of transformations is left to   ment fragments), 
     programmers. We propose here a semantic frame-      • temporal (temporal ordering of the multimedia objects). 
     work, which accounts for multimedia document 
                                                         These dimensions are not totally independent and require a 
     adaptation in very general terms. A model of a mul•
                                                       combined processing. 
     timedia document is a potential execution of this 
                                                         This paper primarily focuses on the adaptation of multime•
     document and a context defines a particular class 
                                                       dia documents along their temporal dimension. In a temporal 
     of models. The adaptation should then retain the 
                                                       multimedia document, the presentation of the multimedia ob•
     source document models that belong to the class 
                                                       jects is scheduled over time. Such a document is presented 
     defined by the context if such models exist. Oth•
                                                       in Figure 1. Time is displayed on the horizontal axis. The 
     erwise, the adaptation should produce a document 
                                                       example presented is the introduction of a slideshow made 
     whose models belong to this class and are "close" 
                                                       of different panels composed of graphic objects that can be 
     to those of the source documents. We focus on the 
                                                       presented simultaneously. The first panel displays the title, 
     temporal dimension of multimedia documents and 
                                                       authors and outline of the speech; each of these objects are 
     show how adaptation can take advantage of tempo•
                                                       represented by a segment whose begin and end points corre•
     ral reasoning techniques. Several metrics are given 
                                                       spond to the beginning and ending of their presentation on 
     for assessing the proximity of models. 
                                                       screen. 
 1 Introduction                                              Title 
                                                                            Outline 
 The multiplication of execution contexts for multimedia doc•
 uments requires the adaptation of document specifications to      Authors          B D 
 the particularities of the contexts. Adaptation is not very pre• 0 2 5 8 10 12 t(s) 
 cisely defined and it is currently specified through program•
 ming. We propose a semantic approach to multimedia docu•
 ments (§2). It does not deal with the semantics of document Figure 1: Temporal dimension of a multimedia document. 
 content, but with that of their composition. The approach 
 allows the definition of adaptation in very general semantic The Title object starts at second 0 and ends at second 5, 
 terms independent from the multimedia objects (§3). We then while the Author object starts at second 2 and ends at sec•
 investigate the temporal dimension of multimedia documents ond 5. Between seconds 5 and 8 the Outline object is pre•
 specified qualitatively (§4) and propose metrics for finding sented, etc. Such a description is exact and quantitative since 
 the "best" adaptations. We discuss then the limitations of it defines exactly the beginning and ending instants of each 
 current multimedia specifications that prohibit a better adap• multimedia object. This information is sufficient for playing 
 tation (§5).                                          the document: to one exact quantitative representation corre•
   We first introduce the characteristics of multimedia docu• sponds only one possible execution of the document (within 
 ments (§1.1) and adaptation (§1.2).                   a fixed temporal reference). 


Al AND THE INTERNET                                                                                    31    Specifying a multimedia document in an exact manner is 
 like writing a paper directly in PostScript instead of using 
 LATEX. Multimedia documents are not often specified in an 
 exact way because it is more convenient for the author to 
 leave the interpretation of the specification to the machine as 
 soon as the will of the author is clearly expressed. The author 
 can concentrate on the creative part of is or her work instead 
 of characterising the exact position of each object. 
   Non-exact specifications can be achieved by expressing the  2 A semantic approach to multimedia 
 qualitative relations between multimedia objects. There are 
                                                                   documents 
 several languages for specifying multimedia documents with 
 different ways of expressing the temporal dimension: SMIL 
 [W3C, 1998] expresses the positioning of multimedia ob•
 jects with parallel and sequence operators on intervals; Magic 
 I Dalai et al, 1996] and Madeus [Layaida, 1997] use a restric•
 tion of the Allen algebra of temporal intervals.              2.1 Specifications 
   The document of Figure 1 can be expressed qualitatively. 
 For instance, the Authors object starts after and finishes with 
 the Title object; the Authors object meets the Outline object. 
 From such a specification, the multimedia presentation sys•
 tem (or the Player) computes a plan (called "scenario") that 
 can be executed. This function is called temporal formatting. 

 1.2 Adapting multimedia documents 
 A server delivers a multimedia document to be played by a 
 client. Clients and servers can be different machines with 
 different capabilities. Different contexts of multimedia pre•
 sentations introduce different constraints on the presentation 
 itself. For instance, bandwidth limitations between the client 
 and the server can result in preventing the client from playing 
two bandwidth-demanding videos at the same time. Display 
 limitations can produce similar constraints. Other constraints 
 may also be introduced by user preferences, content protec•
tion or terminal capabilities. The constraints imposed by a 
client are called a profile. 
   Profiles can be expressed in terms of a restriction of the   Table 1: The 13 relationships between temporal intervals. 
language used for specifying target documents or in terms of 
additional constraints imposed on the objects. For instance,   Definition 1 (Specification). A specification s — (O, C) of a 
if the device features only a screen with limited capabilities, document is made of a set of objects O and a set of constraints 
it can be impossible to display two images simultaneously on   C between these objects (i.e., a relation between several ob•
the same screen.                                              jects). The set of all specifications will be noted S. 
   For satisfying these constraints, multimedia documents 
must be adapted before being played. From the profile and 
the source document, the adaptation must provide a document 
satisfying the constraints expressed in the profile. Qualitative 
specifications arc central to this process as they enable more   In the remainder, the constraints will be considered as bi•
efficient adaptation by providing more flexibility. This adap• nary. The temporal specification can then be represented as a 
tation is usually performed by a program transforming the      relation graph [van Beek, 1992]. This representation will be 
document IVillard, 2001; Lemlouma and Layaida, 2001].          used for describing models. 
   For the purpose of characterising the adaptation process, 
we introduce a semantics of multimedia documents and illus•
trate it on the temporal dimension (§2). The semantic defi•
nition of adaptation (§3) leads to distinguish refining adapta•
tion (in which the models of the adapted document are mod•
els of the source documents) from transgressive adaptation 
(in which the models are as close as possible to those of the 
source document). Section 4 illustrates the notion of close•
ness for the temporal dimension. The limits of our approach    Definition 3 (Resolved relation graph). A relation graph is 
are then presented (§5).                                       resolved iff all the labels are singletons. 


32                                                                                               Al AND THE INTERNET 2.2 Semantics of a specification                               3.1 Adaptation constraints 
The specification of a multimedia document is interpreted as   Definition 7 (Adaptation constraint). An adaptation con•
the set of its potential executions. A model of a multimedia   straint a determines a set of possible executions Ma- The set 
document (in the sense of model theory) is an execution of     of adaptation constraints will be noted A 
the document satisfying the specification.                       The example above introduced a constraint prohibiting 
                                                               more than one image to be displayed at once on a screen. 
                                                               This can be expressed by a MSO constraint. 


                                                                 A profile p is a set of such constraints. It determines a class 
                                                               of qualitative models (those who satisfy the constraints). The 
                                                               role of adaptation is thus to determine if there exist models of 
                                                               the initial specification belonging to that class. Otherwise, it 
                                                               is convenient to alter the specification by finding, among the 
                                                               set of models satisfying the profile, those that are "semanti-
                                                               cally closer" to the source specification. 


Example 3 (Temporal model). The interpretation presented 

in Example 2 is a model of s1 but not of s2. 
   In the following, we will always consider that there exists 
at least one model of the source specification (which is thus 
consistent). 
   These models correspond faithfully to the execution of the 
multimedia documents. However, the formatter will consider 
executions as equal if they only differ by a translation factor 
and the adaptation will consider two executions as equal if 
they only differ in duration, preserving topology and order•
ing. We introduce qualitative representations of models as 
abstractions of models. 


                                                               3.2 Problems 
                                                               One of the benefits of the approach is to be able to clearly pro•
   Since the Allen relations are exclusive and exhaustive,     vide criteria that an adaptation function r must meet. These 
qualitative representations of a model correspond to resolved  criteria are expressed here as a set of problems. 
relation graphs.                                                 The first one is that the adapted specification must satisfy 
                                                               the adaptation constraints. 


                                                                 Moreover, if there exists a possible execution of the doc•
3 Semantics of adaptation                                      ument satisfying the adaptation constraints, this execution 
The adaptation of a multimedia document is constrained by      must be preserved in the adapted specification. 
the profile. The profile defines constraints that must be satis•
fied by the document to be played. 


Al AND THE INTERNET                                                                                                    33    In such a case, the adaptation should not authorise models 
 that were not models of the source specification. 


 • Unfortunately, no guarantee is given that the languages 
used for expressing the specifications and the adaptation con•
straints allow the expression of a specification satisfying these 
requirements. 


   Moreover, one constraint that should be achieved by a se•
                                                               Definition 9 (Distance between sets of models). 
mantic approach is that the result of adaptation must not de•
pend on the syntactic form of the specification. 


   Taking the semantic approach to multimedia document 
adaptation allows the characterisation of adaptation in a very 
general way depending only on model theoretic considera•
tions. In particular, these definitions are totally independent 
from the language used for expressing documents and profiles     The second element is the distance d that is considered 
as well as the multimedia object and constraint types. 
                                                              hereafter1. 
   This characterisation clearly emphasises the constraints 
that a refining adaptation must meet and that can be over•    4.1 Distance on the qualitative models 
looked when programming the transformation.                   The first distance that comes to mind consists of counting 
   Transgressive adaptation is more difficult to characterise the relations between two objects that differ between models. 
and this is considered in the next section.                   It is comparable to the Hamming distance (i.e., the cardinal 
                                                              of the symmetric difference between two sets) counting the 
4 Transgressive adaptation in the temporal                    propositional atoms that do not have the same truth-value in 
    dimension                                                 propositional logic [Dalai, 1988]. Because qualitative models 
The goal of transgressive adaptation is to find a specification correspond to resolved relation graphs, the distance is easily 
T(S) as close as possible to the source specification s. Seman- computed by counting the labels which differ between each 
tically, this amounts to find the specifications whose models pair of objects. The distance is defined on graphs (and more 
are the closest possible to those of the source specification. precisely on their labelling functions). 
Figure 3 shows the set of models satisfying MSO(l). A dis-    Definition 10 (Distance between resolved relation graphs). 


                                                              Example 7. Concerning s1, the four models are all at the 
                                                              same distance from the model of the source specification be•
                                                              cause they all differ by two relations (the one between A and 
                                                              B and its converse). 
                                                                 In order to find more precise results that discriminate be•
                                                              tween the four models of the example, the relations between 
                                                              intervals can be transcribed into relations between their begin 
                                                              and end points and the same sort of distance can be used. 
  Applying a semantic approach to transgressive adaptation 
can be compared to the use of the semantic approach for 
knowledge base revision [Dalai, 1988]. This will be the first 
step taken here. But we will show that the simple distance 
used for comparing models is not sufficient for adapting mul•
timedia documents. Measures depending on the kind of mul•
timedia objects are required. 
  The usual way to compute the distance between sets of 
models is function of a distance d between two models and 
a method of aggregation F. 


34                                                                                               Al AND THE INTERNET Definition 11 (Distance between interval relations based 
on endpoints). 


  The distance between models is the sum of the distance 
between each interval relation. 
Definition 12 (Distance between models based on end-
points). 


                                                                Then the distance between models can be expressed by 
                                                              summing up the conceptual distances between the relation•
                                                              ships used in both models. 
                                                              Definition 15 (Conceptual distance between models). 


                                                              Example 9. Concerning s1, the models satisfying the adapta•
                                                              tion constraint MSO(l) are at different conceptual distances 
                                                              from the source specification: before is at a distance of 2, 
                                                              meet is at a distance of 1, met by is at a distance of 5 and after 
Table 2: Relations preserved by the linearization of an over• is at a distance of 6. So the closest solution to serializing the 
lap                                                           overlap relation is meet. This corresponds to the intuition. 

adapting situation s\. Two models (before and meets) arc      5 Limitations 
clearly preferred over the others (met by and after). But in• Extending the presented work to the spatial dimension does 
tuitively, it seems that meet is a belter solution because it not look very difficult. The logical dimension is even eas•
reduces the distance between the two objects which where      ier because it provides a very structured organisation of the 
previously overlapping. We show that it is possible to find a document that, we conjecture, can yield direct adaptation. So 
distance conforming to this intuition.                        the proposed approach is able to cope with adaptation in each 
                                                              dimension of the document. 
4.3 Conceptual distance in the interval algebra                 Real difficulties arise when hypermedia and temporal and 
The problem with the former distance is that it does not take spatial dimensions are considered together. As a matter of 
into account the topological structure of temporal relations  fact, the presence of hypermedia links which, when triggered 
(i.e., it only counts differing relations on endpoints or inter• by the users, jump to other parts of the presentation, introduce 
vals without consideration for a proximity between the dis•   non-determinism in the interpretation of documents [Dalai el 
agreeing relations). To take this proximity into account, we  al, 1996; Fargier el al, 1998]. This non determinism does 
take advantage of the notion of conceptual neighbourhood      not easily fit with the conceptual neighbourhood approach 
[Freksa, 1996] and the shortest path distance in its graph (see which favours continuity. 
Figure 4).                                                      A further analysis shows that the temporal information 
  Conceptual neighbourhood attempts at capturing the prox•    contained in specifications is not sufficient for a good adapta•
imity between qualitative relations by observing the effects of tion. For instance, considering two panels composed of two 
transforming the related objects.                             pictures each (AB and then CD, like in Figure 1) and the 
                                                              MSO(l) constraint, the closest models linearizing the presen•
                                                              tation are ABCD and ABDC with a conceptual distance of 
                                                              18. However, if both panels aim at comparing two objects 
                                                              01 (right) and 02 (left) on the basis of two features (one by 
                                                              panel), preserving the parallelism (which suggests the com•
                                                              parison) imposes the choice of ABCD. The absence of in•
                                                              formation about the comparison is missing from the speci•
  The conceptual neighbourhood relation for the transforma•   fication resulting in lower quality adaptation. Some authors 
tion that moves one endpoint without affecting the others is  [Rutledge el al, 2000] have proposed to use rhetorical struc•
given in Figure 4.                                            tures [Mann and Thompson, 19871 in order to choose a better 
  A distance between relations can be directly computed       presentation at the formatting stage. This could be useful for 
from the graph.                                               the adaptation stage as well. 


Al AND THE INTERNET                                                                                                   35 