           Getting Serious about the Development of Computational Humor 

                                Oliviero Stock and Carlo Strapparava 
                                   ITC-irst, 1-38050 Povo Trento Italy 
                                          {stock, strappa}@itc.it 


                     Abstract                          a computational system should be able to: recognize situa­
                                                       tions appropriate for humor; choose a suitable kind of humor 
    Society needs humor, not just for entertainment. In 
                                                       for the situation; generate an appropriately humorous output; 
    the Web age, presentations become more and more 
                                                       and, if there is some form of interaction or control, evaluate 
    flexible and personalized and they will require hu­
                                                       the feedback. 
    mor contributions for electronic commerce devel­
                                                         We are concerned with systems that automatically produce 
    opments (e.g. product promotion, getting selective 
                                                       humorous output (rather than systems that appreciate humor). 
    attention, help in memorizing names, etc...) more 
                                                       Some of the fundamental competencies are within the range 
    or less as it happened in the world of broadcasted 
                                                       of the state of the art of natural language processing. In one 
    advertisement. Even if deep modeling of humor in 
                                                       form or in another humor is most often based on some form 
    all of its facets is not something for the near future, 
                                                       of incongruity. For verbal humor this means that different in­
    there is something concrete that has been achieved 
                                                       terpretations of utterances must be possible (and must not be 
    and that can help in providing attention to the field. 
                                                       detected before the culmination of the humorous process) or 
    The paper refers to the results of HAHACRONYM, 
                                                       must cause perception of specific forms of opposition. Nat­
    a project devoted to humorous acronym production, 
                                                       ural language processing research has often dealt with ambi­
    a circumscribed task that nonetheless requires vari­
                                                       guity in language. A common view is that ambiguity is an 
    ous generic components. The project opens the way 
                                                       obstacle for deep comprehension. Most current text process­
    to developments for creative language, with appli­
                                                       ing systems attempt to reduce the number of possible inter­
    cations in the world of advertisement. 
                                                       pretations of the sentences, and a failure to do so is seen as 
                                                       a weakness of the system. From a different point of view, 
1 Introduction                                         the potential for ambiguity can be seen as a positive feature 
                                                       of natural language. Metaphors, idioms, poetic language and 
Future human-machine interaction, according to a 
                                                       humor use all the multiple senses of texts to suggest connec­
widespread view, will emphasize naturalness and effec­
                                                       tions between concepts that cannot, or should not, be stated 
tiveness and hence the incorporation of models of possibly 
                                                       explicitly. 
all human cognitive capabilities, including the handling of 
humor. There are many practical settings where computa­  The work presented here is based on various resources for 
tional humor will add value. Among them: business world natural language processing, adapted for humor. It is a small 
applications (e-commerce to name one), general computer- step, but aiming at an appreciable concrete result. It has 
mediated communication and human-computer interaction  been developed within HAHACRONYM1, a project devoted 
[Morkes et al, 1999], educational and edutainment systems. to computational humor. A visible and evaluable result was 
There are important prospects for humor also in automatic at the basis of the deal. We proposed a situation that is of 
information presentation. In the Web age presentations practical interest, where there is no domain restriction and 
become more and more flexible and personalized and they many components are present, but simpler than in more ex­
will require humor contributions for electronic commerce tended scenarios. The goal is a system that makes fun of ex­
developments (e.g. product promotion, getting selective isting acronyms, or, starting from concepts provided by the 
attention, help in memorizing names, etc...) more or less as user, produces a new acronym, constrained to be a word of 
it happened in the world of broadcasted advertisement. the given language. And, of course, it has to be funny. 
                                                         The project was meant to convince about the potential of 
  Yet deep modeling of humor in all of its facets is not some­
                                                       computational humor, through the demonstration of a work­
thing for the near future; the phenomena are too complex, 
                                                       ing prototype and an assessment of the state of the art and 
humor is one of the most sophisticated forms of human in­
telligence. It is Al-complete: the problem of modeling it is 
                                                          1European Project IST-2000-30039. HAHACRONYM has been 
as difficult to solve as the most difficult Artificial Intelligence the first EU project devoted to computational humor. The consor­
problems. But some steps can be followed to achieve results. tium included ITC-irst, as coordinator, and the University of Twente. 
In the general case, in order to be successfully humorous, See http://haha.itc.it. 


ART AND CREATIVITY                                                                                      59 of scenarios where humor can add something to existing in­ 3 HAHACRONYM 
 formation technologies. The results of the project put us in 
                                                       3.1 Resources 
 a better position to move forwards in introducing computa­
 tional humor in more complex scenarios.               In order to realize the HAHACRONYM prototype, we have re­
                                                       fined existing resources and we have developed general tools 
                                                       useful for humorous systems. As we will see, a fundamental 
2 AI and Computational Humor                           tool is an incongruity detector/generator, that makes the sys­
                                                       tem able to detect semantic mismatches between word mean­
So far only very limited effort has been put on building com­ ing and sentence meaning (i.e. in our case the acronym and 
putational humor prototypes. Indeed very few working pro­ its context). For all tools, particular attention was put on 
totypes that process humorous text and/or simulate humor reusability. 
mechanisms exist, and mostly they worked in very restricted The starting point for us consisted in making use of some 
domains.                                               "off-the-shelf resources, such as WORDNET DOMAINS 
  There has been a considerable amount of research on lin­ [Magnini et al., 2002] (an extension of the well-known En­
guistics of humor and on theories of semantics and prag­ glish WORDNET) and standard parsing techniques. The tools 
matics of humor [Attardo, 1994; Attardo and Raskin, 1991; resulting from the adaptation will be reusable for other appli­
Giora and Fein, 1999; Attardo, 2002]; however, most of the cations, and are portable straightforwardly to other languages 
work has not been formal enough to be used directly for com­ (e.g. WORDNET DOMAINS is multilingual). 
putational humor modeling. An effort toward formalization 
of forced reinterpretation jokes has been presented by Ritchie Wordnet and Wordnet Domains 
[2002].                                                WORDNET is a thesaurus for the English language inspired 
  Within the artificial intelligence community, most writ­ by psycholinguistics principles and developed at the Prince­
ing on humor has been speculative [Minsky, 1980; Hofs- ton University by George Miller [Fellbaum, 1998]. It has 
tadter el al., 1989]. Minsky made some preliminary remarks been conceived as a computational resource, therefore im­
about how humor could be viewed from the artificial intelli­ proving some of the drawbacks of traditional dictionaries, 
gence/cognitive science perspective, refining Freud's notion such as circularity of definitions and ambiguity of sense ref­
that humor is a way of bypassing our mental "censors" which erences. Lemmata (about 130,000 for version 1.6) are orga­
control inappropriate thoughts and feelings. Utsumi [1996] nized in synonym classes (about 100,000 synsets). WORD-
outlines a logical analysis of irony, but this work has not been NET can be described as a "lexical matrix" with two di­
implemented. Among other works: De Palma and Weiner    mensions: a dimension for lexical relations, that is rela­
[ 1992] have worked on knowledge representation of riddles, tions holding among words, and therefore language spe­
Ephratt [1990] has constructed a program that parses a lim­ cific, and a dimension for conceptual relations, which hold 
ited range of ambiguous sentences and detects alternative hu­ among senses (the synsets) and that, at least in part, we con­
morous readings. A formalization, based on a cognitive ap­ sider independent from a particular language. A synset con­
proach (the belief-desire-intention model), distinguishing be­ tains all the words by means of which it is possible to ex­
tween real and fictional humor has been provided by Mele press the synset meaning: for example the synset {horse, 
[2002].                                                Equus-caballus} describes the sense of "horse" as an 
                                                       animal, while the synset {knight, horse} describes 
  Probably the most important attempt to create a computa­
                                                       the sense of "horse" as a chessman. The main relations 
tional humor prototype is the work of Binsted and Ritchie 
                                                       present in         are synonymy, antonymy, hyperonymy-
[1997]. They have devised a formal model of the seman­          WORDNET
                                                       hypony my, meronymy-holonymy, entailment, troponymy. 
tic and syntactic regularities underlying some of the simplest 
types of punning riddles. A punning riddle is a question- Augmenting WordNet with Domain information 
answer riddle that uses phonological ambiguity. The three Domains have been used both in linguistics (i.e. Semantic 
main strategies used to create phonological ambiguity are syl­ Fields) and in lexicography (i.e. Subject Field Codes) to mark 
lable substitution, word substitution and metathesis.  technical usages of words. Although this is useful informa­
  Almost all the computational approaches try to deal with tion for sense discrimination, in dictionaries it is typically 
the incongruity theory at various level of refinement [Raskin, used for a small portion of the lexicon. WORDNET DO­
1985; Attardo, 1994]. The incongruity theory focuses on the MAINS is an attempt to extend the coverage of domain labels 
element of surprise. It states that humor is created out of a within an already existing lexical database, WORDNET (ver­
conflict between what is expected and what actually occurs sion 1.6). The synsets have been annotated with at least one 
in the joke. This accounts for the most obvious features of a domain label, selected from a set of about two hundred la­
large part of humor phenomena: ambiguity or double mean­ bels hierarchically organized. (Figure 1 shows a portion of 
ing.                                                   the domain hierarchy.) 
  Specific workshops concerned with Computational Humor  We have organized about 250 domain labels in a hierar­
have taken place in recent years and have drawn together most chy (exploiting Dewey Decimal Classification), where each 
of the community active in the field. The proceedings of the level is made up of codes of the same degree of specificity: 
most comprehensive events are [Hulstijn and Nijholt, 1996] for example, the second level includes domain labels such as 
and iStock et al, 2002]. Ritchie [2001] has published a sur­ BOTANY, LINGUISTICS, HISTORY, SPORT and RELIGION, 
vey of the state of the art in the field.              while at the third level we can find specialization such as 


60                                                                                    ART AND CREATIVITY                                                               Figure 2: An example of adjective clusters linked by 
                                                              antonymy relation 
        Figure 1: A portion of the domain hierarchy 
                                                              Exploiting the hierarchy 
                                                              It is possible to exploit the network of lexical and seman•
AMERICAN_HISTORY, GRAMMAR, PHONETICS and TEN•                 tic relations built in WORDNET to make simple ontological 
NIS.                                                          reasoning. For example, if a noun or an adjective has a ge•
   Information brought by domains is complementary to what    ographic location meaning, the pertaining country and conti•
is already present in WORDNET. First of all a domain          nent can be inferred. 
may include synsets of different syntactic categories: for 
instance MEDICINE groups together senses from Nouns,          Rhymes 
such as doctor#l and hospital#l, and from Verbs               The HAHACRONYM prototype takes into account 
such as operate#7. Second, a domain may include               word rhymes and the rhythm of the acronym ex•
senses from different WORDNET sub-hierarchies For ex•         pansion. To cope with this aspect we got and 
ample, SPORT contains senses such as athlete#l, de•           reorganized the CMU pronouncing dictionary 
riving from life_form#l, game equipment # l, from             (http: //www. speech.es.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict) 
physical_object#l, sport#l from act#2, and                    with a suitable indexing. The CMU Pronouncing Dictionary 
playing_f ield#l, from location#l.                            is a machine-readable pronunciation dictionary for North 
                                                              American English that contains over 125,000 words and their 
                                                              transcriptions. 
Opposition of semantic fields 
                                                                 Its format is particularly useful for speech recognition and 
On the basis of well recognized properties of humor ac•       synthesis, as it has mappings from words to their pronunci•
counted for in many theories (e.g. incongruity, semantic field ations in the given phoneme set. The current phoneme set 
opposition, apparent contradiction, absurdity) we have mod•   contains 39 phonemes; vowels may carry lexical stress. 
elled an independent structure of domain opposition, such as 
RELIGION VS. TECHNOLOGY, SEX VS. RELIGION, etc... We          Parser, grammar and morphological analyzer 
exploit these kind of opposition as a basic resource for the  Word sequences that are at the basis of acronyms are sub•
incongruity generator.                                        ject to a well-defined grammar, simpler than a complete noun 
                                                              phrase grammar, but complex enough to require a nontrivial 
Adjectives and Antonymy Relations                             analyzer. We have decided to use a well established nonde-
                                                              terministic parsing technique. As far as the dictionary is con•
Adjectives play an important role in modifying and gen•       cerned, we use the full WORDNET lexicon, integrated with 
erating funny acronyms. WORDNET divides adjectives            an ad-hoc morphological analyzer. 
into two categories. Descriptive adjectives (e.g. big,           Also for the generation part we exploit the grammar as the 
beautiful, interesting, possible, married)                    source for syntactic constraints. 
constitute by far the largest category. The second category      All the components are implemented in Common Lisp aug•
is called simply relational adjectives because they are related mented with nondeterministic constructs. 
by derivation to nouns (i.e. electrical in electrical 
engineering is related to noun electricity). To re•           Other resources 
lational adjectives, strictly dependent on noun meanings, it is An "a-semantic" dictionary is a collection of hyper-
often possible to apply similar strategies as those exploited bolic/epistemic/deontic adjective/adverbs. This is a last re•
for nouns. Their semantic organization, though, is entirely   source, that some time can be useful in the generation 
different from the one of the other major categories. In fact of new acronyms. Some examples are: abnormally, ab-
it is not clear what it would mean to say that one adjective  strusely, adorably, exceptionally, exorbitantly, exponentially, 
"is a kind of' (ISA) some other adjective. The basic semantic extraordinarily, voraciously, weirdly, wonderfully. This re•
relation among descriptive adjectives is antonymy. WORD-      source is hand-made, using various dictionaries as informa•
NET proposes also that this kind of adjectives is organized   tion sources. 
in clusters of synsets associated by semantic similarity to a    Other lexical resources are: a euphemism dictionary, a 
focal adjective. Figure 2 shows clusters of adjectives around proper noun dictionary, lists of typical foreign words com•
the direct antonyms fast I slow.                              monly used in the language with some strong connotation. 


ART AND CREATIVITY                                                                                                    61  3.2 Architecture and Implementation 
 To get an ironic or "profaning" re-analysis of a given 
 acronym, the system follows various steps and strategies. The 
 main elements of the algorithm can be schematized as fol­
 lows: 
   • acronym parsing and construction of a logical form 
   • choice of what to keep unchanged (typically the head 
      of the highest ranking NP) and what to modify (e.g. the 
      adjectives) 
   • look up for possible substitutions 
                                                              we can use in the acronym expansion a synonym of "CPU". 
   • exploitation of semantic field oppositions 
                                                              The same happens for "fast"). Once we have an acronym 
   • granting phonological analogy: while keeping the con­    proposal, a syntactic skeleton has to be filled to get a correct 
      straint on the initial letters of the words, the overall noun phrase. For example given in input "fast" and "CPU", 
     rhyme and rhythm should be preserved (the modified       the system selects TORPID with the possible syntactic skele­
     acronym should sound similar to the original as much     ton: 
     as possible) 
   • exploitation of WORDNET antonymy clustering for ad­
     jectives 
   • use of the a-semantic dictionary as a last resource 
   Figures 3 and 4 show a sketch of the system architecture.    where "rapid" and "processor" are synonyms re­
                                                              spectively of "fast" and "CPU" and the notation 
                                                              <Part_of _Speech>Le^tr means a word of that par­
                                                              ticular part_of.speech with Letter as initial. Then the system 
                                                              fills this syntactic skeleton with strategies similar to those 
                                                              described for re-analysis. 
                                                                The system is fully implemented in Common Lisp, exploit­
                                                              ing CLOS and the Meta-Object protocol to import WORD-
                                                              NET DOMAINS and to implement the navigation/reasoning 
                                                              algorithms. 

                                                              3.3 Examples 
                                                              Here below some examples of acronym re-analysis are re­
   In our system, making fun of existing acronyms amounts to  ported. As far as semantic field opposition is concerned we 
an ironical rewriting, desecrating them with some unexpect­   have slightly tuned the system towards the domains FOOD, 
edly contrasting, but otherwise consistently sounding expan­  RELIGION and SEX. We report the original acronym, the re-
sion.                                                         analysis and some comments about the strategies followed by 
   As far as acronym generation is concerned, the problem is  the system. 
more complex. To make the task more attractive - and dif­     ACM - Association for Computing Machinery 
ficult - we constrain resulting acronyms to be words of the   -->Association for Confusing Machinery 
dictionary (APPLE would be good, IBM would not). The          FBI - Federal Bureau of Investigation 
system takes in input concepts (actually synsets, possibly the —► Fantastic Bureau of Intimidation 
result of some other process, for instance sentence interpre­
tation) and some minimal structural indication, such as the   The system keeps all the main heads and works on the adjec­
semantic head. The primary strategy of the system is to con­  tives and the PP head, preserving the rhyme and/or using the 
sider as potential acronyms words that are in ironic relation a-semantic dictionary. 
with the input concepts. By definition acronyms have to sat­
                                                              CRT - Cathodic Ray Tube 
isfy constraints - to include the initial letters of some lexical 
                                                              —► Catholic Ray Tube 
realization of the inputs words synsets, granting that the se­
                                                              ESA - European Space Agency 
quence of initials satisfy the overall acronym syntax. In this —> Epicurean Space Agency 
primary strategy, the ironic reasoning comes mainly at the 
                                                              PDA - Personal Digital Assistant 
level of acronym choice in the lexicon and in the selection of —►Penitential Demoniacal Assistant 
the fillers of the open slots in the acronym.                 —> Prenuptial Devotional Assistant 
   For example, giving as input "fast" and "CPU", we 
                                                              MIT - Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
get static, torpid, dormant. (Note that the com­              —► Mythical Institute of Theology 
plete synset for "CPU" is {processor#3, CPU#1, 
central..processing.unit#l, mainframe#2}. So                  Some re-analyses are RELIGION oriented. Note the rhymes. 


62                                                                                               ART AND CREATIVITY   As far as generation from scratch is concerned, a main con­
cept and some attributes (in terms of synsets) are given as in­
put to the system. Here below we report some examples of 
acronym generation. 
Main concept: processor (in the sense of CPU); 
Attribute: fast 
OPEN - On-line Processor for Effervescent Net 
PIQUE - Processor for Immobile Quick Uncertain Experi­
                                                                    Table 1: Evaluation Results 
    mentation 
TORPID - Traitorously Outstandingly Rusty Processor for 
                                                         A curiosity that may be worth mentioning: HA­
    Inadvertent Data_proeessing                        HACRONYM participated to a contest about (human) produc­
UTMOST - Unsettled Transcendental Mainframe for Off-line tion of best acronyms, organized in December 2002 by RAI, 
    Secured Tcp/ip                                     the Italian National Broadcasting Service. The system won a 
                                                       jury's special prize. 
  We note that the system tries to keep all the expansions 
of the acronym coherent in the same semantic field of the 
main concept (COMPUTER _SCIENCH). At the same time,    4 Prospects for advertisement 
whenever possible, it exploits some incongruity in the lexi­ Humor is the healthy way of creating 'distance* between 
cal choices.                                           one's self and the problem, a way of standing back and look­
                                                       ing at the problem with perspective. Humor reveals new as­
3.4 Evaluation                                         pects, disarms and relaxes. It is also infectious and it is an 
Testing the humorous quality of texts is not an easy task. important way to communicate ideas. On the cognitive side 
There have been relevant studies though, such as (Ruch, humor has two very important properties: 
19961. For HAHAc RONYM, a simpler case, an evaluation    - it helps getting and keeping people's attention. Type 
was conducted under the supervision of Salvatore Attardo at and rhythm of humor may vary and the time involved 
Youngstown University, Ohio. Both reanalysis and genera­   in building the effect may be different in different cases: 
tion have been tested according to criteria of success stated in some times there is a context - like joke telling - that 
advance and in agreement with the European Commission, at  from the beginning let you expect for the humorous cli­
the beginning of the project.                              max, which may occur after a long while: other times the 
  The participants in the evaluation were forty students.  effect is obtained in almost no time, with one perceptive 
They were all native speakers of English. The students were act - for instance in static visual humor, funny posters 
not told that the acronyms had been computer generated. No or in cases when some well established convention is re­
record was kept of which student had given which set of    versed with an utterance; 
answers (the answers were strictly anonymous). No demo­
graphic data were collected. However, generally speaking, - it helps remembering. For instance it is a common ex­
the group was homogeneous for age (traditional students, be­ perience to connect in our memory some knowledge we 
tween the ages of 19 and 24) and mixed for gender and race. have acquired to a humorous remark or event. In a for­
  The students were divided in two groups. The first group of eign language acquisition it may happen that an involun­
twenty was presented the reanalysis and generation data. We tary funny situation is created because of so called "false 
tested about 80 reanalyzed and 80 generated acronyms (over friends" - words that sound similar in two languages and 
twice as many as required by the agreement with the Euro­  may have the same origin but have a very different mean­
pean Commission). Both the reanalysis module and the gen­  ing. The humorous experience is conducive to remem­
eration module were found to be successful according to the bering the correct use of the word. 
criteria spelled out in the assessment protocol. The acronyms No wonder that humor has become one of the favorite 
reanalysis module showed roughly 70% of acronyms hav­  strategies used by creative people involved in the advertising 
ing a score of 55 or higher (out of a possible 100 points), business. In fact among the various fields in which creative 
while the acronym generation module showed roughly 53% language is used, advertising is probably the area of activity 
of acronyms having a score of 55 or higher. The thresholds in which creativity (and hence humor) is practiced with most 
for success established in the protocol were 60% and 45%, precise objectives. 
respectively.                                            From an applied AI point of view, we believe that an envi­
  A set of randomly generated acronyms were presented to a ronment for proposing solutions to advertising professionals 
different group of twenty students. A special run of the sys­ can be a realistic practical development of computational hu­
tem was performed in which the semantic filters and heuris­ mor and one of the first attempts in dealing creative language. 
tics had been disabled, while only the syntactical constraints Some examples of the huge array of opportunities that lan­
were operational. (If the syntactical rules had been disabled guage offers and that existent NLP techniques can cope with: 
as well the output would have been gibberish and it would be rhymes, wordplays, popular sayings or proverbs, quotations, 
difficult to compare with the regular system production). In alliterations, triplets, chiasmus, neologism, non sequitur, 


ART AND CREATIVITY                                                                                      63 