           On the Revision of Probabilistic Beliefs using Uncertain Evidence 

                                     Hei Chan and Adnan Darwiche 
                                      Computer Science Department 
                                  University of California, Los Angeles 
                                         Los Angeles, CA 90095 
                                       [hei, darwiche] @cs. ucla. edu 

                     Abstract                          way uncertain evidence is specified. Jeffrey requires uncer•
                                                       tain evidence to be specified in terms of the effect it has on 
    We revisit the problem of revising probabilistic be• beliefs once accepted, which is a function of both evidence 
    liefs using uncertain evidence, and report results on strength and beliefs held before the evidence is obtained. 
    four major issues relating to this problem: How    Pearl, on the other hand, requires uncertain evidence to be 
    to specify uncertain evidence? How to revise a     specified in terms of its strength only. Despite this differ•
    distribution? Should, and do, iterated belief revi• ence, we show that one can easily translate between the two 
    sions commute? And how to provide guarantees on    methods of specifying evidence and provide the method for 
    the amount of belief change induced by a revision? carrying out this translation. 
    Our discussion is focused on two main methods for 
                                                         The multiplicity of methods for specifying evidence also 
    probabilistic revision: Jeffrey's rule of probability 
                                                       raises an important question: how should informal statements 
    kinematics and Pearl's method of virtual evidence, 
                                                       about evidence be captured formally using available meth•
    where we analyze and unify these methods from the 
                                                       ods? For example, what should the following statement trans•
    perspective of the questions posed above. 
                                                       late to: "Seeing these clouds, I believe there is an 80% chance 
                                                       that it will rain?" We will discuss this problem of interpreting 
1 Introduction                                         informal evidential statements later, where we emphasize its 
                                                       subtlety. 
We consider in this paper the problem of revising beliefs 
given uncertain evidence, where beliefs are represented using As to the question of iterated belief revision: It is well 
a probability distribution. There are two main methods for known that Jeffrey's rule does not commute; hence, the or•
revising probabilistic beliefs in this case. The first method is der in which evidence is incorporated matters [Diaconis & 
known as Jeffrey's rule and is based on the principle of proba• Zabell, 1982]. This has long been perceived as a problem, 
bility kinematics, which can be viewed as a principle for min• until clarified recently by the work of Wagner who observed 
imizing belief change [Jeffrey, 1965]. The second method is that Jeffrey's method of specifying evidence is dependent on 
called virtual evidence and is proposed by Pearl in the context what is believed before the evidence is obtained and, hence, 
of belief networks—even though it can be easily generalized should not be commutative to start with [Wagner, 2002]. 
to arbitrary probability distributions—and is based on reduc• Wagner proposed a method for specifying evidence, based 
ing uncertain evidence into certain evidence on some virtual on the notion of Bayes factor, and argued that this method 
event [Pearl, 1988]. We analyze both of these methods in this specifies only the strength of evidence, and is independent of 
paper with respect to the following four questions:    the beliefs held when attaining evidence. Wagner argued that 
                                                       when evidence is specified in that particular way, iterated re•
  1. How should one specify uncertain evidence?        visions should commute. He even showed that combining this 
 2. How should one revise a probability distribution?  method for specifying evidence with the principle of proba•
                                                       bility kinematics leads to a revision rule that commutes. We 
  3. Should, and do, iterated belief revisions commute? 
                                                       actually show that Pearl's method of virtual evidence is speci•
 4. What guarantees can be offered on the amount of belief fying evidence according to Bayes factor, exactly as proposed 
    change induced by a particular revision?           by Wagner and, hence, corresponds exactly to the proposal he 
Our main findings can be summarized as follows. First, we calls for. Therefore, the results we discuss in this paper unify 
show that Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method both revise be• the two main methods for probabilistic belief revision pro•
liefs using the principle of probability kinematics. Jeffrey's posed by Jeffrey and Pearl, and show that differences between 
rule explicitly commits to this principle, while Pearl's method them amount to a difference in the protocol for specifying un•
is based on a different principle. Yet, we show that Pearl's certain evidence. 
method implies the principle of probability kinematics, lead• Our last set of results relate to the problem of providing 
ing to the same revision method as that of Jeffrey's. The dif• guarantees on the amount of belief change induced by a re•
ference between Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method is in the vision. We have recently proposed a distance measure for 


BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                              99 bounding belief changes, and showed how one can use it 
to provide such guarantees [Chan & Darwiche, 2002]. We 
show in this paper how this distance measure can be com•
puted when one distribution is obtained from another using 
the principle of probability kinematics. We then show how 
the guarantees provided by this measure can be realized when 
applying either Jeffrey's rule or Pearl's method, since they 
both are performing revision based on the principle of proba•
bility kinematics. 
                                                              Therefore, for any event a, its probability under the new dis•
     Probability Kinematics and Jeffrey's Rule                tribution Pr' is: 


                                                              which is the closed form for Jeffrey's rule. We now show an 
                                                              example of using Jeffrey's rule. 
   Consider now the problem of revising a probability distri• Example 1 (Due to Jeffrey) Assume that we are given a 
bution Pr given uncertain evidence relating to a set of mutu-
                                                              piece of cloth, where its color can be one of: green (cg), blue 
                                                              (cb), or violet (cv). We want to know whether, in the next day, 
of specifying uncertain evidence is through the effect that it the cloth will be sold (s), or not sold (s). Our original state 
would have on beliefs once accepted. That is, we can say that of belief is given by the distribution Pr: 


the logical entailment relationship. This is exactly the distri•
bution that Jeffrey suggests and, hence, this method of re•   3 Virtual Evidence and Pearl's Method 
vision is known as Jeffrey's rule. We stress here that we 
are drawing a distinction between the principle of probabil•
ity kinematics and Jeffrey's rule, which are often considered 
synonymous. Specifically, Jeffrey's rule arises from a com•
bination of two proposals: (1) the principle of probability 
kinematics, and (2) the specification of uncertain evidence us•
ing a posterior distribution. It is possible for one to combine 
the principle of probability kinematics with other methods for 
specifying evidence as we discuss later. 


100                                                                                    BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                 One day, Mr. Holmes' receives a call from his neighbor, 
                                                              Mrs. Gibbons, saying she may have heard the alarm of his 
                                                              house going off. Since Mrs. Gibbons suffers from a hearing 
                                                              problem, Mr. Holmes concludes that there is an 80% chance 
                                                              that Mrs. Gibbons did hear the alarm going off. According 
                                                              to the method of virtual evidence, this uncertain evidence can 


                                                              4 Comparing the Revision Methods 
                                                              From the illustrations of the two belief revision methods, Jef-
                                                              frey's rule and Pearl's method of virtual evidence, we can see 
                                                              that a belief revision method can be broken into two parts: a 
                                                              formal method of specifying uncertain evidence, and a prin•
which is the closed form for Pearl 's method.                 ciple of belief revision that commits to a unique distribution 
  The above revision method is a generalization of the        among many which satisfy the uncertain evidence. 
method of virtual evidence proposed by Pearl [1988] in the 
context of belief networks. A belief network is a graphi•     4.1 Pearl's method and Probability Kinematics 
cal probabilistic model, composed of two parts: a directed    We now show that Pearl's method, like Jeffrey's rule, also 
acyclic graph where nodes represent variables, and a set of   obeys the principle of probability kinematics; what they differ 
conditional probability tables (CPTs), one for each variable  in is how uncertain evidence is specified. 
[Pearl, 1988; Jensen, 2001]. The CPT for variable X with 
parents U defines a set of conditional probabilities of the 
form Pr(x | u), where x is a value of variable X', and u 
is an instantiation of parents U. Suppose now that we have 
some virtual evidence bearing on variable Y, which has val-


BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                                          101                                                               4.3 From Jeffrey's Rule to Pearl's Method 
                                                              We can also easily translate from Jeffrey's rule to Pearl's 
                                                              method. Specifically, the new probabilities of events 

Therefore, both Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method obey the 
principle of probability kinematics for belief revision. 

4.2 From Pearl's Method to Jeffrey's Rule 
With the previous result, we now show how we can easily 
translate between the two methods of specifying uncertain 
evidence. For example, to translate from Pearl's method to 
Jeffrey's rule, we note that the new probabilities of events 


Suppose instead that we want to evisc the distribution Pr 
using Jeffrey's rule, assuming that after accepting uncertain 


Substituting the above probability qt in Jeffrey's rule (Equa•
tion 2), we get: 


which is exactly the distribution obtained by the method of 
virtual evidence (Equation 4). We now illustrate this transla•
tion by revisiting Example 2. 


                                                              5 Interpreting Evidential Statements 
                                                              The evidence specification protocols adopted by Jeffrey's rule 
                                                              and Pearl's method have been discussed by Pearl [2001], in 
                                                              relation to the problem of formally interpreting evidential 
                                                              statements. Consider the following statement as an example: 
                                                                   Looking at this evidence, I am willing to bet 2:1 
                                                                   that David is not the killer. 
                                                              This statement can be formally interpreted using either pro•
                                                              tocol. For example, if a denotes the event "David is not the 
                                                              killer," this statement can be interpreted in two ways: 


102                                                                                     BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                gardless of how this is accomplished though, we need to 
                                                               stress that the process of mapping an informal evidential 
                                                               statement into a revised probability distribution involves three 
                                                               distinct elements: 
                                                                 1. One must adopt a formal method for specifying evi•
                                                                    dence. 
                                                                 2. One must interpret the informal evidential statement, by 
The first interpretation translates directly into a formal piece    translating it into a formal piece of evidence. 
of evidence, Jeffrey's style, and can be characterized as an     3. One must apply a revision, by mapping the original 
"All things considered" interpretation since it is a statement      probability distribution and formal piece of evidence 
about the agent's final beliefs, which are a function of both       into a new distribution. 
his prior beliefs and the evidence [Pearl, 2001]. On the other 
hand, the second interpretation translates directly into a for• Our main point here is that Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method 
mal piece of evidence, Pearl's style, and can be character•    employs the same belief revision principle, i.e. probability 
ized as a "Nothing else considered" interpretation since it is kinematics. Moreover, although they adopt different, formal 
a statement about the evidence only [Pearl, 2001].             methods for specifying evidence, one can translate between 
   The two interpretations can lead to contradictory conclu•   the two methods of specification. Finally, one may take the 
sions about the evidence. For example, if we use the "Nothing  view that Jeffrey's rule and Pearl's method constitute com•
else considered" approach to interpret our statement, we will  mitments to how informal evidential statements should be in•
conclude that the evidence is against David being the killer.  terpreted, making the first and second elements the same, but 
However, if we use the "All things considered" interpretation, wc do not take this view here. Instead, we regard the issue of 
it is not clear whether the evidence is for or against, unless interpretation as a third, orthogonal dimension which is best 
we know the original probability that David is the killer. If, addressed independently. 
for example, David is one of four suspects who are equally 
likely to be the killer, we will originally have: Pr(a) = 3/4. 6 Commutativity of Iterated Revisions 
Therefore, this evidence has actually increased the probabil•
                                                               We now discuss the problem of commutativity of iterated re•
ity that David is the killer! Because of this, Pearl argues for 
                                                               visions, that is, whether the order in which we incorporate 
the "Nothing else considered" interpretation, as it provides 
                                                               uncertain evidence matters.
a summary of the evidence and the evidence alone, and dis•                               2 
cusses how people tend to use betting odds to quantify their     It is well known that iterated revisions by Jeffrey's rule are 
beliefs even when they are based on the evidence only [Pearl,  not commutative [Diaconis & Zabell, 1982]. As a simple ex•
2001].                                                         ample, assume that we are given a piece of uncertain evidence 
                                                               which suggests that the probability of event o is .7, followed 
   Example 2 provides another opportunity to illustrate the 
                                                               by another piece of uncertain evidence which suggests that 
subtlety involved in interpreting evidential statements. The 
                                                               the probability of r* is .8. After incorporating both pieces 
evidential statement in this case is "Mr. Holmes concludes 
                                                               in that order, we will believe that the probability of a is .8. 
that there is an 80% chance that Mrs. Gibbons did hear 
                                                               However, if the reversed order of revision is employed, we 
the alarm going off." Interpreting this statement using the 
                                                               will believe that the probability of a is .7. In general, even if 
"All things considered" approach gives us the conclusion that 
                                                               we are given pieces of uncertain evidence on different events, 
Pr\a) : Pr' (a) = 4:1, where a denotes the event that 
                                                               iterated revisions by Jeffrey's rule are not commutative. 
the alarm has gone off. This interpretation assumes that the 
                                                                 This was viewed as a problematic aspect of Jeffrey's rule 
4 : 1 ratio applies to the posterior beliefs in a and a, after Mr. 
                                                               for a long time, until clarified recently by Wagner [2002]. 
Holmes has accommodated the evidence provided by Mrs. 
                                                               First, Wagner observed and stressed that the evidence spec•
Gibson. However, in Example 2, this statement was given a 
                                                               ification method adopted by Jeffrey is suitable for the "All 
"Nothing else considered" interpretation, as by Pearl [1988, 
                                                               things considered" interpretation of evidential statements. 
Page 44-47], where the 4 : 1 ratio is taken as a quantification 
                                                               Moreover, he argued convincingly that when evidential state•
of the evidence strength. That is, the statement is interpreted 
                                                               ments carry this interpretation, they must not be commutative 
as Pr(n | a) : Pr(n | a) = 4 : 1, where n stands for the 
                                                               to start with. So the lack of commutativity is not a problem 
evidence. In fact, the two interpretations will lead to two dif•
                                                               of the revision method, but a property of the method used to 
ferent probability distributions and, hence, give us different 
                                                               specify evidence. In fact, Wagner suggested a third method 
answers to further probabilistic queries. For example, if we 
                                                               for specifying evidence based on Bayes factors [Good, 1950; 
use the "All things considered" approach in interpreting this 
                                                               1983; Jeffrey, 1992], which leads to commutativity. Specif•
evidential statement, the probability of having a burglary will 
                                                               ically, if Pr and Pr' are two probability distributions, and 
be Pr'{b) = 7.53 x 10-3, which is much larger than the prob•
ability we get using the "Nothing else considered" approach 
                                                                  2There is a key distinction between iterated revisions using cer•
in Example 2, which is 3.85 x 10-4.                            tain evidence versus uncertain evidence. In the former case, pieces 
  From the discussions above, the formal interpretation of     of evidence may be logically inconsistent, which adds another di•
evidential statements appears to be a non-trivial task, which  mension of complexity to the problem [Darwiche & Pearl, 1997], 
can be sensitive to context and communication protocols. Re•   leading to different properties and treatments. 


BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                                            103 