           Quantifying information and contradiction in propositional logic 
                                        through test actions 

        Sebastien Konieczny Jerome Lang Pierre Marquis 
             IRIT - UPS IRIT - UPS CRIL - Universite d' Artois 
     F-31062 Toulouse - France F-31062 Toulouse - France F-62307 Lens - France 
        konieczny@irit.fr lang@irit.fr marquis@cril.univ-artois.fr 

                    Abstract                          when trying to reach a compromise among several agents who 
                                                      have possibly conflictual preferences about a common deci•
    Degrees of information and of contradiction are in• sion (like voting, resource sharing, public goods buying). In 
    vestigated within a uniform propositional frame-  this context, not only it is relevant to compute a global degree 
    work, based on test actions. We consider that the of conflict (among the set of agents) but also degrees of con•
    degree of information of a propositional formula  flicts associated with small groups of agents (coalitions) so as 
    is based on the cost of actions needed to identify to localize as precisely as possible where the conflicts are. 
    the truth values of each atomic proposition, while  Now, what do "degree of information" and "degree of con•
    the degree of contradiction of a formula is based tradiction" mean? There is no consensus about it. The main 
    on the cost of actions needed to make the formula features shared by existing definitions (and there are not nu•
    classically consistent. Our definitions are to a large merous, cf. Section 7) is that (1) such degrees are numerical 
    extent independent of the underlying propositional values, and (2) they vary depending on the representation lan•
    logic; this flexibility is of prime importance since guage. Thus, one may consider a as fully informative in the 
    there is no unique, fully accepted logic for reason• case where a is the single atomic proposition of the language 
    ing under inconsistency.                          but surely not fully informative when the vocabulary also con•
                                                      tains b (provided that a and b are independent propositions). 
1 Introduction                                          In this paper, our point of view is that it is inadequate 
                                                      to quantify the information/contradiction conveyed by some 
Information and contradiction are two fundamental aspects data without considering at the same time a set of available 
of knowledge processing. Quantifying them is an important actions and a goal to be reached. Accordingly, our degrees 
issue when reasoning about beliefs (or preferences) stemming of information and contradiction are defined in an "active" 
from one or different sources. Here are some contexts where way. Acting so as to reduce inconsistency or to gain infor•
quantifying information and contradiction is relevant: mation often relies on performing knowledge-gathering ac•
• diagnosis and testing. In model-based diagnosis, some tions (also called tests). We consider that the degree of in•
initial assumptions that each component works correctly are formation of an information base is based on the number (or 
made; these assumptions may conflict with actual observa• the cost) of actions needed to identify the truth value of each 
tions. Measuring the conflict of the resulting base may be a atomic proposition (the lower the cost the more informative 
good hint about how hard it will be to identify the faulty com• the base); and that the degree of contradiction of an infor•
ponents.                                              mation base is based on the number (or the cost) of actions 
• preference elicitation. In the interactive process of elicitat- needed to render the base classically consistent. Thus, both 
ing the preference profile of an individual (user) about a set degrees are dependent on the language but also on the given 
of possible alternatives, it is not unfrequent that contradictory set of tests and the way plans costs are computed. 
preferences arise. In this situation, it is useful to quantify and The rest of this paper is organized as follows. After some 
localize the contradictions as well as the information about formal preliminaries in Section 2, we present our framework 
the user's preferences, so as to be in position to choose the in Section 3. In order to show the generality of our frame-
next questions to ask.                                work, we instantiate it to three different propositional log•
• belief merging. In this framework, degrees of information ics: classical logic (Section 4), the paraconsistent logic LPm 
and contradiction can be the basis on which one can decide (Section 5) and a syntax-based approach to inconsistency 
whether to take or not into account the data conveyed by an handling (Section 6). Related work is given in Section 7, and 
agent. If the degree of contradiction of the data given by an some conclusions in Section 8. 
agent is high, it may be relevant to reject the information, 
since there is a significant evidence that the source is not reli•
able; however, this must be balanced by the quantity of infor• 2 Formal preliminaries and notations 
mation furnished by the agent, especially when she also gives We consider a propositional language Lps based on a finite 
some important and uncontroversial pieces of information. set of propositional symbols PS and a set of connectives that 
• group decision making. Contradictions arise frequently may vary depending on the logic used. Well-formed formulas 


106                                                                         BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                                           107 a plan is defined as the maximum cost among its trajecto•
ries); this principle, consisting in assuming the worst out•
come, is known in decision theory as Wald criterion. Other 
criteria could be used instead, such as the optimistic crite•
rion obtained by replacing max by min. More interesting, 
the criterion obtained by first using max and then min for 
tie-breaking, or the leximax criterion, allow for a better dis•
crimination than the pure pessimistic criterion. The choice 
of a criterion is fairly independent from the other issues dis•
cussed in this paper, which gives our framework a good level 
of flexibility and generality. Due to space limitations, how•
ever, we consider only the pessimistic criterion in the rest of 
the paper. 


                                                                This example also shows that mere expansion is not a very 
                                                              satisfying revision operator. Indeed, since it does not enable 
                                                              to purify any inconsistent base (whatever the test context), 
                                                              expansion does not enable as well to disambiguate any incon•
                                                              sistent base. Furthermore, it may lead to degrees of contra•
                                                              diction (or purification costs) that are not intuitively correct. 


                                                              son of this discrepancy between what is expected and what is 
                                                              achieved is that expanding an inconsistent information base 
                                                              always leads to an inconsistent base, while it would be neces•
                                                              sary to restore consistency2 for achieving purification and dis•
                                                              ambiguation in classical logic. Note that using AGM revision 
                                                              instead of expansion would not help a lot since AGM opera•
                                                              tors do not behave well when applied to inconsistent bases. 


108                                                                                    BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 5 Case study 2: the paraconsistent logic LPm 
Paraconsistent logics have been introduced to avoid exfalso 
quodlibet sequitur of classical logic, hence handling incon•
sistent bases in a much more satisfying way. While many 
paraconsistent logics have been defined so far and could be 
used in our framework, we focus here on the LPm logic as 
defined in [Priest, 1991]. This choice is mainly motivated by 
the fact that this logic is simple enough and has an inference 
relation that coincides with classical entailment whenever the 
information base is classically consistent (this feature is not 
shared by many paraconsistent logics). 


                                                              6 Case study 3: "syntax-based" information 
                                                                  bases 


BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                                          109                                                                of information is general enough to recover classical entropy, 
                                                               applied to classical logic4. 
                                                                 Lozinskii f 1994a] gives a set of properties that a measure 
                                                               of quantity of information should satisfy. Our degree of ig•
                                                               norance is fully compatible with Lozinskii's requirements in 
                                                               several cases. The degree of information defined by Lozin•
                                                               skii corresponds to the notion in Shannon's theory, assuming 
                                                               a uniform distribution over the set of propositional interpre•
                                                               tations5. It is thus required that the input information base 


                                                                 [Knight, 2003] reports some other postulates for a mea•
                                                               sure of quantity of information. Our measure d1 does not 
                                                               satisfy all of them, even in simple cases (for space reasons, 
                                                               we cannot detail it here). This contrasts with the two mea•
                                                               sures introduced by Knight, which generalize in an elegant 
7 Related work                                                 way Shannon's entropy-based measure to the case the infor•
                                                               mation base is an inconsistent set of formulas. However, both 
To the best of our knowledge, only few proposals for a notion  measures trivialize when the information set is an inconsis•
of degree of information can be found in the literature, and   tent singleton. 
things are even worse to what concerns the notion of degree      The only two approaches we are aware of, which con•
of contradiction. All existing approaches are stuck to specific sider (non-trivial) degrees of inconsistency defined for clas-
propositional logics with the corresponding consequence re•
lations, which address only some aspects of the paraconsis-
tency issue, if any (as evoked previously, there is no undebat-
able paraconsistent inference relation). 
   Shannon's information theory [Shannon, 1948] provides 
the most famous approach on which notions of quantity of 
information can be defined, but it relies on the assumption 
that the available information is given under the form of a 
probability distribution; furthermore, it cannot directly ad•
dress inconsistent data. Interestingly, our definition of degree 


110                                                                                     BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 