 Minimal Change and Maximal Coherence for Epistemic Logic Program Updates 

                                               Yan Zhang 
                                       School of Computing & IT 
                                      University of Western Sydney 
                                 Penrith South DC, NSW 1797, Australia 
                                       E-mail: yan@cit.uws.edu.au 

                     Abstract                          [Lobo et al, 2001]. When we use an epistemic logic pro•
                                                       gram to represent an agent's knowledge base, it is a nontrivial 
    We consider the problem of updating nonmono•       question how the agent's knowledge base (an epistemic logic 
    tonic knowledge bases represented by epistemic     program) can be updated when new information is received. 
    logic programs where disjunctive information and 
                                                         In this paper, we propose an approach for epistemic logic 
    notions of knowledge and beliefs can be explic•
                                                       program updates. Contrary to other logic programs, notions 
    itly expressed. We propose a formulation for epis•
                                                       of knowledge and beliefs in epistemic logic programs have 
    temic logic program updates based on a princi•
                                                       strong semantic connections to the standard Kripke structures 
    ple called minimal change and maximal coherence. 
                                                       of modal logics. On the other hand, epistemic logic programs 
    The central feature of our approach is that during 
                                                       are also sensitive with various syntactic forms. Hence, we be•
    an update procedure, contradictory information is 
                                                       lieve that a pure model-based or syntax-based approach will 
    removed on a basis of minimal change under the 
                                                       not be appropriate to handle epistemic logic program updates. 
    semantics of epistemic logic programs and then co•
                                                       Instead, we require our update formulation to meet three ma•
    herent information is maximally retained in the up•
                                                       jor criteria: (1) an update should be performed on a basis 
    date result. By using our approach, we can char•
                                                       of minimal change semantics to remove contradictory infor•
    acterize an update result in both semantic and syn•
                                                       mation; (2) based on the minimal change semantics, the up•
    tactic forms. We show that our approach handles 
                                                       date result should have a clear syntactic representation and 
    update sequences and satisfies the consistency re•
                                                       contain maximal consistent information from previous pro-
    quirement. We also investigate important semantic 
                                                       grants); and (3) the underlying update procedure should be 
    properties of our update approach such as reduc•
                                                       consistent, that is, updating a consistent program by another 
    tion, persistence and preservation. 
                                                       consistent program (or a sequence of consistent programs) 
                                                       should generate a consistent result. Our main idea to accom•
1 Introduction                                         plish these criteria is so called minimal change and maximal 
                                                       coherence which presents both semantic and syntactic fea•
Logic programming has been proved to be one of the most 
                                                       tures in an update procedure. 
promising logic based formulations for problem solving, 
knowledge representation and reasoning, and reasoning about The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a 
actions and plans. Recent research on logic program updates brief overview on epistemic logic programs. Section 3 de•
further shows that logic programming also provides a feasi• velops a formulation for epistemic logic program updates, 
ble framework for modeling agents' activities in dynamic en• while section 4 extends this formulation to handle update se•
vironments [Alferes and et al, 2000; Eiter and et al, 2002; quences. Section 5 investigates important semantic properties 
Sakama and Inoue, 1999; Zhang and Foo, 1998].          for our update approach. Finally, section 6 concludes the pa•
  While all current approaches for logic program updates fo• per with discussions on related work and future research. 
cus on the problem of updating extended logic programs or 2 Epistemic Logic Programs: An Overview 
their variations, updating epistemic logic programs, however, 
has yet to be explored in the research. By combining knowl• In this section, we present a general overview on epistemic 
edge and belief operators into logic rules, epistemic logic logic programs. Gelfond extended the syntax and semantics 
programming [Gelfond, 1994] is a powerful representation of disjunctive logic programs to allow the correct representa•
formalism in logic programming paradigm. It can deal with tion of incomplete information (knowledge) in the presence 
more difficult problems in reasoning with disjunctive infor• of multiple extensions. Consider the following disjunctive 
mation while traditional disjunctive extended logic programs program about the policy of offering scholarships in some 
fail to handle. Furthermore, epistemic logic programs seem university [Gelfond, 1994]: 
more feasible for knowledge reasoning than many other au-  V: 
toepistemic logics [Gelfond, 1994] and has been used as a    r1: eligible(x) <- highGPA(x), 
formal basis for modeling knowledge in action theories, e.g. r2: eligible(x) <- minority(x)ifairGPA(x), 


112                                                                          BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE  Rule r4 can be viewed as a formalization of the statement: 
 "the sutdents whose eligibility is not decided by rules r1, 
 r2 and r3 should be interviewed by the committee". It is 
 easy to see that V has two answer sets {highGPA(mike), 
 eligible (mike)} and {fair GPA(mike), interview(mike)}. 
 Therefore the answer to query interview (mike) is unknown, 
 which seems too weak from our intuition. Epistemic logic 
 programs will overcome this kind of difficulties in reasoning 
 with incomplete information. 


                                                                 Now we define that a collection A of sets of ground literals 
                                                               is a world view of V if A is the collection of all belief sets of 
                                                              PA* Consider program V about the eligibility of scholarship 
                                                              discussed earlier, if we replace rule r4 with the following 
                                                               rule: 


                                                              3 Formalizing Epistemic Logic Program 
                                                                   Updates 
                                                              From this section, we start to develop a formulation for epis•
                                                              temic logic program updates. Consider the update of an epis•
                                                              temic logic program V\ by another epistemic logic program 
                                                              P2- Our approach consists of two stages: firstly, we update 
                                                              each world view of "P1 by P2 - this will remove contradictory 
                                                              information between P1 and P2 and ensure a minimal change 
                                                              for the underlying update semantics; and secondly, from the 
                                                               first stage result, we will derive a resulting program which re•
                                                              tains the maximal consistent information represented by V\. 


Step 1. Let V be an epistemic logic program not containing 
modal operators K and M and negation as failure not. A 
set W of ground literals is called a belief set of V iff W 


BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                                          113                                                                3.3 Maximal Coherence and Resulting Programs 
                                                               As discussed earlier, during the second stage of an update 
   A collection of belief sets is consistent if each of its belief procedure, we need to derive a resulting program which 
sets is consistent. An epistemic logic program is consistent if should contain the maximal consistent information repre•
it has a world view and all of its world views are consistent. sented by the initial program in syntactic forms. This is 
To simplify our presentation, in the rest of this paper, we will achieved by introducing the concept of coherence. Let 
simply call an epistemic logic program program. By V(P) 
we denote the set of all collections of belief sets in which V 
is satisfied. We also denote the set of all world views of V as 

3.2 Minimal Change on World View Updates 


                                                                 Now the resulting program can be specified by the follow•
                                                               ing definition. 


114                                                                                     BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 4 Handling Update Sequences 


                                                               where the following conditions hold: 


decreasing priorities. Similarly to our previous update for•
mulation, we will formalize this principle from both seman•
tic and syntactic considerations. We first illustrate our idea by 
the following example. 


                                                               Example 4 Consider an irrigation system which has the fol•
                                                               lowing general rules to decide whether the plants should be 
                                                               watered: 
                                                                    If there is no evidence showing that it will not be 
                                                                    raining next day, then we do not need to water the 
                                                                    plants; and 
                                                                    If there is no evidence showing that the soil is dry, 
                                                                    then we do not need to water the plants. 
                                                               It is also assumed that the soil is dry or it will not be raining 
                                                               next day. This scenario can be represented by the following 

                                                               program P1: 


BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE                                                                                            115  from which it is concluded that we do not need to water the 
plants. However, from a conservative viewpoint for plants' 

growth, this result is rather optimistic because r3 does not 
represent an exclusive disjunctive information. Therefore, we 

consider to update P1 by P2 

                                                                 Now we investigate two specific properties called persis•
                                                               tence and preservation for epistemic logic program updates. 
                                                               Informally, the persistence property ensures that if a literal is 
                                                               derivable from a program, then after updating this program, 
                                                               this literal is still derivable from the resulting program. The 
which says that if it is not known that the soil is dry and it preservation property, on the other hand, says that if a literal 
may be believed that it will not be raining next day, then we  is derivable from a program, then updating other program by 
water the plants; and we do not need to water the plants if the this program will still preserve this literal's derivability from 
soil is not dry or it will be raining next day. After a period the resulting program. While the persistence property is usu•
of time, suppose new information is further received that is   ally not valid for classical belief revision and update due to 
represented by P3 as follows:                                  their nonmonotonicity, the preservation property, neverthe•
                                                               less, indeed holds for classical belief revision and update. It is 
                                                               not difficult to observe that generally none of these two prop•
                                                               erties holds for extended logic program updates or epistemic 
                                                               logic program updates. However, it is always worthwhile 
                                                               to explore their restricted forms because under certain con•
                                                               ditions, these properties may significantly simplify the com•
                                                               putation of a query to the update result. We first present the 
                                                               following lemma. 


5 Semantic Characterizations 


Theorem 1 Let P be an update sequence with a length of k          4One referee pointed that as a general extension of Lifschitz and 
andV a program. Then the following properties hold:            Turner's result, Watson also proposed a splitting set theorem for 
                                                               epistemic logic programs [Watson, 2000]. It appears that our split•
                                                               ting theorem has a different feature from Watson's though the later 
                                                               may be also used for this proof. 


116                                                                                     BELIEF REVISION AND UPDATE 