                                  A Logic For Causal Reasoning 

                                          Alexander Bochman 
                                     Computer Science Department, 
                             Holon Academic Institute of Technology, Israel 
                                      e-mail: bochmana@hait.ac.il 


                     Abstract                          The importance of determinate theories lies in the fact that 
                                                       (modulo some mild finiteness restrictions) the explained in•
    We introduce a logical formalism of irreflexivc 
                                                       terpretations of such a theory are precisely the interpretations 
    causal production relations that possesses both a 
                                                       of its classical completion (see [McCain and Turner, 1997]). 
    standard monotonic semantics, and a natural non•
                                                       Consequently, the nonmonotonic consequences of such the•
    monotonic semantics. The formalism is shown to 
                                                       ories are obtainable by the use of classical inference tools 
    provide a complete characterization for the causal 
                                                       (such as the Causal Calculator, described in [Giunchiglia et 
    reasoning behind causal theories from [McCain and 
                                                       al.,2001]). 
    Turner, 1997]. It is shown also that any causal re•
                                                         Finally, we will describe a relationship between causal re•
    lation is reducible to its Horn sub-relation with re•
                                                       lations and abductive reasoning. As we will see, the latter 
    spect to the nonmonotonic semantics. We describe 
                                                       will be representable via a special kind of causal relations 
    also a general correspondence between causal re•
                                                       called abductive causal relations. This will serve as yet an•
    lations and abductive systems, which shows, in ef•
                                                       other justification for our general claim that causal produc-
    fect, that causal relations allow to express abductive 
                                                       tion relations could be used as a general-purpose formalism 
    reasoning. The results of the study seem to sug•
                                                       for nonmonotonic reasoning, a viable alternative to other non•
    gest causal production relations as a viable general 
                                                       monotonic formalisms (such as default logic). 
    framework for nonmonotonic reasoning. 
                                                       2 Causal production relations 
1 Introduction 
                                                       We will assume that our language is an ordinary proposi-
Causal theories have been introduced in [McCain and Turner, tional language with the classical connectives and constants 
1997] as a nonmonotonic formalism that provides a natural {A, V, ->, ->, t, f}. In addition, t= and Th will denote, respec•
solution for both the frame and ramification problem in rea• tively, the classical entailment and the associated logical clo•
soning about actions (see [Giunchiglia el al, 2001] for a de• sure operator. 
tailed exposition). A causal theory is a set of causal rules A causal rule is a rule of the form A => B, where A and 
A->B that express a kind of a causal relation among proposi• B arc classical propositions. Informally, such a rule says 
tions. The nonmonotonic semantics of such theories is deter• that, whenever A holds, B is caused. The following defini•
mined by causally explained interpretations, namely the in• tion describes an inference system for causal rules that will be 
terpretations that arc both closed with respect to the causal shown to be adequate (and complete) for causal theories. Ac•
rules and such that every fact holding in them is caused. tually, many of the postulates below (e.g., And and Or) have 
  The above fonnalism has been defined semantically, and already been suggested in the literature (see, Lifschitz, 1997; 
the main aim of our study consists in laying down its log• Schwind, 1999]). 
ical foundations. As we will show, such foundations can Definition 2.1. A causal production relation (or simply a 
be built in the framework of an inference system for causal causal relation) is a relation => on the set of propositions sat•
rules that we will call causal production relations. The log•
                                                       isfying the following conditions: 
ical origins of the latter are in input/output logics [Makinson 
and der Torre, 2000], but we will supply them with a nat• (Strengthening) If A I= B and B => C, then A => C; 
ural nonmonotonic semantics allowing to represent signifi• (Weakening) If A => B and B I= (7, then A => C; 
cant parts of nonmonotonic reasoning. Thus, the main result 
                                                       (And) If A => B and A =» C, then A=>B/\C\ 
of the present study is that causal production relations com•
pletely characterize the inference rules for causal condition• (Or) If A => C and B => C, then AvB=>C; 
als that preserve the nonmonotonic semantics of causal theo• (Cut) If A => B and A A B => C, then A => C; 
ries. It will be shown also that any causal theory is reducible 
                                                       (Truth) t => t; 
with respect to this semantics to a determinate causal the•
ory that contain only Horn causal rules with literals in heads. (Falsity) f=>f. 


CAUSALITY                                                                                              141    Though causal relations satisfy most of the rules for clas•   Now the above lemma says that any causal rule can be de•
 sical entailment, their distinctive feature is that they are ir- composed into a (non-causal) constraint and a conditional ab-
 reflexive, that is, they do not satisfy the postulate A=>A. Ac• ducible. This decomposition neatly delineates two kinds of 
 tually, such relations correspond to a strongest kind of input- information conveyed by causal rules. One is a logical infor•
 output logics from [Makinson and der Torre, 2000], basic      mation that constraints the set of admissible models, while the 
 input-output logics with reusable output, with the only dis•  other is an explanatory information describing what proposi•
tinction that causal relations satisfy also Falsity. The latter tions are caused (explainable) in such models . 

restricts the universe of discourse to consistent theories1.     For a finite set u of propositions, will denote their con•
   As a consequence of Cut, any causal relation will already   junction. We will extend causal rules to rules having arbitrary 
be transitive, that is, it will satisfy                        sets of propositions as premises using the following 'com•
                                                               pactness' recipe: for any set u, 

   However, transitivity is a weaker property than Cut, since 
it does not imply the latter (see [Makinson and der Torre, 
2000]). In addition, the material implications corresponding     For a given causal relation =», we will denote by C(u) the 
to the causal rules can be used as auxiliary assumptions in    set of propositions caused by u, that is 
making derivations. This is a consequence of the following 
property that holds for causal relations: 
                                                                 The operator C will play much the same role as the usual 
(AS) If A=> D and C/\(A-+B) => D, then C => D. 
                                                               derivability operator for consequence relations. It satisfies the 
Remark. The notion of a causal production sanctioned by        following familiar properties: 
the above postulates is atemporal. For example, the rule 
           cannot be understood as saying that P and q jointly 
cause -q (afterwards) in a temporal sense; instead, by Cut 
and Falsity it implies , which means, in effect, that 
p Aq cannot hold. Speaking generally, 'causally consistent' 
propositions cannot cause an effect incompatible with them. 
A representation of temporal and action domains in this for•             _ 
malism can be achieved, however, by adding explicit tempo•
ral arguments to propositions, just as in the classical logic  3 Monotonic semantics of causal inference 
(see [Giunchiglia et ai, 2001]).                               We will describe now a monotonic semantics for causal re•
   A constraint is a causal rule of the form Such lations. Actually, it will be just a slight modification of the 
constraints correspond to state constraints in action theories. semantics given in [Turner, 1999]. 
Now, any causal rule implies the corresponding constraint:       A fully formal semantic interpretation of causal relations 
                                                               could be given in terms of possible worlds frames of the form 
(Reduction) 
                                                               (i,W), where i is a propositional interpretation, while W 
   Note, however, that the reverse entailment does not hold.   is a set of propositional interpretations that contains i (see 
Actually, given the rest of the postulates, Reduction can re•  [Turner, 1999]). In order to make our descriptions more trans•
place the Cut postulate:                                       parent, however, we will identify such frames with pairs of 
Lemma 2.1. Cut is equivalent to Reduction.                     theories of the form , where a is a world (maximal de•
                                                               ductively closed set), while u is a deductively closed set in•
   Another important fact about causal relations is the follow•
                                                               cluded in a. Such pairs will be called bitheories. Clearly, 
ing 'decomposition' of causal rules: 
                                                               any possible worlds frame (i, W) determines a certain bithe-
                                                               ory, and vice versa, so all our definitions will admit a purely 
                                                               semantic reformulation. 
   Causal rules of the form are ' classically trivial',          By a causal semantics we will mean a set of bitheories. 
but they play an important explanatory role in non-reflexive  The corresponding notion of validity for causal rules is given 
causal reasoning. Namely, they say that, in any causally ex•   in the next definition. 
plained interpretation in which A holds, we can freely accept 
B, since it is self-explanatory in this context. Accordingly, 
such rules could be called conditional abducibles. We will 
                                                                 • A => B is valid with respect to a causal semantics B if it 
discuss the role of abducibles later as part of the general cor•
                                                                   holds in all bitheories from B. 
respondence between causal and abductive reasoning2. 
                                                                 We will denote by =B the set of all causal rules that are 
   1 In fact, it has been shown in [Bochman, 2002] that other, weaker valid in a causal semantics B. It can be easily verified that this 
input-output logics can also be given a semantics of the kind de• set is closed with respect to the postulates for causal relations, 
scribed in what follows.                                      and hence we have 
   2Note also that, under the general correspondence between 
causal inference and default logic (see [Turner, 1999]), such rules 3Cf. a similar decomposition of causal rules in [Thielschcr, 
correspond to normal defaults in default logic.                1997]. 


142                                                                                                          CAUSALITY                                                                  Propositions that hold in all causally explained worlds are 
 the following theorem shows that this semantics determines    considered as the nonmonotonic consequences determined by 
precisely the source causal relation, including the causal rules the causal relation. This semantics is indeed nonmonotonic, 
 with arbitrary sets of premises. In other words, the source   since the set of such consequences changes nonmonotonically 
 causal relation is strongly complete for this semantics.      with changes in the underlying set of causal rules. 
                                                                 Now we will establish a correspondence between the above 
                                                               semantics and the nonmonotonic semantics of causal theories 
                                                               from [McCain and Turner, 1997]. 
   Thus, any causal semantics determines a causal relation 
 and vice versa, any causal relation is generated by some 
 causal semantics. Hence we conclude with the following gen•
 eral completeness result: 
 Corollary 3.3. A relation on propositions is a causal relation 
iff it is generated by a causal semantics. 

3.1 Possible worlds semantics 
Causal relations can also be given a semantic interpretation in 
terms of standard possible worlds models. 


                                                               Definition 4.2. Two causal theories will be called (non-
                                                               monotonically) equivalent if they determine the same set of 
   The following definition provides the notion of validity for causally explained worlds. 
causal rules in such models: 
                                                                 As a first part of our general result, the next theorem shows 
                                                               that the postulates of causal inference preserve the above non•
                                                               monotonic semantics. 

                                                                 The above theorem shows, in effect, that the logic of 
Theorem 3.4. A relation is causal if and only if it is deter•
                                                               causal relations is adequate for the nonmonotonic reasoning 
mined by a quasi-reflexive possible worlds model. 
                                                               in causal theories. 


                                                               Definition 4.3. • A causal theory is determinate if it con•
                                                                    tains only Horn rules. A causal relation will be called 
4 The nonmonotonic semantics                                        determinate if it is generated by a determinate causal 
                                                                    theory. 
In addition to the monotonic semantics, a causal relation de•
termines also a natural nonmonotonic semantics. 

                                                                 • A causal theory will be called definite if it is determinate 
                                                                    and locally finite. 
                                                                 Clearly, any finite causal theory will be locally finite, 
                                                               though not vice versa. Similarly, any finite determinate the•
                                                               ory will be definite. As can be easily verified, a determinate 
fact is causally explained. It is these worlds that determine 
the nonmonotonic semantics, defined below.                        4Thus, any constraint A => f will be a Horn rule in this sense. 


CAUSALITY                                                                                                            143  causal theory is definite if and only if, for any literal /, there is a monotonic (logical) notion, and hence, unlike the non•
 is no more than a finite number of rules with the head /. Con• monotonic equivalence, it is preserved under addition of new 
 sequently, our definition of definite theories turns out to be causal rules. For example, though any causal theory is equiv•
 equivalent to that given in [McCain and Turner, 1997].        alent to a determinate one, they may give different results if 
   By a determinate subrelation of a causal relation => we     we add some causal rules to them. 
 will mean the least causal relation generated by the set of all 
 Horn rules from =». Then we have 
 Theorem 4.2. Any causal relation is nonmonotonically 
equivalent to its determinate subrelation. 
   By Theorem 4.1 we can conclude now that any causal the•
ory is equivalent to some determinate theory. 
Example. The causal theory 


                                                                 Strongly equivalent theories are 'equivalent forever', that 
                                                               is, they are interchangeable in any larger causal theory with•
                                                               out changing the nonmonotonic semantics. Consequently, 
                                                               strong equivalence can be seen as an equivalence with respect 
                                                               to the monotonic logic of causal theories. And the next result 
                                                               shows that this logic is precisely the logic of causal relations. 
                                                               Theorem 4.5. Two causal theories are strongly equivalent if 
                                                               and only if they are causally equivalent. 
                                                                 The above result (and its proof) has the same pattern as 
   Then the following result can be proved:                    the corresponding results about strong equivalence of logic 
                                                               programs and default theories (see [Lifsehitz et al., 2001; 
   Unfortunately, the above algorithm is not modular. More•    Turner, 2001]). 
over, it does not preserve local finiteness: there are locally   The above result implies, in effect, that causal relations are 
finite causal theories such that their determinate counterparts maximal inference relations that are adequate for reasoning 
are not locally finite. Still, in many simple cases it gives a with causal theories: any postulate that is not valid for causal 
convenient recipe for transforming an arbitrary causal theory  relations can be 'falsified' by finding a suitable extension of 
into an equivalent determinate theory.                         two causal theories that would determine different causally 
   Now we arc going to show the second part of our main        explained interpretations, and hence would produce different 
result, namely that causal relations constitute a maximal logic nonmonotonic conclusions. 
suitable for reasoning in causal theories. To begin with, we 
introduce                                                      5 Causation versus abduction 
                                                               Causal inference has numerous connections with other non•
                                                               monotonic formalisms. Thus, [Turner, 1999] describes the re•
                                                               lations with circumscription, autoepistemic and default logic. 
                                                               In this section we will describe a correspondence between 
                                                               causal inference and abductive reasoning. In addition to spe•
                                                               cific results, this will give us a broader perspective on the 
                                                               representation capabilities of causal relations. 


Corollary 4.4. Causally equivalent theories are nonmono•
tonically equivalent.                                            A general correspondence between abductive frameworks 
   The reverse implication in the above corollary does not     and input-output logics has been established in [Bochman, 
hold, and a deep reason for this is that the causal equivalence 2002], based on the identification between the above notion 


144                                                                                                          CAUSALITY of explainability and input-output derivability. By this corre• a finite language should be well-founded. Moreover, let us 
spondence, abducibles are representable by 'reflexive' propo•  say that a causal relation is finitary if it is generated by some 
sitions satisfying input-output rules A=> A, while abductive   finite set of causal rules. Then we have 
frameworks themselves correspond exactly to input-output       Lemma 5.2. Any finitary causal relation is well-founded. 
logics satisfying an additional postulate of Abduction (see 
below). By these results, input-output logics allow to give      Finally, the next result shows that all such causal relations 
a syntax-independent representation of abductive reasoning.    will be weakly abductive. 
                                                               Theorem 5.3. Any well-founded causal relation is weakly 
5.1 The abductive subrelation                                  abductive. 
We will begin with the following definitions:                    It turns out that well-foundedness is not the only condi•
                                                               tion that is sufficient for weak abductivity. Thus, adequately 
                                                               acyclic causal theories (see [McCain and Turner, 1998] for 
                                                               a definition) are not in general well-founded, but they also 
                                                               satisfy this property. 
                                                               Theorem 5.4. Any adequately acyclic causal relation is 
                                                               weakly abductive. 
   Causal inference in abductive causal relations is always      The above results show that in many cases of interest, the 
mediated by abducibles. Consequently, propositions caused      nonmonotonic semantics of causal theories can also be com•
by worlds are caused, in effect, by the abducibles that hold in puted using abduction. Still, as a general conclusion, we can 
these worlds:                                                  say that causal inference constitutes a proper generalization 
                                                               of abductive reasoning beyond the situations where facts are 
                                                               explainable by reference to a fixed set of self-explanatory ab•
                                                               ducibles. 

                                                               6 Conclusions and perspectives 
                                                               Summing up the main results, we can argue that causal rela•
                                                               tions constitute a powerful formalism for nonmonotonic rea•
                                                               soning, especially suitable for representing action domains. It 
                                                               has been shown, in particular, that it gives an exact descrip•
                                                               tion of the logic underlying causal theories. We have seen 
                                                               also that it allows to give a syntax-independent representa•
                                                               tion of abductive reasoning. If we add to this also the natural 
                                                               correspondences with other nonmonotonic formalisms, such 
                                                               as default logic and circumscription (see [Turner, 1999]), we 
   The abductive subrelation of a causal relation preserves 
                                                               can safely conclude that causal inference covers a significant 
many properties of the latter. For example, both have the 
                                                               part of nonmonotonic reasoning. 
same constraints and abducibles. 
                                                                 Viewed from this perspective, there is still much to be done 
   Recall that in causally explained interpretations any propo•
                                                               in order to realize the opportunities created by the formalism. 
sition is caused by other propositions, the latter are also 
                                                               There are two kinds of problems that need to resolved in this 
caused by accepted propositions, and so on. Clearly, if our 
                                                               respect. 
'causal resources' are limited, such a causal chain should stop 
                                                                 The nonmonotonic semantics for causal theories is based 
somewhere. More exactly, it should reach abducible (self-
                                                               on the principle of universal causation which is obviously 
explanatory) propositions. This indicates that in many cases 
                                                               very strong. The principle implies, for example, that if we 
the nonmonotonic semantics associated with a causal theory 
                                                               have no causal rules for a certain proposition, it should be 
should be determined by the corresponding abductive subre•
                                                               false in all explainable interpretations. As a result, adding 
lation. Below we will make this claim precise. 
                                                               a new propositional atom to the language makes any causal 
Definition 5.2. A causal relation will be called weakly ab•    theory inconsistent, since we have no causal rules for it. This 
ductive if it is nonmonotonically equivalent to its abductive  makes causal theories extremely sensitive to the underlying 
subrelation.                                                   language in which they are formulated. One way out has 
  The next definition will give us an important sufficient con• been suggested in [Lifschitz, 1997]; it amounts to restricting 
dition for weak abductivity.                                   the principle of universal causation to a particular subset of 
                                                               explainable propositions. This approach, however, is purely 
                                                               syntactical and hence retains language dependence. 
                                                                 More subtle, yet perceptible difficulties arise also in rep•
                                                               resenting indeterminate situations in causal theories. Thus, 
  The above definition describes a variant of a standard       since any causal theory is reducible to a determinate theory, 
notion of well-foundedness with respect to the (transitive)    causal rules with disjunctive heads are ignored in the non•
causal order. It should be clear that any causal relation in   monotonic semantics; more exactly, they are informative only 


CAUSALITY                                                                                                            145 