                Responsibility and Blame: A Structural-Model Approach 

                       Hana Chockler                             Joseph Y. Halpern* 
       School of Engineering and Computer Science          Department of Computer Science 
                     Hebrew University                            Cornell University 
                  Jerusalem 91904, Israel.                     Ithaca, NY 14853, U.S.A. 
                 Email: hanac@cs.huji.ac.il                 Email: halpern@cs.cornell.edu 

                     Abstract                          is clear that, according to this definition, each of the voters 
                                                       for Mr. B is a cause of him winning, since if they had voted 
    Causality is typically treated an all-or-nothing con• against Mr. B, he would have lost. On the other hand, in the 
    cept; either A is a cause of B or it is not. We extend case of the 11-0 vote, there are no causes according to the 
    the definition of causality introduced by Halpern  naive counterfactual definition. A change of one vote does 
    and Pearl 2001a to take into account the degree of not makes no difference. Indeed, in this case, we do say in 
    responsibility of A for B. For example, if someone natural language that the cause is somewhat "diffuse". 
    wins an election 11-0, then each person who votes 
                                                         While in this case the standard counterfactual definition 
    for him is less responsible for the victory than if he 
                                                       may not seem quite so problematic, the following example 
    had won 6-5. We then define a notion of degree 
                                                       (taken from [Hall, 2003]) shows that things can be even more 
    of blame, which takes into account an agent's cpis-
                                                       subtle. Suppose that Suzy and Billy both pick up rocks and 
    temic state. Roughly speaking, the degree of blame 
                                                       throw them at a bottle. Suzy's rock gets there first, shattering 
    of A for D is the expected degree of responsibil•
                                                       the bottle. Since both throws are perfectly accurate, Billy's 
    ity of A for B, taken over the epistemic state of an 
                                                       would have shattered the bottle had Suzy not thrown. Thus, 
    agent. 
                                                       according to the naive counterfactual definition, Suzy's throw 
                                                       is not a cause of the bottle shattering. This certainly seems 
1 Introduction                                         counter to intuition. 
                                                         Both problems are dealt with the same way in [Halpern and 
There have been many attempts to define causality going back Pearl, 2001a]. Roughly speaking, the idea is that A is a cause 
to Hume 1739, and continuing to the present (see, for exam• of B if B counterfactually depends on C under some con•
ple, [Collins et al, 2003; Pearl, 2000] for some recent work). tingency. For example, voter 1 is a cause of Mr. B winning 
While many definitions of causality have been proposed, all even if the vote is 11-0 because, under the contingency that 
of them treat causality is treated as an all-or-nothing concept. 5 of the other voters had voted for Mr. G instead, voter 1 's 
That is, A is either a cause of B or it is not. As a consequence, vote would have become critical; if he had then changed his 
thinking only in terms of causality docs not at times allow us vote, Mr. B would not have won. Similarly, Suzy's throw is 
to make distinctions that we may want to make. For example, the cause of the bottle shattering because the bottle shattering 
suppose that Mr. B wins an election against Mr. G by a vote counterfactually depends on Suzy's throw, under the contin•
of 11-0. Each of the people who voted for Mr. B is a cause of gency that Billy doesn't throw. (There are further subtleties 
him winning. However, it seems that their degree of respon• in the definition that guarantee that, if things are modeled ap•
sibility should not be as great as in the case when Mr. B wins propriately, Billy's throw is not a cause. These are discussed 
6-5.                                                   in Section 2.) 
  In this paper, we present a definition of responsibility that 
                                                         It is precisely this consideration of contingencies that lets 
takes this distinction into account. The definition is an ex•
                                                       us define degree of responsibility. We take the degree of re•
tension of a definition of causality introduced by Halpern and 
                                                       sponsibility of A for B to be 1/(N + 1), where N is the 
Pearl 2001a. Like many other definitions of causality going 
                                                       minimal number of changes that have to be made to obtain a 
back to Hume 1739, this definition is based on counterfactual 
                                                       contingency where B counterfactually depends on A. (If A 
dependence. Roughly speaking, A is a cause of B if, had 
                                                       is not a cause of B, then the degree of responsibility is 0.) In 
A not happened (this is the counterfactual condition, since A 
                                                       particular, this means that in the case of the 11-0 vote, the de•
did in fact happen) then B would not have happened. As is 
                                                       gree of responsibility of any voter for the victory is 1/6, since 
well known, this naive definition does not capture all the sub•
                                                       5 changes have to be made before a vote is critical. If the vote 
tleties involved with causality. In the case of the 6-5 vote, it 
                                                       were 1001-0, the degree of responsibility of any voter would 
   * Supported in part by NSF under grant CTC-0208535 and by be 1/501. On the other hand, if the vote is 5-4, then the 
the DoD Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (MURI) degree of responsibility of each voter for Mr. B for Mr. B's 
program administered by ONR under grant N00014-01-1-0795. victory is 1; each voter is critical. As we would expect, those 


CAUSALITY                                                                                              147  voters who voted for Mr. G have degree of responsibility 0    merman, 1988]). Our definitions, by design, do not take 
 for Mr. B's victory, since they are not causes of the victory. into account intentions or possible alternative actions, both 
 Finally, in the case of Suzy and Billy, even though Suzy is   of which seem necessary in dealing with moral issues. For 
 the only cause of the bottle shattering, Suzy's degree of re• example, there is no question that Truman was in part respon•
 sponsibility is 1/2, while Billy's is 0. Thus, the degree of  sible and to blame for the deaths resulting from dropping the 
 responsibility measures to some extent whether or not there   atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. However, to decide 
 are other potential causes.                                   whether this is a morally reprehensible act, it is also necessary 
   When determining responsibility, it is assumed that every•  to consider the alternative actions he could have performed, 
 thing relevant about the facts of the world and how the world and their possible outcomes. While our definitions do not di•
 works (which we characterize in terms of what are called      rectly address these moral issues, we believe that they may be 
structural equations) is known. For example, when saying       helpful in elucidating them. 
 that voter 1 has degree of responsibility 1/6 for Mr. B's win   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec•
 when the vote is 11-0, we assume that the vote and the pro•   tion 2 we review the basic definitions of causal models based 
 cedure for determining a winner (majority wins) is known.     on structural equations, which are the basis for our defi•
There is no uncertainty about this. Just as with causality, there nitions of responsibility and blame. In Section 3, we re•
 is no difficulty in talking about the probability that someone view the definition of causality from [Halpern and Pearl, 
has a certain degree of responsibility by putting a probability 2001a], and show how it can be modified to give a defi•
distribution on the way the world could be and how it works.   nition of responsibility. In Section 3.3, we give our def•
But this misses out on important component of determining      inition of blame. In Section 4, we discuss the com•
what we call here blame: the epistemic state. Consider a doc•  plexity of computing responsibility and blame. Proofs of 
tor who treats a patient with a particular drug resulting in the the theorems can be found in the full paper, available at 
patient's death. The doctor's treatment is a cause of the pa•  http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/halpern/papers/blame.ps. 
tient's death; indeed, the doctor may well bear degree of re•
sponsibility 1 for the death. However, if the doctor had no 
idea that the treatment had adverse side effects for people 
with high blood pressure, he should perhaps not be held to 
blame for the death. Actually, in legal arguments, it may not 
be so relevant what the doctor actually did or did not know, 
but what he should have known. Thus, rather than considering 
the doctor's actual epistemic state, it may be more important 
to consider what his epistemic state should have been. But, 
in any case, if we are trying to determine whether the doctor 
is to blame for the patient's death, we must take into account 
the doctor's epistemic state. 
   We present a definition of blame that considers whether 
agent a performing action b is to blame for an outcome 
The definition is relative to an epistemic state for a, which is 
taken, roughly speaking, to be a set of situations before ac•
tion b is performed, together with a probability on them. The 
degree of blame is then essentially the expected degree of re•
sponsibility of action b for (except that we ignore situations 
where was already true or b was already performed). To 
understand the difference between responsibility and blame, 
suppose that there is a firing squad consisting of ten excel•
lent marksmen. Only one of them has live bullets in his rifle; 
the rest have blanks. The marksmen do not know which of 
them has the live bullets. The marksmen shoot at the prisoner 
and he dies. The only marksman that is the cause of the pris•
oner's death is the one with the live bullets. That marksman 
has degree of responsibility 1 for the death; all the rest have 
degree of responsibility 0. However, each of the marksmen 

has degree of blame 1/10.1 
   While we believe that our definitions of responsibility and 
blame are reasonable, they certainly do not capture all the 
connotations of these words as used in the literature. In the 
philosophy literature, papers on responsibility typically are 
concerned with moral responsibility (see, for example, [Zim-

   1 We thank Tim Williamson for this example. 


148                                                                                                          CAUSALITY    While the equations for a given problem are typically ob•
vious, the choice of variables may not be. For example, con•
sider the rock-throwing example from the introduction. In 
this case, a naive model might have an exogenous variable 
U that encapsulates whatever background factors cause Suzy 
and Billy to decide to throw the rock (the details of U do not 
matter, since we are interested only in the context where U's 
value is such that both Suzy and Billy throw), a variable ST 
for Suzy throws (ST = 1 if Suzy throws, and ST = 0 if she 
doesn't), a variable DT for Billy throws, and a variable BS 
for bottle shatters. In the naive model, whose graph is given 
in Figure 1, BS is 1 if one of ST and BT is 1. (Note that the 
graph omits the exogenous variable U, since it plays no role. 
In the graph, there is an arrow from variable X to variable Y 
if the value of Y depends on the value of X.) 


                                                               3 Causality and Responsibility 
                                                               3.1 Causality 
                                                               We start with the definition of cause from [Halpern and Pearl, 
                                                               2001a]. 


                                                                 AC1 just says that A cannot be a cause of B unless both A 
                                                               and B are true, while AC3 is a minimality condition to pre•
                                                               vent, for example, Suzy throwing the rock and sneezing from 


CAUSALITY                                                                                                            149 being a cause of the bottle shattering. Eiter and Lukasiewicz 
 2002b showed that one consequence of AC3 is that causes can 
 always be taken to be single conjuncts. Thus, from here on in, 


                                                               Example 3.4 It is easy to see that Suzy's throw has degree of 
                                                               responsibility 1/2 for the bottle shattering both in the naive 
                                                               model described in Figure 1 and the "better" model of Fig•
                                                               ure 2 in the context where both Suzy and Billy throw. In both 
                                                               cases, we must consider the contingency where Billy docs 
                                                               not throw. Although Suzy is the only cause of the bottle shat•
                                                               tering in the latter model, her degree of responsibility is still 
                                                               only 1 /2, since the bottle would have shattered even if she 
                                                               hadn't thrown. This is a subtlety not captured by the notion 
                                                               of causality. 

                                                                 Interestingly, in a companion paper [Chockler et al, 2003] 
                                                               we apply our notion of responsibility to program verification. 
                                                               The idea is to determine the degree of responsibility of the 
                                                               setting of each state for the satisfaction of a specification in a 
                                                               given system. For example, given a specification of the form 
                                                               Op (eventually p is true), if/; is true in only one state of the 
3.2 Responsibility                                             verified system, then that state has degree of responsibility 1 
                                                               for the specification. On the other hand, if p is true in three 
The definition of responsibility in causal models extends the  states, each state only has degree of responsibility 1/3. Expe•
definition of causality.                                       rience has shown that if there are many states with low degree 
                                                               of responsibility for a specification, then either the specifica•
                                                               tion is incomplete (perhaps p really did have to happen three 
                                                               times, in which case the specification should have said so), or 
                                                               there is a problem with the system generated by the program, 
                                                               since it has redundant states. 
                                                                 The degree of responsibility can also be used to provide 
                                                               a measure of the degree of fault-tolerance in a system. If a 
                                                               component is critical to an outcome, it will have degree of 
                                                              responsibility 1. To ensure fault tolerance, we need to make 
                                                               sure that no component has a high degree of responsibility 
                                                               for an outcome. Going back to the example of O P,, the degree 
                                                               of responsibility of 1/3 for a state means that the system is 
                                                               robust to the simultaneous failures of at most two states. 


150                                                                                                          CAUSALITY 3.3 Blame                                                        • (M3,u3), where the bottle was whole before Suzy's 
The definitions of both causality and responsibility assume         throw, and Suzy's throw hit before Billy's throw (as de­
that the context and the structural equations are given; there      scribed in the model in Figure 2); and 

is no uncertainty. We are often interested in assigning a de­    • (M4,u4), where the bottle was whole before Suzy's 
gree of blame to an action. This assignment depends on the          throw, and Billy did not throw. 
epistemic state of the agent before the action was performed. 
                                                               To compute the degree of blame assigned to Suzy's throwing 
Intuitively, if the agent had no reason to believe that his action 
                                                               the rock for the bottle shattering, we ignore (A/, u ), because 
would result in a certain outcome, then he is not to blame for                                                 1
                                                               the bottle is already shattered in (M,u ) before Suzy's ac­
the outcome (even if in fact his action caused the outcome).                                         1
                                                               tion. The degree of responsibility of Suzy's throw for the 
   To deal with the fact that we are considering two points 
                                                               bottle shattering is 1/2 in (M ,u ) and (M  ,u ), and is 1 
in time—before the action was performed and after—we add                                    2  2          3  3
                                                               in (M  ,7/4). It is easy to see that the degree of blame is 
superscripts to variables. We use a superscript 0 to denote the      4
value of the random variable before the action was performed 
and the superscript 1 to denote the value of the random vari­

able after. Thus, Y0 = 1 denotes that the random variable 
Y has value 1 before the action is performed, while Y1 = 2 
denotes that it had value 1 afterwards. If ψ is a Boolean com­
bination of (unsuperscripted) random variables, we use ψ° 

and ψ1 to denote the value of ψ before and after the action is Example 3.6 Consider again the example of the firing squad 
performed, respectively.                                       with ten excellent marksmen. Suppose that marksman 1 
   There arc two significant sources of uncertainty for an     knows that exactly one marksman has a live bullet in his rifle. 
agent who is contemplating performing an action:               Thus, he considers 10 situations possible, depending on who 
                                                               has the bullet. Let p  be his prior probability that marksman 
   • what the true situation is; for example, a doctor may be                      L
                                                               i has the live bullet. Then the degree of blame of his shot for 
     uncertain about whether a patient has high blood pres­
                                                               the death is p . The degree of responsibility is cither 1 or 0, 
     sure.                                                                   i
                                                               depending on whether or not he actually had the live bullet. 
   • how the world works; for example, a doctor may be un­     Thus, it is possible for the degree of responsibility to be 1 and 
     certain about the side effects of a given medication.     the degree of blame to be 0 (if he ascribes probability 0 to his 
                                                               having the live bullet, when in fact he does), and it is possi­
   In our framework, the "true situation" is determined by 
                                                               ble for the degree of responsibility to be 0 and the degree of 
the context and "how the world works" is determined by the 
                                                               blame to be 1 (if he mistakenly ascribes probability 1 to his 
structural equations. Thus, we model an agent's uncertainty 
                                                               having the bullet when he in fact does not). 
by a pair (AC, Pr), where AC is a set of pairs of the form (A/, a), 
where M is a causal model and u is a context, and Pr is        Example 3.7 The previous example suggests that both de­
a probability distribution over AC. Following [Hlalpern and    gree of blame and degree of responsibility may be relevant in 
Pearl, 2001b], who used such epistemic states in the defini­   a legal setting. Another issue that is relevant in legal settings 
tion of explanation, we call a pair (A/, u) a situation.       is whether to consider actual epistemic state or to consider 
   Roughly speaking, the degree of blame that setting X to     what the epistemic state should have been. The former is rel­
x has for ψ is the expected degree of responsibility of X =    evant when considering intent. To see the relevance of the 
x for ψ, taken over the situations , where                     latter, consider a patient who dies as a result of being treated 
                       Our actual definition of blame is just  by a doctor with a particular drug. Assume that the patient 
this definition, except that, when computing the expectation,  died due to the drug's adverse side effects on people with 
we do not count situations in AC where ψ was already true or   high blood pressure and, for simplicity, that this was the only 
X was already x. To understand why, suppose that we are        cause of death. Suppose that the doctor was not aware of the 
trying to compute the degree of blame of Suzy's throwing the   drug's adverse side effects. (Formally, this means that he docs 
rock for the bottle shattering. Assume that we are interested  not consider possible a situation with a causal model where 
in a period in a bottle in the period between time 0 and time 1, taking the drug causes death.) Then, relative to the doctor's 
and the bottle was actually shattered at time 1. We certainly  actual epistemic state, the doctor's degree of blame will be 
don't want to say that Suzy's throw was to blame if Suzy       0. However, a lawyer might argue in court that the doctor 
didn't throw between time 0 and time 1 or if the bottle was    should have known that treatment had adverse side effects 
already shattered at time 0. So suppose that Suzy does in fact for patients with high blood pressure (because this is well 
throw between time 0 and time 1, and at time 0, she considers  documented in the literature) and thus should have checked 
the following four situations to be equally likely:            the patient's blood pressure. If the doctor had performed this 
                                                               test, he would of course have known that the patient had high 
   • (M1,u1), where the bottle was already shattered before    blood pressure. With respect to the resulting epistemic state, 
     Suzy's throw;                                             the doctor's degree of blame for the death is quite high. Of 
                                                               course, the lawyer's job is to convince the court that the lat­
   • (M2,u2), where the bottle was whole before Suzy's 
     throw, and Suzy and Billy both hit the bottle simulta­    ter epistemic state is the appropriate one to consider when 
     neously (as described in the model in Figure 1);          assigning degree of blame. 


CAUSALITY                                                                                                             151 