                                   Causes and Explanations Revisited 

                                                    James D. Park 
                                           Computer Science Deptartment 
                                 University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095 
                                                    jd@cs.ucla.edu 


                        Abstract                               have been previous attempts to use functional causal models 
                                                               as a basis for defining actual cause, but they have been shown 
     This paper reconsiders the notions of actual cause 
                                                               to suffer from serious defects of their own [Hopkins & Pearl, 
     and explanation in functional causal models. We 
                                                               2003]. In this paper, we identify (at least partially) why pre­
     demonstrate that isomorphic causal models can 
                                                               vious methods have failed, and provide new definitions that 
     generate intuitively different causal pronounce­
                                                               avoid many of their problems. These definitions allow for a 
     ments. This occurs because psychological factors 
                                                               more refined determination of actual causation. Additionally, 
     not represented in the model determine what cri­
                                                               they provide a useful basis for producing explanations. 
     teria we use to determine causation. This par­
     tially explains the difficulty encountered in previ­
     ous attempts to define actual cause. Freed from           2 Review of causal models 
     trying fit all examples to match intuition directly       In this section we review the basic definitions from [Pearl, 
     (which is not possible using only the information         2000] that we will use. First we need some notation. Upper 
     in causal models), we provide definitions for cau­        case letters (e.g. X, Y, Z) represent variables. Lower case 
     sation matching the different causal criteria we in­      letters (e.g. x, y, z) represent a particular value of the corre­
     tuitively apply. This formulation avoids difficulties     sponding variable. Bold face upper case letters (e.g. X, Y, Z) 
     associated with previous definitions, and allows a        represent sets of variables, and bold face lower case letters 
     more refined discussion of what constitutes a cause       (e.g. x, y, z) an instantiation of the corresponding variables. 
     in a given situation. The definitions of actual cause       A causal model is a triple (U, V, F) where U is the set 
     also allow for more refined formulations of expla­        of background (or exogenous) variables (i.e. their values are 
     nation.                                                   determined outside the model), and V is the set of endoge­
                                                               nous variables (i.e. those whose value is determined by model 
1 Introduction                                                 variables).is a set of functions where 
                                                               fx maps from , Together, for any set­
Identifying an actual cause in a specific situation is a normal ting of the background variables, T determines the values of 
part of every day human reasoning. From the specifics of the   all variables in V. The parents of a variable X are the vari­
situation, we sift through the events, identifying those that  ables that directly influence the value of X (i.e. the set of 
actually caused the event in question. This is different than  variables that is non-trivial in fx). The causal diagram of a 
general claims about causal tendencies. In fact, the causal    model is a directed graph with vertices U U V where there 
nature of events can actually run counter to the general causal is an edge from vertex X to vertex Y iff X is a parent of Y 
tendency of the variables. For example, buying a lottery ticket in the model. We will restrict our attention to models with 
has the general tendency to decrease wealth. However, in       acyclic causal diagrams. A submodel of causal model M un­
certain circumstances (the numbers on the ticket correspond    der intervention X = x is a causal model 
to the winning numbers), it can cause a significant increase   where . This allows 
wealth. People are able to make these situation dependent      us to talk about what would have happened if X had been x. 
pronouncements fairly easily. 
                                                               We will write Yx(u) to mean the value that Y takes on in 
  Automating causal determinations has a number of ap­
                                                               the submodel Mx in context U = u. For a propositional for­
plications, including natural language processing, diagnosis,  mula ψ, defined over primitives of the form 
and planning. Unfortunately, formulating a successful no­      represents the value of the formula when the primitives are 
tion of actual cause has proved elusive. Previous attempts 
                                                               evaluated in model Mx in context u. 
were often hindered by trying to embed them in formalisms 
that are not appropriate for modeling causality (See [Pearl,  3 Previous work 
2000, Chapter 10] for a discussion of these). Recently, func­
tional causal models [Pearl, 2000] have proven to be an ef­    Formulating the notion of cause has been a topic of philo­
fective formalism for modeling causal relationships. There     sophic debate for many years. Unfortunately, all of the philo-


154                                                                                                          CAUSALITY sophical works of which we are aware either suffer from seri­ based on psychological factors outside of the causal model. 
ous problems, or are not precise enough to be falsifiable (See We believe that the difficulties associated with previous 
[Halpem & Pearl, 2001a] for a review of some of these prob­ definitions are at least in part due to the fact that they failed 
lems).                                                 to distinguish between different notions of cause.1 In fact, 
  There have been at least two previous attempts to formulate we would argue that like many problems in philosophy, one 
actual cause in functional causal models. The first was the reason cause eludes satisfactory definition is because the intu­
causal beam approach [Pearl, 2000]. This notion of actual itive concept is fundamentally imprecise. What criteria to ap­
cause seemed to be too restrictive, classifying certain events ply is often a subjective decision, witnessed by the ease with 
as noncauses that intuitively clearly should have been causes which one can often convince others that an alternate crite­
(See for example the critique in [Halpern & Pearl, 2001a]). ria is the appropriate one. For example, one may argue that 
The other [Halpem & Pearl, 2001a] (which we will call ASC it is inappropriate to say that arsonist 1 caused the fire since 
for Alternate situation Strong Cause) tried to remedy those regardless of his action, the fire would still have occurred. 
problems, but introduced several others. [Hopkins & Pearl, While the choice of criteria for determining cause is im­
2003] provides a thorough analysis of its problems.    precise and subject to factors not representable in a func­
                                                       tional causal model, the same is not true once a criteria has 
4 Why so hard?                                         been chosen. Each criteria is precise and completely decid-
                                                       able based on the causal model and the state of its variables. 
The many formulations encountered, and the problems they Formulating and illustrating appropriate definitions of these 
exhibit beg the question: why is ascribing cause so difficult to criteria is the focus of the next section. 
formalize? Consider the following example from [Halpem & 
Pearl, 2001a]: Two arsonists light matches at opposite ends 5 A new proposal 
of the forrest. Both start fires, and the forrest burns down. In this section, we introduce basic definitions which we then 
Either arsonist alone was sufficient to burn down the forrest. compose to form criteria for evaluating causal relationships. 
Now, we ask whether arsonist 1 lighting his match caused the As there are several ways in which an event may be consid­
forrest to burn down. Clearly it did. The reason being that it ered a cause, we provide definitions for the different aspects. 
was sufficient to burn it down, and participated in the actual We believe that all causal tests are based on two basic ideas, 
causal process that brought it about.                  which are related to , though distinct from, necessity and suf­
  Consider another example: A prisoner is scheduled for ex­ ficiency. By combining these two criteria we can produce the 
ecution. The execution proceeds as follows: The executioner different criteria used for making causal judgments. 
selects a gun from among several, which may or may not have First, we need some background and auxiliary definitions. 
a bullet in the chamber. The prisoner is given the option of Foremost among them is what we allow to be causes and ef­
death by lethal injection (which is always fatal), or face ex­ fects. 
ecution by gunshot. If the prisoner selects gunshot, the ex­
ecutioner fires the weapon. If the weapon he selected had a Definition 1 An instantiation x, of endogenous variables X 
bullet, it kills the prisoner. If not, the execution fails and the is an event in context u if X(u) = x. A propositional formula 
prisoner goes free. In the situation we consider, the prisoner ψ defined over the endogenous variables of the model is an 
chooses execution by lethal injection. As it turns out, the se­ effect in context u if ψ(u). 
lected gun was loaded so the prisoner would have died even Any potential cause of an effect must be an event. Note that 
if he had he chosen gunshot.                           we force events and effects to be true in the situation being 
  Now, we ask if the prisoner's choice of execution method considered. This is merely a convenience meant to simplify 
caused his death. Obviously it did not. The reason being that subsequent definitions. 
in this circumstance, regardless of his choice, he would still Since we are concerned with determining cause in a partic­
die. That is, his choice had no impact on the outcome. ular context, the causal diagram of a model is not very infor­
  Surprisingly, the obvious causal models in these two exam­ mative. A variable X that in general is necessary to determine 
ples are in fact isomorphic as are the specific situations con­ the value of another variable Y (and hence has an edge from 
sidered. The effect (forrest burns down <-> death) occurs in X to Y in the diagram), may become irrelevant in a particular 
all but one possible instantiation of its direct causes (neither context. That is, a particular value of the background vari­
arsonist lights their match <-> execution by gunshot is selected ables u may make the value of Y unresponsive to the value 
and the gun is not loaded) and both sufficient conditions oc­ of A". This observation motivates the following definition: 
curred in the situation under consideration. In other words, Definition 2 The context diagram of causal world M(u) is 
the information that rendered one a cause and the other a non- the directed graph whose vertices are the endogenous vari-
cause is not contained in the causal model, or the specific sit­ ables of M, and includes each edge (X, Y) where the func­
uation. We achieved intuitively different results because we tion fy is nontrivial in X when the background variables are 
tested different notions of cause. In the forest fire example, fixed to u. 
we tested the ability to produce the fire, i.e. whether it was The context diagram simplifies reasoning about causal rela­
capable of bringing about the result. In the second exam­ tionships in a specific context. 
ple, we tested the consequentiality of the choice of execution 
methods, i.e. whether an alternate decision would produce a 1 [Hall, 2002] makes a similar argument, although the details dif­
different result. The choice of what test to apply seems to be fer from ours. 


CAUSALITY                                                                                              155    Another preliminary notion we will need is sufficiency.2    causes must be fixed. That is, a new value can not be added, 
                                                               if the relevant parents have not already been included. 
 Definition 3 An event x is sufficient to cause effect ψ in con­
text u if for all instantiations w of the nondescendants W of  Definition 5 An event x is a strongly sufficient cause of effect 
 X in the context diagram of                                   ψ in context u if either of the following conditions hold: 
Note that it must hold only when the nondescendants are ma­      • For all instantiations 
nipulated. Descendants are excluded from manipulation since 
we believe that the values they take on, including interplay     • x is a sufficient cause of ψ and there exists some child 
between them, are an integral component of determining cau­         event yof x which is a strongly sufficient cause of ψ in 
sation. Allowing them to be manipulated would upset and             context u 
skew that process.                                             Effectively, what we require is that the event be sufficient 
   Sufficiency is not really strong enough for our purposes.   for the effect, and that as the causal process progresses from 
For example, consider this example from [Hall, 2002]:          the event, the sufficiency is maintained. This prevents events 
     Suzy and Billy both pick up rocks and throw them          that arc preempted from being strongly sufficient. For exam­
     at a bottle. Suzy's rock gets there first, shattering     ple, whileis sufficient for the only child 
     the bottle. Since both throws are perfectly accurate,     event, is not, so the event is not strongly suf­
     Billy's would have shattered the bottle had it not        ficient. Suzy throwing, on the other hand, is strongly suf­
     been preempted by Suzy's throw                            ficient, witnessed by the sequence 

                                                                 Strong sufficiency is the first of the two primary notions 
                                                               used to evaluate causality in specific situations. In fact, strong 
                                                               sufficiency by itself corresponds to one of the primary notions 
                                                               of causation. Strong sufficiency corresponds to our intuitions 
                                                               about physical causality. The cause sets in motion a chain of 
                                                               events capable of bringing about the effect. Intuitively, we 
                                                               expect causation to be transitive. If x causes y and y causes 

                                                               z, we expect x to cause z.3 It is not hard to see that strong 
                                                               sufficiency meets that expectation. In fact, strong sufficiency 
             Figure 1: Rock throwing example 
                                                               turns out to be the only transitive relation among our defini­
                                                               tions of cause. 
Figure 1 shows the causal diagram of a model of the story 
                                                                 The other primary consideration when testing actual 
(the background variables, as well as the functional relation­
                                                               causality is the notion of consequentiality. In addition to par­
ship between variables should be obvious in this story, as well 
                                                               ticipating in the causal process, we often require that an event 
as the others, so will not be explicated). BT (ST) represents 
                                                               be in some sense consequential in order to be considered a 
Billy (Suzy) throwing BH (SH) represents Billy's (Suzy's) 
                                                               cause. That consideration motivates the following definition. 
rock hitting the bottle, and BS stands for the bottle shattering. 
Billy throwing is sufficient to cause the bottle to shatter, but Definition 6 Let Z be the nondescendants of X in the context 
it doesn't actually participate in the causal process that made diagram of u. Then, an event x is potentially consequential 
the bottle shatter. Suzy's action preempted Billy's. We ex­    with respect to effect ψ in context u if for some instantia­
pect not only sufficiency of the cause, but that in some sense, tions ). Event x 
the event actually participates in the causal process. Defining is actually consequential with respect to effect ψ if for some 
this notion has been one of the primary difficulties in talking instantiation 
about actual cause. The following two definitions formalize 
these notions in a way that avoids the problems associated     Like strong sufficiency, actual conscquentiality alone is a 
with previous approaches.                                      common criteria for causation. For example, in the execution 
                                                               example from Section 4 the choice of lethal injection was not 
Definition 4 Let Z be the children of X in the context dia­    considered a cause of his death precisely because it was not 
gram of u, and let Y be some non-empty subset of Z. Let W      consequential. If instead the gun had not been loaded, which 
be the intersection of the descendants of X (including X) and  would make the decision consequential, we would consider 
the ancestors of Y (excluding Y). Then event xy is a child     it a cause. Note that a consequential event necessarily par­
of event x in context                                          ticipates in the actual causal process. That is, for every actu­
                                                               ally consequential event, there is a minimal strongly sufficient 
A child event can be thought of as a next step in an unfolding 
                                                               event that contains some member of the consequential event. 
causal process. The criteria that is merely to enforce 
                                                                 Potential consequentiality on the other hand is not of it-
the intuition that before a variable takes on a value, its direct 
                                                               self enough for an event to be considered a cause. However, 

   2Note that this definition differs from the definition for suffi­ combining it with strong sufficiency produces a very common 
ciency presented in [Pearl, 2000]. That definition was used for a causal criteria. 
different purpose, and is not appropriate in this context. It is more 
closely related to, although distinct from the notion of sustenance 3 In fact, this intuition is so strong that some theories of causation 
[Pearl, 2000].                                                 start with the transitivity of cause as a starting point [Lewis, 1986]. 


156                                                                                                          CAUSALITY   Test Strong           Test Consequentiality                      is brought about (namely, via the left-hand track, or 
  Sufficiency      Actual | Potential | No                         via the right-hand track). 
      Yes          Strong       Sustaining   Strongly 
                                                              Two models which produced different causal pronounce­
                                             Sufficient 
                                                              ments were given, demonstrating the impact that model 
      No       Consequential        -            -
                                                              choice has on the determination of causation. The model that 
                                                              classified it as a cause is the one we arc interested in. Figure 2 
Table 1: Different types of actual cause can be tested by com­
                                                              shows the model. F represents the state of the switch, LT (RT) 
bining tests for strong sufficiency and consequentiality. 
                                                              whether the train goes down the left (right) track, and A rep­
                                                              resents whether the train arrives. The justification given was 
Definition 7 An event x sustains effect ψ in context u if 'x is 
strongly sufficient and potentially consequential for ψ. 
The notion of sustenance defined here is a modified version of 
the one that appeared in [Pearl, 2000]. It differs in two ways. 
First, it requires strong sufficiency as opposed to merely suf­
ficiency. Second, it fixes the variables W, against which x 
must be tested, while the previous definition has W as one of 
the parameters. 
   Sustenance is a very commonly applied criteria for cau­
                                                                      Figure 2: A possible model for the train story 
sation. Most of the examples in [Halpern & Pearl, 2001a] 
which were deemed causes correspond to our notion of sus­
                                                              that under normal circumstances, we may not call it a cause, 
taining cause. In the forrest fire example in Section 4, arsonist 
                                                              but if something abnormal were to happen (for example, one 
1 was considered a cause of the fire because it sustained the 
                                                              of the tracks malfunctions, or is destroyed) then the action 
forrest fire. 
                                                              would be a cause. Our new definitions say that flipping the 
   A more restrictive causal criteria is also sometimes useful. 
                                                              switch is a strongly sufficient cause ( In the words of Hall it 
Definition 8 An event x is a strong cause of ψ in context u if ''helps to determine how the arrival is brought about"), but it 
x is a strongly sufficient and actually consequential cause of is not even potentially consequential, so is not a contributory 
                                                              cause. This seems a more satisfactory result. 
A strong cause can be thought of as a complete explication of    Unlike the ASC definition, these definitions do not always 
why the effect occurred.                                      reduce to singleton causes even if minimality is enforced. 
  Often we talk about an event helping to cause an event even Additionally, the different criteria produce causes that cor­
though it is neither consequential nor sufficient. It is instead respond to different ways that people think about cause. 
part of some cause. That consideration motivates the follow­    For example, consider a situation where 5 people vote re­
ing definition.                                               garding a ballot measure. The votes are tallied, and the mea­
                                                              sure passes if 3 or more vote for it. The associated diagram 
Definition 9 An event xy (y may be empty) is a contributory   appears in Figure 3. Suppose that 4 vote for the measure, and 
cause of effect ψ in context u if x is potentially consequential, 1 votes against. According to the ASC definition, each in-
and for some event z, xz is a minimal sustaining cause of ψ. 
Contributory causation is the closest in spirit to the ASC defi­
nition. If we insist on minimality, it reduces to singletons just 
as that definition does. Additionally, in all but one example 
included in [Halpern & Pearl, 2001a], contributory causation 
matches the pronouncements of the ASC definition. We con­
sider that example among others in the next section. 

6 Examples 
                                                              Figure 3: A voting example. The V1 correspond to the votes 
The single example presented in [Halpern & Pearl, 2001a]      cast, T the vote tally, and P whether the measure passed. 
where the ASC definition differs from our definition of con­
tributory causation comes from the following story (along     dividual who votes for the measure is an actual cause of the 
with some commentary), quoted from [Hall, 2002]:              measure passing. In the causal beam approach, nothing qual­
     You are standing at a switch in the railroad tracks.     ifies as a cause of the measure passing. In this approach, it 
     Here comes the train: If you flip the switch, you'll     depends what type of cause we arc considering. 
     send the train down the left-hand track; if you            Three votes for the measure constitute a strong cause of the 
     leave where it is, the train will follow the right-      measure passing, while two do not. This corresponds to our 
     hand track. Either way, the train will arrive at the     notion that a majority of the votes is required to cause it to 
     same point, since the tracks reconverge up ahead.        pass. 
     Your action is not among the causes of this ar­            Two votes for the measure constitute a consequential cause. 
     rival; it merely helps to determine how the arrival      Changing those votes to vote against the measure would make 


CAUSALITY                                                                                                           157  the measure fail. This corresponds to the way we often talk   In light of our new definitions, we do not see that particular 
 about causes in elections. Often election outcomes are at•    consideration as a problem. According to our definition, it 
 tributed to the voting behavior of some minority of the elec• again depends on what you are looking for. It is sustaining, 
 torate (in U.S. politics these include "Reagan Democrats",    but it is not consequential. Typically, when we are testing if 
 "soccer moms", "angry white men" , "African Americans",       an event caused something to remain unchanged, we are look•
 etc). While they are far from sufficient to win an election,  ing for a consequential cause. That is clearly the case in this 
 we say that they caused the election result because if they   example. However, it is still reasonable to say that cutting off 
 had voted significantly differently the outcome of the election his finger at the factory was a sustaining cause, because that 
 would have been different. On the other hand, most people     event makes certain the effect, regardless of what Larry does 
 understand that in the vast majority of elections their single or does not do. 
 vote did not cause the outcome. This is reflected in our defi•  Our definitions also handle correctly the examples in [Hop•
 nitions by the fact that none of the criteria yield a single voter kins & Pearl, 2003] avoiding the problems of ASC, but be•
 as a cause in this situation. A single vote for the measure is a cause of space limitations we will not review them all here. 
 contributory cause however, as one would expect.              We will consider a single example of the problem to demon•
   [Halpern & Pearl, 2001a] provides a number of examples      strate how these definitions avoid it. Consider the following 
 that have proved problematic for other methods. As most of    story: Before an execution, the captain loads one of the guns 
the examples correspond either to issues of sustenance or con- of the two members of his firing squad, putting a blank in 
sequentially4 (and with the exception of the train example     the other gun. Both gunmen then fire simultaneously and 
considered above, all of the positive examples are contribu•   the prisoner dies. In the current situation, the captain put 
tory causes, and the negative examples are not), we will not   the bullet in the gun of gunman 1, and both men shoot. The 
review them all here. We would like to revisit one exam•       model consists of the loader, and the two gunmen as direct 
ple that was considered troublesome. The first version of the  causes of the the variable representing whether the prisoner 
story is as follows: A machine severed Fred's finger while he  is alive. Now, we ask if gunman 2 shooting caused the pris•
was at work. He was rushed to the hospital and it was reat•    oner's death. According to the ASC definition, it did. Gun•
tached. A month later his finger worked just as before. We     man 2 did not cause the prisoner's death according to any of 
would of course not consider getting his finger cut off a cause our definitions of cause. It is clearly not consequential, nor 
of it being fully function later (because it is not consequen• sufficient, so it can not be a cause. It is not a contributory 
tial). Now, suppose we add another component to the story: It  cause either because it is not a member of any minimal suffi•
is possible that Larry the loanshark may be waiting outside for cient cause. According to these definitions, gunman 1 shoot•
Fred, so that he can cut off his finger to make an example of  ing is a consequential cause, gunman 1 shooting and the cap•
him for not paying his loan promptly. If Larry cuts off the fin• tain loading his gun is a strong cause, and gunman 1 shooting 
ger, he will destroy it so that it can not be reattached. If Fred and the captain loading his gun are both contributory causes. 
severs his finger at the factory, he will be rushed to the hos•
pital, so Larry will not have an opportunity to do it himself. 
                                                               7 Explanations 
The causal diagram appears in Figure 4. Now, consider the 
                                                               If we have a probability distribution quantifying our uncer•
                                                               tainty about what context will actually occur, we can use that 
                                                               distribution, combined with our model to produce explana•
                                                               tions for an observed effect. 
                                                                 Causation forms an integral part of evaluating explanations 
                                                               (see [Chajewska & Halpern, 1997; Pearl, 2000; Halpern & 
                                                               Pearl, 2001b] for critiques of methods that ignore causal con•
                                                               siderations when producing causes). In spirit, we agree with 
                                                               the intuitive notion of explanation put forth in [Halpern & 
Figure 4: Finger severing example. FS represents severing his  Pearl, 2001b]. That is, an explanation is fundamentally just a 
finger. LL represents whether Larry is lurking. LC represents  hypothesized event which if true would be a possible cause of 
whether Larry cuts off his finger and FF represents whether    the observed phenomenon. Our new view of actual causation, 
his finger is fully functional                                however, makes the particulars somewhat different. Our def•
                                                               initions of actual cause form the basis for evaluating possible 
situation in which Larry turns out not to be waiting outside,  explanations. We allow any instantiation of endogenous vari•
and Fred does sever his finger. Was Fred cutting his finger off ables to be an explanation and compare them based on how 
a cause of his finger being fully functional the next month?  well they explain the effect. According to our view, there are 
According to the ASC definition it is. This was considered    different types of explanation, just as there are different types 
disturbing because adding a provision for a contingency that  of causes. Which type of explanation to choose depends on 
did not occur changed the the event from noncause to cause.   its intended purpose. This is in contrast to the approach using 
                                                              ASC as the basis for causal explanation. We believe that this 
   4ln fact, most of the difficult examples play off of the conflict•
ing interpretation of cause between sustenance and consequential ity. approach provides more flexibility and is more general than 
That is, the event in question is typically either consequential or sus• ASC based explanations. 
taining, but not both.                                           By way of example, consider the following situation: We 


158                                                                                                          CAUSALITY 