       GHOST: experimenting conflicts countermeasures in the pilot's activity 

                      Frederic Dehais, Catherine Tessier and Laurent Chaudron 
                                              Onera-DCSD 
                                    31055 Toulouse cedex 04 - France 
                             {dehais,tessier,chaudron}@cert.fr 

                     Abstract                          2 Track the pilot's activity 

    An approach for designing countermeasures to cure  2.1 Reference model 
    conflict in aircraft pilots' activities is presented, 
    both based on Artificial Intelligence and Human    The approach to capture the pilot's activity is based on situa­
    Factors concepts.                                  tion tracking classically used for system diagnosis, monitor­
    The first step is to track the pilot's activity, i.e. to ing and intelligence [Ghallab, 1996; Chaudron et al, 1997; 
    reconstruct what he has actually done thanks to the Rota and Thonnat, 2000]. Whatever the formalism used to 
    flight parameters and reference models describing  represent knowledge, situation tracking rests on a matching 
    the mission and procedures. The second step is     between observed facts and known situations (reference mod­
    to detect conflict in the pilot's activity, and this is els), and its object is to carry out postdictions, predictions or 
    linked to what really matters to the achievement   to diagnose the current state of the system. 
    of the mission. The third step is to design accu­  To represent knowledge, we use the concept of propositional 
    rate countermeasures which are likely to do bet­   attitude, "which covers the notions of belief, desire, inten•
    ter than the existing onboard devices. The three   tion, [...] which have in common the fact of being identified 
    steps are presented and supported by experimental  by their pwpositional contents " [Tessier et al, 2000]. 
    results obtained from private and professional pi­ Definition: a propositional attitude (PA) is a pair (K.T) 
    lots.                                              where K is a logical cube, i.e. a conjunction of first order 
                                                       literals [Chaudron et al, 2003], and T is the time interval 
                                                       within which the properties captured by K are true. 
1 Introduction                                         The pilot's knowledge is divided into three categories of PAs, 
                                                       which constitute the reference model: 
The review of civilian and military reports reveals that a con- • Propositional attitude goal describes a goal of the mission. 
flictual situation is a precursor to the loss of aircrews' situa­ Ex: pa-goal(goal(5) ,<Landing(francazal)>,T) 
tion awareness and is a major cause of air accidents. Conflict means that the fifth goal of the mission is to land at Francazal 
may occur through different forms: open conflict between the during time interval T. 
different operators (Air Philippines crash, April 1999), repre­ • Propositional attitude plan describes the properties the pilot 
sentation conflict about the aircraft position (Korean air, Au­ is committed to satisfy to reach a PA-goal as long as he car­
gust 1997), resource conflict (Streamline, May 2000), knowl­ ries out this goal. 
edge conflict (Crossair, January 2000), or more recently, a Ex: pa.plan(goal(5) , <VOR-frequency (116) , 
conflict between automated systems (TCAS) and human op­ VOR-heading.def lection (true) , gear_down (true) , 
erators (air collision between a Tupolev 154 and a Boeing 757 flaps-down (2) , visibility (true) >,T) 
over Switzerland, July 2002). Therefore, the idea is to detect means that to satisfy goal 5, the pilot has to select the accu-
conflict so as to propose accurate on-line countermeasures to rate radio frequency, fly a correct route, lower gears and flap 
pilots.                                                deflection 2 and have a good visibility during time interval T. 
The first step is to track the pilot's activity, i.e. to reconstruct • A crucial propositional attitude describes the hard con­
what he has actually done thanks to the flight parameters and straints associated to one or several goals. 
reference models describing the mission and procedures. The Ex: pa-crucial(goal(5),<visibility(true)>,T) 
second step is to detect conflict in the pilot's activity, and this means that to succeed in landing at Francazal, the pilot must 
is linked to what really matters to the achievement of the mis­ have a correct visibility during T. 
sion. The third step is to design accurate countermeasures Remark: the model does not implement deontic logic [Traum 
which are likely to do better than the existing onboard de­ and Allen, 1994] to capture the pilot's obligations; at each 
vices. The three steps are presented and supported by experi­ time step, the system will check whether the pilot meets the 
mental results obtained both from private and military pilots. different constraints on the PA-goals. 


COGNITIVE MODELING                                                                                     163 2.2 Observed activity                                 not coherent1 and the fact that it is not coherent matters. 
                                                      The inconsistency of a set of PAs matters either because 
The pilot's activity is observed and analyzed through his ac­ there is a need: 
tions on the airplane interface: during the experiments, the 
                                                      • to satisfy the rationality2 of the agent(s) involved (pilot, 
flight parameters are recorded every second. The parameters copilot...); 
are then translated into symbolic knowledge and aggregated • or to build a coherent set of knowledge; 
to build observation prepositional attitudes.         • or to decide on further goals. 
The numerical thresholds that are used for numerical to sym­ All these different reasons are implemented in the reference 
bolic translation are adjusted during interviews with the pilots model as crucial propositional attitudes (see section 2.1). 
to built an accurate model for each pilot. For example, if the Therefore a conflict is an incoherent set of knowledge that 
pilot has to fly 2500 ft, he defines his own flight envelope matters through one or several crucial propositional attitudes. 
where he feels secure [Amalberti and Wioland, 1997]. After 
numerical to symbolic translation, parameter altitude is char­
acterized as altitude (false) (i.e. out of flight envelope) 3.2 Conflict detection 
or allitude (true) (i.e. within flight envelope). 
The same kind of analysis is performed with parameters such Conflict detection is a tracking process that monitors the 
as the route, the fuel level, etc.                    pilot's PAs at each time step t. It is a two-step process: (1) 
Therefore, propositional attitude observation describes per­ detect the sets of PAs that are not coherent at time t and (2) 
ceived and deduced facts from the pilot's activity:   detect the conflicts given the crucial PAs that concern time 
Ex: pa.obs (<VOR_f requency (116) ,                   t. One could have designed a single-step process, however 
VOR_heading.def lection (true) , gear_down (true) ,   it is of great interest to track PAs that are not coherent and 
flaps-down (3) , visibility (false) >,<1500,15 00>)   do not conflict: indeed, contrary to the minimal inconsistent 
means that at time 1500, the pilot has selected the accurate sets approach [De Kleer, 1986], we aim at capturing all 
radio frequency, is flying a correct route, has lowered gears the inconsistencies and analyzing how they are managed 
and flap deflection 3 and has a bad visibility.       by the pilots for "lessons learned" and further man-artefact 
                                                      interaction model tuning. 
                                                      (1) Detect the sets of PAs that are not coherent 
3 Detect conflict                                     Predicate not -hold-together detects incoherent sets of 
                                                      PAs Inct at time t,. 
3.1 Conflict                                          Ex: given the set of PAs 
                                                      •pa_goal(goal(5), <Landing(francazal)>,<1000,tl>) 
Considering research in the field of A.I. and partic­ • pa_plan(goal (5) , <VOR_f requency (116) , 
ularly on multi-agent systems, the focus has been 
                                                      VOR_heading.deflection (true) , gear_down (true) , 
brought much on how to avoid, solve or get rid of 
                                                      flaps-down(2),visibility(true)>,<l000,tl>) 
conflicts, especially via negotiation [Sycara, 1989; 
                                                      • pa.obs (<VOR.frequency (116) , 
Rosenschein and Zlotkin, 1994], argumentation [Jung and 
                                                      VOR_heading_deflection (true) , gear_down (true) , 
Tambe, 2000] or constraint satisfaction [Conry et al., 1991; 
                                                      f laps_down(3),visibility(false)>/<1500/1500>), 
Khedro and Genesereth, 1994; Hannebauer, 2000]. Such  two incoherent sets of PAs arc detected: 
approaches, where (i) conflict is likened to formal inconsis­
                                                      —> not_hold altogether (pa_plan (5, flaps-down (2) ) , 
tency and (ii) the internal knowledge of the agents is clearly 
                                                      pa.obs (flaps_down (3) , <1500,1500>) ; 
identified, are not suited to our purpose. Indeed in aeronau­
                                                      —► not_hold_together (pa.plan (5 , visibility (true) , 
tics, uncertainty on data is high and the human behavior is 
                                                      pa.obs(visibility(false)),<1500,1500>). 
extremely variable and unpredictable. Moreover, while in 
                                                      (2) Detect the conficts 
air, aircrews frequently face incoherent situations due to the 
                                                      The crucial PAs that concern time t are then considered. 
uncertain environment (e.g. weather, failures) or because 
                                                      Definition: let Inc  an incoherent set of PAs at time /. If 
of their own errors. Nevertheless, these situations are not           t
                                                      Inc  includes PAs or properties that matter through one or 
necessarily conflictual, and pilots are used to going on with t
                                                      several crucial PAs, then Inc  is a conflict. 
their missions with such inconsistencies. An inconsistency                    t
becomes conflictual only if it leads to a critical flight phase Predicate matters screens sets Inct thanks to the crucial 
and matters to the mission or to the aircrew's safety. PAs, so as to determine whether they are conflicts or not. 
Therefore we are very close to Eastcrbrook's definition of Ex: for the previous example, the crucial PA that holds at 
conflict [Easterbrook, 1991]: "[...] viewpoints are free to time 1500 is: 
differ, and only conflict when that difference matters for • pa.crucial(goal(5),<visibility(true)>, 
some reason, leading to interference. [...] A conflict, then, <1000,tl>) 
is simply a difference that matters." This point of view Predicate matters detects that one of the two incoherent 
has been emphasized in social sciences [Festinger, 1957; 
                                                          in relation to the formalism used to represent the properties in 
Lewin et al.  1939] and in A.l. applied to social modeling 1
          f                                           the PAs. 
[Castelfranchi, 2000], where human conflict is seen as the 
                                                        2 According to Festinger [Festinger, 1957] who postulates that an 
result of an impossibility to succeed in a goal that matters. individual always aims at being coherent when interacting with his 
Definition: a conflict is a set of propositional attitudes that is environment. 


164                                                                                 COGNITIVE MODELING sets of PAs is conflictual:                                   vinced that waypoint 5 was the refuelling area (in spite of 
matters (pa_plan(goal (5) , visibility (true) ) ,             the map displayed in the cockpit); he reached it and noticed 
pa_obs(visibility(false),<1500,1500>)                         that the fuel level did not increase. Thinking he had missed 
The other set of PAs relative to flaps deflection is not a    waypoint 5, he decided to fly back to waypoint 5. He did 
conflict because a landing with flap deflection 3 is possible this manoeuvre again and again till he ran out of fuel, getting 
even though less recommended.                                 more and more stressed. 

3.3 Preliminary experiment and results 
A preliminary experiment designed to test conflict tracking   4 Send accurate countermeasures 
[Dehais, 2002] was conducted with ten pilots on a research 
                                                              4.1 Guidelines 
flight simulator. The pilots were proposed a flight scenario 
whose aim was to follow a flight plan at a constant altitude  The findings of the preliminary experiments are akin 
and then land with instruments. The difficult point in this   to a recently published report of the BEA3 (the French 
scenario was to manage the fuel consumption correctly con­    national institute for air accident analysis) that re­
sidering refuelling areas.                                    veals that pilots' erroneous attitudes of persevera­
This experiment has validated conflict detection and interest­ tion have been responsible for more than 40 percent 
ingly enough has shown that a psychological perseveration     of casualties in air crash (in civilian aeronautics). 
phenomenon appeared with conflict : the pilots who faced      This behavior, called the "perseveration syndrome", 
conflictual situations did not come to the right decision to  is studied in neuropsychology [Vand Der Kolk, 1994; 
solve their conflict, on the contrary they got themselves tan­ Pastor, 2000] and psychology [Beauvois and Joule, 1999]: 
gled up in it, and all the more so since the temporal pressure it is known to summon up all the pilot's mental efforts 
was increasing. The most surprising thing was that all the    toward a unique objective (excessive focus on a single 
necessary data to come to the accurate decision were avail­   display or focus of the pilot's reasoning on a single task). 
able and displayed on the onboard equipments.                 Once entangled in perseveration, the pilot does anything to 
Ex: one of the pilots flew toward waypoint 5 instead of fly­  succeed in his objective even if it is dangerous in terms of 
ing first over waypoint 6 for refuelling, and started circling security, and worse, he neglects any kind of information that 
around, until he ran out of fuel (see figure 1).              could question his reasoning (like alarms or data on displays). 

                                                                Therefore the idea is to design countermeasures in order to 
                                                              break this mechanism and get the pilot out of the conflict. The 
                                                              design of the countermeasures is grounded on the following 
                                                              theoretical and empirical results: 
                                                              • conflictual situations lead pilots to persevere; 
                                                              • additional information (alarms, data on displays) designed 
                                                              to warn pilots arc often unnoticed when pilots persevere. 
                                                              Our conjectures are then: 
                                                              —► with an accurate on-line conflict detection, it is possible to 
                                                              analyze and predict the subject of the pilot's perseveration; 
                                                              —> instead of adding information (classical alarms), it is more 
                                                              efficient to remove the information on which the pilot is fo­
                                                              cused and which makes him persevere, and to display a mes­
                                                              sage to explain his error instead. 
                                                              Ex: in the experiment described afterwards, pilots persevere 
                                                              in trying a dangerous landing at Francazal despite the bad 
                                                              visibility, with a particular focus on an instrument called the 
                                                              H.S.I.4 to locate Francazal airport. The countermeasures will 
                                                              consist in removing the H.S.I, during a few seconds, to dis­
                                                              play two short messages instead, one after the other ("Land•
                                                              ing is dangerous"... "look at central display") and next to 
                                                              send an explanation of the conflict on the central display 
                                                              ("Low visibility on Francazal, fly back to Blagnac"). 
                                                              The idea here is to shock the pilot's attentional mechanisms 
                                                              with the short disappearance of the H.S.I., to introduce a cog­
                                                              nitive conflict ("iff land, I crash") to affect the pilot's reason­
                                                              ing, and to propose a solution on the central display. 
           Figure 1: Conflict and perseveration 

                                                                 3 http://www.bea-fr.org 
                                                                 4The H.S.I is a display that gives the route to follow and indicates 
  During the debriefing, the pilot explained that he was con- any discrepancy from the selected route. 


COGNITIVE MODELING                                                                                                  165 4.2 GHOST                                                     cial goal of the mission cannot be achieved: 
Ghost is an experimental environment designed to test coun-   • scenario 1 is a navigation task from Toulouse-Blagnac air­
termeasures to cure the pilot's perseveration. It is composed port to Francazal airport including three waypoints (VOR 
of;                                                            117.70, NDB 331 and NDB 423). An atmospheric depres­
                                                              sion is positioned in such a way that the pilot cannot see the 
• Flightgear5, an open source flight simulator, which means 
that many modifications can be made, e.g. implementing new    landing ground but at the last moment when it is too late to 
displays. To fly the airplane, pilots have a stick, rudder and land on it. 
a keyboard. Almost all the airports and beacons (NDB and      • scenario 2 is a navigation task from Toulouse-Blagnac air­
                                                              port to Francazal airport including three waypoints (VOR 
VOR6) of the world are modeled, and the air traffic control is 
simulated. During the experiment, the flight simulator inter­  117.70, NDB 415 and NDB 423). The visibility is decreased 
face is displayed on a giant screen;                          from the runway threshold: from far away, the landing ground 
                                                              is visible but as the pilot gets closer to it, it disappears totally 
• Atlas7, a freeware designed to follow the pilot's route. The 
airplane trajectory, cities, airports and beacons arc displayed in a thick fog. 
with an adjustable focus;                                     • scenario 3 is a navigation from Toulouse-Blagnac back to 
• a wizard of Oz interface (see figure2) we have designed     Toulouse-Blagnac including three waypoints (VOR 117.70, 
and implemented, which allows a human operator to trigger     NDB 331 and NDB 423). An atmospheric depression is posi­
events (failures, weather alteration and the countermeasures) tioned over waypoint 2 (NDB 331), and as the pilot flies over 
from an external computer via a local connection (TCP/IP      this waypoint, the left engine fails. 
protocol, sockets communication).                             In scenarios 1 and 2 the pilot's conflict can be summarized as 
As far as the countermeasures are concerned, several actions  "should I try a dangerous landing at Francazal or should I 
are available to the wizard of Oz:                            fly back to Blagnac for a safer landing?". If our conjectures 
• replace a display on which the pilot is focused by a black  hold, pilots will persevere and try to land at Francazal. 
one (time of reappearance is adjustable);                     In scenario 3, the pilot's conflict can be summarized as 
• blink a display (frequency and time of blinking is ad­      "should J go on with the mission despite the failure or should 
justable);                                                    I land at Francazal and therefore abort the mission?" 
• fade a display and brighten it again; 
• send a message to a blinked, removed or faded display;      4.4 Experimental Results 
• send a message to the central display for explicit conflict 21 experiments were conducted with Ghost in December 
solving.                                                      2002 (see figure 3). The pilots' experiences ranged from 
                                                              novice (5 hours, small aircraft) to very experienced (3500 
                                                              hours, military aircraft). Conflicts where detected with the 
                                                              conflict tracker (described above) and were inputs for the wiz­
                                                              ard of Oz to elaborate the countermeasures. 
                                                              Results for scenarios 1 and 2: "impossible landing" 
                                                              In these scenarios, the pilots faced the decision of mission 
                                                              abortion, i.e. not to land at Francazal and fly back to Blagnac. 
                                                              Both scenarios were tested within two different contexts: 
                                                              without countermeasures and with countermeasures. 
                                                              • Context 1: no countermeasures 
                                                              7 pilots tested scenario 1 or 2 without any countermeasures 
                                                              (see next table). "Circuits" corresponds to the number of cir­
                                                              cuits performed by the pilot round Francazal before crashing 
                                                              or landing. 


   Figure 2: The wizard of Oz interface - countermeasures 


4.3 Experimental scenarios 
As conflict appears when a desired goal cannot be reached, 
we have designed three experimental scenarios where a cru-      The results suggest that without any countermeasures, 
                                                              none of the pilots came to the right decision (fly back to 

   5 http://www. fightgear. org/                              Blagnac): they all persevered at trying to land at Francazal. 
   6NDB and VOR are two kind of radionavigation beacons used to Four of them hit the ground, and the other three had a "chance 
guide pilots.                                                 landing", which means that while they were flying round 
   7http://atlas.sf.nct                                       Francazal, the runway appeared between two fog banks and 


166                                                                                              COGNITIVE MODELING they succeeded in achieving a quick landing. During the de­ the countermeasure was successful: the pilots performed 
briefing, all of them admitted they had come to an erroneous the correct action at once. During the debriefing, the pilots 
and dangerous decision.                               declared that this kind of alarm was very interesting, and 
• Context 2: with countermeasures                     much more efficient and stressless than a classical audio or 
12 pilots tested scenario 1 or 2 with countermeasures (see visual alarm because they could identify at once what the 
next table). "Circuits" corresponds to the number of circuits problem was. 
performed by the pilot round Francazal before a countermea­
sures is triggered by the wizard of Oz.                 These experiments have shown also the significance of the 
                                                      message contents on the blinked display. For example, as far 
                                                      as the erroneous landing at Francazal is concerned, the ini­
                                                      tial message was "Don't land'', but the pilots did not take it 
                                                      into account, thinking it was a bug of the simulator. When 
                                                      the message was changed to "Fly back to Blagnac" or "Im­
                                                      mediate overshoot" it was understood and taken into account 
                                                      at once. 


  The results show the efficiency of the countermeasures 
to cure perseveration: 9 pilots out of 12 changed their 
minds thanks to the countermeasures, and flew back safely 
to Blagnac. During the debriefing, all the pilots confirmed 
that the countermeasures were immediately responsible for 
their change of mind. Moreover, the short disappearance of 
the data due to the countermeasures did not cause any stress 
to them. 4 military pilots found that the solutions proposed 
by the countermeasures were close to what a human co-pilot 
would have proposed. 
The results with Pilot 19 suggest that the more a pilot perse­          Figure 3: GHOST 
veres, the more difficult it is to get him out of perseveration. 
During the debriefing, Pilot 19 told us that he was obsessed 5 Conclusion and perspectives 
by the idea of landing, and that he became more and more 
stressed as long as he was flying round Francazal. He then We have presented an approach to detect and cure conflicts in 
declared that he did not notice any countermeasures. Pilot 16 aircraft pilots' activities. A first experiment has validated the 
and Pilot8 also persevered despite the countermeasures: they conflict detection tool and has shown that pilots facing con­
declared they knew they were not flying properly and that flicts have a trend to persevere in erroneous behaviors. This 
they had done that on purpose because they wanted to test the agrees with the observations made by experts of the pilots' 
flight simulator.                                     behaviors in real air accidents. These first results have led us 
                                                      to design GHOST, an experimental environment dedicated to 
Results for scenario 3: "failure"                     test countermeasures designed to get pilots out of persever­
Only 2 pilots tested scenario 3. One pilot experimented this ation. A second experiment was conducted with twenty-one 
scenario without any countermeasures: he did not notice the pilots in this new experimental environment: it has proved 
failure and hit the ground. The second pilot was warned the efficiency of the countermeasures to cure perseveration 
through the countermeasures that he had a failure and that and has also confirmed the relevance of conflict detection. 
there was a landing ground at vector 80: the pilot immediately Further experiments are to be conducted to go on tuning the 
performed an emergency landing on this landing ground. countermeasures according to the pilots' feedback. 
Other experiments are currently being conducted with this The next step is to design and implement the whole coun­
scenario.                                             termeasures closed-loop, i.e to remove the wizard of Oz and 
                                                      perform an automated conflict and perseveration manage­
Other results                                         ment. This is currently done thanks to (see figure 4): 
During the experiments, 9 pilots made errors, e.g. selection • the conflict detection tool (see section 3). 
of a wrong radio frequency, erroneous altitude, omission to • Kalmansymbo(aero), a situation tracker and predictor 
retract flaps and landing gear. To warn them, the wizard of [Tessier, 2003] which is based on predicate/transition timed 
Oz blinked the display on which they were focusing and Petri nets for procedure and pilot's activity modeling. 
displayed the error (e.g.: "gear still down"). In each case, Kalmansymbo assesses the current situation thanks to the pa-


COGNITIVE MODELING                                                                                    167 