308                                                    Session No. 7 Pattern Recognition I General Papers 


                                                        The operators &p are defined by the set of 
 PATTERN LINGUlSTIC ANALYSIS INVARIANT FOR PLANK 
 TRANSFORMATIONS                                    numerical values (α1 , α2.. .αq ). The result upX is 
                                                    the numerical value obtainea by a translation of 
                                                     p units and a scalar multiplication. Digital fil-
   J. 0. Simon        and        A. Checroun         ters, neurone nets and Perceptrons make use of 
                                                     such linear operators. 
 Institut de Programmation - 9, quai Saint Bernard 
                                                        The recogniti on decision is taken according 
                   PARIS 5e 
                                                    to the numerical value of uPX. Usually if uXP is 
                                                    greater than a threshold uO A, the feature corres -
    Pattern analysj s using syntacti c methods is   ponding to £ is recognized. 
 discussed briefly to introduce the ideas of the        Such a process is easily extended to images, 
 linguistic nature of the attributes and of possi-   i.e. two dimensi onal signals. 
 bl e invariance properties versus usual geometrica] 
 t ran sformations.                                  T.2. SYNTACTIC OR LINGUISTIC OPERATORS 
    A linguistic operator invariant for projec -
 ti ons from plane to plane is proposed and appli ed    It has been realized for quite a time that li 
 to the analysis of point patterns X. From knowled  near operators alone are not able to take into ac 
 ge of the operator "result" or "attribute", it is   count structural relationships i n patterns -
 possible to obtain the convex envelope, reconsti­      At the beginning of the 1960's a number of au 
 tute X, compare X to another pattern X' and more   thors such as Eden (1),(2), Minsky (5), Naranimhan 
 generally, to obtai n the possible common subpat -  (6), Kirsch (4), advocated a "description-proees -
 terns. Thi s last process showy that a threshold   sing" of pattern, thus starting a new "syntactic" 
 exists, under which a pattern comparison is not    approach to pattern recognition problems of 
 reliable.                                          higher complexity. Quoting FU and SWAIN (3), who 
    Linguistic operators invari ant tor plane simi- recently reviewed the state of the art : 
 larities are also consi dered.                         "Syntactic patt ern recogni ti on i s an attempt 
                                                    to adapt the techniques of formal language theory 
                                                    which provides both a notation (grammar) and an 
               §1. INTRODUCTION                     analysis mechanism (parsing) to the problem of re 
                                                    presenting and analysing patterns... Syntactic 
 J.I. FORMALIZATION OF PATTERN RECOGNITION          analysis can proceed only if a grammatical model 
     OPERATIONS                                     for the data generation and / or analysis process 
    Except for some very simple recognitions, many  can be formulated (This does not necessarily im -
 "recogni ti on 1 eve] r," have i o be di st inguished in ply that the data is actually generated by a me -
 a pattern recogniti on problem.                    chanism which operates in the same way as the mo -
    Recognition operations have to be performed to  del). A related practical problem i s the develop -
 get from one level to the next. Most of the time,  ment of efficient analys i s procedures based on 
                                                    the grammati cal model. The available Ij tteraturc 
 they may be described under a common formaliza -
                                                    concerning syntactic pattern recognition deals al 
 tion : 
                                                    most exclusively with the formulation of grammati 
 a. Let a pattern X he a set of "primitive" pat­    cal models, although the development of anaiysi s 
   terns, each of which has a name to which are     algorithms is currently receiving more attention.." 
   associated numerical values-                         This new approach is a subject of consi derable 
 b. One or more anatysi s operat ors to operate on X interest among pattern recognition specialists. 
   through algorithms ; the result of & is u  .     Nevertheless, the practjcal results in the analy-
                                         x          sis field do not seem up to the expectatIons-
                                         A 
                                                        In fact syntactic techniques are successful , 
 c. A recognition decision i s performed by compa­
                                                    says Kirsch, only if the generati ve grammar is 
   ring u  w i th informat ion previously stored. If 
         X                                          fully known. Rut, as for natural languages, there 
   this phase is successful, a pattern "feature" 
                                                    are some doubts about the existence of such 
    is extracted. Thi s feature has EL name ; nunieri 
                                                    "CHOMSKY-like" grammars for images, even with the 
    cal values may be associated with it. 
                                                    improvements provided by the "web grammars" propo 
     The recogni z ed features are the new primitive 
 patterns. Their set i s the pattern on which the   sed by Pfaltz and Rosenfeld (7). 
 operators of the next level will operate.              We would like to retain two features of the 
     This scheme is valid obviously for the first   syntactic approach : 
 J evel extract ion of simple features where X is the - Give up the interpretation of the processed 
 set of samples obtai ned t hrough a measuring instru   quantities as numeri cal values, consider them 
rnent such as an optical or acoustical device. Most     rather as words of a language with which nume 
of the time, the operators & are linear operators.      ri cal values may be associated. 
For example, let X be a one dimensional "signal", 
i is the name of the primitive measure or sample,     - Try to find "rules" valid for a large class 
x the munerical value associated with it.               of patterns. 
                                                        Accordingly, coming, back to our formalism, WE 
                                                    propose to consider analysis operators & of a lin 
                                                    guistic and invari ant nature : Session No. 7 Pattern Recognition I General Papers                                             309 


  - The result uX is to be one or more words "built operators". But usually we cannot modify the qua­
                                                    lities of these physical operators. This proper­
    on the alphabet consisting of the names of      ty could be used as a way to define the "outer 
    the primitive patterns. For this purpose a      world or universe ... 
    formal generative grammar is not absolutely         The second level is reached, most of the ti­
    necessary, as long as an algorithm giving an    me by the use of linear operators or filters. The 
    appropriate result can be found. This algori­   se simple operators have no invariance properties 
    thm, called the analysis operator, should be    They are thus successful only for invariant sub -
    implemented, of course, by a computer program.  patterns. Elements of lines, strokes or line cros 
    The pattern X will be the variable data set     sings are examples of such subpatterns invariant 
    of this program.                                for many transformations ; thus may be explained 
  - The result uX is to be invariant under some     the limited success of "Perceptron-like machines" 
                                                    for complex patterns, composed of these simple 
    transformations of the set X, corresponding     features. 
    to some geometrical transformations of the 
    analysed object. This "invariance concept" un­  3. The object of this paper is to propose some 
    derlies the syntactic pattern methods, though   "invariant linguistic operators" usually effecti­
    previous authors do not seen to emphasize its   ve for reaching the next level. They apply to two 
    relevance.                                      dimensional signals or images. The envisioned geo 
    The recognition decision will be taken by com   metrical transformations are plane to plane trans 
paring the ux with some stored information (1.1.    formations. One is for plane projections, the 
                                                    other for plane similarities. 
phase c). We will see later examples of how this 
phase can be implemented.                           §TI. LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS OPERATORS INVARIANT FOR 
1.3. REMARKS                                            PLANE PROJECTIONS 
1. Our formalism can be compared witn the one pro 
                                                    11.1. DEFINITIONS 
posed by Fu and Swain (7)- For them a Generalized 
Syntactic Formalism (GGF) utilizes :                    Let the pattern be composed of "primitives" 
  - A Generalized Syntactic Element (GSE), which    of names A0, A1, A2,,... A .... An, to which are 
    is a construct consisting of two parts : a na 
    me and an attribute list , which is a set of    associated numerical values (x0 ,y0 ) ,...(x.,y.)... 
    modifiers or variable properties.               These primitives may be the "features" of the se­
                                                    cond level. The numerical values x., y. are the 
  - A Generalized Syntactic Production (GSP) , 
    which is a rule specifying how a syntactic-     coordinates of the "center" of features A.. Let 
    element is composed from or generates other     these "points A." be in a plane II. 
    syntactic elements. Usually the syntactic ele­       Let us establish one of them as privileged, 
    ments generated are "more primitives".          for example. A. A0 defines a direction. Starting 
    Thus, a set X of primitive patterns can be      from this direction, let us rotate a vector 
compared to a GSE, an analysis operator & to a      around A. in a given manner. This vector will en -
GSP with the difference that now the results are    counter the other points A. in a certain order. 
"Jess primitive" elements, "result" and attribute"                          J 
being equivalent words.                                 Noting this order we can obtain an n-word 
    Our terminology seems more general, being also  on the alphabet {A-} of the names, starting by 
appropriate for the filtering or sifting proces­    A. : 
ses. One could in fact assert that in terms of the 
computer states there is no basic difference, only 
the semantic differs. 
    To stress the fact that no generative grammar       From all the points except A , a word such 
is implied by our operators, we would prefer to 
                                                    as ui may be obtained. Let us name Ux this set of 
call them "linguistic" rather than syntactic.           1 X 
                                                    n words of n letters. 
2. An instrument provides numerical results or          A projection from plane II to plane II' trans­
samples ; a name is given to each sample and a      forms the word A0, A1 , A2... A into A' A' A,',,.. 
number of numerical values. For example, in a reti  A'n. It is easily verified that the set of n words 
na the cell of name i gives an intensity of numeri   n 
cal value z1.. The coordinates of cell i are the nu U' obtained, from the new pattern X' by the same 
                                                     A 
merical values x., y.. Thus an "elementary measu­
                                                    algorithm, is derived from U  by substituting 
re" is defined by i, x., y., z.. The set of these                             X
                                                                              A 
measures is the first pattern, each "elementary     A! for A. . 
measure" being a "primitive pattern". This level     1 
will be called the first level. It is already a          Thus the operator £ implemented by the propo 
"feature level", if we consider that the "elemen­   sed algorithm is invariant for a plane projection 
tary measures" are the "results" of some "physical  it is easy to verify that a plane similarity, a 
                                                    rotation for example, does not modify the n words 
                                                    either. 310                                                    Session No. 7 Pattern Recognition I General Papers 


 Remarks 
 1. Let the projection from plane to plane be a 
 "parallel projection", i.e. the center of projec 
 tion be at infinity. Let G be the center of gra -
 vity of the primitive points A., which may be 
 weighted by numerical values z..                       Such a function covers the available compu•
                                                     ter numerical range. It orders the angles with a 
                                                     very high discrimination. 
                                                     N. B. This precision may be superfluous ; as will 
                                                     be seen later, it may be useful to decide that 
    G', the projection of G, is still the center 
                                                     two points A , A are seen "in line" from a point 
 of gravity of the projected points. The quality                k
 is invariant for the proposed transformation. Thus  A., in other words that the angles of vectors A. 
                                                      l 
 for these parallel projections, G may be selected 
                                                     A, and A. A with a fixed direction are the same, 
 as the "privileged n + 1 point" A of an n-points              e 
 picture.                                            This is achieved by reducing the function pre -
                                                     ci si on. 
  . Let AO be at infinity. This means that the          The figures 1-X and 1-Y display images X and 
 starting direction of the rotating analysis vector Y of 8 primitive points. A, B,... H. The corres 
 is the same for all the n points A.. Let us consi- ponding results are given by Fig. 2-X and 2-Y. 
                                                        The Y image has points "in line". This is re•
 der the projections from one plane to another kee  corded in the 8x8 matrix by setting a number 
ping at infinity the projection of A . In other     after the letter. For instance F and C are in li -
words, this means that A  is the point at infinity  ne with A, also H and F ; C and A are in line 
                       O                            with E, F and A with H, cf. Fig. 2-Y. 
on the intersection line of the two considered pla 
nes. For the new plane, the starting direction of 
the rotating analysis vector is the same for all 
projected points. It is the projection of the star 
 ting direction in the former plane. We will ;res -
trict ourselves to such transformations in the pro 
posed application examples. 

 11.2. PRACTICAL APPLICATION TO IMAGES 
    Let us take for the common starting direction 
of the rotating vector, the direction of the x 
axes (horizontal right). The rotation sense is 
taken counter clockwise. 
    Let (A1, A2,... A n} be the alphabet of names 
of the primitives. The partial result, obtained 
 from pojnt A. will be written down as : 


 n words such as u form an n X n matrix : the 
 "result UX ". This; result is invariant for the 
 envisioned plane projections. 
    Any monotone increasing function of the vector 
angle results in obtaining the u.. Let q be the 
 size of the computer register in which is stored 
the angle of A. A. with the horizontal axes. Let 
x and y be the A. A. projections on the horizon-
tal and vertical axes. An easily computed two's 
 complement function (A. A ) is : 
                       J i Session No. 7 Pattern Recognition I General Papers                                             311 


                                                    which a convex polygon can be built such that all 
                                                    the other image points are inside this polygon. 
                                                    Let two points A,k  Ae  be such that : 
                                                    a. In the line starting at A, , called the A, line 
                                                                                            k 
                                                       the point immediately after A. is A . 
                                                                                  k e 
                                                    b. The A line terminates with A. . 
                                                           e k 
                                                        It is easy to demonstrate that A, and A are 
                                                                                     k e 
                                                    elements of the convex envelope, and that A imme 
                                                    diately follows Ak on the envelope for the adop-
                                                    ted rotating sense. 
                 Fig. 2-Y                               The next point A on the envelope is such 
                                                    that it is the point following A, in the A line. 
Remarks                                                                           k e 
                                                    if A  is the last point in the A line, A is the 
1. A change in the common angular origin of the        kk 
rotating analysis vector usually transform X U : a  second 'circular permutation property). 
                                                        All the envelope points are obtained through 
circular permutation of the n - 1 letters in a Ii   this algorithm, continuing so as to find again 
ne after the first may occur.                       the first point A . 
    An image rotation in the plane would introdu­
ce such permutations. The considered operator is        For instance, going back to the eight primiti 
not rotation invariant. Why then use such an ope­   ve points image of Fig. 1-X, the UX of which is 
rator rather than the more general one introduced?  displayed in Fig. 2-X, it is very easy to obtain 
Because, by comparing two unknown figures, the cor  any U corresponding to any partial image, dedu -
respondence between the points AO has to be known. 
In general this is not feasible.                    ced from the original image by suppressing a num­
    The proposition of taking the center of gravi   ber of points. Fig. 3 gives the envelopes of ima­
ty as the point AO is quite interesting, but it     ges deduced from Fig. 1-X. One line gives the 
                                                    points, the line underneath the convex envelope 
restricts the plane projections to parallel pro -   points. For the total image A B... H, the envelo­
jections. On the other hand by using the parallel   pe is C A E G 11 F. 
origin direction vector we will be able to compa­
re figures with different number of primitive 
points and also to obtain the convex envelope. 
This would not be possible by using the "center 
of gravity" origin method. Anyway, the invariance 
to rotation may be of real value for some problems 
and this process is worth studying also. 

2. If AO is at infinity, the image can be scanned 
 from A , in the same sense that the rotating vec­
tors' sense. Here this scanning is made by a hori 
zontal line, the ordinate of which decreases from 
          Thus the n primitive points are put in 
a certain order. We adopt this order for the first 
 column of the n X n matrix Ux, which is then uni­                      Fig. 3 
 quely defined ; cf. Fig. 2-X and 2-Y. 
                                                    Selected points of Fig. 1-X, followed by the con­
                                                    vex envelope points. 
 II.3. SOME PROPERTIES DEDUCED FROM Ux 

    The UX matrix, invariant for plane projections  Rebuilding the image from UX 

         A                                              A matrix UX , being the result of the analysis 
 preserving the horizontal direction, is used to re 
 cognize large pattern classes.                     operator &, s it possible to obtain again the 
    Already some properties of the analysed image   primitive image X from UX ? 
 may be deduced from UX alone. For instance it is       Let us recall that the interest of UX is not 
 possible to state the sense of any three pointed                                        A. 
 triangle or to decide if any four pointed quadri­  an information reduction from the primitive infor 
 lateral is convex or not.                          mation of one image, but that a UX is the same 
 The convex envelope                                for a class of patterns, modulo a "geometrical" 
                                                    transformation Q, such as has been envisioned. 
    A most interesting property is the ability to       Even more, some image "deformations" do not 
 find the convex envelope, i.e. the points on       modify U^- Let us consider a pattern X of n 312                                                    Session No. 7 Pattern Recognition I General Papers 


 points, the n(n - 1) half-lines joining two points     Though we are quite convinced that this is 
 A., A., the n horizontal half-lines joining a       not the best idea, successive iterations of this 
                                                     process usually increases the number of points 
 point A. with the point AO at infinity. If none 
       I 0                                           that can be disposed of according to UY. 
 of these n half lines crosses an image point AK 
 during a "deformation" transform Δ, obviously the 
 result UX will be unchanged. Such a deformation A 
        A 
 may alter the primitiv• • • e pattern shape considera­
 bly. Thus any image rebuilt from UX may differ 
 from the original image X not only by a transfor­
mation ө , but also by a deformation A. 
    The convex envelope of any subpattern may be 
 obtained from UX . This facility is used to rebuild 
              A 
 a pattern X' from U . The envelope points are put 
 evenly on a circle in their order. The matrix UX 
                                            A 
 indicates the regions, defined by a number of 
 straight half-lines, where the other points should 
be. The set of these other points is ordered in 
order of decreasing freedom. The first points in 
this order, thus those with the minimum number of 
constraints, are put first at the barycenter of 
the surface where they should be set according to 
UX. An impossibility may occur before the set is 
exhausted. The process is then started again after 
a random variation of the positions of the points. 