                  Dynamic Bayesian modeling of the cerebral activity 

                          Vincent Labatut, Josette Pastor, Serge Ruff 
                                         Inserm u455 
                                  Pavilion Riser, CHU Purpan 
                               31059 Toulouse CEDEX 3, France 
                  {vincent.labatut; josette.pastor; serge.ruff}@toulouse.inserm.fr 

                   Abstract                      activity during a task performance. Statistical analyses of 
                                                 the activation data allow determining where [Fox and 
    Conventional methods used for the interpretation Raichle, 1985], i.e. in which areas, and/or when [Giard et 
    of activation data provided by functional neuro- al., 1995] during the task performance, the activation 
    imaging techniques provide useful insights on reaches local extrema. Through the study of covariation 
    what the networks of cerebral structures are, and between local activations, they give a sketch of what the 
    when and how much they activate. However,    network of cerebral areas involved in the cognitive func•
    they do not explain how the activation of these tion is [Herbster et al. ,, 1996]. A known oriented ana•
    large-scale networks derives from the cerebral tomical link between 2 areas allows determining why the 
    information processing mechanisms involved in activation of one area can affect the other one [Buchel 
    cognitive functions. At this global level of repre• and Friston, 1997]. Above methods allow identifying the 
    sentation, the human brain can be considered as substratum of a cognitive function and the activation 
    a dynamic biological system. Dynamic Bayesian level and dynamics of the substratum during the function 
    networks seem currently the most promising   performance. They do not give any clue of how the cog•
    modeling paradigm. Our modeling approach is  nitive processes participating in the function are imple•
    based on the anatomical connectivity of cerebral mented by the substratum and how the activation derives 
    regions, the information processing within cere• from the processing. That is, they do not allow interpret•
   bral areas and the causal influences that con• ing neuroimaging data as the result of information proc•
   nected regions exert on each other. The capabili• essing at the integrated level of large-scale networks. 
    ties of the formalism's current version are illus•
   trated by the modeling of a phonemic categoriza•
   tion process, explaining the different cerebral ac•
   tivations in normal and dyslexic subjects. The 
   simulation data are compared to experimental re•
   sults [Ruff et al, 2001]. 

1 Introduction 
In Neurology and Neuropsychology, the diagnosis of the 
neurological causes of cognitive disorders, as well as the 
understanding and the prediction of the clinical outcomes 
of focal or degenerative cerebral lesions, necessitate 
knowing the link between brain and mind, that is what 
the cerebral substratum of a cognitive or a sensorimotor 
function is and how the substratum's activity can be in• Figure 1: Large-scale network involved in phoneme monitor•
terpreted in cognitive terms, i.e. in terms of information ing, according to results from [Demonet, et al., 1994] 
processing. 
  Studies in humans and animals [Bressler, 1995; De- Interpretative models, linking a networked structure 
monet et al, 1994] have shown that sensorimotor or cog• activity to the realization of a function, are at the core of 
nitive functions are the offspring of the activity of ori• Computational Neurosciences. Most existing works in the 
ented large-scale networks of anatomically connected domain are based on formal neural networks, with vary•
cerebral regions (Figure 1). In humans, functional neuro- ing levels of biological plausibility, from physiology 
imaging techniques provide activation data, which are [Wang and Buzsaki, 1996], hardly interpretable in terms 
indirect measures of the brain's electrical or metabolic of information processing, to more or less biologically 


COGNITIVE MODELING                                                                         169 plausible models of how basic cognitive functions      nodes are information processors that implement func•
emerge from neuronal activation [Grossberg et al, 2002], tional primitives, which may all be different. 
and to purely functional models [Cohen et al., 1990], not A large-scale network has therefore neurophysiologi-
concerned with cerebral plausibility. Although these   cally constrained, oriented edges and possibly differenti•
models answer the how, they do not meet two major re•  ated nodes. The explicit representation of the nodes' 
quirements for an interpretative approach of functional function allows the direct expression of hypotheses on 
neuroimaging data. The models are not explicit enough to cerebral processing, and their easy modification in order 
be directly used for clinical purpose, and they cannot to follow the evolution of knowledge in neurosciences. 
evolve quickly and easily with new findings in neurosci- This cannot be dealt with by formal neural networks' 
ence, such as the integration of more detailed knowledge implicit modeling that requires modifying the whole net•
on the substratum, which often necessitates a complete work architecture to implement functional changes. 
rebuilding of the formal network.                      Hereafter, a structural or a functional structure will be 
  The causal connectivity approach [Pastor et al. , 2000] indifferently named a cerebral zone. 
aims at answering the how and satisfying the constraints. 
However, the underlying formalism, causal qualitative  2.2 Information Representation and 
networks based on interval calculus, limits severely the     Processing 
biological plausibility of the models, since it cannot rep• The cerebral information processed by a neuronal popula•
resent major cerebral features, such as learning or the tion can be seen as the abstraction of the number and the 
non-linearity and the uncertainty of cerebral processes. 
                                                       pattern of the neurons firing for this information. It can be 
Dynamic Bayesian networks only meet the three major 
                                                       represented both by an energy level and by a category. En•
constraints: temporal evolution, uncertainty and nonlin-
earity [Labatut and Pastor, 2001]. The utility of graphical ergy is indirectly represented by the imprecise activation 
probabilistic formalisms for cognitive modeling has also data provided by neuroimaging techniques. The category 
been demonstrated in the representation of visuomotor  representation is in agreement with the "topical" organiza•
mechanisms with Bayesian networks [Ghahramani and      tion of the brain, which reflects category maps of the input 
Wolpert, 1997].                                        stimuli, and can persist from primary cortices to nonprimary 
  Hereafter, we describe how the interpretation of func• cortices and subcortical structures [Alexander et al, 1992], 
tional images for a clinical purpose can be tackled. Sec• through transmission fibers [Leiner and Leiner, 1997]. The 
tion 2 presents our viewpoint on large-scale cerebral  energy and the category of a stimulus can also be easily 
networks. After a short introduction to dynamic Bayesian extracted from its psychophysical properties. 
networks, section 3 describes the characteristics of our Modeling cerebral processes necessitates an explicit and 
formalism. Section 4 illustrates the formalism's capabili• discrete representation of time, both for taking into account 
ties by an example. We conclude with some perspectives. the dynamics of cerebral mechanisms (transmission delays, 
                                                       response times...), and for complying with sampled func•
2 Representation of Large-Scale Cere•                  tional neuroimaging data. 
     bral Networks                                       According to a definition of causality inspired by Hume 
                                                       [Hume, 1740] and consistent with Pearl's probabilistic cau•
2.1 Structural and Functional Nodes                    sality [Pearl, 2001], information processing in a large-scale 
                                                       network can be considered as mediated through causal 
The function implemented by a large-scale network de•  mechanisms. Causality is defined by three properties: spatial 
pends on three properties: the network's structure     and temporal contiguity, temporal consistency, and statisti•
[Goldman-Rakic, 1988], the functional role of each node cal regularity [Labatut and Pastor, 2001]. In other words, 
(E.g. Wernicke's area (Figure 1), which is supposed to two entities A and B are causally linked if they are contigu•
realize the early stages of phoneme processing), and the ous relatively to the system they belong to, if the beginning 
properties of the links (length, role: inhibitory or excita• of A precedes temporally the beginning of B, and if most of 
tory, ...). In each network, regions, which are the stride- the times, A provokes B. In the brain, oriented anatomical 
tural nodes, are information processors and connecting links provide spatial and temporal contiguity between cere•
oriented fibers are information transmitters [Leiner and 
                                                       bral nodes, cerebral events are temporally consistent (a fir•
Leiner, 1997]. 
                                                       ing zone provokes the activation of downstream zones), and 
  All neurons in a region do not have the same structure 
                                                       there is a statistical regularity in the response of a specific 
or the same role. Similar neurons constitute generally 
local populations that realize a specific function. For ex• neuronal population to a given stimulus. 
ample, the inhibitory role of GABAergic neurons on 
other neuronal populations may explain the fact that   3 Description of the Formalism 
every visual stimulus is not perceived in high frequency 
stimulation [Pastor, et al, 2000]. Therefore, each region 3.1 Dynamic Bayesian Networks 
is itself a network of smaller neuronal populations {func•
tional nodes), connected through neuronal fibers. These In summary, the brain can be viewed as a network whose 
                                                       nodes are differentiated dynamic and adaptive informa-


170                                                                                  COGNITIVE MODELING tion processors and oriented edges convey causality.   3.2 Formal definition 
Moreover, cerebral mechanisms, which are the abstrac•
tion, at the level of a neuronal population, of the chemi• Static and Dynamic Networks 
cal and electrical mechanisms at the cell levels, are often A static network is the graphical representation of a 
nonlinear. Causal dynamic Bayesian networks are the    large-scale network, whose nodes are cerebral zones and 
paradigm that meets best the constraints derived from  edges are the oriented axon bundles connecting zones. 
these properties [Labatut and Pastor, 2001].           Due to anatomical loops, it is often cyclic. The DBN is 
  A causal Bayesian network consists of a directed     the acyclic temporal expansion of the static network. 
acyclic graph where nodes represent random variables   Each node of the DBN is the processing entity related to 
and edges represent causal relationships between the   a cerebral zone, i.e. the mathematical expression, at a 
variables [Pearl, 1988]. A conditional probability is asso• given time slice, of information processing in the zone. 
ciated with each relationship between a node and its par• Each edge is the propagation entity, whose orientation is 
ents. If the node is a root, the probability distribution is a its corresponding axon bundle's orientation. When deriv•
prior. When some nodes' values are observed, posterior ing the DBN from the static network, values are given to 
probabilities for the hidden nodes can be computed     the temporal parameters, according to known physiology 
thanks to inference algorithms such as the junction tree results (e.g. the transmission speed in some neural fi•
algorithm [Jensen, 1996].                              bers). That is, the length of the time slices is fixed, and a 
  In a dynamic Bayesian network (DBN), the evolution   delay representing the average propagation time in the 
of random variables through time is considered. Time is bundle's fibers is associated to the propagation entity. 
seen as a series of intervals called time slices [Dean and 
Kanazawa, 1988]. For each slice, a submodel represents Information Representation 
the state of the modeled system. DBNs are used to model Cerebral information is the flowing entity that is com•
Markovian processes, i.e. processes where a temporally puted at each spatial (cerebral zone) and temporal (time 
limited knowledge of the past is sufficient to predict the slice) step, by a processing entity. It is a two-
future. The choice of the inference algorithm, generally dimensioned data. The first part, the magnitude, stands 
an extension of the junction tree algorithm [Murphy,   for the cerebral energy needed to process the information 
1999], depends on the DBN's structure, the nature of its in the zone. It is represented by a real random variable in 
variables (discrete or continuous), and relationships (lin• the DBN. For the second part, the type, which represents 
ear or nonlinear).                                     the cerebral category the zone attributes to the informa•
  Activation data and/or the subject's responses to the tion, the representation is based on the symbol and cate•
stimuli are the only observable variables we have. There• gorical field concepts. 
fore, they must be integrated in our models. One may     A symbol represents a "pure" (i.e. not blurred with 
reasonably consider that the hidden variables, describing noise or another symbol) category of information. For 
the successive states of the cerebral network, constitute a example, when the information represents a linguistic 
Markov chain, and that observable variables depend only stimulus, a symbol may refer to a non ambiguous pho•
on them. Moreover, the variables are continuous and their neme. For cerebral information, the symbol represents, in 
relationships may be nonlinear. This is typically the de• each zone, the neuronal subpopulation being sensitive to 
scription of a type of DBNs called fully nonlinear state (i.e. that fires for) the corresponding category. It may be, 
space models. Specific and recent algorithms allowing  in the primary auditory cortex, the subpopulation sensi•
dealing with nonlinearity exist for this type of structures. tive to a specific frequency interval. A categorical field 
Their general principle is to linearize the model in order is a set of symbols describing stimuli of the same seman•
to apply the classic Kalman filter. These algorithms differ tic class. The "color" categorical field contains all the 
on the used linearization method: first-order Taylor ap• color symbols, but it cannot contain phonemes. 
proximations for the extended Kalman filter [Julier and  A type concerns several symbols, due to the presence 
Uhlmann, 1997; Norgaard et al, 2000] or polynomial     of noise or because of some compound information. Let 
approximations for the unscented Kalman filter [Julicr S be the set of all existing symbols. We assume that a 
and Uhlmann, 1997], the divided difference filter (DDF) type T is defined for only one categorical field. Let S
[Norgaard, et al, 2000], and others [Van Der Merwe and                                                  1 
Wan, 2001]. The algorithms based on polynomial ap•     be the subset of S, corresponding to this categorical 
proximations seem to give more reliable results        field. The type T is an application from ST to [0,1], with 
[Norgaard, et al., 2000]. Their computational complexity the property , i.e. it describes a symbol reparti•
is 0(L3), where L is the state dimension [Van Der Merwe 
and Wan, 2001]. They offer equivalent qualities, but 
those of the DDF are more accurate according to its au• tion for a specific categorical field. In a stimulus, this 
thor [Norgaard, et al, 2000].                          repartition corresponds to the relative importance of each 
                                                       symbol compounding the information carried by the 
                                                       stimulus. Inside the model, T(s) stands for the proportion 
                                                       of s-sensitive neurons in the population that fired for the 
                                                       information whose type is T. Unlike the magnitude, the 


COGNITIVE MODELING                                                                                     171  type is not represented by a random variable. Indeed, it is   viants. Each block contains 6 sequences of 4 sounds, 3 
 not necessary to represent its uncertainty (and hence to      pivots and the block's deviant, in a random order. 
 make the computational complexity harder) since we              We focus on a single region, a part of the right tempo•
 cannot compare it to neuroimaging data.                       ral superior gyrus involved in the early processing of 
   At time / and node X, the information is represented by     auditory stimuli and activated differently in controls and 
                                                               dyslexic subjects. Phylogeny is in favor of the existence 
 the type and the magnitude at the output of X. 
                                                               of specialized phonemic processors in this area (Figure 
 Propagation and Processing                                    2). Since their location is unknown, they cannot consti•
                                                               tute separate structural nodes. They are supposed to have 
   For a zone X, both the cerebral propagation mecha•
                                                               the same building functional nodes. According to our 
 nisms (i.e. the relationships towards the zone) and the 
                                                               genericity hypothesis, the processors' structure and pa•
 processing (spatial and temporal integration of the inputs,   rameters are based on a previously released visual cortex 
 and processing as such) are described by a pair of func•      model [Pastor, et al., 2000]. The Input Gating Nodes 
 tions, the type and the magnitude functions fM . In           (IGN.) express the phoneme processors' sensitivity to the 
 the general case where n zones are inputs to X,               stimulus. The Output Gating Nodes (OGN.) send infor•
                                                               mation to the downstream areas. Intra and inter (lateral) 
 let be the corresponding delays of these rela•                inhibitions (/TV. and LIN.) are assumed between the /pa/ 
 tionships. In the DBN, the general form of the magnitude      and /ta/ processors. LIN. make the activation of an IGN. 
 functions is:                                                 cause an inhibition in the opposite IGN.. Each Firing 
                                                               Threshold Node (FTN.) is modulated by an OGN. that 
                                                       (1) 
                                                               can lower it. Since only one activation measure is pro•
 where can be a nonlinear function. The random vari•           vided by fMRI for the area, it is represented by the sole 
 able models uncertainty in the cerebral                      AN node in the static model. Stim stands for the stimulus. 
 processing. 
   The type function is any combination of the incoming 
 types and of the previous type that respects our type defi•
 nition. If all types are defined on the same categorical 
 field 5, the type function can be the linear combination: 


   The functions' definition, as well as the setting of the 
parameters1 values (e.g. the value of a firing threshold), 
 utilize mostly results in neuropsychology or in neuro•        Figure 2: Static network used to model the cerebral phonemic 
physiology. The existence of generic models, that is, non      categorization process. 
instantiated, reusable, models of functional networks, is        Except for the parameterization of the IGN. nodes, 
assumed. For example, primary cortices may implement 
                                                               which reflects the specialization of each phonemic proc•
 the same mechanisms, although they arc parameterized so 
                                                               essor to the phoneme category (/pa/ or /ta/), the functions 
that they can process different types of stimuli [Pastor, et 
al., 2000].                                                    for both the /pa/ and /ta/ parts share exactly the same 
                                                               structure and parameters. Thus, only the pa part will be 
4 Example                                                     presented. In the following equations, the ith parameter of 
                                                              the function of a node X is noted a (1) 
The model, presented hereafter, is based on an experi•
                                                                 The refractory period of the processor's neurons is 
mental study [Ruff, et al, 2001] that focused on the dif•
                                                              modeled in by a sigmoid function that makes 
 ferences between normal and dyslexic subjects during a 
passive phonemic categorization process.                      the node sensitive to the incoming stimulus only if the 
   Six patients and six controls were submitted to a pas•     magnitude of the output is already close to zero: 
sive hearing of stimuli that are mixes of the two phoneti•
cally close syllables /pa/ and /ta/. The pivot is noted devO 
and the deviants are 4 different mixes of /pa/ and /ta/, 
noted dev2M, dev1M, dev1P, dev2P (Table 1). The meas•
urements were made with fMRI. An experiment is consti•           The categorical field contains two symbols (pa and ta). 
tuted of 5 blocks, corresponding to the pivot and the de•     The type of a stimulus represents the proportions of the 
                                                              two symbols (Table 1). 


 172                                                                                             COGNITIVE MODELING                                                                         trols, the more distant (from the pivotal stimulus, cate•
                                                                        gorically speaking) the deviant is, the stronger the activa•
                                                                        tion is (Figure 3). This is supposed to be caused by a ha•
                                                                        bituation mechanism that lowers the activation, followed 
                                                                        by an activation the force of which depends on the "sur•
                                                                        prise" caused by the deviant. Dyslexic subjects do not 
    Table 1: Constants for both phonemic categorization models          correctly categorize the different phonemes, both the pa 
                                                                        and the ta parts of the gyrus activate for each block. This 
   The sensitivity of each 1GN. to the received type is de•             illustrates how activation data can be explained thanks to 
fined by a constant type sens.. is more sensitive to                    the understanding of the cerebral information processing 
the symbol pa, and to ta. The function in mechanisms expressed in the models. 

equation (3) is used with the constant and the in•
coming stimulus' type in order to modulate the mag•
nitude of 

   The types are used only for the input gating; they do 
not intervene in the rest of the model. The sigmoid 
in magnitude function allows it to fire only if 
the magnitude coming from the is greater than the 
firing threshold's one: 


   AN consists in the sum of the successive IGNs' activa•
tions during one experimental block: 
                                                                         Figure 3: Compared results between simulated data (± 2 stan•
                                                                (8) 
                                                                        dard deviations) and experimental measures. 
   This is a gross approximation of the fMRI data, which 
models only the part of the information processing mecha•               5 Conclusion 
nisms in the activation building and neglects metabolic 
                                                                        Instead of building a specialized model, designed for a 
processes at the level of the cerebral blood flow. Since, ex•
                                                                        specific function or cerebral network, we have presented 
cept the Stim and the AN nodes, all nodes represent neu•
                                                                        a general framework, allowing the interpretation of func•
ronal activities, the time unit is set to 1 ms. We used the             tional neuroimaging data. This framework has been de•
DD2 algorithm [Norgaard, ei al., 2000] to perform the simu•             signed to be open to evolutions of the knowledge in neu•
lations.                                                                ropsychology and neurophysiology. Using DBNs allows 
   The hypothesis is that the difference of processing be•              modeling the brain as a dynamic causal probabilistic 
tween normal and dyslexic subjects is caused by a disorder              network with nonlinear relationships. We have illustrated 
in the inhibitory mechanisms. Thus, the two models, one for             this with an example concerning a language-related proc•
the average patient and the other for the average control, use          ess. Currently, our framework is adapted to automatic 
the same functions and share the same parameters, except                processing, which is dominant in cerebral functioning. In 
for the inhibition nodes (IN. and LIN.). There are no lateral           function of the stimulus type, nodes can react differently 
inhibitions in the dyslexic model. It can be interpreted in             and different networks may be activated, thus implement•
cognitive terms as the fact that all the processors compete             ing different functions. Our future work will focus on the 
for each stimulus and that no clear category can be built.              integration of more biological plausibility in the frame-
Also, the dyslexic model's internal inhibitions are slightly            work. The representation of complex relationships be•
stronger than in the normal one, leading to a slowing in the            tween and inside the zones will allow the representation 
                                                                        of controlled processes and contextual modulation of the 
stimulus perception. These two tentative interpretations are 
                                                                        cerebral activity. The combination of types from different 
good starting points for new experiments. 
                                                                        categorical domains and the search for regularities in the 
   The differences in the inhibition parameters are suffi•
                                                                        combinations will allow the implementation of learning 
cient to obtain very different activation data. For con•                mechanisms. Another essential topic is to make our mod-


COGNIT1VE MODELING                                                                                                                      173 