                   Propositional Argumentation and Causal Reasoning

                                         Alexander Bochman
                                     Computer Science Department,
                             Holon Academic Institute of Technology, Israel
                                      e-mail: bochmana@hait.ac.il


                    Abstract                            The plan of the paper is as follows. We introduce ﬁrst an
                                                      abstract argumentation theory, and describe its four-valued
    The paper introduces a number of propositional    semantics based on acceptance and rejection of arguments.
    argumentation systems obtained by gradually ex-   Adding a ‘global’ negation to this language will give us a
    tending the underlying language and associated    formalism that generalizes the assumption-based argumenta-
    monotonic logics. An assumption-based argumen-    tion framework from [Bondarenko et al., 1997]. Then we
                   [                     ]
    tation framework Bondarenko et al., 1997 will     describe an alternative extension of the argumentation theory
    constitute a special case of this construction. In to the full classical propositional language. A special case
    addition, a stronger argumentation system in a full of the latter formalism will be shown to be equivalent to a
    classical language will be shown to be equivalent system of causal reasoning. Finally, we will consider the cor-
                              [
    to a system of causal reasoning Giunchiglia et al., respondence between argumentation and causal reasoning on
        ]
    2004 . The implications of this correspondence for the level of their associated nonmonotonic semantics.
    the respective nonmonotonic theories of argumen-
    tation and causal reasoning are discussed.        2   Collective argumentation
                                                      As a general formal basis of argumentation theory, we will
1  Introduction                                       adopt the formalism of collective argumentation suggested in
In this study we will demonstrate, among other things, that [Bochman, 2003a] as a ‘disjunctive’ generalization of Dung’s
two relatively recent approaches to nonmonotonic reasoning, argumentation theory. In this formalism, a primitive attack
namely argumentation theory [Dung, 1995b; Bondarenko  relation holds between sets of arguments: in the notation in-
et al., 1997] and a theory of causal nonmonotonic reason- troduced below, a ֒→ b says that a set a of arguments attacks
ing [McCain and Turner, 1997; Giunchiglia et al., 2004; a set of arguments b. This fact implies, of course, that these
,Bochman, 2003b; 2004a] are actually ‘two faces of the same two sets arguments are incompatible. a ֒→ b says, however
coin’. The common basis of these formalisms is a notion of more than that, namely that the set of arguments a, being ac-
explanation, which takes the form of an attack relation in the cepted, provides a reason, or explanation, for rejection of the
argumentation theory, and a causal relation in the theory of set of arguments b. Accordingly, the attack relation will not
causal reasoning. It will be shown that, at some level of gen- in general be symmetric, since acceptance of b need not give
eralization, these two relations will be directly interdeﬁnable. reasons for rejection of a. In addition, the attack relation is
  Both the argumentation theory and theory of causal non- not reducible to attacks between individual arguments. For
monotonic reasoning have proved to be powerful frameworks instance, we can disprove some conclusion jointly supported
for representing different kinds of nonmonotonic reasoning, by a disputed set of arguments, though no particular argument
including traditional nonmonotonic logics, logic program- in the set, taken alone, could be held responsible for this.
ming, abduction and reasoning about actions and change. The In what follows, a, b, c, . . . will denote ﬁnite sets of ar-
present study should hopefully provide a basis for clarifying guments, while u, v, w, . . . arbitrary such sets. We will use
the representation capabilities of these formalisms, and a step the same agreements for the attack relation as for usual con-
toward a uniﬁed theory of nonmonotonic reasoning.     sequence relations. Thus, a, a1 ֒→ b, B will have the same
.Another objective of this study consists in a systematic de- meaning as a ∪ a1 ֒→ b ∪ {B}, etc  
velopment of a propositional approach to argumentation, in Deﬁnition 2.1. Let A be a set of arguments. A (collective)
-which arguments are represented as (special kinds of) propo- attack relation is a relation ֒→ on ﬁnite sets of arguments sat
sitions. This approach will naturally lead us to developing isfying the following postulate:
the underlying logics of argumentation (cf. [Chesnevar˜ et
.al., 2000; Prakken and Vreeswijk, 2001]) and their associ- Monotonicity If a ֒→ b, then a, a1 ֒→ b, b1
ated semantics. As will be shown, the resulting argumen- Though deﬁned primarily on ﬁnite sets of arguments, the
tation systems will directly represent a number of important attack relation will be extended to arbitrary such sets by im-
nonmonotonic formalisms.                              posing the compactness requirement: for any u, v ⊆ A,Compactness) u ֒→ v if and only if a ֒→ b, for some ﬁnite 2.2 Assumption-based argumentation)
a ⊆ u, b ⊆ v.                                         The notion of an argument is often taken as primitive in ar-
  The original Dung’s argumentation theory [Dung, 1995b] gumentation theory, which allows for a possibility of consid-
can be seen as a special case of collective argumentation that ering arguments that are not propositional in character (e.g.,
satisﬁes additional properties (cf. [Kakas and Toni, 1999]): arguments as inference rules, or derivations). As has been
                                                      shown in [Bondarenko et al., 1997], however, a powerful ver-
Deﬁnition 2.2. An attack relation is normal if no set of argu- sion of argumentation theory can be obtained by identifying
ments attacks ∅, and the following condition is satisﬁed: arguments with propositions of a special kind called assump-
                                                          1
-Locality) If a ֒→ b, b1, then either a ֒→ b, or a ֒→ b1. tions . This representation can be reﬁned further to a full)
                                                      ﬂedged theory of propositional argumentation in a certain
.For a normal attack, a ֒→ b holds iff a ֒→ A, for some A∈b. well-deﬁned propositional language  
As was shown in [Bochman, 2003a], the resulting argumen- Let us extend the language of arguments with a negation
tation theory coincides with that given in [Dung, 1995a]. connective ∼ having the following semantic interpretation:
  By an argument theory we will mean an arbitrary set of at-
tacks a ֒→ b between sets of arguments. Any argument theory       ∼A  is accepted iff A is rejected
∆ generates a unique least attack relation that we will denote    ∼A  is rejected iff A is accepted.
:by ֒→∆. The latter can be described directly as follows
                                                        The connective ∼ will be called a global negation, since
u ֒→∆ v iff a ֒→ b ∈ ∆, for some a ⊆ u, b ⊆ v.   it switches the evaluation contexts between acceptance and     
                                                      rejection. An axiomatization of this connective in argumen-
  It can be easily veriﬁed that an attack relation is normal if tation theory can be obtained by imposing the following rules
and only if it is generated in this sense by an argument theory on the attack relation (see [Bochman, 2003a]):
.consisting only of attack rules of the form a ֒→ A
A ֒→ ∼A     ∼A ֒→ A                                                                      
(Four-valued semantics                                     If a ֒→ A, b and a, ∼A ֒→ b, then a ֒→ b (AN  2.1
                                                               If        and           then
Collective argumentation can be given a four-valued seman-       a, A ֒→ b  a ֒→ b, ∼A,    a ֒→ b
tics that will be instructive in describing the meaning of the Attack relations satisfying the above postulates will be
attack relation. This semantics stems from the following un- called N-attack relations. It turns out that the latter are in-
.derstanding of an attack a ֒→ b:                      terdeﬁnable with certain consequence relations
    If all arguments in a are accepted, then at least one A Belnap consequence relation in a propositional language
    of the arguments in b should be rejected.         with a global negation ∼ is a Scott (multiple-conclusion) con-
                                                      sequence relation  satisfying the postulates
  The argumentation theory does not impose, however, the
                                                      (Reﬂexivity)  A  A;
classical constraints on acceptance and rejection of argu-                          ′     ′      ′   ′
ments, so an argument can be both accepted and rejected, or (Monotonicity) If a  b and a ⊆ a , b ⊆ b , then a  b ;
neither accepted, nor rejected. Such an understanding can be (Cut) If a  b, A and a, A  b, then a  b,
captured formally by assigning any argument a subset of the
                                                      as well as the following Double Negation rules for ∼:
set {t, f}, where t denotes acceptance (truth), while f de-
notes rejection (falsity). This is nothing other than the well-     A  ∼∼A      ∼∼A    A.
known Belnap’s interpretation of four-valued logic (see [Bel-
nap, 1977]). As a result, collective argumentation acquires a For any set u of propositions, we will denote by ∼u the set
natural four-valued semantics described below.        {∼A  | A ∈ u}. Now, for a given N-attack relation, we can
                                                      deﬁne the following consequence relation:
-Deﬁnition 2.3. An attack a ֒→ b will be said to hold in a four
( b ≡ a ֒→ ∼b             (CA valued interpretation ν of arguments, if either t∈ / ν(A), for          a
some A ∈ a, or f ∈ ν(B), for some B ∈ b.                Similarly, for any Belnap consequence relation we can de-
  An interpretation ν will be called a model of an argument ﬁne the corresponding attack relation as follows:
theory ∆ if every attack from ∆ holds in ν.
( ∼b              (AC a ֒→ b ≡ a                                                                        
  Since an attack relation can be seen as a special kind of
an argument theory, the above deﬁnition determines also the As has been shown in [Bochman, 2003a], the above def-
notion of a model for an attack relation.             initions establish an exact equivalence between N-attack re-
  For a set I of four-valued interpretations, we will denote lations and Belnap consequence relations. This correspon-
-by ֒→I the set of all attacks that hold in each interpretation dence allows us to represent an assumption-based argumen
from I. Then the following result is actually a representation tation framework from [Bondarenko et al., 1997] entirely in
theorem showing that the four-valued semantics is adequate the framework of attack relations.
for collective argumentation (see [Bochman, 2003a]).    Slightly changing the deﬁnitions from [Bondarenko et al.,
                                                      1997], an assumption-based argumentation framework can
Theorem 2.1. ֒→ is an attack relation iff it coincides with
.[I , for some set of four-valued interpretations I.     1See also [Kowalski and Toni, 1996→֒deﬁned as a triple consisting of an underlying deductive sys- As a result, the collective attack relation in this language is
tem (including the current set of beliefs), a distinguished sub- reducible to an attack relation between individual arguments,
set of propositions Ab called assumptions, and a mapping as suggested already in [Dung, 1995b].
from Ab to the set of all propositions of the language that Having a conjunction at our disposal, we only have to add
determines the contrary A of any assumption A.        a classical negation ¬ in order to obtain a classical language.
  Now, the underlying deductive system can be expressed Moreover, since sets of arguments are reducible to their con-
directly in the framework of N-attack relations by identify- junctions, we can represent the resulting argumentation the-
.ing deductive rules a ⊢ A with attacks of the form a ֒→ ∼A. ory using just a binary attack relation on classical formulas
Furthermore, the global negation ∼ can serve as a faithful As a basic condition on argumentation in the classical
logical formalization of the operation of taking the contrary. propositional language, we will require only that the attack
More precisely, given an arbitrary language L that does not relation should respect the classical entailment  in the pre-
contain ∼, we can deﬁne assumptions as propositions of the cise sense of being monotonic with respect to  on both sides.
form ∼A, where A ∈ L. Then, since ∼ satisﬁes double nega- Deﬁnition 3.1. A propositional attack relation is a relation
tion, a negation of an assumption will be a proposition from ֒→ on the set of classical propositions satisfying the following
L. Moreover, such a ‘negative’ representation of assumptions postulates:
will agree with the applications of the argumentation theory
                                                                               
;to other nonmonotonic formalisms, described in [Bondarenko (Left Strengthening) If A B and B ֒→ C, then A ֒→ C
;et al., 1997]. Accordingly, N-attack relations can be seen as (Right Strengthening) If A ֒→ B and C  B, then A ֒→ C
a proper generalization of the assumption-based framework.
;Truth)   t ֒→ f)                                                      
                                                                 f   t
. →֒   (Classical propositional argumentation              (Falsity  3
                                                        Left Strengthening says that logically stronger arguments
Taking seriously the idea of propositional argumentation, it is should attack any argument that is attacked already by a log-
only natural to make a further step and extend the underlying ically weaker argument, and similarly for Right Strengthen-
language of arguments to a full classical propositional lan- ing. Truth and Falsity postulates characterize the limit cases
guage. The latter step should be coordinated, however, with of argumentation by stipulating that any tautological argu-
the inherently four-valued nature of an attack relation. And ment attacks any contradictory one, and vice versa.
the way to do this amounts to requiring that the relevant clas- There exists a simple deﬁnitional way of extending the
sical connectives should behave in a usual classical way with above attack relation to a collective attack relation between
respect to both acceptance and rejection of arguments. arbitrary sets of propositions. Namely, for any sets u, v of
:As a ﬁrst connective of this kind, we introduce the con- propositions, we can deﬁne u ֒→ v as follows  
junction connective ∧ on arguments that is determined by the
following familiar semantic conditions:
u ֒→ v ≡ ^  a ֒→ ^ b, for some ﬁnite a ⊆ u and b ⊆ v                                                        
   A ∧ B is accepted iff A is accepted and B is accepted The resulting attack relation will satisfy the properties of
    A ∧ B is rejected iff A is rejected or B is rejected collective argumentation, as well as the postulates (A∧) for
                                                      conjunction.
  As can be seen, ∧ behaves as an ordinary classical conjunc- Finally, in order to acquire full expressive capabilities of
tion with respect to acceptance and rejection of arguments. an argumentation theory, we can add the global negation ∼
On the other hand, it is a four-valued connective, since the to the language. Actually, a rather simple characterization of
above conditions determine a four-valued truth-table for con- the resulting collective argumentation theory can be obtained
junction in the Belnap’s interpretation of four-valued logic by accepting the postulates AN for ∼, plus the following rule
    [          ]
(see Belnap, 1977 ). The following postulates provide a syn- that permits the use of classical entailment in attacks:
tactic characterization of this connective for attack relations:
.Classicality If a  A, then a ֒→ ∼A and ∼A ֒→ a                                                      
a, A ∧ B ֒→ b iff a, A, B ֒→ b              It can be veriﬁed that the resulting system satisﬁes all the            
a ֒→ A ∧ B, b iff a ֒→ A, B, b    (A∧)    postulates for propositional argumentation. The system will            
                                                      be used later for a direct representation of default logic.
  Collective attack relations satisfying these postulates will
be called conjunctive. The next result shows that they give a 3.1 Semantics
complete description of the four-valued conjunction.
                                                      A semantic interpretation of propositional attack relations
Corollary 3.1. An attack relation is conjunctive if and only can be obtained by generalizing four-valued interpretations to
if it coincides with ֒→I , for some set of four-valued interpre- pairs (u, v) of deductively closed theories, where u is the set
tations I in a language with a four-valued conjunction ∧. of accepted propositions, while v the set of propositions that
  An immediate beneﬁt of introducing conjunction into the are not rejected. Such pairs will be called bimodels, while a
language of argumentation is that any ﬁnite set of arguments set of bimodels will be called a binary semantics.
a becomes reducible to a single argument V a:         Deﬁnition 3.2. An attack A ֒→ B will be said to be valid in a
                                                      binary semantics B if there is no bimodel (u, v) from B such
.a ֒→ b iff ^  a ֒→ ^ b.                 that A ∈ u and B ∈ v              We will denote by ֒→B the set of attacks that are valid in As a result, the basic attack relation can be safely restricted  
a semantics B. This set forms a propositional attack relation. to an attack relation in a classical language.
Moreover, the following result shows that propositional at- Finally, the rule Self-Defeat of causal argumentation gives
tack relations are actually complete for the binary semantics. a formal representation for an often expressed desideratum
-Theorem  3.2. ֒→ is a propositional attack relation if and that self-conﬂicting arguments should not participate in de
                                                      feating other arguments (see, e.g., [Bondarenko et al., 1997]).
.only if it coincides with ֒→B, for some binary semantics B
                                                      This aim is achieved in our setting by requiring that such ar-
3.2  Probative and causal argumentation               guments are attacked even by tautologies, and hence by any
We will introduce now some stronger propositional attack re- argument whatsoever.
lations that will be shown to correspond to systems of causal 3.3 Argumentation vs. causal inference
inference. These stronger attack relations are obtained by
                                                      Probative attack relations will now be shown to be equivalent
adding the following quite reasonable postulates:
                                                      to general production inference relations from [Bochman,
-Left Or)  If A ֒→ C and B ֒→ C, then A ∨ B ֒→ C;     2003b; 2004a], a variant of input-output logics from [Makin)
.[Right Or)  If A ֒→ B and A ֒→ C, then A ֒→ B ∨ C;    son and van der Torre, 2000)
                                                        A production inference relation is a relation ⇒ on the set
.Self-Defeat) If A ֒→ A, then t ֒→ A)
                                                      of classical propositions satisfying the following rules:
Deﬁnition 3.3. A propositional attack relation will be called (Strengthening) If A  B and B ⇒ C, then A ⇒ C;
probative if it satisﬁes Left Or, basic, if it also satisﬁes Right
                                                                                   
Or, and causal, if it is basic and satisﬁes Self-Defeat. (Weakening) If A ⇒ B and B  C, then A ⇒ C;
  Probative argumentation allows for reasoning by cases. Its (And) If A ⇒ B and A ⇒ C, then A ⇒ B ∧ C;
semantic interpretation can be obtained by restricting bimod- (Truth) t ⇒ t;
els to pairs (α, v), where α is a world (maximal classically (Falsity) f ⇒ f.
consistent set). The corresponding binary semantics will also
                                                        A production rule A ⇒ B can be informally interpreted as
be called probative. Similarly, the semantics for basic argu-
                                                      saying that A produces, or explains B. A characteristic prop-
mentation is obtained by restricting bimodels to world pairs
                                                      erty of production inference is that reﬂexivity A ⇒ A does not
(α, β); such a binary semantics will be called basic. Finally, hold for it. Production rules are extended to rules with sets of
the causal binary semantics is obtained from the basic seman-
                                                      propositions in premises by requiring that u ⇒ A holds for a
tics by requiring further that is a bimodel only if
                       (α, β)                (β, β)   set u of propositions iff a ⇒ A, for some ﬁnite a ⊆ u. C(u)
is also a bimodel.                                                        V
                                                      will denote the set of propositions produced by u:
Corollary 3.3. A propositional attack relation is probative            C(u) = {A | u ⇒ A}
[basic, causal] iff it is determined by a probative [resp. basic,
causal] binary semantics.                               The production operator C plays much the same role as the
                                                      usual derivability operator for consequence relations.
  Basic propositional argumentation can already be given a A production inference relation is called basic, if it satisﬁes
purely four-valued semantic interpretation, in which the clas-
                                                      (Or)   If       and      , then         .
sical negation ¬ has the following semantic description2:      A ⇒ C     B ⇒ C      A ∨ B ⇒  C
                                                      and causal, if it is basic and satisﬁes, in addition
          ¬A  is accepted iff A is not accepted
                                                      (Coherence)   If A ⇒ ¬A, then A ⇒ f.
           ¬A is rejected iff A is not rejected         It has been shown in [Bochman, 2003b] that causal infer-
  A syntactic characterization of this connective in collective ence relations provide a complete description of the underly-
argumentation can be obtained by imposing the rules   ing logic of causal theories from [McCain and Turner, 1997]
                                                      (see also [Giunchiglia et al., 2004]).
A, ¬A ֒→    ֒→ A, ¬A                     It turns out that the binary semantics, introduced earlier, is               
:If a, A ֒→ b and a, ¬A ֒→ b then a ֒→ b (A¬) appropriate also for interpreting production inference         
If a ֒→ b, A and a ֒→ b, ¬A then a ֒→ b      Deﬁnition 3.4. A rule A ⇒ B is valid in a binary semantics         
                                                      B if, for any bimodel (u, v) ∈ B, A ∈ u only if B ∈ v.
  Then a basic propositional attack relation can be alterna-
tively described as a collective attack relation satisfying the As has been shown in [Bochman, 2004a], the above seman-
rules (A∧) and (A¬). Moreover, the global negation ∼ can be tics is adequate for production inference relations. Moreover,
added to this system just by adding the corresponding postu- the semantics for basic production inference can be obtained
lates (AN). It turns out, however, that the global negation is by restricting bimodels to world pairs (α, β), while the se-
eliminable in this setting via to the following reductions: mantics for causal inference is obtained by requiring, in addi-
                                                      tion, that (α, β) is a bimodel only if (α, α) is also a bimodel.
a, ∼A ֒→ b ≡ a ֒→ b, ¬A  a ֒→ ∼A, b ≡ a, ¬A ֒→ b      Now, the correspondence between probative argumentation  
a, ¬∼A ֒→ b ≡ a ֒→ b, A  a ֒→ ¬∼A, b ≡ a, A ֒→ b    and production inference can be established directly on the  
                                              (R∼)    syntactic level using the following deﬁnitions:
(A ⇒  B  ≡ ¬B ֒→ A;             (PA                                                                      
  2This connective coincides with the local four-valued negation
(from [Bochman, 1998].                                                 A ֒→ B  ≡ B ⇒ ¬A.              (AP  Under these correspondences, the rules of a probative at- The above result is similar to the corresponding representa-
tack relation correspond precisely to the postulates for pro- tion result in [Bondarenko et al., 1997] (Theorem 3.10), but it
duction relations. Moreover, the correspondence extends also is much simpler, and is formulated entirely in the framework
to a correspondence between basic and causal argumentation, of propositional attack relations. The simpler representation
on the one hand, and basic and causal production inference, was made possible due to the fact that propositional attack
on the other. Hence the following result is straightforward. relations already embody the deductive capabilities treated as
.Lemma 3.4. If ֒→ is a probative [basic, causal] attack rela- an additional ingredient in assumption-based frameworks
tion, then (PA) determines a [basic, causal] production infer- As our next result, we will establish a correspondence be-
ence relation, and vice versa, if ⇒ is a [basic, causal] pro- tween the nonmonotonic semantics of causal inference rela-
duction inference relation, then (AP) determines a probative tions and that of causal argumentation.
[basic, causal] attack relation.                        The nonmonotonic semantics of a causal inference relation
                                                      is a set of its exact worlds, namely worlds α such that α =
Remark. A seemingly more natural correspondence between C(α) (see [Bochman, 2004a]). Such a world satisﬁes the rules
propositional argumentation and production inference can be of the causal relation, and any proposition that holds in it is
obtained using the following deﬁnitions:              explained by the causal rules.
A ⇒  B ≡  A ֒→ ¬B     A ֒→ B ≡  A ⇒ ¬B.            A causal theory is an arbitrary set of production rules. By     
                                                      a nonmonotonic semantics of a causal theory ∆ we will mean
  By these deﬁnitions, A explains B if it attacks ¬B, and the exact worlds of the least causal relation containing ∆.
vice versa, A attacks B if it explains ¬B. Unfortunately, this The correspondence between exact worlds and stable sets
correspondence, though plausible by itself, does not take into of assumptions is established in the next theorem.
account the intended understanding of arguments as (nega- Theorem 4.2. If ∆ is a causal theory, and ∆a its correspond-
tive) assumptions. As a result, it cannot be extended directly ing argument theory given by (AP), then a world α is an exact
to the correspondence between the associated nonmonotonic world of ∆ iff α˜ is a stable set of assumptions in ∆a.
semantics, described below.
                                                        The above result shows, in effect, that propositional ar-
                                                      gumentation subsumes causal reasoning as a special case.
4  Nonmonotonic semantics                             Moreover, it can be shown that causal attack relations con-
The correspondence between argumentation and causal rea- stitute a strongest argumentation system suitable for this kind
soning has been established above on the level of underlying of nonmonotonic semantics.
logical (monotonic) formalisms. In this section we will de- As an application of the above correspondence, we will de-
scribe how this correspondence can be extended to the asso- scribe now an alternative argumentation-based representation
ciated nonmonotonic semantics.                        of logic programming.
  In [Bondarenko et al., 1997], the assumption-based argu- A general logic program Π is a set of rules of the form
mentation framework has been instantiated to capture exist-
                                                                       not         not
ing nonmonotonic formalisms. In other words, it has been                   d, c ← a,   b              (*)
shown how particular nonmonotonic systems can be viewed where a, b, c, d are sets of propositional atoms. These are
as assumption-based frameworks just by deﬁning assump- program rules of a most general kind that contain disjunc-
tions and their contraries. We will show, however, that the tions and negations as failure not in their heads. As has been
propositional argumentation theory allows us to give a direct shown in [Bochman, 2004b], general logic programs are rep-
representation of Reiter’s default logic [Reiter, 1980]. resentable as causal theories obtained by translating program
  Given a system of propositional argumentation in the clas- rules (*) as causal rules
sical language augmented with the global negation ∼, we will
interpret Reiter’s default rule a:b/A as an attack                    d, ¬b ⇒ ^ a → _  c,
:a, ∼¬b ֒→ ∼A,                      and adding a formalization of the Closed World Assumption                   
or, equivalently, as a rule a, ∼¬b  A of the associated Bel- (Default Negation) ¬p ⇒ ¬p, for any propositional atom p.
nap consequence relation. Similarly, an axiom A of a default Now, due to the correspondence between causal reasoning
-theory will be interpreted as an attack t ֒→ ∼A. For a default and argumentation, this causal theory can be transformed (us
theory ∆, we will denote by tr(∆) the corresponding argu- ing (PA)) into an argument theory that consists of attacks
ment theory obtained by this translation.
(By our general agreement, by assumptions we will mean                   a, ¬c ֒→ ¬b, d             (AL  
propositions of the form ∼A, where A is a classical proposi- plus the ‘argumentative’ Closed World Assumption:
tion. For a set u of classical propositions, we will denote by
.u˜ the set of assumptions {∼A | A∈ / u}. Finally, a set w of (Default Assumption) p ֒→ ¬p, for any atom p
assumptions will be called stable in an argument theory ∆ if, Let tr(Π) denote the argument theory obtained by this
for any assumption A, A ∈ w iff w֒→6 ∆ A. Then we have translation from a logic program Π. Then we obtain
Theorem 4.1. A set u of classical propositions is an exten- Theorem 4.3. A set u of propositional atoms is a stable
sion of a default theory ∆ if and only if u˜ is a stable set of model of a logic program Π iff u˜ is a stable set of assump-
assumptions in tr(∆).                                 tions in tr(Π).