                         Two-Sided Bandits and the Dating Market
                       Sanmay Das                                 Emir Kamenica
     Center for Biological and Computational Learning         Department of Economics
   and Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab           Harvard University
           Massachusetts Institute of Technology               Cambridge, MA 02138
                  Cambridge, MA 02139                        kamenica@fas.harvard.edu
                     sanmay@mit.edu

                    Abstract                          model is driven by the need to relax this assumption. The ex-
                                                      isting literature on two-sided search with nontransferable util-
    We study the decision problems facing agents in   ity (for example [Burdett and Wright, 1998]) assumes match-
    repeated matching environments with learning, or  ing is exogenous and random. Our problem is more deeply re-
    two-sided bandit problems, and examine the dat-   lated to bandit problems [Berry and Fristedt, 1985], in which
    ing market, in which men and women repeatedly go  an agent must choose which arm of an n-armed bandit to pull
    out on dates and learn about each other, as an ex- in order to maximize long-term expected reward, taking into
    ample. We consider three natural matching mecha-  account the tradeoff between exploring, that is learning more
    nisms and empirically examine properties of these about the reward distribution for each arm, and exploiting,
    mechanisms, focusing on the asymptotic stability  pulling the arm with the maximum expected reward. How-
    of the resulting matchings when the agents use a  ever, in our model the arms themselves have agency — they
    simple learning rule coupled with an -greedy ex- can decide whether to be pulled or not, or whom to be pulled
    ploration policy. Matchings tend to be more stable by, and they themselves receive rewards based on who the
    when agents are patient in two different ways —   puller is. This motivates our formulation of the problem as a
    if they are more likely to explore early or if they “two-sided” bandit problem.
    are more optimistic. However, the two forms of pa-  In principle, we would like to examine the equilibrium be-
    tience do not interact well in terms of increasing havior of agents in two-sided bandit problems. However, per-
    the probability of stable outcomes. We also deﬁne fect Bayesian equilibria of the game we formulate are pro-
    a notion of regret for the two-sided problem and  hibitively hard to compute. Because of this difﬁculty, the ap-
    study the distribution of regrets under the different proach we use is closely related to the theory of learning in
    matching mechanisms.                              games [Fudenberg and Levine, 1998], which considers more
                                                      generally how individual learning rules affect outcomes in
                                                      games and whether agents reach static equilibria.
1  Introduction                                         In this paper we formally deﬁne the two-sided bandit prob-
This paper analyzes the learning and decision problems of lem and describe three important matching mechanisms. We
agents in a model of one-to-one two-sided matching, focusing deﬁne regret as the difference between the actual reward re-
on the role of the matching mechanism and the exploration- ceived and the reward under the stable matching, i.e. a match-
exploitation tradeoff. We consider a repeated game in which ing such that there is no pair that would rather be with each
agents gain an uncertain payoff from being matched with a other than with whom they are matched. We experimentally
particular person on the other side of the market in each time analyze the asymptotic stability and regret properties when
period. A natural example of such a situation is the dating agents use -greedy learning algorithms adapted to the differ-
market, in which men and women repeatedly go out on dates ent matching mechanisms.
and learn about each other. Another example is a spot labor The Gale-Shapley mechanism [Gale and Shapley, 1962],
market, in which employers and employees are matched for which yields stability when information is complete and pref-
particular job contracts. A matching mechanism is used to erences are truthfully revealed, converges quickly to stable
pair the agents. For example, we can consider a mechanism matchings, whereas mechanisms that are more realistic for
in which all the women decide which man to “ask out,” and the dating example, in which women make single offers to
then each man selects a woman from his set of offers, with the men, do not always converge to stable matchings. Asymp-
the rejected women left unmatched for that period.    totically stable matches are more likely when agents explore
  Standard models of matching in economics [Roth and So- more early on. They are also more likely when agents are
tomayor, 1990] almost always assume that each agent knows optimistic (again, early on) — that is, they assume a higher
his or her preferences over the individuals on the other side probability of their offer being accepted or an offer being
of the market. This assumption is too restrictive for many made to them than is justiﬁed by the past empirical frequen-
markets, including the market for romantic partnerships. Our cies of these events. However, increased optimism does notinteract well with increased exploration in terms of stability; Intuitively, it is useful to think of the simultaneous choice
the probability of stability is actually higher for lower explo- mechanism as capturing a situation in which women ask men
ration probabilities when optimism is greater.        out over e-mail and each man can review all his offers before
                                                      making a decision, while the sequential choice mechanism
2  The Model                                          captures the situation where women ask men out over the
                                                      telephone. We are particularly interested in these two match-
There are M men and W  women, who interact for T time
                                                      ing mechanisms because they are more plausible descriptions
periods. vm is the value of woman j to man i, and vw is
         ij                                    ij     of reality than a centralized matchmaker and do not require
the value of man j to woman i. These values are constant
                                                      agents to reveal their preferences to a third party.
through time. In each period, men and women are matched
to each other through a matching mechanism. A matching is
a pairing between men and women in which each woman is 3  The Decision and Learning Problems
paired with one or zero men and each man is paired with one We ﬁrst describe the decision problems agents face at each
or zero women. Formally, a matching mechanism is a map- time step if they want to optimize their myopic reward in that
ping from agents’ actions to a matching. If man i is matched time step. After this we discuss the exploration-exploitation
                                 m    m
with woman j in period t, he receives vij + ijt, and she re- issues under the different matching mechanisms and describe
       w    w
ceives vji + jit. If unmatched, individual i receives some speciﬁc forms of the -greedy algorithm.
constant value K .                                           {m,w}
              i                                         Let Qij    denote man (woman) i’s estimate of the value
                                                                                    w
  For our empirical analysis we put some structure on the of going out with woman (man) j, pij denote woman i’s esti-
reward processes and the matching mechanism. First, we mate of the probability that man j will go out with her if she
                                                                      m
make the strong assumption of sex-wide homogeneity of pref- asks him out and pij denote man i’s estimate of the probabil-
erences. That is, every man is equally “good” for each ity that woman j will ask him out under the sequential choice
woman and vice versa — there are no idiosyncratic prefer- mechanism.
ences and there are no couples who “get along” better than
                m     m         w     w
others. Formally, vij = vj ∀i and vij = vj ∀i. We also 3.1 Women’s Decision Problem
                                                 z
assume that people dislike being single: ∀i, Ki  minj vij Under Gale-Shapley matching, women’s action space is the
∀i, z ∈ {m, w}, and that the noise terms  are independently set of rankings of men. Under the other two mechanisms, a
and identically distributed.1 Extensions to more general pref- woman chooses which man to make an offer to. She must
erences are straightforward.2                         base her decision on any prior beliefs and the history of re-
  We consider three matching mechanisms. Without loss of wards she has received in the past. She has to take into ac-
generality, we assume that women always ask men out.  count both the expected value of going on a date with each
                                                      man and (for the non-Gale-Shapley mechanisms) the proba-
Gale-Shapley matching Each agent submits a list of prefer-
                                                      bility that he will accept her offer.
    ences and a centralized matching procedure produces a
                                                        Under the woman-optimal variant of the Gale-Shapley
    matching based on these lists. The Gale-Shapley algo-
                                                      mechanism, the dominant myopic strategy, and thus the
    rithm [Gale and Shapley, 1962] guarantees a matching
                                                      greedy action, is for woman i to rank the men according to
    that is stable under the submitted preferences. The man-
                                                      the expected value of going out with each of them, Qw . For
    optimal variant yields the stable matching that is opti-                                       ij
                                                      the other two mechanisms, the greedy action is to ask out man
    mal for men, and the woman-optimal variant the stable
                                                      j = arg max (pw Qw ).
    matching that is optimal for women. We use the woman-        j  ij ij
    optimal variant.                                  3.2  Arms With Agency: Men’s Decision Problem
Simultaneous offers Each woman independently chooses  The action space of men, the arms of the bandit, may be con-
    one man to make an offer to. Each man selects one of strained by women’s actions. The decision problem faced
    the offers he receives. Women who are rejected are un- by a man depends on the matching mechanism used. Under
    matched for the period, as are the men who receive no the woman-optimal Gale-Shapley mechanism, men may have
    offers.                                           an incentive to misrepresent their preferences, but since the
Sequential offers Each woman independently chooses one sex-wide homogeneity of preferences ensures a unique stable
    man to make an offer to. The offers are randomly or- matching [Roth and Sotomayor, 1990], this is less likely to
    dered and men must decide on these “exploding” offers be a problem.3 So, the greedy action for man i under Gale-
    without knowing what other offers are coming. Men see Shapley is to rank women based on their Qij’s.
    all the offers they receive, including ones that arrive after With the simultaneous choice mechanism, in each time pe-
    they accept. If an offer is rejected the woman making the riod a man receives a list of women who have made him an
    offer is unmatched in that period. A man is unmatched offer. He must decide which one to accept. This is a ban-
    if he rejects all offers he receives.             dit problem with a different subset of the arms available at
                                                      each time period. The greedy action is to accept the woman
  1                                                                 m
   Another plausible and interesting structure to consider is pair- j = arg maxj Q .
                              m    w                                ij
wise homogeneity of preferences with vij = vji ∀i, j.
  2There is always a unique stable matching under the assumed 3Speciﬁcally, if the submitted rankings satisfy sex-wide homo-
preference structure. With multiple stable matches, we would need geneity, man- and woman-optimal algorithms yield the same match-
to use a different notion of regret, as discussed later. ing so truthtelling is the dominant myopic strategy for men.  Under the sequential choice mechanism, a man might re- 1 −  and otherwise selects a random arm. Although sim-
ceive multiple offers within a time period, and each time he ple, the algorithm is very successful in most empirical prob-
receives an offer he has to decide immediately whether to ac- lems, and we therefore use it in our experiments. We have
cept or reject it, and he may not renege on an accepted offer. also experimented with alternatives like softmax-action selec-
The information set he has is the list of women who have tion with Boltzmann distributions [Sutton and Barto, 1998;
asked him out so far. For each woman who has not asked him Luce, 1959] and the Exp3 algorithm [Auer et al., 2002].
out, it could either be that she chose not to make him an offer, These do not improve upon the empirical performance of -
or that her turn in the ordering has not arrived yet. We can greedy in our simulations.
formulate the man’s value function heuristically. Let i be the Under each matching mechanism the exploratory action is
index of the man, let S be the set of women who have asked to randomly select an action, other than the greedy one, from
him out so far, and let h be the woman currently asking him the available action space. Since the value of exploration de-
out (h ∈ S).                                          creases as learning progresses, we let  decay exponentially
                                                      over time which also ensures that the matchings converge.
                                                        At this stage we cannot solve for the perfect Bayesian equi-
                  m
  V (S, h) = max{Qih,                                 librium set. We believe, however, that if the agents are sufﬁ-
      X
          Pr(k next woman to ask i out)V (S ∪ {k}, k)} ciently patient and the horizon is sufﬁciently long, the match-
                                                      ings will converge to stability on the equilibrium path. Solv-
      k∈ /S                                           ing for the equilibrium set would enable us to explicitly char-
                              w
  The base cases are V (W, h) = Qih where W is the set of acterize the differences between equilibrium behavior and be-
all women. The greedy action is to accept an offer when havior under the -greedy algorithm.
                                                        The two-sided nature of the learning problem leads to non-
   m    X
 Qih >     Pr(k next woman to ask i out)V (S ∪ {k}, k) stationarities. Under the sequential and simultaneous mech-
       k∈ /S                                          anisms, women need to consider the reward of asking out a
                                                      particular man, not the reward of going out with him. The re-
  The relevant probabilities are:                     ward of asking out a particular man depends on the probabil-
                                                      ity that he will accept the offer. Thus, the reward distribution
  Pr(k next woman to ask i out) =
                                                      changes based on what the men are learning, introducing an
                                                  externality to the search process. The same applies to men un-
          X        1       Y
                                  (1 − pm)  pm        der the sequential mechanism since the probability that a par-
                |S0|                  ij  ik
       T ∈Perm(S0)     j preceding k in T             ticular woman will ask a man out changes over time. This is a
                                                      problem of coordinated learning that is related to the literature
  where S0 = W \S. This is a variant of the classic secretary on learning in games [Fudenberg and Levine, 1998] and to
problem [Gilbert and Mosteller, 1966]. We are not sure at the reinforcement learning of nonstationary distributions in mul-
moment if this particular form can be simpliﬁed to yield a tiagent environments [Bowling and Veloso, 2002]. Some re-
closed form solution for the value or decision function. cent work by Auer et al. on “adversarial” bandit problems,
                                                      which makes no distributional assumptions in deriving regret
3.3  The Exploration-Exploitation Tradeoff            bounds, is relevant in this context [Auer et al., 2002].
Women and men both have to consider the exploration-    Since the underlying vij’s are constant we deﬁne Qij as
exploitation tradeoff (summarized in [Sutton and Barto, person i’s sample mean of the payoff of going out with per-
1998]). Exploitation means maximizing expected reward in son j. In order to deal with the nonstationarity of pij’s, on the
the current period (also called the greedy choice), and is other hand, we use a ﬁxed learning rate for updating the prob-
solved as above. Exploration happens when an agent does not abilities which allows agents to forget the past more quickly:
select the greedy action, but instead selects an action that has
lower expected value in the current period in order to learn pij[t] = (1 − η)pij[t − 1] + ηI[offer made / accepted]
more and increase future rewards.
  The one-sided version of the exploration-exploitation prob- where η is a constant and I is an indicator function indicat-
lem is central to n-armed bandit problems [Berry and Frist- ing whether a man accepted an offer (for the woman’s update,
edt, 1985; Gittins and Jones, 1974, inter alia]. An n-armed applied only if woman i made an offer to man j at time t) or
bandit is deﬁned by random variables X where 1 ≤ i ≤ n whether a woman made an offer to a man (for the man’s up-
                                 i,t                  date, applied at each time period t).
is the index of the arm of the bandit, and Xi,t speciﬁes the
payoff received from pulling arm i at time t. The distribu-
tion of some or all of the Xi,t is unknown so there is value to 4 Empirical Results
exploring. The agent pulls the arms sequentially and wishes
to maximize the discounted sum of payoffs. In our model, if Our simulations involve a market with 5 women and 5 men.
there is a single woman and n men, the woman faces a stan- The agents use η of 0.05 for updating their probability esti-
dard n-armed bandit problem.                          mates and the probability of exploration evolves with time as
                                                           t/1000                      m     w       m
  One of the simplest techniques used for bandit problems t =  . Agents have true values v0 = v0 = 10, v1 =
                                                       w       m    w       m     w      m     w
is the so-called -greedy algorithm. This algorithm se- v1 = 9, v2 = v2 = 8, v3 = v3 = 7, v4 = v4 = 6. We
                                                                                        {m,w}
lects the arm with highest expected value with probability assume Ki = 0 ∀i. The noise signals ijt are i.i.d. and                                                             ID  Simultaneous Regret Sequential Regret
                                       Gale−Shapley
                                       Simultaneous              Woman’s    Man’s  Woman’s   Man’s
                                       Sequential

     1                                                       0      0.126    0.126    0.578  0.552
                                                             1      0.090    0.278   -0.023  0.009
                                                             2      0.236    0.136   -0.153  -0.148
    0.8                                                      3      0.238   -0.126   -0.005  -0.024
                                                             4     -0.690   -0.414   -0.171  -0.187

    0.6
                                                      Table 2: Distribution of regret under simultaneous choice
                                                      ( = 0.1) and sequential choice ( = 0.9) mechanisms
    0.4
    Probability  of asymptotic stable matching


    0.2                                                       4
                                                                                                   Man 0
                                                                                                   Man 1
                                                                                                   Man 2
                                                                                                   Man 3
                                                              3                                    Man 4
     0
     0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9
                       Initial epsilon
                                                              2
                                                             Woman
Figure 1: Probability of a stable (asymptotic) matching as a  1
function of initial value of 
                                                              0


                                                              −1
                                                              1600  1650 1700 1750  1800 1850  1900
drawn from a normal distribution with mean 0. Unless other-                    Tick
wise speciﬁed, the standard deviation of the noise distribution
is 0.5. Reported results are averages from 500 simulations,
                                                      Figure 2: A “phase transition”: men and women are ranked
each lasting a total of 30,000 time steps. Initial values of Q
                                                 ij   from 0 (highest) to 4 (lowest) with -1 representing the un-
are sampled from a uniform [6, 10] distribution and initial val-
                                                      matched state. The graph shows the transition to a situation
ues of p are sampled from a uniform [0, 1] distribution.
      ij                                              where the second highest ranked man ends up paired with the
  Our experiments show that settings in which agents are lowest ranked woman
matched using the Gale-Shapley mechanism always result in
asymptotically stable matchings, even for very small initial
values of  such as 0.1. After a period of exploration, where (s)he would have done under the stable matching). This de-
the agents match up with many different partners and learn ﬁnition is unambiguous with sex-wide homogeneity of pref-
their preferences, agents start pairing up regularly with just erences since there is only one stable matching, but could be
one partner, and this is always the agent with the same rank- problematic in other contexts, when there may be multiple
ing on the other side. This indicates that agents are generally stable matchings. In such cases it might make sense to ana-
successful at learning their preferences. Interestingly, even if lyze individual agent performance in terms of the difference
only one side explores (that is, either men or women always between average achieved reward and expected reward under
pick the greedy action), populations almost always converge one of the stable matchings depending on context.
to stable matchings, with a slight decline in the probability of In the case of sex-wide homogeneity of preferences we of
stability when only men explore (under the woman-optimal course expect that regret will be greater for more desirable
matching algorithm, women’s rankings can have a greater ef- agents since they have more to lose when their value is not
fect on the matching than men’s rankings).            known. Table 2 shows the distribution of regrets for simul-
  The probabilities of convergence under the simultaneous taneous and sequential choice. The regrets are averaged over
and sequential choice mechanisms are signiﬁcantly lower, al- the last 10,000 periods of the simulation. Under simultaneous
though they increase with larger initial values of . We can see choice, the worst woman beneﬁts at the expense of all other
this behavior in Figure 1, which also reveals that the probabil- women while the worst two men beneﬁt at the expense of the
ity of convergence to a stable matching is much higher with top three. Under sequential choice, other agents beneﬁt at the
the simultaneous choice mechanism. Table 1 shows these expense of the best ones. Further research is needed to bet-
probabilities as well as the score, which is a measure of how ter understand this apparent difference in the distribution of
large the deviation from the stable matching is. If men and regrets under the two mechanisms.
women are indexed in order of their true value ranking, the Figure 2 shows interesting dynamic behavior in one par-
                              1 P
score for a matching is deﬁned as W i∈W |i − Partner(i)| ticular simulation where the second best man ends up with
where Partner(i) is the true value ranking of the man woman the worst woman. The graph shows which man is matched
i is matched with, and W is the set of all women.     with which woman at each time period. The lines represent
  It is also interesting to look at who beneﬁts from the insta- the men, and the numbers on the Y axis represent the women.
bilities. In order to do this, we deﬁne a notion of regret for The value -1 represents the state of being unmatched in that
an agent as the (per unit time) difference between the reward period for a man. The men and women are ranked from 0
under the stable matching and the actual reward received (a (best) to 4 (worst). Initially, the second best man is paired
negative value of regret indicates that the agent did better than with the best woman so he keeps rejecting offers from all the                         Simultaneous Choice  Sequential Choice    Gale-Shapley
                          Pr (stability) Score Pr (stability) Score Pr (stability) Score
                      .1     0.318    0.4296    0.050    0.9688     1.000    0.0000
                      .2     0.444    0.3832    0.054    0.9280     1.000    0.0000
                      .3     0.548    0.2920    0.050    0.8560     1.000    0.0000
                      .4     0.658    0.1880    0.058    0.8080     1.000    0.0000
                      .5     0.788    0.0992    0.096    0.7448     1.000    0.0000
                      .6     0.856    0.0672    0.108    0.7064     1.000    0.0000
                      .7     0.930    0.0296    0.130    0.6640     1.000    0.0000
                      .8     0.970    0.0120    0.164    0.5848     1.000    0.0000
                      .9     0.998    0.0008    0.224    0.4912     1.000    0.0000

                               Table 1: Convergence to stability as a function of 

              σ    Pr (stability) Score
              0.5    0.658     0.1880
                                                              4             Man 0
              1.0    0.636     0.1952                                       Man 1
                                                                            Man 2
              1.5    0.624     0.2120                                       Man 3
              2.0    0.600     0.2328                         3             Man 4


Table 3: Convergence to stability as a function of σ with si- 2
multaneous choice and initial  = 0.4
                                                             Woman

                                                              1
other women. These women thus learn that he is extremely
particular about whom he dates and there is no point in asking 0
him out. When the best woman ﬁnally learns that she can get
a better man this triggers a chain of events in which all the −1
                                                              0     0.5   1     1.5  2           3  
men sequentially move to the woman ranked one higher than                      Tick
the one they were seeing. However, all the women have such
a low opinion of the second best man that he ends up getting
                                                      Figure 3: The mechanism of stability with optimism: agents
matched with the very worst woman. The matching shown at
                                                      keep trying better ranked agents on the other side until they
the end of the graph is the ﬁnal asymptotic matching in this
                                                      ﬁnally “fall” to their own level
simulation. Note that the gender asymmetry (women ask men
out) precludes this from happening to a woman.
  Finally, we analyze how the noise distribution affects the an offer will be made to you. We explore this empirically
probability of stability. We expect that there will be less con- with the sequential choice mechanism. Instead of using the
vergence to stability when the signals are less precise. We ran
                                                      learned values of pij as previously deﬁned, agents instead use
experiments in which the standard deviation of the noise dis- an optimistic version. At time t, both men and women use the
tribution was changed while holding other factors constant. optimistic probability estimate:
We used an initial  of 0.4 and the same underlying values
                                                                       0
as above. Table 3 shows the results using the simultaneous            pij = αt + (1 − αt)pij
choice mechanism. We vary the standard deviation from one
half of the distance between the two adjacent true values (0.5) in decision making (the actual pij is maintained and updated
to twice that distance (2.0), and the probability of stability as before). αt should decline with time. In our simulations
falls by less than 10%. This suggests that the instabilities α0 = 1, αT = 0 (where T is the length of the simulation) and
arise mostly from the structure of the problem and the non- α declines linearly with t. There are no other changes to any
stationarity of probability estimates rather than from the noise of the decision-making or learning procedures.
in the signals of value.                                Figure 3 shows the process by which agents converge to
                                                      asymptotic matchings (in this case a stable one) with the op-
                                                      timistic estimates. The structure of the graph is the same
5  Optimism and Exploration                           as that in Figure 2. Essentially, each agent keeps trying for
The insight that instabilities arise mostly from the structure the best agent (s)he can match with until the optimism para-
of the problem suggests an alternative method for engineer- meter has declined sufﬁciently so (s)he “falls” to the equiv-
ing asymptotic stability into the system. Suppose agents are alently ranked agent on the other side of the market. Figure
initially optimistic and their level of optimism declines over 4 shows that agents are considerably more likely to converge
time. This is another form of patience — a willingness to wait asymptotically to stable matchings using this algorithm for
for the best — and it should lead to more stable outcomes. any value of the initial exploration probability. Of course,
  Optimism can be represented by a systematic overestima- this convergence comes at the expense of utility achieved in
tion of the probability that your offer will be accepted or that the period before the agents settle down.