424                                                              Session No. 9 Pattern Recognition n Statistical Approaches 


          ON THE CLASSIFICATION OF PATTERNS 
                                        f 
                  BY THE KARHUNEN-LOEVE 

        ORTHOGONAL SYSTEM WITHOUT SUPERVISOR 

                             by 


          Shingo Tomita and Shoichi Noguchi 

  ( Research Institute of Electrical Communication, 

         Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan ) 

  Summary 

     In this paper we show how the pattern samples 

  generated from the unknown asymmetric finite 

 mixture distribution are dichotomized by the 

  Karhunen-Loeve orthogonal system in the optimal 

 way. 

     We introduce the concept of the difference of 

  features of two categories and prove that 

  decreasing the error probability of dichotomy is 

  equal to increasing the difference of features 

  of two categories. And it can be shown that the 

  maximum difference of features obtained by the 

  KL system is equivalent to that which is obtained 

  by the Bayes solution. 

     Moreover it can be proved that there exists a 

  dichotomy which converges to the Bayes soJution 

  by increasing the number of samples. 


  1. Introduction 

     Let us explain the outline of the Karhunen-

  Loeve orthogonal system. Let a pattern on the 

  N-dimensional space RN be X and a normal and 

  orthogonal system on RN be a. Then a pattern X 
                             N 
  is expanded by a as follows: 428                                              Session No. 9 Pattern Recognition II Statistical Approaches 


 4. Conclusion 
    Utlizing the concept of the Karhunen-Loeve 
 orthogonal system which extracts the maximum 
 difference of features of patterns, the algorithm 
 of classification for patterns generated from an 
 unknown asymmetric finite mixture distribution 
 is obtained, and this one is proved to become 
 the Bayes solution. 
 As a concreTfe example, random numbers generated 
 from the 2-dimensional mixture of normal 
 distributions are used and good results are 
 obtained on a digital computer. 

 Reference 
 (1) S. Watanabe : Knowing and Guessing, 
 Wily, 1969. 
 (2) K. Fukunage, etc. : Application of the 
 Karhunen-Loeve expansion to feature selection 
 and ordering, IEEE Trans. C-19 (1970). 
 (3) D.B. Cooper, etc. : On suitable condition 
 for statistical pattern recognition without 
 supervision, SIAM. Appl. Math. 17 (1969). 
 (4) S. Kullback : Information theory and 
 statistics, Dover, 1968. 