                                     Consistency and Set Intersection 

                                      Yuanlin Zhang and Roland H.C. Yap 
                                          National University of Singapore 
                                            3 Science Drive 2, Singapore 
                                    {zhangyl,ryap}@comp.nus.edu.sg 


                        Abstract                                  In this paper, we present a new framework1 which unifies 
                                                               well known results mainly along the second approach (includ•
     We propose a new framework to study properties            ing [van Beek and Dechter, 1995; 1997]). The power of this 
     of consistency in a Constraint Network from the           framework is that it allows the study of the relationship be•
     perspective of properties of set intersection. Our        tween local and global consistency from the perspective of 
     framework comes with a proof schema which gives           set intersection. 
     a generic way of lifting a set intersection property 
     to one on consistency. Various well known results           For example, one property of set intersection is that if ev•
     can be derived with this framework. More impor•           ery pair (2) of tree convex sets intersect, the whole collection 
     tantly, we use the framework to obtain a number           of these sets also intersect. The main point is that local in•
     of new results. We identify a new class of tree           formation on intersection of every pair of sets gives global 
     convex constraints where local consistency ensures        information on intersection of all sets. Intuitively, this can be 
     global consistency. Another result is that in a net•      related to getting global consistency from local consistency. 
     work of arbitrary constraints, local consistency im•      Our framework enables us to lift the result on tree convex 
     plies global consistency whenever there arc certain       sets to the following result on consistency. For a binary net•
     m-tight constraints. The most interesting result is       work of tree convex constraints, (2+1 )-consistency (path con•
     that when the constraint on every pair of variables       sistency) implies global consistency. 
     is properly m-tight in an arbitrary network, global         Properties of the intersection of tree convex sets, small sets, 
     consistency can be achieved by enforcing relational       large sets are presented in section 3. Section 4 develops the 
     m=1 -consistency. These results significantly im•         framework which consists of a lifting lemma together with 
     prove our understanding of convex and tight con•          a proof schema which gives a generic way of using the lift•
     straints. This demonstrates that our framework is         ing lemma to get consistency results from properties of set 
     a promising and powerful tool for studying consis•        intersection. One benefit of the framework lies in that it pro•
     tency.                                                    vides a modular way to greatly simplify the understanding 
                                                               and proof of results on consistency. This benefit is consid•
                                                               erable as often the proof of many existing results is complex 
1 Introduction                                                 and "hard-wired". 
A fundamental problem in Constraint Networks is to study         We demonstrate the power of the framework by showing 
properties of consistency in some networks with particu•       three new consistency results as well as a number of well 
lar constraints or structure. There have been two main ap•     known results. The first is a generalization of global consis•
proaches to this problem.                                      tency of row convex constraints to a network of tree convex 
   The first is to utilise topological structure of the network. constraints which is presented in section 5. The second is a 
For example, where the network forms a tree structure, arc     new result on global consistency on weakly tight networks in 
consistency is sufficient to make the network globally consis• section 6. These networks only require certain constraints to 
tent [Freuder, 1982].                                          be m-tight rather than all constraints as shown in [van Beck 
   Another approach is to make use of semantic properties      and Dechter, 1997]. The final result is presented in section 
of the constraints. For monotone constraints, path consis•     8. This is most interesting because we can make certain net•
tency implies global consistency [Montanari, 1974]. Dechter    works globally consistent by enforcing relational consistency, 
[1992] shows that a certain level of consistency in a net•     but this may not be achievable in previous work (for example 
work whose domains are of limited size ensures global con•     [van Beek and Dechter, 1997]). 
sistency. Van Beek and Dechter [1995] generalize monotone 
constraints to a larger class of row convex constraints. Later, 
they [1997] study the consistency inside a network with tight     'Our work can be related to the first approach in those cases 
and loose constraints.                                         where the network topology leads to some set intersection property. 


CONSTRAINTS                                                                                                           263 264                                                                                                      CONSTRAINTS                                                               4 Set Intersection and Consistency 
                                                              In this section we relate set intersection with consistency in 
                                                              constraint networks. 
                                                                 Underlying the concept of consistency is whether an in•
                                                              stantiation of some variables can be extended to a new vari•
                                                              able such that all relevant constraints to the new variable arc 
                                                              satisfied. A relevant constraint to a variable Xi is a constraint 
                                                              where only Xi is uninstantiated and the others are instanti•
                                                              ated. Each relevant constraint allows a set (possibly empty) 
                                                              of values for the new variable. This set is called extension set 
                                                              below. The satisfiability of all relevant constraints depends on 
                                                              whether the intersection of their extension sets is non-empty 
                                                              (see lemma 4). 


                                                              An extension set is trivial if it is empty; otherwise it is non-
                                                              trivial. 


                                                              Let a — (a,b,a) be an instantiation of variables Y = 
                                                              {x1, X2, x4}. The relevant constraints to x are cs1, cs2, and 
                                                              cs3 cs4 is not relevant since it has two uninstantiated vari•
                                                              ables. The extension sets of a to u: with respect to the relevant 
                                                              constraints are: 

                                                                    E1(a) - {d,a),E2{a) = {d,b},E3(a) = {d,c}. 


                                                                The relationship between k-consistency and set intersection 
                                                              is characterized by the following lemma which is a direct con•
                                                              sequence of the definition of k-consistency. 


CONSTRAINTS                                                                                                          265  where Eij is the extension set of a to xk with respect to cs, , Definition 5 A constraint network is tree convex if and only 
                                                               if all constraints are tree convex under a common tree on the 
 and cs, , • • •, <'<st we all relevant constraints. 
                                                               union of all domains. 
   The insight behind this lemma is to see consistency from 
 the perspective of set intersection.                            Convex sets naturally give rise to convex constraints which 
   Example. Consider again the previous example. We            is a special case of tree convex constraints. 
 would like to check whether the network is 4-consistent. Con­
 sider the instantiation a of Y again. This is a trivial consis­ Definition 6 A constraint cs is row convex with respect to x 
 tent instantiation since the network doesn't have a constraint if and only if the sets in 
 among the variables in Y. To extend it to X, we need to check 
 the first three constraints. The extension is feasible because 

 the intersection of E1, E2, and E3 is not empty. We show 
 the network is 4-consistent, by exhausting all consistent in­
                                                               are convex. It is row convex if under a total ordering on the 
 stantiations of any three variables. Conversely, if we know 
                                                               union of involved domains, it is row convex wrt every 
the network is 4-consistent, we can immediately say that the 
                                                               A constraint network is row convex iff all constraints are row 
 intersection of the three extension sets of a to x is not empty. 
                                                               convex under a common total ordering on the union of all 
 U 
                                                               domains. 
   The usefulness of this lemma is that it allows consistency 
 information to be obtained from the intersection of extension   The consistency results on these networks can be derived 
sets, and vice versa. Using this view of consistency as set in­ from the property of set intersection using the proof schema. 
tersection, some results on set intersection properties, includ­ We obtain the main result of this section. 
ing all those in section 3, can be lifted to get various consis­
tency results for a constraint network through the following   Theorem 1 (tree convexity) Let R be a network of con•
proof schema.                                                  straints with arity at most r and 7?, be strongly 2(r — 1) + 1 
   Proof Schema                                                consistent. If R is tree convex then it is globally consistent. 
   1. (Consistency to Set) From a certain level of consistency 
   in the constraint network, we derive information on the       Proof. The network is strongly 2(r - 1) + 1 consistent 
   intersection of the extension sets according to lemma 4.    by assumption. We prove by induction that the network is k 
   2. (Set to Set) From the local intersection information of  consistent for any 
   sets, information may be obtained on intersection of more     Consider any instantiation a of any k - 1 variables and any 
   sets.                                                       new variable x. Let the number of relevant constraints be /. 
   3. (Set to Consistency) From the new information on in­     For each relevant constraint there is one extension set of a to 
   tersection of extension sets, higher level of consistency is x. So we have / extension sets. If the intersection of all / sets 
   obtained according to lemma 4.                              is not empty, we have a value for x such that the extended 
   4. (Formulate conclusion on the consistency of the con•     instantiation satisfies all relevant constraints. 
   straint network). □                                           (Consistency to Set) Consider any two of the / extension 
Given the proof schema, lemma 4 is also called the lifting     sets: E1 and E2. The two corresponding constraints involve 
lemma.                                                         at most 2(r — 1) + 1 variables since the arity of a constraint is 
   In the following sections, we demonstrate how the set in­   at most r and each of the two constraints has x as a variable. 
tersection properties and the proof schema are used to obtain  According to the consistency lemma, that 1Z is 2(r - 1) + 1-
new and also well known results on consistency of a network.   consistent implies that the intersection of E1 and E2 is not 
                                                               empty. 
5 Application I: Global Consistency of Tree                      (Set to Set) Since all relevant constraints are tree convex 
     Convex Constraints                                        under the given tree, the extension sets of a to a: are tree con­
                                                               vex. Henceforth, the fact that every two of the extension sets 
The notion of extension set plays the role of a bridge between 
                                                               intersect shows that the intersection of all / extension sets is 
the restrictions to set(s) and properties of special constraints. 
                                                               not empty, in terms of the tree convex sets intersection lemma. 
The sets in lemma 1 are restricted to be tree convex. If all 
extension sets of a constraint is tree convex, we call this con­ (Set to Consistency) From the consistency lemma, we have 
straint tree convex.                                           that R is k-consistent. D 
                                                                 Since a row convex constraint is tree convex, we have the 
                                                               following result. 

                                                               Corollary 4 (row convexity) [van Beck and Dechter, 1995] 
                                                               Let R be a network of constraints with arity at most r and R 
                                                               be strongly 2(r — 1) +1 consistent. If there exists an ordering 

                                                               of the domains D1, • • •, Dn of R such that R is row convex, 
                                                               R is globally consistent. 

                                                                 This can also be proved directly by lifting corollary 1. 


266                                                                                                       CONSTRAINTS 6 Application II: Global Consistency on 
    Weakly Tight Networks 
In this section, we study networks with some tight constraints. 
The m-tight property of a constraint is related to the cardinal•
ity of the extension set in the following way. 


                                                              Table 1: Relevant constraints in extending the instantiation of 
                                                              four variables to the other one 

                                                              7 Application III: Constraint Looseness 
  The small set intersection lemma gives the following theo•
rem. 
Theorem 2 (Weak Tightness) If a constraint network R with 
constraints of arity at most r is strongly ((m.-f 1)(r - 1) +1 )-
consistent and weakly m-tight at level ((m + l)(r-l) + l), 
it is globally consistent. 
The proof is similar to the theorem on tree convexity. 
  Immediately we have the following result which is a main 
result in [van Beck and Dechter, 1997]. 

Corollary 5 (Tightness) [van Beek and Dechter, 1997] If a       The large set intersection lemma is lifted to the following 
constraint network R with constraints that are m-tight and of result on constraint looseness. 
arity at most r is strongly ((m + l)(r - 1) + \)-consistent, 
then it is globally consistent. 
This result can of course be directly lifted from corollary 2. 
Corollary 5 requires every constraint to be m-tight. The weak 
tightness theorem on the other hand does not require all con•
straints to be m-tight. The following example illustrates this 
difference. 
  Example. For a weakly m-tight network, we are inter•        8 Application IV: Making Weakly Tight 
ested in its topological structure. Thus we have omitted the      Networks Globally Consistent 
domains of variables here. Consider a network with five vari•
                                                              In this section, relational consistency will be used to make a 
ables labelled {1,2,3,4,5}. In this network, for any pair of 
                                                              constraint network globally consistent. 
variables and for any three variables, there is a constraint. As-
sume the network is already strongly 4-consistent. 
  Since the network is already strongly 4-consistent, we can 
simply ignore the instantiations with less than 4 variables. 
This is why we introduce the level at which the network is 
weakly m-tight. The interesting level here is 4. Table 1 
shows the relevant constraints for each possible extension of 
four instantiated variables to the other one. In the first row, 
1234 —> 5 stands for extending the instantiation of variables 
{1,2,3,4} to variable 5. Entries in its second column denote 
                                                                All the results on small set intersection and tree convex set 
a constraint. For example, 125 denotes c 125. If the constraints 
                                                              intersection in section 3 can be rephrased by using relational 
on {1,2,5} and {1,3,4} (suffixed by * in the table) are ra-
                                                              consistency. For example, a new version of weak tightness is 
tight, the network is weakly m-tight at level 4. Alternatively, 
                                                              shown below. Its proof can be easily obtained following the 
if the constraints {1,5}, {2,3} and {3,4} (suffixed by +) are 
                                                              proof schema. 
77i-tight, the network will also be weakly m-tight. However, 
the tightness corollary requires all binary and ternary con•
straints to be m-tight. The weak m-tightness theorem needs 
significantly less constraints to be 771-tight. Further results are 
in section 8. D 


CONSTRAINTS                                                                                                         267 