                                              Great Expectations. 
              Part I: On the Customizability of Generalized Expected Utility* 

                                     Francis C. Chu and Joseph Y. Halpern 
                                          Department of Computer Science 
                                                  Cornell University 
                                              Ithaca, NY 14853, U.S.A. 
                                       Email: {fcc,halpern}@cs.cornell.edu 

                        Abstract                               and she is relating the alternatives according to their expected 
                                                               utility. The assumptions are typically regarded as criteria for 
     We propose a generalization of expected utility 
                                                               rational behavior, so these results also suggest that if a DM's 
     that we call generalized EU (GEU), where a deci­
                                                               beliefs are actually described by a probability measure and 
     sion maker's beliefs are represented by plausibil­
                                                               her tastes are described by a utility function, then she should 
     ity measures and the decision maker's tastes are 
                                                               relate the alternatives according to their expected utility (if 
     represented by general (i.e., not necessarily real-
                                                               she wishes to appear rational). 
     valued) utility functions. We show that every agent, 
                                                                 Despite the appeal of EU maximization, it is well known 
     "rational" or not, can be modeled as a GEU max­
                                                               that people do not follow its tenets in general [Resnik, 1987]. 
     imizes We then show that we can customize 
                                                               As a result, a host of extensions of EU have been proposed 
     GEU by selectively imposing just the constraints 
                                                               that accommodate some of the more systematic violations 
     we want. In particular, by show how of Savage's 
                                                               (see, for example, [Gul, 1991; Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1989; 
     postulates corresponds to constraints on GEU. 
                                                               Giang and Shenoy, 2001; Quiggin, 1993; Schmeidler, 1989; 
                                                               Yaari, 1987]). Again, the typical approach in the decision 
1 Introduction                                                 theory literature has been to prove representation theorems, 
                                                               showing that, given a suggested decision rule R, there ex­
Many decision rules have been proposed in the literature. Per­
                                                               ists a collection of assumptions such that a preference rela­
haps the best-known approach is based on maximizing ex­
                                                               tion satisfies the assumptions iff it has an R representation, 
pected utility (EU). This approach comes in a number of 
                                                               where an 7v representation of a preference relation is essen­
variants; the two most famous are due to von Neumann and 
                                                               tially a choice of tastes (and beliefs) such that, given these 
Morgenstern [1947] and Savage [1954]. They all follow the 
                                                               as inputs, R relates the alternatives the way the preference 
same pattern: they formalize the set of alternatives among 
                                                               relation does. 
which the decision maker (DM) must choose (typically as 
                                                                 Given this plethora of rules, it would be useful to have a 
acts  or lotteries ). They then give a set of assumptions (often 
    1          2                                               general framework in which to study decision making. The 
called postulates or axioms) such that the DM's preferences 
                                                               framework should also let us understand the relationship be­
on the alternatives satisfy these assumptions iff the prefer­
                                                               tween various decision rules. We provide such a framework 
ences have an EU representation, where an EU representation 
                                                               in this paper. 
of a preference relation is basically a utility function (and a 
                                                                 The basic idea of our approach is to generalize the notion 
probability measure when acts are involved) such that the re­
                                                               of expected utility so that it applies in as general a context 
lation among the alternatives based on expected utility agrees 
                                                               as possible. To this end, we introduce expectation domains, 
with the preference relation. Moreover, they show that the 
                                                               which are structures consisting of 
representation is essentially unique. In other words, if the 
preferences of a DM satisfy the assumptions, then she is be­     • three (component) domains: a plausibility domain, a 
having as if she has quantified her tastes via a real-valued        utility domain, and a valuation domain, 
utility function (and her beliefs via a probability measure) 

   *Work supported in part by NSF under grants IIS-0090145 and 
CTC-0208535 and by the DoD Multidisciplinary University Re­
search Initiative (MURI) program administered by ONR under grant 
                                                               Intuitively, combines plausibility values and utility values 
N00014-01-1-0795. 
                                                               much the same way that x combines probability and (real) 
   1Formally, given a set S of states of the world and another set C 
of consequences, an act a is a function from S to C that, intuitively, utility, while combines the products to form the (general­
associates with each state S the consequence of performing a in ,s. ized) expected utility. 
                                                                 We have three domains because we do not want to require 
   2Formally, a lottery is a probability distribution over conse­
quences; intuitively, the distribution quantifies how likely it is that that DMs be able to add or multiply plausibility values or util­
each consequence occurs.                                       ity values, since these could be qualitative (e.g., plausibility 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                      291  values could be {"unlikely", "likely", "very likely",...} and a framework in which we can represent all preference rela­
 utility values could be {"bad", "good", "better", ...}). In   tions, we can then consider what preference relations have 
 general, we do not assume that is an order (or even a pre-    "special" representations, in the sense that the expectation 
 order), since we would like to be able to represent as many   domain, plausibility measure, and utility function in the rep­
 preference relations and decision rules as possible.          resentation satisfy some (joint) properties. This allows us to 
   Once we have an expectation domain, DMs can express         show how properties of expectation domains correspond to 
 their tastes and beliefs using components of the expectation  properties of preference relations. We can then "customize" 
 domain. More specifically, the DMs express their beliefs      GEU by placing just the constraints we want. We illustrate 
 using a plausibility measure [Friedman and Halpern, 1995],    this by showing how each of Savage's postulates corresponds 
whose range is the plausibility domain of the expectation do­  in a precise sense to an axiom on GEU. 
main (plausibility measures generalize probability measures      Intuitively, a decision rule maps tastes (and beliefs) to pref­
and a host of other representations of uncertainty, such as sets erence relations on acts. Given two decision rules R1 and 

of probability measures, Choquet capacities, possibility mea­  R2, an R1 representation of R2 is basically a function T that 
sures, ranking functions, etc.) and they express their tastes  maps inputs of R2 to inputs of R1 that represent the same 
using a utility function whose range is the utility domain of  tastes and beliefs, with the property that R1(T(Z)) = R2(x)-
the expectation domain. In an expectation domain, it is pos­   Thus, T models, in a precise sense, a user of R2 as a user of 
sible to define a generalization of expected utility, which we R1, since T preserves tastes (and beliefs). In a companion 
call generalized EU (GEU). The GEU of an act is basically      paper [Chu and Halpern, 2003] we show that (almost) every 
the sum (in the sense of ©) of products (in the sense of <8>)  decision rule has a GEU representation. 
of plausibility values and utility values that generalizes the   Although there has been a great deal of work on decision 
standard definition of (probabilistic) expected utility over the rules, there has been relatively little work on finding gen­
reals in the obvious way.                                      eral frameworks for representing decision rules. In partic­
   We start by proving an analogue of Savage's result with     ular, there has been no attempt to find a decision rule that 

respect to the decision rule (Maximizing) GEU.3 We show        can represent all preference relations. There has been work 
that every preference relations on acts has a GEU represen­    in the fuzzy logic community on finding general notions of 
tation (even those that do not satisfy any of Savage's postu­  integration (which essentially amounts to finding notions of 
lates), where a GEU representation of a preference relation    expectation) using generalized notions of see, for 
basically consists of an expectation domain E, plausibility    example, [Benvenuti and Mesiar, 2000]. However, the expec­
measure PI, and utility function u, such that the way acts     tation domain used in this work is (a subset of) the reals; ar­
are related according to their GEU agrees with the preference  bitrary expectation domains are not considered. Luce [1990; 
relation (Theorem 3.1). In other words, no matter what the     2000] also considers general addition-like operations applied 
DM's preference relation on acts is, she behaves as if she has to utilities, but his goal is to model joint receipts (which are 
quantified her beliefs by a plausibility measure and her tastes typically modeled as commodity bundles in economics) as a 
via a utility function, and is relating the acts according to their binary operation, rather than to represent decision rules. 
(generalized) expected utility as defined by the of The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We cover 
some expectation domain. That is, we can model any DM          some basic definitions in Section 2: plausibility domains, 
using GEU, whether or not the DM satisfies any rationality     utility domains, expectation domains, decision problems, and 
assumptions. An important difference between our result and    GEU. We show that every preference relation on acts has 
that of Savage is that he was constructing EU representations, a GEU representation in Section 3. In Section 4, we show 
which consists of a real-valued utility function u and '& prob• that each of Savage's postulates corresponds to an axiom on 
ability measure Pr (and the expectation domain is fixed, so    GEU. We conclude in Section 5. Proofs of theorems stated 
                                                               are available at http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/halpcrn. 
   Given that GEU can represent all preference relations, it 
might be argued that GEU is too general—it offers no guide­    2 Preliminaries 
lines as to how to make decisions. We view this as a feature,  2.1 Plausibility, Utility, and Expectation Domains 
not a bug, since our goal is to provide a general framework in 
which to express and study decision rules, instead of propos­  Since one of the goals of this paper is to provide a general 
ing yet another decision rule. Thus the absence of "guide­     framework for all of decision theory, we want to represent 
lines" is in fact an absence of limitations: we do not want to the tastes and beliefs of the DMs in as general a framework 
exclude any possibilities at the outset, even preference rela­ as possible. In particular, we do not want to force the DMs to 
tions that are not transitive or are incomplete. Starting from linearly preorder all consequences and all events (i.e., subsets 
                                                               of the set of states). To this end, we use plausibility measures 
   3Many decision rules involve optimizing (i.e., maximizing or to represent the beliefs of the DMs and (generalized) utility 
minimizing) some value function on the acts. Sometimes it is ex­ functions to represent their tastes. 
plicitly mentioned whether the function is to be maximized or min­
imized (e.g., "Minimax Regret" says explicitly to "minimize the 
maximum regret") while other times only the function name is men­
tioned and it is implicitly understood what is meant (e.g., "EU" 
means "maximize EU"). In this paper we will use "Maximizing 
GEU" and "GEU" interchangeably. 


292                                                                                                  DECISION THEORY                                                                An act a is simple iff its range is finite. That is, a is simple 
                                                               if it has only finitely many consequences. Many works in 
                                                               the literature focus on simple acts (e.g., [Fishburn, 1987]). 
                                                               We assume in this paper that A contains only simple acts; 
   Clearly plausibility measures are generalizations of prob­  this means that we can define (generalized) expectation using 
ability measures. As pointed out in [Friedman and Halpern,     finite sums, so we do not have to introduce infinite series or 
 1995], plausibility measures generalize a host of other repre­ integration for arbitrary expectation domains. Note that all 
sentations of uncertainty as well. Note that while the proba­  acts are guaranteed to be simple if either S or C is finite, 
bility of any two sets must be comparable (since R is totally  although we do not assume that here. 
ordered), the plausibility of two sets may be incomparable.      A decision problem is essentially a decision situation to­
   We also want to represent the tastes of DMs using some­     gether with information about the tastes and beliefs of the 
thing more general than R, so we allow the range of utility    DM; that is, a decision problem is a decision situation to­
functions to be utility domains, where a utility domain is a set gether with the subjective part of the circumstance that faces 
U endowed with a reflexive binary relation . Intuitively,      the DM. Formally, a (plausibilistic) decision problem is a 
elements of U represent the strength of likes and dislikes of  tuple V = (A, E, u, PI), where 
the DM while elements of P represent the strength of her be­     • A = (A, 5, C) is a decision situation, 
liefs. Note that we do not require the DM's preference to be 
transitive (although we can certainly add this requirement). 
Experimental evidence shows that DMs' preferences occa­          • u : C —► U is a utility function, and 

sionally do seem to violate transitivity.                        • PI : 2s —► P is a plausibility measure. 
                                                               We say that V is monotonic iff E is monotonic. 

                                                               2.3 Expected Utility 
                                                               Let V — {{A,S, C), E, u,Pl) be a plausibilistic decision 
                                                               problem. Each a € A induces a utility random variable 

                                                               uu : S —> U as follows: uu(s) = u(a(s)). In the standard 
                                                               setting (where utilities are real-valued and PI is a probability 
                                                               measure Pi), we can identify the expected utility of act a with 

                                                               the expected value of ua with respect to Pr, computed in the 
                                                               standard way: 


We say that E is monotonic iff (2.1) holds. It turns out that 
monotonicity does not really make a difference by itself; see 
the comments after the proof of Theorem 3.1. 

2.2 Decision Situations and Decision Problems 
A decision situation describes the objective part of the cir­
cumstance that the DM faces (i.e., the part that is independent 
of the tastes and beliefs of the DM). Formally, a decision sit­
uation is a tuple A = (A, 5, C), where                         Note that the notion of additivity we defined is a joint prop­
                                                               erty of several components of a decision problem (i.e., <3), <&, 
   • S is the set of states of the world, 
                                                               u, and PI) instead of being a property of PI alone. Additiv­
   • C is the set of consequences, and                         ity is exactly the requirement needed to make the analogue 
  • A is a set of acts (i.e., a set of functions from S to C). of (2.4) equivalent to (2.3). While decision problems involv­
                                                               ing probability are additive, those involving representations 
   4Sometimes we use x to denote Cartesian product; the context of uncertainty such as Dempster-Shafer belief functions are 
will always make it clear whether this is the case.            not, in general. 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                       293  3 Representing Arbitrary Preference 
     Relations 
 In this section, we show that every preference relation on acts 
 has a GEU representation. GEU, like all decision rules, is 
 formally a function from decision problems to preference re-


   The idea is to let each consequence be its own utility and 
each set be its own plausibility, and define such that 


     all simple acts; in particular, A contains all constant acts. 
     We do not assume that here.) 


                                                              4 Representing Savage's Postulates 
                                                              Theorem 3.1 shows that GEU can represent any preference 
                                                               relation. We are typically interested in representing prefer­
                                                               ence relations that satisfy certain constraints, or postulates. 
                                                              The goal of this section is to examine the effect of such con­
                                                               straints on the components that make up GEU. For definite-
                                                               ness, we focus on Savage's postulates. For ease of exposition, 
                                                               we restrict to additive decision problems in this section; recall 
                                                              that this restriction does not affect Theorem 3.1. 

                                                                 A set Vc of axioms about (i.e., constraints on) plausibilis-
                                                              tic decision problems represents a set of postulates Pr about 
                                                              decision situations and preference relations iff 

                                                              Theorem 3.1 can be viewed as saying that the empty set of 
                                                              axioms represents the empty set of postulates. 


   5Note that, unlike most representation theorems, there is no 
uniqueness condition. However, we can show that our representa­
tion is canonical in a certain sense. 


294                                                                                                  DECISION THEORY that X1,..., Xn is a partition of Y iff the Xis are nonempty 
and pairwise disjoint, and Ui Xi = Y. 
   Fix some decision situation (A, S, C). Readers familiar 
with [Savage, 1954] will recall that Savage implicitly as­
sumes that A consists of all possible functions from S to 
C, since the DM can be questioned about any pair of func­
tions. Throughout this paper, we have assumed that A could 
be any nonempty subset of the set of all simple acts. It is 
possible to maintain that assumption here, though some of 
the postulates would fail, not because does not relate cer­
tain members of A, but because A does not contain certain 
pairs of acts. We could adapt the postulates by "relativizing" 
them (so acts not in A are not required to be related) as we do 
in the full paper; however, that involves changing the state­
ments of Savage's postulates somewhat, and the presentation 
becomes more complicated. To simplify the exposition here,    S into events such that the DM's preference about a and b is 
we assume in this section only that A consists of all simple  unaffected if c were to happen in any element of the partition. 
acts. Here are Savage's first six postulates (stated under the Savage also has a seventh postulate, but it is relevant only for 
assumption that A consists of all simple acts from S to C,    general (nonsimple) acts; since we consider only simple acts, 
so that, for example, if a and b are in A, and X C S, then    we omit it here. 
                                                                 Since we focus on additive decision problems in this sec­
                                                              tion, we can define a notion of conditional GEU, which 
                                                              greatly simplifies the presentation of the GRU axioms. Given 


  PI is the standard necessary condition for representation 
by EU (and many of its generalizations), since the reals are 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                      295 