                                              Great Expectations. 
            Part II: Generalized Expected Utility as a Universal Decision Rule* 

                                     Francis C. Chu and Joseph Y. Halpern 
                                          Department of Computer Science 
                                                  Cornell University 
                                              Ithaca, NY 14853, U.S.A. 
                                       Email: {fcc,halpern}@cs.cornell.edu 

                        Abstract                                 In a companion paper [Chu and Halpern, 2003], we pro­
                                                               pose a general framework in which to study and compare de­
     Many different rules for decision making have been 
                                                               cision rules. The idea is to define a generalized notion of 
     introduced in the literature. We show that a notion 
                                                               expected utility (GEU), where a DM's beliefs are represented 
     of generalized expected utility proposed in a com­
                                                               by plausibility measures [Friedman and Halpern, 1995] and 
     panion paper [Chu and Halpern, 2003] is a univer­
                                                               the DM's tastes are represented by general (i.e., not necessar­
     sal decision rule, in the sense that it can represent 
                                                               ily real-valued) utility functions. We show there that every 
     essentially all other decision rules. 
                                                               preference relation on acts has a GEU representation. Here 
                                                               we show that GEU is universal in a much stronger sense: we 
1 Introduction                                                 show that essentially all decision rules have GEU representa­
A great deal of effort has been devoted to studying decision   tions. The notion of representing one decision rule using an­
making. A standard formalization decribes the choices a de­    other seems to be novel. Intuitively, decision rules are func­
cision maker (DM) faces as acts, where an act is a function    tions from tastes (and beliefs) to preference relations, so a 
from states to consequences. Many decision rules (that is,     representation of a decision rule is a representation of a func•
rules for choosing among acts, based on the tastes and beliefs tion, not a preference relation. 

of the DM) have been proposed in the literature. Some are        Roughly speaking, given two decision rules R1 and R2, an 
meant to describe how "rational" agents should make deci­      R1 representation of 'R2 is a function T that maps inputs of 
sions, while others aim at modeling how real agents actually   R2 to inputs of R1 that contain the same representation of 
make decisions. Perhaps the best-known approach is that of     tastes (and beliefs) such that . Thus, T 

maximizing expected utility (EU). Normative arguments due      models, in a precise sense, a user of R2 as a user of R1, since 
to Savage [1954] suggest that rational agents should behave    r preserves tastes (and beliefs). We show that a large collec­
as if their tastes are represented by a real-valued utility func­ tion of decision rules have GEU representations and charac­
tion on the consequences, their beliefs about the likelihood   terize the collection. Essentially, a decision rule has a GEU 
of events (i.e., sets of states) are represented by a probability representation iff it is uniform in a precise sense. It turns out 
measure, and they are maximizing the expected utility of acts  that there are well-known decision rules, such as maximizing 
with respect to this utility and probability.                  Choquet expected utility (CEU) [Schmeidler, 1989] (which 
   Despite these normative arguments, it is well known that    essentially assumes that the DM is representing beliefs using 
EU often does not describe how people actually behave when     a Dempster-Shafer belief function Bel, and then maximizing 
they make decisions [Resnik, 1987]; thus EU is of limited      CEU with respect to Bel), that have no GEU representations. 
utility if we want to model (and perhaps predict) how peo­     This is because r is not allowed to modify the representation 
ple will behave. As a result, many alternatives to EU have     of the tastes (and beliefs). We then define a notion of ordinal 
been proposed in the literature (see, for example, [Gul, 1991; representation, in which r is allowed to modify the represen­
Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1989; Giang and Shenoy, 2001;           tation of the tastes (and beliefs), and is required to preserve 
Quiggin, 1993; Schmeidler, 1989; Yaari, 1987]). Some of        only the ordinal aspect of the tastes (and beliefs). We show 
these rules involve representations of beliefs by means other  that almost all decision rules, including CEU, have ordinal 
than a (single) probability measure; in some cases, beliefs    GEU representations. 
and tastes are combined in ways other than the standard way      There seems to be no prior work in the literature that con­
which produces expected utility; yet other cases, such as      siders how one decision rule can represent another. Perhaps 
Maximin and Minimax Regret [Resnik, 1987], do not require      the closest results to our own are those of Lehmann [2001]. 
a representation of beliefs at all.                            He proposes a "unified general theory of decision" that con­
   *Work supported in part by NSF under grants IIS-0090145 and tains both quantitative and qualitative decision theories. He 
CTC-0208535 and by the DoD Multidisciplinary University Re­    considers a particular decision rule he calls Expected Quali-
search Initiative (MURI) program administered by ONR under grant tative Utility Maximization, which allows utilities to be non­
N00014-01-1-0795.                                              standard real numbers; he defines a certain preorder on the 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                      297  nonstandard reals and makes decisions based on maximiz­       E1 and E2 say that 0 is associative and commutative. £3 
 ing expected utility (with respect to that preorder). That his says that T is the left-identity of ® and E4 ensures that the 
 framework has EU as a special case is immediate, since for    expectation domain respects the relation on utility values. 
 the standard reals, his preorder reduces to the standard order  The standard expectation domain, which we denote E, is 
 on the reals. He argues informally that Maximin is a special  (R, [0,1], R, +, x), where the ordering on each domain is the 
 case of his approach, so that his approach can capture aspects standard order on the reals. 
 of more qualitative decision making as well. It is easy to see 
 that Lehmann's approach is a special case of GEU; his rule is 2.2 Decision Situations and Decision Problems 
clearly not universal in our sense.                            A decision situation describes the objective part of the cir­
                                                               cumstance that the DM faces (i.e., the part that is independent 
2 Preliminaries                                                of the tastes and beliefs of the DM). Formally, a decision sit­
                                                               uation is a tuple A — {A, 5, C), where 
To make this paper self-contained, much of the material in the 
first three subsections of this section is taken (almost verba­  • S is the set of states of the world, 
tim) from [Chu and llalpern, 2003].                              • C is the set of consequences, and 
                                                                 • A is a set of acts (i.e., a set of functions from S to C). 
2.1 Plausibility, Utility, and Expectation Domains 
                                                               An act a is simple iff its range is finite. That is, a is simple 
Since one of the goals of this paper is to provide a general   if it has only finitely many consequences. Many works in 
framework for all of decision theory, we want to represent     the literature focus on simple acts (e.g., [Fishburn, 1987]). 
the tastes and beliefs of the DMs in as general a framework as We assume in this paper that A contains only simple acts; 
possible. To this end, we use plausibility measures to repre­  this means that we can define (generalized) expectation using 
sent the beliefs of the DMs and (generalized) utility functions finite sums, so we do not have to introduce infinite series or 
to represent their tastes.                                     integration for arbitrary expectation domains. Note that all 
                                                               acts are guaranteed to be simple if either S or C is finite, 
                                                               although we do not assume that here. 
                                                                 A decision problem is essentially a decision situation to­
                                                               gether with information about the tastes (and beliefs) of the 
                                                               DM; that is, a decision problem is a decision situation to­
                                                               gether with the subjective part of the circumstance that faces 
                                                               the DM. Formally, a nonplausibilistic decision problem is a 
                                                               tuple (A, U, u), where 
                                                                 • A = (A,5, C) is a decision situation, 
                                                                 • U is a utility domain, and 
                                                                 • u : C —> U is a utility function. 
                                                               A plausibilistic decision problem is a tuple (A, E, u, PI), 
                                                               where 
                                                                 • A — (A, 5, C) is a decision situation, 
                                                                 • E= (U,, P, V, ®, ®) is an expectation domain, 
                                                                 • u : C —> U is a utility function, and 

                                                                 • PI : 2s: —> P is a plausibility measure. 
                                                               We could have let a plausibilistic decision problem be simply 
                                                               a nonplausibilistic decision problem together with a plausi­
                                                               bility domain and a plausibility measure, without including 
                                                               the other components of expectation domains. However, this 
                                                               turns out to complicate the presentation (see below). 
                                                                 We say that V is standard iff its utility domain is R (and, 
                                                               if D is plausibilistic, its plausibility measure is a probability 
                                                               measure and its expectation domain is E). 
                                                               2.3 Expected Utility 
                                                               Let V be a decision problem with S as the set of states, U as 
                                                               the utility domain, and u as the utility function. Each act a of 

                                                               V induces a utility random variable ua : S —► U as follows: 
    Sometimes we use x to denote Cartesian product; the context ua(s) = u(a(s)). If in addition V is plausibilistic with P 
will always make it clear whether this is the case.            as the plausibility domain and PI as the plausibility measure, 


298                                                                                                  DECISION THEORY                                                                  • Minimax Regret (REG) is based on a different philoso•
                                                               phy. It tries to hedge a DM's bets, by doing reasonably well 
                                                               no matter what the actual state is. It is also a nonplausibilistic 
                                                               rule. As a first step to defining it, given a nonplausibilistic de•
                                                               cision problem for each state 
                                                               let that is, is the least upper bound 
                                                               of the utilities in state s. The regret of a in state .s, denoted 
                                                                                    note that no act can do better than a by 
                                                               more than r(a, s) in state s. Let For 
                                                               example, suppose that and the DM picks a. Sup•
                                                               pose that the DM then learns that the true state is so and is 
                                                               offered a chance to change her mind. No matter what act she 
                                                               picks, the utility of the new act cannot be more than 2 higher 
                                                               then . REG orders acts by their regret and thus takes 
                                                               the "best" act to be the one that minimizes Intuitively, 
                                                               this rule tries to minimize the regret that a DM would feel if 
                                                               she discovered what the situation actually was: the "I wish 1 
 2.4 Decision Rules 
                                                               had done a2 instead of a1" feeling. Thus, 
 Intuitively, a decision rule tells the DM what to do when     iff Like Maximin, Nature is viewed as an 
 facing a decision problem in order to get a preference rela•  adversary that would pick a state that maximizes regret, no 
 tion on acts—e.g., compare the expected utility of acts. Just matter what act the DM chooses. It is well known that, in 
 as we have nonplausibilistic decision problems and plausi•    general, Maximin, REG, and EU give different recommenda•
 bilistic decision problems, we have nonplausibilistic deci•   tions [Resnik, 1987]. 
 sion rules and plausibilistic decision rules. As the name 
 suggests, (non)plausibilistic decision rules are defined on     • The Maxmin Expected Utility rule (MMEU) [Gilboa and 
 (non)plausibilistic decision problems.                        Schmeidler, 1989] assumes that a DM's beliefs are repre•
   We do not require decision rules to be defined on all deci• sented by a set V of probability measures. Act a1 is pre•
 sion problems. For example, (standard) EU is defined only     ferred to a2 if the worst-case expected utility of a1 (taken 
 on standard plausibilistic decision problems. More formally,  over all the probability measures in V) is at least as large as 
 a (non)plausibilistic decision rule R is a function whose do• the worst-case expected utility of a2. Thus MMEU is, in a 
 main, denoted dom(R.), is a subcollection of the collection of sense, a hybrid of EU and Maximin. To view MMEU as a 
 (non)plausibilistic decision problems, and whose range, de•   function on decision problems, we must first show how to 
 noted ran (R), is a collection of preference relations on acts. represent a set of probability measures as a single plausibil•
                                                               ity measure. We do this using an approach due to Halpern 
 If doin(R) and a1 and a2 are acts in V, then we write 
                                                               [2001]. Let the plausibility domain that is, all 
                                                               functions from V to [0,1], ordered pointwise; in other words, 
 Here are a few examples of decision rules:                                                                 Thus, in this 
   • GEU is a plausibilistic decision rule whose domain con•   domain, is the constant function 0 and T is the constant 
 sists of all plausibilistic decision problems. Given a decision function 1. For each let be the function 
 problemwe                                                     that evaluates each probability measure in V at A"; that is, 
 have for all                                                                     for all Let it 
 acts _ of A. Note that GEU would not be a decision rule       is easy to verify that PIp is a plausibility measure. We view 
 according to this definition if plausibilistic decision problems PIp as a representation of the set V of probability measures; 
 contained only a utility function and a plausibility measure, clearly V can be recovered from The domain of MMEU 
 and did not include the other components of expectation do•   consists of all plausibilistic decision problems of the form 
 mains.                                                                                                       where V is 
   • Of course, standard EU is a decision rule (whose domain   a set of probability measures on MMEU(D) A2 
 consists of all standard plausibilistic decision problems).                                              . Note that this 
   • Maximin is a nonplausibilistic decision rule that orders 
 acts according to their worst-case consequence. It is a con•    • (Dempster-Shafer) belief functions [Dempster, 1967] are 
 servative rule; the "best" act according to Maximin is the one a representation of uncertainty that generalize probability. 
with the best worst-case consequence. Intuitively, Maximin     That is, every probability measure is a belief function, but 
views Nature as an adversary that always pick a state that     the converse is not necessarily true.2 Given a belief func•
realizes the worst-case consequence, no matter what act the    tion Bel, it is well-known that there exists a set PBcl of 
 DM chooses. The domain of (standard) Maximin consists         probability measures such that for all . Bel(Ar) = 
 of nonplausibilistic decision problems with real-valued util-                   [Dempster, 1967]. A notion of expected 

                                                                  2Due to lack of space, we assume that the reader is familiar with 
                                                               belief functions. 


 DECISION THEORY                                                                                                     299                                                                  Although it can represent many decision rules, GEU cannot 
                                                               represent CEU. We can in fact characterize the conditions 
                                                               under which a decision rule is representable by GEU. 
                                                                 There is a trivial condition that a decision rule must satisfy 
                                                               in order for it to have a GEU representation. Intuitively, a de­
                                                               cision rule R respects utility if R relates acts of constant util­
                                                               ity according to the relation between utility values. Formally, 
                                                               a decision rule 7v respects utility iff for all dom(R.) with 
                                                               A as the set of acts, S as the set of states, U as the utility 

                                                               domain, and u as the utility function, for all a1,a2 A, if 
                                                                           for all states then 
                                                                                                                     (3.5) 
                                                               We say that R weakly respects utility iff (3.5) holds for all 
                                                               constant acts (but not necessarily for all acts of constant util­
                                                               ity). It is easy to see that GEU respects utility, since 
                                                               for all is a substructure of . Thus 
                                                               if R does not respect utility, it has no GEU representation. 
                                                               While respecting utility is a necessary condition for a deci­
                                                               sion rule to have a GEU representation, it is not sufficient. It 
                                                               is also necessary for the decision rule to treat acts that behave 
                                                               in similar ways similarly. 

                                                                 Two acts a1, a2 in a decision problem V are indistinguish-
                                                               able, denoted iff either 


300                                                                                                  DECISION THEORY                                                                 The reader may have noticed an incongruity here. Ex­
                                                              ample 3.3 shows that MMEU has a GEU representation; 
                                                              moreover, as shown earlier, MMEU produces essentially the 
                                                              same order on acts as CEU. However, CEU has no GEU 
                                                              representation. There is no contradiction to Theorem 3.4 


Intuitively, we can think of utility random variables and utility The key reason that GEU cannot represent nonuniform de­
lotteries as descriptions of what an act a does in terms of the cision rules is because they do not respect the indistinguisha-
tastes (and beliefs) of the DM. If 7v is uniform, we can view bility relations imposed by the utility function (and the plau­
7v as relating the acts indirectly by relating their descriptions. sibility measure). Recall that we require that r{D) ~ "D be­
  As the following theorem shows, all uniform decision rules  cause we want a user of one decision rules to appear as if she 
have GEU representations.                                     were using another, without pretending that she has different 
                                                              tastes (and beliefs). So we want r to preserve the tastes (and 
Theorem 3.4: For all decision rules R,1Z has a GEU repre•     beliefs) of its input. 
sentation iff R, is uniform and R respects utility.             There is a long-standing debate in the decision-theory liter­
Proof: The "if direction is somewhat similar in spirit to the ature as to whether preferences should be regarded as ordinal 
proof of Theorem 3.6, given below; due to the lack of space,  or cardinal. If they are ordinal, then all that matters is their 
we omit this direction.                                       order. If they are cardinal, then it should be meaningful to 
                                                              talk about the differences between preferences, that is, how 
                                                              much more a DM prefers one consequence to another. Simi­
                                                              larly, if representations of likelihood are taken to be ordinal, 
                                                              then all that matters is whether one event is more likely than 
                                                              another. As we show below, if we require only that r{V) and 
                                                              V describe the same ordinal tastes (and beliefs), then we can 
                                                              in fact express almost all decision rules, including CEU, in 
                                                              terms of GEU. 


                                                                We want to show next that almost all decision rules have 
                                                              an ordinal GEU representation. Doing so involves one more 
                                                              subtlety. Up to now, we have assumed that plausibility do­
                                                              mains are partially ordered. This implies that two plausibil­
                                                              ity measures that represent the same ordinal beliefs necessar­
                                                              ily induce the same indistinguishability relation (because of 
                                                              antisymmetry). Thus, in order to distinguish sets that have 
                                                              equivalent plausibilities when computing expected utility us­
                                                              ing and , we need to allow plausibility domains to be 
                                                              partially preordered. So, for this result, we assume that is 
                                                              a reflexive and transitive relation that is not necessarily anti­
                                                              symmetric (i.e., we could have that 
                                                              but 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                     301 