             Qualitative Decision under Uncertainty: Back to Expected Utility 

                          Helene Fargier Regis Sabbadin 
                  1RIT, 118 Route de Narbonne INRA-UBIA, 
                 31062 Toulouse Cedex, France BP 27 - 31326 Castanet-Tolosan Cedex - France 
                           fargier@irit.fr sabbadin@toulouse.inra.fr 


                        Abstract                               consequence, the topic of qualitative decision theory is a nat­
                                                               ural one to consider [Pearl, 1993; Dubois and Prade, 1995; 
     Different qualitative models have been proposed 
                                                               Brafman and Tennenholtz, 1997; Dubois et al, 1998b; Doyle 
     for decision under uncertainty in Artificial Intelli­
                                                               and Thomason, 1999; Giang and Shenoy, 2000; Dubois et 
     gence, but they generally fail to satisfy the princi­
                                                               al, 2000], Giving up the quantification of utility and uncer­
     ple of strict Pareto dominance or principle of "ef­
                                                               tainty has led to give up the expected utility (EU) criterion 
     ficiency", in contrast to the classical numerical cri­
                                                               as well: the principle of most theories of qualitative deci­
     terion — expected utility. In [Dubois and Prade, 
                                                               sion making is to model uncertainty by an ordinal plausi­
     1995J qualitative criteria based on possibility the­
                                                               bility relation on events and preference by a complete pre-
     ory have been proposed, that are appealing but inef­
                                                               ordering on consequences. In [Dubois and Prade, 1995; 
     ficient in the above sense. The question is whether 
                                                               Dubois et ai, 1998b] two qualitative criteria based on pos­
     it is possible to reconcile possibilistic criteria and 
                                                               sibility theory, an optimistic and a pessimistic one, are pro­
     efficiency. The present paper shows that the an­
                                                               posed and axiomatized whose definitions only require a finite 
     swer is yes, and that it leads to special kinds of 
                                                               ordinal scale L = {0L < ■■• < 1L} for evaluating both 
     expected utilities. It is also shown that although nu­
                                                               utility and plausibility: 
     merical, these expected utilities remain qualitative: 
     they lead to two different decision procedures based 
     on min, max and reverse operators only, generaliz­
     ing the leximin and leximax orderings of vectors. 

1 Introduction and motivation 


   A numerical approach is classically advocated (see e.g. 
[Savage, 1954]) for encoding both the information pertain­

ing to the states of nature and the preferences on Ar: uncer­
tainty is represented by a probability distribution p and pref-

                                                               criterion which is "optimistic", or "adventurous". 
                                                                 Although appealing from a qualitative point of view, pos­
                                                               sibilistic utilities suffer from a lack of decisiveness called 
                                                               the "drowning effect": when two acts give an identical and 
                                                               extreme (either good or bad) consequence in some plausi­
                                                               ble state, they may be undistinguished by these criteria, al­
   Information about preference and uncertainty in decision 
                                                               though they may give significantly different consequences 
problems cannot always be quantified in a simple way, but 
only qualitative evaluations can sometimes be attained. As a 

   1 Since expected utility is not sensitive to linear transformations 
of u, the choice of [0,1] as the range for u is made for convenience. 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                       303                                                                  Since we are looking for complete and transitive relations 
                                                               it is natural to think of refinements based on expected utility. 
                                                               Savage [1954] has indeed shown that, as soon as a complete 
                                                               preorder is desired that satisfies the STP and some very nat­
                                                               ural axioms, the EU criterion is almost unavoidable. So, the 
                                                               question is: are there any expected utility criteria that refine 
                                                               the possibilistic criteria ? 
                                                                                       be a QPU model. When considering 
                                                               the optimistic (resp. pessimistic) criterion, we are looking 
                                                               for a probability distribution P and a utility function u such 
   Most of the qualitative approaches [Pearl, 1993; Dubois     that . The idea 
 and Prade, 1995; Brafman and Tennenholtz, 1997; Giang and 
                                                               is to build the EU criteria by means of a transformation x: 
 Shenoy, 2000], fail to satisfy Pareto dominance. But this is  L —> [0,1] that maps to a probability distribution: 
 not the case within expected utility theory, since this model 
 obeys the following Sure-Thing Principle (STP) that insures   Definition 2 (Probabilistic transformation of a scale) 
 that identical consequences do not influence the relative pref­                              model. A probabilistic trans•
 erence between two acts:                                     formation of L w.r.t. n is a mapping X ; L —> [0,1] such that 
                                                                                        is a probability distribution. 
                                                                 Notice the presence of the condition that ex­
                                                               presses the fact that the impossibility of an event (represented 
                                                               by a degree of 0L, in possibility theory) is expressed by a null 
                                                               probability. But the most plausible events (possibility degrees 
                                                               of 1L, obviously do not receive a probability degree of 1, 
                                                               since they may be mutually exclusive. Notice also that we 
                                                               are looking for a unique function X for transforming L — 
                                                               both p and u will be built upon this transformation. This is 
                                                               due to the fact that we assume that preference and uncertainty 
                                                               levels arc commensurate and belong to the same scale : it is 
   This means that possibilistic decision criteria cannot obey thus natural to transform the degrees regardless whether they 
 the STP, except in a very particular case: when the actual state model uncertainty or preference. 
 of the world is known, i.e. when there is no uncertainty at all! Moreover, and originally represent all the information 
 So, we cannot stay in the pure QPU framework and escape the   available to the user, both in terms of uncertainty of the actual 
drowning effect altogether. The idea is then to cope with the  state of the world and preference over possible consequences. 
difficulty by proposing refinements of the possibilistic criteria So, no undesirable arbitrary information should be introduced 
                                                               in the refined decision model and p and u must be as close 
that obey the Sure Thing Principle 2. 
   This paper shows (Section 2) that any possibilistic model   as possible to the original information: we are looking for 
can be refined by an expected utility. The kind of expected    "unbiased" transformations of L. Formally: 
utility that is at work, and the very special probability mea­
sure that underlies it, are studied in Section 3 under the light 
of related work. It is also shown (Section 4) that although 
numerical, these expected utility criteria remain qualitative, 
since they lead to a decision procedure based solely on min, 
max and reverse operators — these new procedures general­
ize well known leximin and leximax decision procedures . 

                                                               2.1 Expected utility refinements of optimistic QPU 
                                                               Let us first provide a tractable sufficient condition for a prob­
                                                               abilistic transformation to generate an expected utility that 


   2The idea of refining QPU first appeared in [Dubois et al., 2000]: 
the principle was to break ties thougth an extra criterion (e.g. refin­
ing the pessimistic QPU by the optimitic QPU or by another max-
tnorm aggregation). The use of a max operator kept the approach in 
an ordinal framework, but forbade the full satisfaction of the STP 


304                                                                                                  DECISION THEORY                                                                  At this point in the paper we have proved an important re­
                                                               sult for bridging qualitative possibilistic decision theory and 
                                                               expected utility theory: we have shown than any optimistic 
                                                               or pessimistic QPU model can be refined by a EU model. 
   Notice that Proposition 4 does not mean that the numbers    Thus, we may conclude that (i) possibilistic decision criteria 

attached to the states by and P2 — X2 ° , nor                  are compatible with the classical expected utility criterion and 
the ones attached to the consequences by u1 — \\ o and         (ii) choosing a EU model is advantageous, since it leads to a 
            are the same - it only means that the two models   EU-refinement of the original rule (thus overcomes the lack 
are ordinally equivalent, that they make the same decisions    of decisiveness of the possibilisitic criteria), it satisfies the 
and order the events and the consequences in the same way.     STP and the principle of Pareto. But this does not mean that 
It also implies that the refinements that docs not belong to this qualitativeness and ordinality are given up. In Section 4, we 
class (they may exist, e.g. those which introduce a total order will show that, although probabilistic and based on additive 
in S or in X) cannot be unbiased : they must either introduce  manipulations of numbers, these criteria remain ordinal. This 
a strict preference between equivalent consequences or order   is very natural: since we start with an ordinal model and do 
equi-plausiblc states.                                         not accept any bias, we produce another (probabilistic but) 
   So, we get the following result for optimistic QPU models:  ordinal model, in which the numbers only encode orders of 
                                                               magnitude — this is the topic of the next Section. 


  We have hence obtained what we were looking for: for 
any QPU model we are able to propose an EU model that re­
fines As a refinement, it is perfectly compatible 
with but more decisive than the optimistic utility. Moreover, 
it does not use other information than the original one - it is 
unbiased. Since based on expected utility, it obviously satis­
fies the Sure Thing Principle as well as Pareto Dominance. 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                       305                                                                vectors. When S is finite, the comparison of acts can indeed 
                                                               be seen as a comparison of vectors of pairs of elements of L: 


 Such measures are often encountered in the AI literature. 
 First, they have much in common with [Spohn, 1990]'s k, — 
 functions: these disbelief degrees can indeed be interpreted 
 as the order of magnitude of a e probability [Pearl, 1993; 
 Giang and Shenoy, 1999], which is obviously a big stepped 
                                                               Definition 8 (Maxmin relation) 
 probability. Moreover, big stepped probabilities also form 
 a special class of lexicographic probabilities in the sense 
of [Blume et al, 1991; Lehmann, 1998] — we add the re­
striction that here all the states within a single cluster arc 
equiprobable. Indeed each cluster corresponds to a class of 
equipossible states and since we are looking for unbiased 
transformations, equipossibility leads to equiprobability. Fi­
nally, Definition 5 generalizes the notion of big-stepped prob­ ordinal comparison of degrees and we will show the equiv­
ability of [Snow, 1999; Benferhat et al. , 1999] — which is    alence between this purely syntactical decision rule and the 
recovered when each cluster is a singleton. Big stepped prob­  above EU models. 
abilities have also been proposed by [Dubois et a/., 1998a] as 4.1 Case of total ignorance 
a way to refine any possibility/necessity measure 4. 
   This reasoning on the order of magnitude also applies to 
utility: in a discrete setting, big-stepped utilities can be de­
fined in the same way: 


                                                               and min operators is well known, as it is known that it suffers 
are big stepped utilities. It is also the case of the c utilities 
                                                               from a lack of decisive power. That is why refinements of 
that underly k-utility functions [Pearl, 1993; Wilson, 1995; 
Bonet and Geffner, 1996; Giang and Shenoy, 2000]. These 
works have advocated an approach to decision under uncer­      Definition 9 (Leximax, Leximin) 
tainty based on k-functions, but without taking the STP into 
account (decision is made on the order of magnitude only, 
with a criterion comparable to optimistic utility). The present 
work makes a step further: in order to satisfy Pareto optimal­
ly, we go back to the underlying E utilities and probabilities, 
using double exponents for epsilons instead of simple ones 
— we remain "big stepped" on the join scale. The other con­
tribution of our approach is that it can be followed to encode 
pessimistic utilities as well. 
   [La Valle and Fishburn, 1992; Hammond, 1998; Lehmann, 
1998] have studied decision models of lexicographic prob-
abilities or lexicographic utilities, but in these models, the 
lexicographic characteristic is used only on one of the two 
dimensions (either the likelihood level, or the utility level). 
We operate on both dimensions simultaneously using a join 
transformation. 
                                                               and are very efficient: the only pairs of ties are vectors that 
4 QPU refinements are qualitative                              are identical up to a permutation of their elements. 
Although probabilistic and based on additive manipulations    4.2 General Case 
of utilities, our EU criteria remain ordinal, as paradoxical as 
                                                               Since the leximax and leximin comparisons are good candi­
it may seem at first sight. To establish this claim, this Section 
                                                              dates in a particular case, we have imagined an extension of 
relates the previous EU criteria to the ordinal comparison of 


306                                                                                                  DECISION THEORY                                                                5 Conclusion 
   The leximax procedure can in particular be applied to the 
                                                               The topic of Qualitative Decision Theory has received much 
                                                               attention in the past few years and several approaches, includ­
                                                               ing QPU, have been proposed. This latter model forms a con­
                                                               venient framework for a qualitative expression of problems 
                                                               of decision under uncertainty. However, it suffers from a lack 
                                                               of decisiveness. We have proposed EU-based refinements 
                                                               of QPU which proved to be perfectly compatible with the 
                                                               original qualitative expression of knowledge and preferences: 
                                                               the only difference is that lexicographic (leximax(leximni) 
                                                               or lexiinin (leximax)) comparisons are used instead of 
                                                               rnaxmin or minmax. The axiomatization of these decision 
                                                               procedures is out of the scope of this paper. It actually con­
                                                               sists in the 5 basic Savagean axioms, together with "mild" 
                                                               versions of the pessimism or optimism axioms of possibilis-
                                                               tic utilities (see [Fargier and Sabbadin, 2003]). 


                                                               U(/(-s))}- Again, we conjecture that replacing min and max 
                                                               with their lexicographical versions allows an efficient refine­
                                                               ment and lead to Choquet-EU criteria [Gilboa, 1987]. 

                                                               Appendix 
                                                               Most of the proofs are omitted for sake of brevity 
                                                               and can be found in [Fargier and Sabbadin, 
dures are purely ordinal: the degrees in L are only compared   2003] or at the following address : http://www-
using min, max and reverse operators — only their relative     bia.inra.fr/T/sabbadinAVEB/FargierSabbadin03Rap.html. 
orders matter. Our final result is that these refinements are  We provide here the skecthes of the most interesting ones. 
equivalent to the EU-refinemcnts identified in Section 2. 


DECISION THEORY                                                                                                      307 