504                                                              Session No. 11 Theoretical Foundations 


  LARGE SYSTEMS AND THEIR REGULAR EXPRESSIONS: AN 
  APPROACH TO PATTERN RECOGNITION 
      David C. Rine 
      Statistics and Computer Science Department 
      West Virginia University 
      Morgantown, West Virginia 
      U. S. A. 
  Abstract. 
      Systems theory deals with classes of identi•
  fiable parts each interacting in such a way that 
  a given class exists together to satisfy certain 
  specific requirements; these parts can be thought 
  of an components of the system, some of which are 
  permanent and some not. In analyzing a given 
  system (see (13)) one usually offers up an m-
  tuple consisting of devices to be analyzed, pri•
  mitives to represent any device, allowable com•
  positions, concepts of simulation, and theorems 
  that tell how the devices are to be analyzed. 
      Category theory serves as an organizational 
  tool for large systems. 
      Lerge a category with the category 

  of sets is the category of functors 

       whose morphisms are natural transformations 

  between functors. We call a universe whose ob•

  jects are node labels and whose morphisms are 

  edge labels. Functor theory, having now reached 

  a level of variety and depth in descriptive pow•

  er, stands ready to help the systems theorist 

  characterize those states which are important in 

  the study of a particular system. 

      A computer with a TV camera is a tissue 

  scanner whose job is to verify homogeneity. 

  That is, it detects flaws or holes in a tissue. 

  It is well know that when two topological spaces 

  are homeomorphic, then their fundamental groups 

  are isomorphic. The job of the functor is to 

  "record holes" in spaces. 

      Zeeman'8 (38) concept of a tolerance space 

  is useful when dealing with visual acuity, while 

  Wallace's (35) concept of a separation space is 

  helpful in recording the position of patterns. Session No. 11 Theoretical Foundations                                                        505 506                                                             Session No. 11 Theoretical Foundations 


                                                    Remark. One might try to think of the automor•

                                                    phism functors as something that changes proper•

                                                    ties being considered. Can one think of it as 

                                                    being a rearrangement of subroutines, a switch 

                                                    in control, a new sorting level, sorting level, 

                                                    sorting routine, scanning, searching! 

                                                        Shaw (34) has considered the parsing of 

                                                    graph-representable pictures and gives a picture 

                                                    parsing algorithm that is an n-dimensional analog 

                                                    of a classical top-down string parser, and an ap•

                                                    plication of an implemented system to the analysis 

                                                    of spark chamber film. 

                                                    Remark. One can show how the abstract notion of 

                                                    category theory, in particular taking limits of 

                                                    diagrams in complete (colimits in cocomplete) ca•

                                                    tegories (Mitchell, 23), attacks these problems. 

                                                                 ACCEPTANCE 

                                                             In the last section we introduced 
                                                      the notion of ACCEPTORS; we now consider 
                                                      acceptance. Session No. 11 Theoretical Foundations                                                         507 


 As was mentioned previously, one of the important 

 natural phenomena that cocomplete (complete) cat•

 egory studies handle is the notion of sorting. 

 With this in mind, let us turn to Berthiaume's 

  (A) definition of cofinal functor.                functors of length m, a natural question to ask 

                                                    is whether or not S0(m)(D) is a semigroup, group, 

                                                    or whatever. Thus, the notion of variables men•

                                                    tioned earlier becomes a search for properties 

                                                    after a certain level: semigroups, groups,... 

                                                         There are two ways to approach a problem 

                                                    (analysis and synthesis). One notion, like 

                                                    "sorting", is given F - colim, then find S0; this 

                                                    seems to be what category theory is all about at 

                                                    this point, i.e. that of synthesis or putting 

                                                    things together. The other notion, like "list•

                                                    ing", is given S0, then find F « colim; this is 

                                                    more the notion of analysis or seeing how things 

                                                    are put together; for example, what pictures are 

                                                    described by a given picture description grammar 

                                                    or what languages can be written down by a given 

                                                    finite state acceptor (automaton, directed graph 

                                                    with entry point) ; language theorists call an 

                                                    analysis a parse. We include one more theorem 


 now give another definition of acceptance and 

  (colimit) category-regular expression. Let 

 Sn(n) = S0 arise from a sequence S1,...,S of       category theory is not entirely new (see 10, 11, 

  functors as before, and let satisfy the ne        12, 33); but, a general theory of abstract sys•

  cessary cocompleteness properties. We admit a     tems using simulation as a category morphism in 508                                                              Session No. 11 Theoretical Foundations 


 order to better understand coordination problems 

 is new (27, 28, 29). 


                                                    ed in the more restricted "classical" definition 

                                                    of cofinality mentioned in (17,4). Moreover, 

                                                    MacLane's proof for T0 cofinal does not work 

                                                    when trying to show B0' cofinal. 

                                                         A good discussion of classical input-

                                                    output systems motivated from differential e-

                                                    quations can be found in references (36, 3, 22), 

                                                    especially where Zadeh and Polak discuss con•

                                                    sistent abstract objects (36). We are making 

                                                    much use of the following notion. Let us con•

                                                    sider the binary form of a general system (21); 

                                                    this is a relation x Y. The u's are in 

                                                    Us and the y's in Ys. Let Z be a set and S_ a 

                                                     function mapping any subset of Z x U into Y 