    Least Common Subsumers and Most Specific Concepts in a Description Logic 
                    with Existential Restrictions and Terminological Cycles* 

                                                    Franz Baader 
                                            Theoretical Computer Science 
                                                      TU Dresden 
                                             D-01062 Dresden, Germany 
                                              baader@inf.tu-dresden.dea 

                        Abstract                               and Molitor [2001] show how the most specific concept can 
                                                               be approximated in EC and some of its extensions. Here, we 
     Computing least common subsumers (Ics) and most           follow an alternative approach: we extend the language by 
     specific concepts (msc) are inference tasks that can      cyclic terminologies with greatest fixpoint (gfp) semantics, 
     support the bottom-up construction of knowledge           and show that the msc always exists in this setting. Of course, 
     bases in description logics. In description logics        then one must also be able to compute the les w.r.t. cyclic ter•
     with existential restrictions, the most specific con•     minologies with gfp-semantics. For the DL ACM (which al•
     cept need not exist if one restricts the attention to     lows for conjunctions, value restrictions, and number restric•
     concept descriptions or acyclic TBoxes. In this pa•       tions) it was shown in [Baader and Kusters, 1998] that the 
     per, we extend the notions les and msc to cyclic          most specific concept always exists if one adds cyclic con•
     TBoxes. For the description logic EC (which al•           cept definitions with gfp-semantics. One reason for Kusters 
     lows for conjunctions, existential restrictions, and      and Molitor to choose an approximation approach rather than 
     the top-concept), we show that the les and msc al•        an exact characterization of the most specific concept using 
     ways exist and can be computed in polynomial time         cyclic definitions was that the impact of cyclic definitions in 
     if we interpret cyclic definitions with greatest fix-     description logics with existential restrictions was largely un•
     point semantics.                                          explored. 
                                                                 The paper [Baader, 2003a] is a first step toward overcom•
1 Introduction                                                 ing this deficit. It considers cyclic terminologies in EC w.r.t. 
                                                               the three types of semantics (greatest fixpoint, least fixpoint, 
Computing the most specific concept of an individual and       and descriptive semantics) introduced by Nebel [1991], and 
the least common subsumer of concepts can be used in the       shows that the subsumption problem can be decided in poly•
bottom-up construction of description logic (DL) knowledge     nomial time in all three cases. This is in stark contrast to the 
bases. Instead of defining the relevant concepts of an ap•     case of DLs with value restrictions. Even for the small DL 
plication domain from scratch, this methodology allows the 
                                                               F Lo (which allows conjunctions and value restrictions only), 
user to give typical examples of individuals belonging to the  adding cyclic terminologies increases the complexity of the 
concept to be defined. These individuals are then general•     subsumption problem from polynomial (for concept descrip•
ized to a concept by first computing the most specific concept tions) to PSPACE. The main tool in the investigation of cyclic 
of each individual (i.e., the least concept description in the definitions in EC is a characterization of subsumption through 
available description language that has this individual as an  the existence of so-called simulation relations on the graph 
instance), and then computing the least common subsumer of     associated with an EL-terminology, which can be computed 
these concepts (i.e., the least concept description in the avail• in polynomial time [Henzinger et al, 1995]. 
able description language that subsumes all these concepts). 
                                                                 This characterization of subsumption can be used to char•
The knowledge engineer can then use the computed concept 
                                                               acterize the les w.r.t. gfp-semantics via the product of this 
as a starting point for the concept definition. 
                                                               graph with itself (Section 4). This shows that, w.r.t. gfp se•
  The least common subsumer (les) in DLs with existential 
                                                               mantics, the les always exists, and that the binary les can be 
restrictions was investigated in [Baader et a/., 1999]. In par•
                                                               computed in polynomial time. (The n-ary les may grow ex•
ticular, it was shown there that the les in the small DL EC 
                                                               ponentially even in EC without cyclic terminologies [Baader 
(which allows for conjunctions, existential restrictions, and 
                                                               et al. , 1999].) 
the top-concept) always exists, and that the binary les can be 
                                                                 The characterization of subsumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics 
computed in polynomial time. Unfortunately, the most spe•
                                                               can be extended to the instance problem in EC. This allows 
cific concept (msc) of a given ABox individual need not exist 
                                                               us to show that the msc in EC with cyclic terminologies inter•
in languages allowing for existential restrictions or number 
                                                               preted with gfp semantics always exists, and can be computed 
restrictions. As a possible solution to this problem, Kiisters 
                                                               in polynomial time (Section 5). 
   * Partially supported by the DFG under grant BA 1122/4-3.     In the next section, we introduce E L with cyclic terminolo-


DESCRIPTION LOGICS                                                                                                    319                                                                  The semantics of (possibly cyclic) we have de•
                                                               fined above is called descriptive semantic by Nebel [1991]. 
                                                               For some applications, it is more appropriate to interpret 
                                                               cyclic concept definitions with the help of a fixpoint seman•
                                                               tics. 
                                                               Example 1 To illustrate this, let us recall an example from 
                                                               LBaader, 2003a]: 
                                                                 Here the intended interpretations arc graphs where we have 
                                                               nodes (elements of the concept Node) and edges (represented 
                                                               by the role edge), and we want to define the concept I node 
                                                               of all nodes lying on an infinite (possibly cyclic) path of the 
                                                               graph. In order to capture this intuition, the above definition 
                                                               must be interpreted with greatest fixpoint semantics. 
gics as well as the lcs and the msc. Then we recall the impor•   Before we can define greatest fixpoint semantics (gfp-
tant definitions and results from [Baader, 2003a]. Section 4   semantics), we must introduce some notation. Let T be an 
formulates and proves the new results for the lcs, and Sec•    E L-TBox containing the rolesthe primitive concepts 
tion 5 does the same for the msc.                                     and the defined concepts . A 
2 Cyclic terminologies, least common                          primitive interpretations J for T is given by a domain , 
                                                               an interpretation of the roles r Nrole by binary relations 
     subsumers, and most specific concepts                                 and an interpretation of the primitive concepts 
Concept descriptions arc inductively defined with the help                 by subsets Obviously, a primitive 
of a set of constructors, starting with a set of concept       interpretation differs from an interpretation in that it does not 
names and a set NR of role names. The constructors deter•      interpret the defined concepts in . We say that the in•
mine the expressive power of the DL. In this paper, wc restrict terpretation X is based on the primitive interpretation J iff 
the attention to the whose concept descriptions arc            it has the same domain as J and coincides with J on Nrole 
formed using the constructors top-concept (T), conjunction    and Nprim. For a fixed primitive interpretation J, the inter•
        , and existential restriction . The semantics of      pretations X based on it are uniquely determined by the tuple 
E L-concept descriptions is defined in terms of an interpreta•              of the interpretations of the defined concepts in 
tion . The domainis a non-empty set                                  We define 
of individuals and the interpretation function I maps each                           is an interpretation based on 
concept name to a subset and each role 
          to a binary relation on . The extension of          Interpretations based on J can be compared by the following 
   to arbitrary concept descriptions is inductively defined, as ordering, which realizes a pairwise inclusion test between the 
shown in the third column of Table 1.                         respective interpretations of the defined concepts: if 
   A terminology (or TBox for short) is a finite set of con•  Int(J), then 
cept definitions of the form where A is a concept 
name and D a concept description. In addition, we require 
that TBoxcs do not contain multiple definitions, i.e., there  It is easy to see that induces a complete lattice on Int (J), 
cannot be two distinct concept descriptions such i.e., every subset of Jnt(J) has a least upper bound (lub) and 
that both belongs to the TBox. Con•                           a greatest lower bound (gib). Using Tarski's fixpoint theorem 
cept names occurring on the left-hand side of a definition are LTarski, 1955] for complete lattices, it is not hard to show 
called defined concepts. All other concept names occurring    LNebel, 1991] that, for a given primitive interpretation J, 
in the TBox are called primitive concepts. Note that we al•   there always is a greatest model of T based on J. 
low for cyclic dependencies between the defined concepts,     We call this models the greatest fixpoint model (gfp-model) 
i.e., the definition of A may refer (directly or indirectly) to of T. Greatest fixpoint semantics considers only gfp-models 
A itself. An interpretation I is a model of the TBox T iff    as admissible models. 
it satisfies all its concept definitions, i.e., for all 
definitions in T.                                             Definition 2 Let T be an let 
  An ABox is a finite set of assertions of the form A(a) and  A, B be defined concepts occurring in T> and a an individual 
r(a,b), where A is a concept name, r is a role name, and      name occurring in A. Then, 
a, b are individual names from a set . Interpretations of        • A is subsumed by B w.r.t. gfp-semantics 
ABoxes must additionally map each individual name                  iff holds for all gfp-models 
to an element . An interpretation I is a model of the 
                                                                 •a is an instance of A w.r.t. gfp-semantics 
ABox A iff it satisfies all its assertions,for all 
                                                                                      holds for all models X of A that are 
concept assertions A(a) in A and x for all role 
assertions in A. The interpretation I is a model of the            gfp-models of T. 
A Box A together with the iff it is a model of both T            On the level of concept descriptions, the least common sub-
and A.                                                        sumer of two concept descriptions C, D is the least concept 


320                                                                                              DESCRIPTION LOGICS description E that subsumes both C and D. An extensions        Proposition 5 Let T\ be an £l-TBox containing the defined 
of this definition to the level of (possibly cyclic) TBoxes is concepts A, B. Assume that T2 and T2 are conservative ex•
not completely trivial. In fact, assume that A1,A2 are con•    tensions of T1 such that 
cepts defined in the TBox T. It should be obvious that taking 
                                                                 • the defined concept E in T2 is a gfp-lcs of A, B in T\; 

                                                                 • the defined concept E' in T2 is a gfp-lcs of A, B in T\; 

                                                                 • the sets of newly defined concepts in respectively T2 and 
                                                                    T2 are disjoint. 


                                                                 The notion "most specific concept" can be extended in a 
                                                               similar way from concept descriptions to concepts defined in 
                                                               a TBox. 


The intended interpretation is similar to the one in Example 1, 
with the only difference that now nodes may have colors, 
and we are interested in blue (red) nodes lying on an infi•
nite path consisting of blue (red) nodes. Intuitively, the les 
of Bluelnode and Redlnode describes nodes lying on an in•
finite path (without any restriction on their color), i.e., the  Uniqueness up to equivalence of the most specific concept 
concept I node from Example 1 should be a definition of this   can be formulated and shown like uniqueness of the least 
les. However, this cannot be expressed by a simple concept     common subsumer. 
description. It requires a new cyclic definition. 
                                                               3 Characterizing subsumption 
                                                               In this section, we recall the characterizations of subsump•
                                                               tion w.r.t. gfp-semantics developed in [.Baader, 2003a]. To 
                                                               this purpose, we must represent TBoxes and primitive inter•
                                                               pretations by description graphs, and introduce the notion of 
                                                               a simulation on description graphs. 


                                                                 As shown in [Baader, 2003a], one can (without loss of gen•
                                                               erality) restrict the attention to normalized TBox. In the fol•
                                                               lowing, we thus assume that all TBoxes are normalized. Nor•
                                                               malized £L-TBoxes can be viewed as graphs whose nodes 
                                                               are the defined concepts, which are labeled by sets of prim•
                                                               itive concepts, and whose edges are given by the existential 
                                                               restrictions. For the rest of this section, we fix a normalized 
  In the case of concept descriptions, the les is unique up 


TBoxes, this uniqueness property also holds (though its for•
mulation is more complicated). 


DESCRIPTION LOGICS                                                                                                    321                                                                  2. There is a simulation Z: Gr ~ GT such that (B, A) £ 
                                                                    Z. 
                                                                 The theorem together with Proposition 9 shows that sub-
                                                               sumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics in £C is tractable. The proof 
                                                               of the theorem given in [Baader, 2003a] depends on a charac•
                                                               terization of when an individual of a gfp-model belongs to a 
                                                               defined concept in this model. 


                                                                 This proposition is also important in the proof of correct•
                                                               ness of our characterization of the instance problem (Theo•
                                                               rem 17). 
                                                               4 Computing the Ics 


   Conversely, every £L-description graph can be viewed as 
representing either an £C-T Box or a primitive interpretation. 
   Simulations are binary relations between nodes of two £L-
description graphs that respect labels and edges in the sense 
defined below. 


   It is easy to see that the set of all simulations from G\ to G2 
is closed under arbitrary unions. Consequently, there always 
exists a greatest simulation from G1 to G2- If G1, G2 are finite, 
then this greatest simulation can be computed in polynomial 
time [Henzinger et al, 1995]. As an easy consequence of this 
fact, the following proposition is proved in [Baader, 2003a]. 

Proposition 9 Let G1, G2 be two finite EL-description 
graphs, v1 a node of G\ and V2 a node of G2- Then we           5 Instance and most specific concepts 
can decide in polynomial time whether there is a simulation 
                                                               One motivation for considering cyclic terminologies in £L is 
                                                               the fact that the most specific concept of an ABox individ•
   Subsumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics corresponds to the exis•   ual need not exist in £C (without cyclic terminologies). An 
tence of a simulation relation such that the subsumee simu•    example is the simple cyclic ABox A := {r(b,b)}, where 
lates the subsumer:                                            b has no most specific concept, i.e., there is no least £L-
                                                               concept description D such that b is an instance of D w.r.t. 
                                                               A [Kiisters and Molitor, 2001]. However, if one allows for 
                                                               cyclic TBoxes with gfp-semantics, then the defined concept 


322                                                                                              DESCRIPTION LOGICS DESCRIPTION LOGICS                                                                                     323 