       &RJQLWLYH0RGHOOLQJRI(YHQW2UGHULQJ5HDVRQLQJLQ,PDJLVWLF'RPDLQV

                  /DXUD60DVWHOOD  0DUD$EHO  /XtV&/DPE  /XL])'H5RV 
                         1Instituto de Informática and 2Instituto de Geociências 
                               Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul 
                                   Porto Alegre, RS 91501-970, Brazil 
                             {mastella,marabel,lamb,lfderos}@inf.ufrgs.br 

                    $EVWUDFW                         tions between the elements of the domain), which is foreign 
                                                      to most proposals developed so far. We are interested in 
   The inference of temporal information from past 
                                                      proposing a cognitive model of the reasoning of an expert 
   event occurrences in imagistic domains is relevant 
                                                      about an imagistic domain, when deriving a temporal rela-
   in several applications in knowledge engineering.  tion from a visual-spatial relation. 
   In such applications, the order in which events 
                                                        ,PDJLVWLFGRPDLQV are characterised by visual-spatial rela-
   have happened is imprinted in the domain as vis-
                                                      tions requiring from the problem-solver the ability of apply-
   ual-spatial relations among its elements. Therefore, ing visual recognition of objects, and from this initial recog-
   the interpretation of the relative ordering in which 
                                                      nition, to start the search and analytical methods in order to 
   those events have occurred is essential for under-
                                                      interpret these objects. Such abilities define a form of LPDJ
   standing the domain evolution. We propose a cog-   LVWLFUHDVRQLQJ [Yip and Zhao, 1996], which cannot de de-
   nitive model for event ordering reasoning within 
                                                      scribed only in terms of the geometrical properties of ob-
   domains whose elements have been modified by 
                                                      jects, but by the meaning and significance that this objects 
   past events.  From the analysis of cognitive abili- have in selecting a particular reasoning path in a visual-
   ties of experts we propose new ontology constructs 
                                                      spatial domain. 
   for knowledge modelling associated to Problem-
                                                        In some domains, the recognition of key features of ele-
   Solving Methods. We illustrate the effectiveness of ments and the identification of the visual-spatial relations 
   the model by means of an application to an imag-
                                                      among them is an important research issue [Ericsson and 
   istic domain.  
                                                      Smith, 1991]. For instance, a geologist identifies visual-
                                                      spatial relations among rock constituents (called paragenetic 
,QWURGXFWLRQ                                       relations), as does a physician when analysing medical im-
The inference of temporal information from past event oc- ages to identify a pathology. 
currences in imagistic domains is relevant in several appli- In order to build an ontology and appropriate problem-
cations in knowledge engineering [Thagard and Shelley, solving methods for such domains, a long process of knowl-
1997]. There are several approaches to model temporal rea- edge acquisition from experts was carried out. The analysis 
soning in intelligent systems such as algebras, logics, calculi of the cognitive abilities of the expert led to the develop-
and effective mechanisms to reason about time [Allen, ment of new ontology constructs for knowledge modelling 
1983; GabbayHWDO, 1994]. Nonetheless, the development associated to Problem-Solving Methods (PSM). These con-
of ontological languages providing adequate support to for- structs and methods are then shown to be capable of model-
malise event-based temporal inferences in such domains is ling the expert’s reasoning when deriving the sequence of 
still incipient. In addition, most proposals consider an abso- events which led to the visual-spatial organisation of the 
lute notion of time, which can be of limited use in a number domain under analysis. 
of applications.                                        Section 2 presents the basics of ontologies and their ex-
  However, here we aim at deriving relative temporal in- tensions with temporal constructs and a brief description of 
formation from another dimension (the visual-spatial rela- the PSMs that shall be used. Section 3 defines the main con-
                                                      structs and primitives of the cognitive model for event rea-
                                                      soning and PSMs to infer sequences of events. Section 4 
   1 This work is supported by the Brazilian Research Council describes the application of the developed models to an im-
CNPq through the CTPetro programme grant 502009/2003-9. L.C. agistic domain, namely VHGLPHQWDU\SHWURJUDSK\. Section 5 
Lamb is partly supported by CAPES and CNPq. presents an initial validation of the model. Section 6 con- The cognitive model proposed here shall be applied for 
cludes the paper and discusses directions for future research. modelling domains that present evolving elements which 
                                                      have been modified by events that have occurred in an un-
3UHOLPLQDULHV                                      planned order. The order in which the events happened is 
An ontology is a formal explicit specification of a shared imprinted in the domain as complex visual-spatial relations 
conceptualisation [StuderHWDO, 1998]. Usually, domain among the elements of the domain. The cognitive models 
ontologies represent static or declarative knowledge about a we introduce here intend to represent how to identify the 
domain: the main concepts, their attributes, the relationships events from the domain elements’ characteristics, and how 
between them, axioms, rules, etc [Gómez-PérezHWDO, to find the order in which the events have occurred out of 
2004]. [Gruber, 1993] has identified five types of ontologi- the visual-spatial relations in such domains. 
cal constructs: FODVVHV, which represent elements of a do- We deal with visual-spatial knowledge translated into a 
main defined by a set of attributes and their possible values; symbolic representation, instead of using typical numerical 
UHODWLRQV, which represent the types of association between approaches for image processing. This follows a line of re-
domain elements; IXQFWLRQV, special relations that map one search outlined in [Kosslyn, 1994] which describes 
or several elements of the domain to a unique element; D[L that some features (and types) of visual-spatial knowledge 
RPV, which are statements that are always true about the are dealt by the human brain as symbolic entities, not image 
domain; and LQVWDQFHV, the individuals of the ontology. representations; therefore we believe that these features can 
  While ontologies describe the structural and static part be represented by means of a symbolic approach. Moreover, 
of knowledge, the dynamic part is described using a   the proposed cognitive models are not intended to recognise 
PSM [Gómez-Pérez and Benjamins, 1999]. A PSM de-      the elements of the domain, but to infer new information 
scribes the reasoning process of a knowledge-based system from their symbolic description made by the user of the ex-
(KBS), specifying the knowledge and data required by an pert system. 
inference process at a more abstract and structured level. 
This reasoning pattern is modelled by three related parts: (i) $&RJQLWLYH0RGHOIRU(YHQW2UGHULQJ
a FRPSHWHQFH VSHFLILFDWLRQ related to the solution of a task, 
       RSHUDWLRQDO VSHFLILFDWLRQ                      Let us now define the required constructs to deal with event 
(ii) an                      described by high-level  ordering and the associated problem-solving methods.  
modelling primitives and (iii) UHTXLUHPHQWVDVVXPSWLRQV of 
the method in terms of domain knowledge.              $Q2QWRORJ\RI(YHQWV
  Recently, some authors have aimed at augmenting the 
                                                      We propose an extension to the constructs of ontological 
expressive power of ontologies representing temporal in-
                                                      representation - classes, relations, inference rules, axioms 
formation. A causal time ontology is proposed by [Kitamura
HW DO, 1997], in which an event represents instantaneous and instances - for evolving domains in order to capture the 
                                                      meaning of HYHQWV and WHPSRUDO UHODWLRQV EHWZHHQ WKHP. 
changes of qualitative values of parameters and their result-
                                                      Such proposed constructs shall be applied for modelling 
ing values at a time point. The work of [Zhou and Fikes, 
2000] treats both time points and time intervals as primitive domains that need to infer past sequences of occurrences to 
                                                      provide a better comprehension of the current state of the 
elements of a time line, and the classes, relations, axioms 
                                                      domain. Further, we aim at understanding how the domain 
and instances of the ontology are built upon those primi-
tives. The extension of DAML to DAML-Time aims to de- elements were produced and by which events, and also at 
                                                      formalising the explanation through a representation of an 
velop an ontology of time that expresses temporal aspects 
                                                      event sequence. We define the new constructs as follows: 
common to any formalisation of time, such as temporal rela- x (YHQWV
tions on instants and intervals [Hobbs and Pustejovsky,          are class-transforming constructs. They repre-
2003]. [Bennett and Galton, 2004] propose a highly expres- sent phenomena that generate or modify the elements of 
sive language for representing temporal relationships and the domain. They are characterised by specific domain-
events, called VEL (Versatile Event Logic). A single VEL dependent attributes, but not by a time stamp. Events are 
formula can contain both time-point and interval variables. also described by rules that associate them to their prod-
In most works, the addition of an explicit temporal dimen- ucts. Events are associated to each other by an ordering 
sion to ontology constructs is typically defined by an abso- relation.   
lute time stamp associated with objects of the ontology, i.e., x 7HPSRUDO UHODWLRQ: a construct proposed to represent 
time points or time intervals.                          the ordering relation between events. We have defined the 
  However, in several application domains, events are not binary relations EHIRUHDIWHU and GXULQJ in order to reflect 
to be interpreted as having time stamps labelling them. It is the ordering between events. 
the UHODWLYHRUGHULQJ in which events have occurred that is Furthermore, in our domain ontology, we extend the no-
of fundamental importance in understanding, analysing, and tion of LQIHUHQFHUXOHV to make them more expressive. They 
inferring the evolution of elements in such domains. The express functions between instances of relations, in addition 
aim of our approach is on representing how the domain to functions between instances of classes.  
evolves through a sequence of events that act as operators Most knowledge representation structures used in domain 
transforming the state-space of a domain.             ontologies define rules as expressions about the DWWULEXWHV of 
                                                      objects, as in the following rule: LIFODVV$DWWULEXWH YDOXH[WKHQFODVV%DWWULEXWH YDOXH\ The HYHQW RUGHULQJ PRGHO is shown in Figure 1, as a 
  We use this type of rule to model functions that identify graphic model that presents the knowledge roles, the infor-
events from their produced elements. The characteristics of mation flow, and the inferences. It is explained as follows. 
the elements (expressed by class attributes in the ontology) The knowledge role (label 1) represents elements in the 
are used to indicate the event that originated or modified the application domain that is under analysis. The elements of 
element. The instances of these rules define that when a the domain are related to each other through complex vis-
particular value for an attribute is found in the description of ual-spatial relations (label 2), which are abstracted from the 
an element then a determined event is indicated as the gen- element description. As visual-spatial relations are binary, 
erating event. These inference rules are called HYHQWLQGLFD the other argument of the relation can be specified as the 
WLRQUXOHV. In addition, we define an extended type of infer- related element (label 3), which is also a domain element. 
ence rule in knowledge representation ontologies. The pur- The result of these steps is a pair of domain elements asso-
pose is to express functions between instances of UHODWLRQV, ciated by a visual-spatial relation.  
instead of classes. This second type of rule, referred to as 
WHPSRUDOLPSOLFDWLRQUXOH, is defined to allow the inference element          Ã             Ã
         WHPSRUDO UHODWLRQV                YLVXDO
of binary                 between events from              Ã
                                                                  relation  visual            related 
VSDWLDOUHODWLRQV between the elements, as in                                        specify 
                                                                  abstract  relation          element 
  LIYLVXDOBUHODWLRQ$%WKHQWHPSRUDOBUHODWLRQ$% 
                                                                                      Ã
  Next, we present a PSM to model inferences about the 
ordering of events in ontologies built with these new types abstract        cover    temporal abstract 
                                                                                     implication 
of constructs and inference rules. 
                                                            Ã          Ã              Ã
$360IRU2UGHULQJ(YHQWV
                                                           attributes       temporal         attributes 
In order to show that the proposed constructs are adequate                  relation 
and sufficient for inferring event ordering, the reasoning             Ã        Ã
method was modelled as a PSM, abstracted from the heuris-   cover      event       event       cover 
tics used by a highly-trained expert in the domain. The PSM           indication  indication   
uses the temporal constructs to identify and order the events Ã                            Ã
that originated the current characteristics of the domain.
                                                             event           order            related 
  The FRPSHWHQFH of our PSM takes a description of do-                                         event 

main elements as input, identifies the events that acted over             Ã
these elements and infers the ordering in which such events   knowledge roles 
have occurred. The DVVXPSWLRQV of our PSM are: (1) the        inference action ordered pair  
                                                                           of events 
characteristics imprinted in the domain elements indicate the information flow 
event that generated the element; (2) the way elements are                                            
spatially disposed reflects the order in which they were 
originated in the domain. The UHTXLUHPHQWV are the inference )LJXUH3UREOHP6ROYLQJ0HWKRGIRU(YHQW2UGHULQJ
rules that associate characteristics of domain elements to 
their generating events and the inference rules that associate Every domain element is described by a set of attributes 
visual-spatial and ordering relations. The input of the PSM which defines its generating event. Relevant attributes (la-
is a description of the visual-spatial features without any belled as 4 and 5) are abstracted from the set of attributes. 
temporal reference. The sequence of events is inferred as the Event indication rules (label 6) cover the generating events 
PSM output. The RSHUDWLRQDO VSHFLILFDWLRQ describes the (labelled as 7 and 8) from the attributes of the element.  
inferences. The inferences are applied to the elements in the The visual-spatial relation between domain elements is 
domain knowledge (represented as knowledge roles) in or- used to infer a temporal relation (label 10) using the tempo-
der to derive new information. The inferences used in our ral implication rules (label 9). From the temporal relation it 
PSM can be detailed as follows:                       is possible to order the events, producing an ordered pair of 
  x $EVWUDFW: select attributes that describe the relevant as- events (label 11). A detailed example of application of this 
  pects of the element for problem-solving.           reasoning method is presented in Section 5.  
                                                        Thus, the above PSM can be used in domain ontologies 
  x 5HODWLRQ DEVWUDFW: takes an element as input and out-
                                                      modelled using the proposed temporal constructs with the 
  puts relevant relations between such element and others.   objective of inferring temporal relations from visual-spatial 
  x 6SHFLI\
          : takes a relation as input and outputs the related relations in an imagistic domain. 
  element (the second argument of the relation). 
  x &RYHU: given a set of rules and objects that match the 0RGHOOLQJDQ,PDJLVWLF'RPDLQ
  premise of the rules, outputs the conclusion of the rule. 
  x 2UGHU: takes a pair of events and the ordering relation We are now in a position to illustrate the application of the 
  between them and produces an ordered pair of events. proposed models to an imagistic domain scenario.  'HVFULELQJWKH3HWURJUDSKLF'RPDLQ               [AbelHWDO, 2003] and modelled as a domain ontology 
                                                      mostly structured as a partonomy3 of classes. The system 
We consider VHGLPHQWDU\SHWURJUDSK\, which aims at evalu-
                                                      implements interpretation tasks as PSMs over the domain 
ating the economic prospects of oil fields and reservoirs by 
means of interpretation techniques from descriptions of rock ontology.  
                                                        Although the petrography domain ontology had already 
samples. One particular technique widely used to determine 
                                                      been modelled, temporal aspects of the domain needed in 
the quality of a reservoir is called GLDJHQHWLF VHTXHQFH LQ
WHUSUHWDWLRQ [AnjosHWDO, 2000], which aims to infer the the interpretation of diagenetic sequences were still lacking. 
                                                      These aspects had to be elicited later, by means of knowl-
order in which diagenetic events occurred in a rock. 
                                                      edge acquisition (KA) sessions with an expert in sedimen-
'LDJHQHWLF HYHQWV are physical-chemical processes that act 
over the sediments transforming them into solid rocks and tary petrography. In order to acknowledge the heuristics of 
                                                      the expert when performing the diagenetic sequence inter-
modifying the porosity and permeability of a potential oil-
                                                      pretation, several knowledge elicitation techniques have 
reservoir. The visual-spatial relations among rock constitu-
ents reflect the changes undergone by the rock as a result of been applied [Cooke, 1994]. Firstly, we applied 
                                                      interviews and observation techniques to elicit the key vo-
diagenetic events. In Figure 2 we show an example of rock 
                                                      cabulary used in the interpretation, to determine the task’s 
sample and the visual-spatial relations between minerals 
(called SDUDJHQHWLFUHODWLRQV) that can be identified.  purpose and to understand how the interpretation is realised. 
                                                      Then, in order to reveal the expert’s implicit knowledge (i.e. 
                                                  knowledge used by the expert that is not easily verbalised 
                             4]                      [Polanyi, 1974]), we applied card sorting and repertory grids 
                                                    techniques. Thus, the main results obtained in the KA ses-
                                                      sion were insights about temporal aspects that needed to be 
                                    4]               modelled (such as diagenetic events and ordering relations) 
         4]                                      and an abstraction of the expert’s reasoning steps when 
                             
                                                      solving the interpretation task.  
                                                        Next, we shall model the task of diagenetic sequence in-
                         
                                     4]              terpretation (i.e. how to identify the order in which events 
                                                    have occurred) by using the constructs proposed in Section 
            4]                                       3 above, so as to represent the temporal aspects identified in 
                                                     the domain. We shall also show how to instantiate the PSM 
                                                      for event ordering of Figure 1 to infer the sequence of 
)LJXUH'HWDLOYLHZRIDURFNVDPSOHZLWKKHPDWLWHFRYHU
 LQJTXDUW]JUDLQV4]TXDUW]FRYHULQJWKHKHPDWLWH diagenetic events that occurred in a rock.  
 TXDUW]EHLQJFRYHUHGE\LOOLWHZKLFKLVFRYHULQJWKHKHPDWLWH )URPWKH(YHQW2QWRORJ\WRWKH3HWURJUDSK\
Even though the arrangement is said to be spatial, they can- 'RPDLQ
not be translated into simple spatial relations, since they are Let us now show how the petrography domain ontology was 
by themselves a result of a visual interpretation of particular extended with temporal aspects using the new temporal con-
rock aspects. This interpretation requires previous experi- structs. 
ence in mineral recognition that goes beyond the analysis of D 5RFN &RQVWLWXHQWV PRGHOOHG DV FODVVHV Rock con-
geometrical and topological characteristics. Figure 2 illus-
                                 2                    stituents are minerals and pores that form a rock. They are 
trates examples of paragenetic relations.             represented in the ontology using the FODVVconstruct, since 
  The expert in petrography points out the ordering of they are elements of the domain. The characteristics of the 
events by observing how the constituents are spatially and constituents are described as DWWULEXWHV of the class that 
visually related to each other, based on his extensive previ- represents it. It is important to represent these features since 
ous knowledge. Using a simple example, if one mineral they reflect how this constituent was produced or modified, 
appears to be on top of other mineral, it means that the for- indicating its generating diagenetic events. 
mer was generated in the rock later than the latter.  E 3DUDJHQHWLF 5HODWLRQV PRGHOOHG DV UHODWLRQV Par-
  Some interpretations techniques used for the evaluation agenetic relations are visual-spatial arrangements among 
                                             3HWUR
of oil reservoirs had already been modelled in the    constituents. Since a paragenetic relation is defined between 
*UDSKHU
        system, an intelligent database application to sup- a pair of constituents, the construct used in the ontology is a 
port the description and interpretation of sedimentary rock ELQDU\UHODWLRQ.  
            HWDO
samples [Abel    , 2004]. The vocabulary of petrography F 'LDJHQHWLF (YHQWV PRGHOOHG DV HYHQWV These events 
was elicited as a result of previous work on the domain are physical-chemical phenomena of rock consolidation and 
                                                      are represented in the model as an HYHQW. The expert does 
                                                 
   2 There are several kinds of paragenetic relations that can be                                                  
identified such as FRYHULQJ, UHSODFLQJ, GLVVROYLQJ. Each particular 3 Partonomy is a domain organization based on a part-of rela-
paragenetic relation creates visual-spatial relations between differ- tion rather than on a kind-of (is-a) relation [Martínez-Béjar and 
ent types of constituents. For instance, the relation GLVVROXWLRQ Fernández-Breis, 2000]. E.g., a foot is part of a leg which is part of 
occurs only between a pore and a diagenetic constituent.   a body.  not take into account the absolute period of time the event analyses each constituent individually. For example, the 
has happened, but only the order in which the diagenetic description of one constituent is as follows: 
event has occurred in relation to other events.       >TXDUW]LQWHUJUDQXODUGLVFRQWLQXRXVSRUHOLQLQJFRYHULQJ
G2UGHULQJ5HODWLRQPRGHOOHGDVDWHPSRUDOUHODWLRQ A GLDJHQHWLFFRQVWLWXHQWV!KHPDWLWH@
rock is formed as a result of several different diagenetic In the PSM depicted in Figure 1, this line corresponds to 
events, which can happen in a simultaneous or in a sequen- the knowledge role labelled as HOHPHQW (1). The next steps 
tial way. To simplify the computational treatment of the are: abstracting the paragenetic relation (FRYHULQJ
sequence, we treat the ordering of events in pairs, as does GLDJHQHWLFFRQVWLWXHQWV!) from the description (role YLVXDO
the expert.  The relations between pairs of events were rep- UHODWLRQ - label 2) and specifying the constituent visually 
resented using the WHPSRUDOUHODWLRQ construct to model the related to the former (role UHODWHGHOHPHQW - label 3). Thus, 
temporal relations DIWHUEHIRUHand GXULQJ        the related constituent is KHPDWLWH, described as follows: 
H,QIHUHQFHUXOHVPRGHOOHGDVIXQFWLRQV As explained in [KHPDWLWH ±FRDWLQJLQWHUJUDQXODUFRQWLQXRXVSRUHOLQ
Section 3.1, the expert is able to indicate the generating LQJZLWKLQLQWHUJUDQXODUSULPDU\SRURVLW\PDFURSRURVLW\
events by analysing the characteristics of the constituents. LQWHUJUDQXODU]  
For instance, when the attribute PRGLILHU of a constituent The result of these steps is a pair of constituents associ-
holds the value GHIRUPHG, it is possible to conclude that the ated by a paragenetic relation (TXDUW]FRYHULQJKHPDWLWH). 
event that transformed the constituent is FRPSDFWLRQ. Hence, A rock constituent is characterised by some attributes 
it was necessary to represent this knowledge as HYHQWLQGLFD which provide an indication of the generating event of the 
WLRQ UXOHV. These inference rules define an association be- constituent. The algorithm abstracts such attributes from the 
tween FRQVWLWXHQWV and GLDJHQHWLF HYHQWV, e.g. (R1) below: description of the constituent. The attributes are the roles 
  LIFRQVWLWXHQWPRGLILHU GHIRUPHG                 labelled as 4 and 5 in Figure 1. The relevant attributes are 
  WKHQHYHQWHYHQWBQDPH FRPSDFWLRQ       R1        used as premises for the event indication rules (label 6), 
  After identifying the events, the expert is able to infer the returning the event that produced or modified the constitu-
order in which they occurred by means of the visual-spatial ent. These last inference steps are performed for both con-
(paragenetic) relations among the constituents. For instance, stituents, resulting in a pair of diagenetic events (labelled as 
when a mineral appears to be FRYHULQJ (on top of) another 7 and 8). For the constituents considered in this example, 
mineral, the expert says that the event that formed the first the following events are inferred by the rules: SUHFLSLWDWLRQ
mineral occurred later than the event that formed the latter. RITXDUW] and SUHFLSLWDWLRQRIKHPDWLWH 
The first part of this particular expert’s rule is assuming a The paragenetic relation between constituents (label 2) is 
SDUDJHQHWLFUHODWLRQ between constituents. The second part used as premise for the temporal inference rules (label 9). 
is defining an RUGHULQJ UHODWLRQ between events. Thus, we The result is the ordering relation (label 10) (e.g. given in 
need to represent this knowledge as WHPSRUDO LPSOLFDWLRQ rule R2, where the paragenetic relation FRYHULQJ implies the 
UXOHV, defined in Section 3.1. An example of this type of rule temporal relation DIWHU). The ordering relation and the pair 
is the following (R2):                                of events are used as inputs for the inference named RUGHU, 
  LIFRYHULQJFRQVWLWXHQWFRQVWLWXHQW            which results an ordered pair of events (label 11), which, in 
  DQGSURGXFHGBE\FRQVWLWXHQWHYHQW
                                            R2        this case is  
  DQGSURGXFHGBE\FRQVWLWXHQWHYHQW              DIWHU&HPHQWDWLRQRI4XDUW]&HPHQWDWLRQRI+HPDWLWH
  WKHQDIWHUHYHQWHYHQW                           The algorithm that mechanizes the PSM is implemented 
  If FRQVWLWXHQW is covering FRQVWLWXHQW and the events as a loop that stops when there are no more constituents to 
that produced them are, respectively, HYHQW and HYHQW, be evaluated. The algorithm outputs a list of ordered pairs, 
then the conclusion is that HYHQW happened after HYHQW. e.g. the following list for the sample being evaluated: 
                                                      DIWHU&HPHQWDWLRQRI+HPDWLWH'HSRVLWLRQRI'HWULWDO4XDUW]
,QLWLDO9DOLGDWLRQRIWKH&RJQLWLYH0RGHOV        DIWHU&HPHQWDWLRQRI4XDUW]&HPHQWDWLRQRI+HPDWLWH
                                                      EHIRUH&HPHQWDWLRQRI4XDUW]&HPHQWDWLRQRI,OOLWH
The temporal constructs and the proposed PSM have been  We use a directed graph to create a sequence of events 
applied to the petrography domain. They were implemented 
                               3HWUR*UDSKHU           from the list of ordered pairs. An edge from the event that 
as an inference module within the           system,   comes before (in the source vertex) to the event that comes 
called GLDJHQHWLFVHTXHQFHLQWHUSUHWDWLRQPRGXOH. Real rock 
                                       3HWUR*UDSKHU   later in time (in the target vertex) defines the ordering rela-
samples were described by the expert in the           tion. For instance, the result of mapping the list above to a 
system and he also provided a previous interpretation of the directed graph is represented in Figure 3. 
sequence of diagenetic events. Thus, the interpretation pro-
duced by the algorithm was compared to the expert’s inter- Deposition Cementa-    Cementa-    Cementa-
pretation of the sequence. In order to illustrate this initial of Detrital tion of tion of     tion of 
                                                           Quartz     Hematite     Quartz       Illite 
validation, a step-by-step interpretation of a sample is de-                                          
scribed in what follows. 
  As input to the algorithm we have a description of a rock )LJXUH(YHQWVVHTXHQFHSURGXFHGE\WKHLQIHUHQFHDOJRULWKP
sample, which is composed by 132 attributes that detail the 
description of the constituents of the rock. The algorithm Such inferences depend on how clear the visual-spatial 
                                                      arrangements of constituents are in a particular sample. 