        Clinical-Reasoning Skill Acquisition through Intelligent Group Tutoring 

                              Siriwan Suebnukarn and Peter Haddawy 
                                     Asian Institute of Technology 
                       Computer Science and Information Management Program 
                                     Pathumthani, Thailand, 12120 
                              {Siriwan.Suebnukarn, haddawy}@ait.ac.th 

                     Abstract                        the lack of standards for PBL tutoring [Das et al., 2002] and 
                                                     a lack of properly trained tutors.  In addition, effective PBL 
    This paper describes COMET, a collaborative in-  requires the tutor to provide a high degree of personal atten-
    telligent tutoring system for medical problem-
                                                     tion to the students.  In the current academic environment 
    based learning.  COMET uses Bayesian networks    where resources are becoming increasingly scarce and costs 
    to model individual student knowledge and activ- must be reduced, providing such attention becomes increas-
    ity, as well as that of the group.  Generic domain-
                                                     ingly difficult.  This is exacerbated by the fact that medical 
    independent tutoring algorithms use the models to school faculty, in particular, often have limited time to de-
    generate tutoring hints.  We present an overview of vote to teaching.  As a consequence, medical students often 
    the system and then the results of two evaluation 
                                                     do not get as much facilitated PBL training as they might 
    studies.  The validity of the modeling approach is need or want.   
    evaluated in the areas of head injury, stroke and  There has been increasing interest in application of intel-
    heart attack. Receiver operating characteristic 
                                                     ligent technologies to medical training to provide rich envi-
    (ROC) curve analysis indicates that, the models are ronments for maximizing learning while minimizing risks to 
    accurate in predicting individual student actions. patients, until sufficient competency is established. The ma-
    Comparison of learning outcomes shows that stu-
                                                     jority of the work in intelligent medical training system has 
    dent clinical reasoning gains from our system are focused on particular domains, such as Radiology [Sharples 
    significantly higher than those obtained from hu- et al., 2000] or Pathology [Crowley and Medvedeva, 2003] 
    man tutored sessions (Mann-Whitney, p = 0.011). 
                                                     for training students in feature perception and disease classi-
                                                     fication.  Little or no work has addressed providing a gen-
1 Introduction                                       eral domain-independent framework for intelligent medical 
The transformation from medical student to physician is a tutoring and no work has addressed intelligent medical tu-
gradual one, requiring the assimilation of vast amount of toring in group settings. 
knowledge as well as the development of clinical-reasoning We have developed a collaborative intelligent tutoring 
skills. Clinical reasoning is the cognitive process by which system for medical problem-based learning called COMET.  
the information contained in a clinical case is synthesized, COMET uses Bayesian networks to model individual stu-
integrated with the physician’s knowledge and experience, dent knowledge and activity, as well as that of the group.  It 
and used to diagnose or manage the patient’s problem uses generic tutoring algorithms applied to the models to 
[Newble et al., 1994]. Problem-based learning (PBL) has generate tutorial hints to guide problem solving activity.  In 
been introduced as an alternative to traditional didactic previous work [Suebnukarn and Haddawy, 2004] we pre-
medical education to teach clinical-reasoning skills at the sented a basic Bayes net student model and details of the 
early stages of medical education. PBL is designed to chal- tutoring algorithms.  We also presented results of a study 
lenge learners to build up their knowledge and develop ef- showing that the hints generated by COMET agree with 
fective clinical-reasoning skills around practical patient those of a majority of human tutors.  In this paper we pre-
problems. PBL instructional models vary but the general sent a new, more expressive Bayesian network student 
approach is student-centered, small group, collaborative model, along with an ROC analysis evaluating of the 
problem solving activities [Barrows, 1986]. The main ar- model’s accuracy.  We also evaluate the overall effective-
guments for using collaborative problem solving in medical ness of COMET in imparting clinical reasoning skills to 
PBL include the wider range of ideas generated and the medical students by comparing clinical reasoning exam 
higher quality of discussion that ensues.  In addition, stu- scores of COMET tutored students to those of human tu-
dents obtain training in the skill of consultation and group tored students. 
clinical problem solving, which are important for the suc-
cessful practice of clinical medicine.  But effectively im-
plementing PBL in the clinical curriculum is difficult due to 


 2 Medical Problem-Based Learning                       The system is implemented as a Java client/server combi-
                                                     nation, which can be used over the Internet or local area net-
Problem-based learning (PBL) can be described as “the works and supports any number of simultaneous PBL groups.  
learning that results from the process of working toward the The system implementation is modular and the tutoring 
understanding or resolution of a problem” [Barrows, 1986]. algorithms are generic so that adding a new scenario requires 
PBL is typically carried out in three phases: (1) Problem only adding the appropriate model representing how to solve 
analysis: In group discussion the students evaluate the pa- a particular case (domain clinical reasoning model). The stu-
tient problem presented to them exactly as they would a real dent clinical reasoning model, which is a probabilistic over-
patient, attempting to determine the possible underlying lay of the domain clinical reasoning model, is then con-
anatomical, physiological, or biochemical dysfunctions and structed during runtime by instantiating the nodes that repre-
to enumerate all possible causal paths (hypotheses and their sent the knowledge and activity of an individual student. The 
causal relations) that would explain the progression of the architecture of COMET differs from that of most ITS’s in that 
patient’s problems. (2)  Self-directed study: In this phase, the domain model and student model are embodied in one 
students work outside the tutorial session, using any relevant representation. The domain model is contained in the part of 
learning resources, e.g. literature, laboratories, specialists, to the structure of the network that represents the hypotheses 
address any open issues identified in the first phase. (3) Syn- and the cause-effect relations among them.  The student 
thesis and application of newly acquired information: The model is contained in the part of the network that represents 
students analyze data and wrap up the problem collabora- how the hypotheses are derived and in the network’s prob-
tively after they return from their self-study period.  abilities.  The probabilities do not represent the likelihood of 
   One of the main issues in PBL is the role of the tutor.  occurrence of the hypotheses but rather the likelihood that a 
Like a good coach, a tutor needs enough command of what- student will be able to create the hypotheses.   
ever the learners are working on to recognize when and 
where they most need help [Das et al., 2002]. The ideal tu-
tor should be an expert in both learning content and learning 
process, which is rare to find among human tutors. The tutor 
intervenes to as small an extent as possible, giving hints 
only when the group appears to be getting stuck or off track.  
In this way, the tutor avoids making the students dependent 
on him for their learning. 

3  A Collaborative Medical Tutor  

3.1 Conceptual Framework 
COMET is designed to provide an experience that emulates 
that of live human-tutored medical PBL sessions as much as 
possible while at the same time permitting the students to                                              
participate collaboratively from disparate locations. COMET 
                                                     Figure 1. COMET student interface. 
incorporates a multi-modal interface that integrates text and 
graphics so as to provide a rich communication channel be-
tween the students and the system, as well as among students 3.2  Domain and Student Clinical Reasoning Model 
in the group (Fig. 1). Students collaboratively create the prob- We built the domain clinical reasoning model based on the 
lem solution on the hypothesis board, shown at the bottom of process of hypothesis generation in problem-based learning. 
Fig. 1.  Typically each student works from a separate com- Consider, for example, the heart attack scenario taken from 
puter. COMET can currently support PBL problem analysis a PBL session at Thammasat University Medical School. 
in the domains of Head injury, Stroke and Heart attack. Note   “Mr. C, a 56-year-old who was diagnosed as having es-
that these three domains are quite different since the knowl- sential hypertension four years ago, is complaining of chest 
edge used to reason about head injury is primarily anatomical, pain which feels like indigestion. You have noticed that he 
while that used to reason about stroke and heart attack is pri- is mildly obese, pale, clammy and sweating profusely…” 
marily physiological.  Furthermore, the patho-physiology of Here students must enumerate possible hypotheses to ex-
the latter two diseases is more dynamic.             plain why the patient is experiencing chest pain. Figure 2 is 
  Generating appropriate tutorial actions in COMET re- a photograph of the white board of the group PBL session, 
quires a model of the students’ clinical reasoning for the showing a directed acyclic graph representing cause-effect 
problem domain. This modeling task is necessarily wrought relationships among hypotheses.  This graph represents the 
with uncertainty since we have only a limited number of problem solution developed by the students. Since we 
observations from which to infer each student’s level of would like to reason about the state of knowledge of each 
understanding. Thus we have chosen to use Bayesian net- student concerning the solution, this graph is our starting 
works as our modeling technique.                     point for the student model. The hypothesis graph can be 
                                                     conveniently represented as a Bayesian network since 


 Bayesian networks are also directed acyclic graphs.  In addi- not be created unless both hypotheses are created first. Each 
tion, Bayesian networks can represent our uncertainty about link node has two states, indicating whether or not the student 
the state of knowledge of the students.              creates a causal link between two hypotheses. 
                                                       The derivation of hypotheses (Fig. 3, left half) is represented 
                                                     in terms of three kinds of nodes: goals, general medical knowl-
                                                     edge, and apply actions.  Every hypothesis node has a unique 
                                                     Apply node as one of its parents. The Apply node represents the 
                                                     application of a medical concept to a goal in order to derive the 
                                                     hypothesis.  For example the Apply_13 node indicates that the 
                                                     student is able to use knowledge of the Vessel Lumina occlu-
                                                     sion medical concept to infer that Myocardial infarction is a 
                                                     consequence of Atherosclerosis.  Each hypothesis node thus 
                                                     has a conditional probability table specifying the probability 
                                                     of the hypothesis being known conditioned on whether the 
                                                     parent hypotheses are known and whether the student is able 
                                                     to apply the appropriate piece of knowledge to determine the 
                                                     cause-effect relationship.  The conditional probability tables 
Figure 2. A photograph of the white board after a PBL session at for the Apply nodes are simple AND gates.   
Thammasat University Medical School. The graph shows hypothe- Our BN student model is similar to the student model used 
ses with arrows indicating cause-effect relations among them. by Conati, et al [2002].  Their model includes five types of 
(Note: Some hypotheses are written in Thai.)         nodes: Context-Rule, Rule-Application, Fact, Goal, and Strat-
   The BN structure contains two types of information: (1) the egy.  The correspondence between their node types and ours 
hypotheses and the causal links of the problem solution (Fig. is: Context-Rule = Concept, Rule-Application = Apply, Fact 
3, right half) and (2) how students derive the hypotheses (Fig. = Hypothesis, and Goal = Goal.  Strategy nodes, which repre-
3, left half). We represent the hypothesis structure following sent different correct solutions to a problem, are implicitly 
the model of Feltovich and Barrows [1984], which defines encoded in our model by the fact that students can enumerate 
three categories of illness features:  enabling conditions, the causal hypothesis structure in any order.  Our model con-
faults, and consequences. Enabling conditions are illness fea- tains causal links among hypotheses, which are not present in 
tures associated with the acquisition of illness (e.g., compro- their model.  The reason for this is that in our medical do-
mised host factors, unusual travel, or hereditary factors). mains a problem solution is represented by the hypotheses 
Faults are the major real malfunctions in illness (e.g., direct and causal links among them, while in their physics domains 
trauma, invasion of tissue by pathogenic organisms, or inade- a problem solution is represented by a sequence of rule appli-
quate blood supply). Consequences are the secondary conse- cations and the derived facts. 
quences of faults within the organism, and generally comprise For each problem scenario, we consulted medical text-
different types of signs and symptoms, e.g., chest pain, books and expert PBL tutors to obtain the hypotheses, the 
breathlessness, or tachycardia.  In Figure 3 (right half), we causal relations among them, the goals, and the medical 
have five possible faults associated with the single conse- concepts used to derive the hypotheses. The conditional 
quence chest pain: Myocardial infarction, Angina, Muscu- probability tables for each resulting network were obtained 
loskeletal injury, Gastrointestinal disorder, and Stress. by learning from data obtained from transcripts of PBL ses-
Atherosclerosis is the enabling condition of Myocardial in- sions. The data for this study consisted of tape recordings 
farction and Angina. The remaining hypothesis nodes are and photographs of tutorial sessions for the head injury, 
consequences of Myocardial infarction.  Each hypothesis stroke and heart attack scenarios at Thammasat University 
node has parent nodes, which have a direct casual impact on Medical School.  A total of 15 groups of third year medical 
it. For example, Right heart failure has parents Pulmonary students were involved in this study. Each group, consisting 
congestion and Myocardial infarction.  All hypothesis nodes of eight students with different backgrounds, was presented 
have two states, indicating whether or not the student knows with the head injury, stroke and heart attack cases and asked 
that the hypothesis is a valid hypothesis for the case.  to construct possible hypotheses for the case, under the 
   In the PBL sessions, the students create the hypotheses as guidance of a tutor.  After the sessions the tape and the re-
well as the causal links between them (Fig. 2). We would like sults on the whiteboard were analyzed to determine whether 
to be able to reason about the probability that students know or not each goal, concept, hypothesis, and link was men-
the correct causal links. But in a Bayes net, random variables tioned.  We used the EM learning algorithm provided by the 
are represented with nodes.  So we use link nodes to represent HUGIN Researcher software to learn the conditional prob-
the causal links between hypotheses.  For every hypothesis abilities of each node [Lauritzen 1995].   
that is a direct cause of another hypothesis (e.g.  Atheroscle-
rosis and Myocardial infarction), we have a node (e.g 3.3  Individual and Collaborative Student Clinical 
Link_14) representing the causal link between them.  The two Reasoning Modeling 
hypothesis nodes (Atherosclerosis, Myocardial infarction) are The domain clinical reasoning model is instantiated for each 
the parents of the link node. The intuition is that the link can- student by entering that student’s medical background 


         Goal             Concept               Apply                                                       Hypothesis                                                       Link 


                                                                                                   
   Figure 3. Part of the Bayesian Network clinical reasoning model of the heart attack scenario. The complete network contains 194 
   nodes. The model contains five types of nodes: goal, concept, apply, hypothesis, and link. 

knowledge as evidence. For example, if a student has a (1) Focus group discussion: Members of the group may 
background in Thoracic anatomy, we would instantiate the suggest various valid hypotheses without focusing on any 
Thoracic organ node.  Since all students have basic knowl- given causal path.  When such lack of focus becomes appar-
edge in Anatomy, Physiology and Pathology before they ent, COMET intervenes by directing the students to focus 
encounter the PBL tutorial sessions, we make the assump- on one of the hypotheses in the group path.  (2) Promote 
tion that once a hypothesis in the domain model is created open discussion: If a student proposes a hypothesis that is 
by one student in the group, every student knows that hy- not on the current group reasoning path, COMET provides 
pothesis.  So as hypotheses are created, they are instantiated positive feedback by encouraging the student to relate the 
in each student model.                               hypothesis to the current focus of discussion.  (3) Deflect 
  Following commonly accepted practice in medical PBL, uneducated guessing: If a student creates an incorrect causal 
we assume that students should and generally do enumerate link, COMET points this out and encourages the student to 
the possible hypotheses by focusing sequentially on the correct the error.  (4) Avoid jumping critical steps: If a stu-
various causal paths in the domain, linking enabling condi- dent creates a link that jumps directly from one hypothesis 
tions with faults and consequences.  So for each student, we to a down-stream consequence, leaving out intermediate 
must determine what causal path he is reasoning along, hypotheses, COMET asks the student for the more direct 
which we do by identifying the path of highest probability consequences.  (5) Address incomplete information: Once 
in that student’s model.  This is computed as the joint prob- the students have completed elaborating all hypotheses on 
ability of the nodes along the path. The most likely current the group path, COMET identifies another path for them to 
reasoning path for each student is path that gives the maxi- work on.  (6) Refer to experts in the group: If after COMET 
mum joint probability. Since the students work in a group, it provides a general and then a more specific hint, the stu-
is also necessary to identify a causal path that can be used to dents still do not respond correctly, COMET determines the 
focus group discussion, particularly when the discussion student most likely to know the answer and refers directly to 
seems to be diverging in different directions.  We would like him.  (7) Promote collaborative discussion: If one student 
to identify a path that has much of the attention of much of dominates the discussion, COMET asks for input from the 
the group and has at least one member whose attention is other students.  If a student does not contribute after a cer-
focused on that path. We identify a set of candidate paths by tain number of hypotheses have been mentioned, COMET 
taking the most likely path for each student.  This guaran- solicits input from that student.  
tees that each candidate path has at least one student cur- All strategies except strategies 6 and 7 have general and 
rently focused on it.  We then compute the sum of the prob- specific versions. COMET first gives a general hint using 
abilities of each candidate path over all students and select the parent goal node of the hypothesis that it has determined 
the path with the highest sum.  This gives us the candidate the students should focus on, and if there is no student re-
path with the highest average attention over all students. sponse or an incorrect response, the more specific parent 
                                                     medical concept node is used. If the students can still not 
3.4  Generating Tutorial Hints                       come up with the hypothesis of interest, COMET refers di-
Our automated tutor takes on the role of guiding the tutorial rectly to the student in the group most likely to know the 
group to construct possible hypotheses for the case by the answer.  If this doesn’t work, COMET identifies this as a 
use of open-ended questions.  From our study of the tutoring learning objective for study outside the session.   
session transcripts, we identified and implemented seven  We developed algorithms to generate each of these types 
hint strategies commonly used by experienced human tutors:  of hints, using as input the interaction log and the Bayesian 


 network student models. All strategies except strategy 7 use Results 
both the structure and the probabilities of the Bayes net To determine whether our student models are accurate in 
models. Strategy 7 uses only a count of the number of inputs predicting student actions, we evaluated them by means of 
from each student. Strategies 1, 2, 5 make use of the group receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. The 
reasoning path discussed in the previous section. The fol- area under the curve (AUC) represents an overall measure-
lowing transcript shows the interaction with the system after ment of performance of the student model, with 1.0 a per-
the students read the heart attack problem scenario, de- fect test and 0.5 representing a model with no discriminating 
scribed in Section 3.2. The system selects hint strategies and capacity. 
content based on the student input on the hypothesis board.  Table 1 shows the ROC curve analysis of the student 
Students: Gastrointestinal disorder, Smoking, Hyperten- models for the Head injury, Stroke, and Heart attack scenar-
sion, Angina, Myocardial infarction, Chest pain (Students in ios. There were more false positive cases in the Stroke sce-
the group gradually create six hypotheses on the board, nario than in the others, since the student model for the 
while analyzing the problem.)                        Stroke scenario was built from students who had already 
Tutor: What is the consequence of Myocardial infarction? studied Cerebrovascular knowledge from the Head injury 
(Strategy 1: COMET focuses group discussion by identify- scenario, while in this study, we recruited students who had 
ing which causal path the group should focus on, finding the not yet studied any of the three scenarios. Averaging results 
highest probability non-mentioned node along the path (Left over all scenarios shows high accuracy in predicting both 
heart failure), and providing a hint using its parent goal hypotheses and causal links.   
node (Consequence of Myocardial infarction).) 
Student: Cardiac output decreased (Cardiac output de- Table 1. ROC analysis showing AUC for three scenarios 
creased is a node along the group reasoning path but not Scenarios                Prediction 
the node that COMET wants the group to focus on.)                         Hypotheses Causal links 
Tutor: Think about decrease in myocardial contractility. Head injury        0.909           0.898 
(Strategy 1: COMET gives the next hint using the medical Stroke             0.765           0.838 
concept parent node of Left Heart Failure.)           Heart attack          0.868           0.905 
Student: Right heart failure (Right heart failure is a node All 0.832 0.900 
along the group reasoning path but not the node that 
COMET wants the group to focus on.)                  4.2  Evaluation of Student Clinical Reasoning Gains 
Tutor: It seems we have a problem. Nida, can you help the 
group? (Strategy 7: Nida is called on since she has the To evaluate the overall impact of the system on student 
highest probability of knowing the Left heart failure node learning, we designed a study to test the hypothesis that a 
among the students.)                                 COMET tutorial will result in similar student clinical rea-
                                                     soning gains to those obtained from a session with an ex-
4 Evaluation                                         perienced human PBL tutor.  
                                                       We compared three groups of students tutored by 
                                                     COMET with three other groups of students tutored by ex-
4.1  Evaluation of the Student Model                 perienced human tutors. The study had a pre/post test con-
In order to determine the accuracy of the model, we com- trol group design. All students were assessed on their clini-
pared the probabilities of hypotheses and causal links from cal reasoning before and after the PBL tutorial session on 
the student model with actual student actions considered as heart attack and stroke to determine the reasoning gains for 
a “gold standard”. We recruited 15 second-year medical each individual student.  
students from Thammasat University Medical School. That We used the Clinical Reasoning Problem (CRP) approach 
is, they had not yet had PBL experience in Head injury, for clinical reasoning assessment [Groves et al., 2002]. Each 
Stroke, or Heart attack. Stratified random sampling was CRP consisted of a clinical scenario that was vetted for clini-
applied to divide the students into 3 groups based on their cal accuracy and realism by a specialist physician. Four cases 
background knowledge. Students were asked to answer pre- in the pre-test set measured each student’s initial ability to 
test questions to determine their background knowledge. solve the problems. Four other post-test cases measured their 
This information was used to instantiate the general student ability to generalize the clinical reasoning acquired from tuto-
model for each individual student. Students participated rial session to the new related cases. Participants were asked 
individually in the problem solving sessions on head injury, to nominate the two diagnoses they considered most likely, to 
stroke, and heart attack with COMET.  Each student was list the features of the case that they regarded as important in 
asked to enumerate hypotheses and the causal links without formulating their diagnoses, and to indicate whether these 
any help from the COMET tutor. The student actions of features were positively or negatively predictive. To establish 
creating hypotheses and their links served as a gold standard reference scores, ten volunteer general practitioners (GPs) 
for comparison with the predicted probabilities from the were asked to complete both sets of CRPs. 
Bayesian network student model.   
                                                     Results 
                                                     There were no statistically significant differences between 
                                                     pre- and post-test scores obtained from the GPs, indicating 


 