 A Probabilistic Framework for Recognizing Intention in Information Graphics∗
          ∗Stephanie Elzer,  ∗∗Sandra Carberry,    ∗ ∗ ∗Ingrid Zukerman,    ∗∗Daniel Chester,
                                  ∗ ∗ ∗∗Nancy Green,   ∗∗Seniz Demir
              ∗Dept. of Computer Science, Millersville University, Millersville, PA 17551
               ∗∗Dept. of Computer Science, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716
∗ ∗ ∗School of Comp. Science and Software Engrg, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800 Australia
 ∗ ∗ ∗∗Dept. of Mathematical Sciences, Univ. of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402

                    Abstract                          ule (IRM). The IRM is responsible for recognizing the in-
                                                      tended message of the information graphic and sending it
    This paper extends language understanding and     to the content planning module (CPM), which will augment
    plan inference to information graphics. We iden-  the intended message with related interesting features of the
    tify the kinds of communicative signals that appear graphic. The message organization module (MOM) will then
    in information graphics, describe how we utilize  organize the most salient propositions into a coherent sum-
    them in a Bayesian network that hypothesizes the  mary, which will be rendered in natural language and con-
    graphic’s intended message, and discuss the perfor- veyed to the user via speech synthesis. The followup ques-
    mance of our implemented system. This work is     tion module (FQM) will allow the user to interactively seek
    part of a larger project aimed at making informa- additional information about the graphic.
    tion graphics accessible to individuals with sight
    impairments.

1  Introduction
For individuals who have serious sight impairments, doc-
uments that contain information graphics (bar charts, line
graphs, etc.) pose challenging problems. Although devices
have been developed for conveying information graphics in
alternative mediums such as musical tones or tactile images,
these approaches have serious limitations. For example, they
often require expensive equipment, as well as requiring the
user to construct a “mental map” of the graphic, which is difﬁ-
cult for congenitally blind users who do not have the personal     Figure 1: System Architecture
knowledge to assist them in the interpretation of the image
[Kennel, 1996]. The underlying hypothesis of our work is
that alternative access to what the graphic looks like is not This paper identiﬁes the communicative signals that appear
enough — the user should be provided with the message and in information graphics and discusses how we exploit them
knowledge that one would gain from viewing the graphic in in a Bayesian network that hypothesizes a graphic’s intended
order to enable effective and efﬁcient use of this information message. It concludes with several illustrative examples and
resource.                                             an evaluation of our system’s performance, which provides
  We are developing an interactive natural language system strong evidence of the effectiveness of our methodology. To
which infers the intended message of an information graphic, our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to extend plan recognition
provides a summary that includes the intended message along to the domain of information graphics.
with notable features of the graphic, and then responds to
follow-up questions from the user. Figure 1 shows the archi- 2 Approach
tecture of our system. The visual extraction module (VEM)
                                                      Language research has posited that a speaker or writer exe-
analyzes the graphic and provides an XML representation
                                                      cutes a speech act whose intended meaning he expects the
of the graphic to the caption tagging module (CTM) which
                                                      listener to be able to deduce, and that the listener identiﬁes
extracts information from the caption and passes the aug-
                                                      the intended meaning by reasoning about the observed signals
mented XML representation to the intention recognition mod-
                                                      and the mutual beliefs of author and interpreter [Grice, 1969].
  ∗Authors  can  be  reached via  email as  follows:  However, as [Clark, 1996] noted, language is more than just
elzer@cs.millersville.edu, {carberry, chester, demir}@cis.udel.edu, words. It is any “signal” (or lack of signal when one is ex-
Ingrid.Zukerman@infotech.monash.edu.au, nlgreen@uncg.edu. pected), where a signal is a deliberate action that is intended                    Local bankruptcy
                      personal filings                ator consisting of:
              3000                                      • Goal: the goal that the operator achieves
              2500                                      • Data Requirements: requirements which the data must

              2000                                        satisfy in order for the operator to be applicable in a
                                                          graphic planning paradigm
              1500                                      • Display Constraints: features that constrain how the
              1000                                        information graphic is eventually constructed if this op-
                  1998 1999 2000 2001                     erator is part of the ﬁnal plan
     Figure 2: Graphic from a 2001 Local Newspaper      • Body: lower-level subgoals that must be accomplished
                                                          in order to achieve the overall goal of the operator
to convey a message. Although some information graphics
are only intended to display data values,1 the overwhelming For plan recognition, the plan operators facilitate chaining
majority of information graphics from popular media sources backwards from perceptual tasks that can be performed on a
appear to have some underlying goal or intended message, given graphic, to hypothesize candidate goals and plans. The
such as the graphic in Figure 2 whose communicative goal display constraints are used in reverse, that is, to eliminate
is ostensibly to convey the sharp increase in local bankrupt- operators from consideration (i.e., if the graphic does not sat-
cies in 2001 compared with the previously decreasing trend. isfy the constraints on the display, then the operator could not
Applying Clark’s view of language to information graphics, have been part of a plan that produced the graphic). The data
it is reasonable to presume that the author of an information requirements are used to instantiate parameters in the oper-
graphic expects the viewer to deduce the message that he in- ator (i.e., the data must have had certain characteristics for
tended to convey by reasoning about the graphic itself, the the operator to have been included in the designer’s plan, and
salience of entities in the graphic, and mutual beliefs. these limit how the operator’s arguments can be instantiated).
  Beginning with the seminal work of [Perrault and Allen, Following the work of [Charniak and Goldman, 1993] and
1980], researchers have applied plan inference techniques to a others, we capture plan inference in a probabilistic frame-
variety of problems associated with understanding utterances, work. We use our plan operators, along with the evidence
particularly within dialogue. Given domain knowledge in the that we glean from the information graphic itself, to construct
form of operators that decompose goals into a sequence of a Bayesian network which allows us to reason about the like-
subgoals, along with evidence in the form of an observed lihood of various candidate plans.
action (such as an utterance), a plan inference system can
chain backwards on the plan operators to deduce one or more 3 Network Structure
high-level goals that might have led the agent to perform the Although we believe that our ﬁndings are extendible to other
observed action as part of an overall plan for achieving his kinds of information graphics, our current work focuses on
goal(s). The high-level communicative goals in the plan cap- bar charts. Our analysis of simple bar charts2 has shown that
ture the utterance’s intended meaning.                the intended message can be classiﬁed into one of 12 high-
  In their work on intelligent multimedia generation, the Au- level categories; examples of such categories are:
toBrief group proposed that speech act theory can be ex-
tended to the generation of graphical presentations [Kerped- • GetRank: Viewer to believe that <entity-1> is ranked
jiev and Roth, 2000]. When designing an information       <rank>  among the entities in the graphic
graphic, the designer has one or more high-level communica- • Change-trend: Viewer to believe that there is a
tive goals. He constructs a graphic that he believes will enable <slope-1> trend from <param1> to <param2> and a
the viewer to perform certain perceptual and cognitive tasks signiﬁcantly different <slope-2> trend from <param3>
which, along with other knowledge, will enable the viewer to <param4>
                                     [
to recognize the graphic’s intended message Kerpedjiev and • Relative-difference: Viewer to believe that the value
         ]
Roth, 2000 . By perceptual tasks we mean tasks that can be of element <param1> is <comparison> the value of
performed by simply viewing the graphic, such as ﬁnding the element <param2>, where <comparison> is greater-
top of a bar in a bar chart; by cognitive tasks we mean tasks than, less-than, or equal-to.
that are done via mental computations, such as computing the
difference between two numbers.                         The top-level node in our network captures the likelihood
  In our research, we extend plan inference techniques to of all of the possible categories of high-level intentions un-
inferring intention from information graphics. Our plan op- derlying a graphic. The entry with the highest probability in
erators capture knowledge about how the graphic designer’s this node represents the category most likely to represent the
goal of conveying a message can be achieved via the viewer graphic designer’s primary intention or communicative goal
performing certain perceptual and cognitive tasks, as well as for the graph. Each individual category of high-level goal is
knowledge about how perceptual and cognitive tasks decom- represented as a child of this top-level node. We refer to the
pose into sets of simpler tasks. Figure 3 displays a plan oper- process of replacing one or more of the parameters of a goal
                                                      or perceptual task with speciﬁc elements or entities of the
  1[Yu et al., 2002] developed a pattern recognition algorithm for graphic as instantiating that goal or task. The network nodes
summarizing interesting features of automatically generated graph-
ics of time-series data from a gas turbine engine.       2We are not yet considering composite or grouped bar charts.Goal:  RankFromBar(<viewer>, <ds>, <g>, <bi>, <vi>, <rank>)
Gloss: Viewer to believe from graphic <g> that the element of dataset <ds> depicted as bar <bi> with the value <vi> for primary key
       <att1> has a value for <att2> that is <rank> among the values of <att2> associated with elements displayed on graphic <g>
Data Requirements:
  1. <att1> is the primary key attribute for dataset <ds>
  2. <att2> is a dependent attribute for dataset <ds>
  3. The values of <att2> have a natural ordering along a quantitative scale
  4. The value of <att2> for <vi> has rank <rank> among the elements of <ds>
Display Constraints:
  1. Graph <g> is a bar chart
  2. For each value of <att1> in dataset <ds>, the value of <att1> and associated value of <att2> is displayed via a bar on graph <g>
Body:
  1. PerceiveRank: Viewer can perform the perceptual task of ﬁnding the <rank> relative to <att2> of bar <bi> in graph <g>
  2. GetLabel: Viewer can perform the perceptual task of ﬁnding the value <vi> for <att1> where <vi> corresponds with the bar
    <bi> on graph <g>
                            Figure 3: Operator for ﬁnding the rank of a particular bar


                                                        Figure 5: Alternative Ways of Achieving the Same Goal

         Figure 4: Top levels of Belief Network         The nodes in the top levels of the network, representing
                                                      the high-level intentions and the alternative ways of achiev-
                                                      ing them (Figure 4), exist in every network and are added
                                                      at the beginning of the network construction process. Nodes
in the top two levels are not instantiated. Speciﬁc instantia- representing perceptual tasks (the lowest-level nodes in the
tions appear in the network as children of the nodes represent- network) are then added, and upward chaining via the plan
ing the high-level intentions. For example, the GetRank node operators adds higher level goals until a link is established
is shown with several children in Figure 4, illustrating several to one of the top-level goal nodes shown in Figure 4. How-
of its possible instantiations — namely, ﬁnding the rank of the ever, automatically adding to the network all of the possible
ﬁrst, second, or third bar in the graphic. (For readability, only instantiations of all possible perceptual tasks rapidly becomes
                                                      infeasible due to the overwhelming size of the resultant net-
the instantiation of the bar parameter < bi > in each GetRank
node is shown in Figure 4.) These are alternative instantia- work and practical constraints on memory. Thus, instead of
tions and so inhibitory links [Huber et al., 1994] are used to constructing the network a priori to include every possible
capture their mutual exclusivity. The child node of GetRank instantiation of each task, the network is built dynamically
with the highest probability represents the instantiation of that (using the API for Netica [Norsys, 2005]) when the system
goal most likely to be part of the graphic designer’s intended is presented with a new information graphic, and nodes are
plan. Therefore, if the entry for GetRank has the highest added to the network only as suggested by communicative
probability in the IntendedMessage root node, our system se- signals in the graphic, as discussed in the next two sections.
lects the instantiated child node of GetRank with the highest
probability, and produces the instantiated version of GetRank 4 Communicative Signals
as its hypothesis about the intended message of the graphic. In plan recognition systems involving dialogue, the com-
  If there are multiple ways for a goal to be achieved, these municative signals are naturally centered around the utter-
are captured as children of the instantiated goal node. For ex- ances, and the inference process uses signals such as the sur-
ample, a viewer might come to believe that the United States face form of the utterance, the focus of attention in the dia-
ranks third in GDP per capita in one of two ways: 1) he might logue, etc. Following AutoBrief [Kerpedjiev and Roth, 2000]
seek out the bar for the U.S. and perceive that it is the third [Green et al., 2004], we contend that when constructing a
highest bar in the graph, or 2) he might notice the bar repre- graphic, the designer made certain design decisions in order
senting the U.S. in the graphic (perhaps it is a different color), to make “important” tasks (the ones that the viewer is in-
and perceive that that bar is the third highest in the graph tended to perform in getting the graphic’s message) as easy
and that it represents the GDP per capita for the U.S. These or as salient as possible. The realization of these design de-
possibilities are captured respectively as RankFromLabel and cisions in the information graphic serve as communicative
RankFromBar in Figure 5.                              signals. The rest of this section identiﬁes the kinds of com-municative signals that appear in information graphics, and the graphic, then it signals the salience of the graphic ele-
Section 5 discusses how these signals are used in our plan ment associated with that label. Certain verbs and adjectives
inference framework.                                  in captions also serve as communicative signals. In this case,
                                                      the verbs and adjectives signal the salience of certain high-
4.1  Effort as a Communicative Signal                 level tasks. For example, the adjective highest in the caption
The design choices made by the graphic designer facilitate “Highest in GDP” suggests that the viewer should ﬁnd the
some perceptual tasks more than others. For example, if the maximum in the graphic, whereas the verb beats in the cap-
viewer is intended to compare the height of two bars, placing tion “U.S. Beats Japan” indicates that the viewer should note
the two bars beside each other in the graphic will facilitate the relative difference in value between the U.S. and Japan.
the comparison task. Thus the relative effort required for a [Elzer et al., 2005] presents our work on exploiting captions
perceptual task serves as a communicative signal about what in understanding information graphics.
tasks the designer expects the viewer to perform.
4.2  Salience as a Communicative Signal               5   Exploiting the Communicative Signals
Our working hypothesis is that if the graphic designer goes The communicative signals gleaned from an information
to the effort of employing attention-getting devices to make graphic can be exploited for two purposes: 1) to select per-
certain elements of the graphic particularly salient, then the ceptual task nodes for insertion in the network, and 2) as ev-
salient elements serve as communicative signals — i.e., the idence that will inﬂuence the hypothesis about the graphic
designer probably intends for them to be part of the intended designer’s intentions.
message of the graphic.                                 As discussed in Section 3, the Bayesian network must be
                                                      restricted to those perceptual tasks suggested by the graphic.
   40                                                 We use two kinds of communicative signals for this purpose:
                                                      perceptual effort and salient elements. We developed a set
   30                                                 of rules, based on research by cognitive scientists such as
                                                      [Lohse, 1993], for estimating the required perceptual effort
   20                                                 for a given perceptual task in a given graphic (eyetracking ex-
                                                      periments validating these rules are detailed in [Elzer et al.,
   10                                                 2004]). This set of rules is used to identify the set of instan-

    0                                                 tiated perceptual tasks in a graphic that are easiest relative to
   GDP  Per Capita, 2001 (in thousands) LuxembourgNorway U.S. Switzerland Japan Denmark Britain others, and nodes representing these tasks are added to the
        Figure 6: Information Graphic Example3        network. In some graphics, these are the only communica-
                                                      tive signals available. However, if there are salient elements
                                                      in the graphic (such as a highlighted bar or a bar whose label
  Highlighting (via a difference in color or shading) is one
                                                      appears as a noun in the caption), this salience signals that the
way of signalling salience. Suppose that the bar for the U.S.
                                                      element may play a role in the plan for achieving the intended
was the only red bar in the graph shown in Figure 6. This
                                                      message of the graphic. Therefore, we instantiate each pos-
would suggest that this bar is particularly relevant to the in-
                                                      sible perceptual task with the salient elements, add them to
tended message of the graphic. Annotating individual ele-
                                                      the network, and chain upward as described in Section 3 un-
ments with their exact values also signals salience. This is not
                                                      til a link is established to the top-level goal node. As nodes
the case when all of the elements are displayed with their ex-
                                                      are added via upward chaining, their subgoals (as captured in
act values, since this is a general design feature of the graphic
                                                      the plan operators) are also added, so that perceptual tasks re-
and does not draw attention to a speciﬁc subset of elements.
                                                      quired to achieve these subgoals are included in the network
Other salient entities include any element that is signiﬁcantly
                                                      even if they were not among the easiest or salient tasks.
taller than all of the other elements in the graphic and the most
                                                        A Bayesian network also needs to explicitly record evi-
recent date on a time-line, since the viewer will certainly no-
                                                      dence that should inﬂuence the credibility of different hy-
tice the height of a bar that is taller than all of the others,
                                                      potheses. Perceptual task effort and salient elements provide
and will naturally be interested in what has occurred most re-
                                                      evidence about the intended message. For each perceptual
cently. Although no speciﬁc action is required on the part of
                                                      task node in the network, evidence nodes are added as chil-
the graphic designer to make these elements salient, we posit
                                                      dren of the perceptual task node, as shown in Figure 7 – in
that it is mutually believed by both designer and viewer that
                                                      our diagrams, nodes representing evidence extracted from the
such elements will be salient to the viewer.
                                                      graphic are shown with dashed outlines. For example, the
  Captions by themselves are often too general [Corio and
                                                      Effort evidence node in Figure 7 captures the relative effort
Lapalme, 1999] or ill-formed to rely solely on them to iden-
                                                      required for the perceptual task that is its parent, the High-
tify what the graphic is intended to convey. However, we
                                                      lighting node captures whether a parameter in the perceptual
have found that captions often contain useful communicative
                                                      task is instantiated with a highlighted element in the graphic,
signals [Elzer et al., 2005]. First, nouns in captions can func-
                                                      and the NounInCaption node captures whether a parameter
tion the same as highlighting; if the noun matches a label in
                                                      in the perceptual task is instantiated with a bar whose label
  3This is based on a U.S. News & World Report graphic in our matches a noun in the caption.
corpus.                                                 Certain verbs and adjectives in the caption are also com-                                                           PerceiveRank(<bar>)     InPlan  NotInPlan
                                                           Only <bar> annotated     24.99        2.3
                                                           <bar> and others annotated 0.01       0.9
                                                           only others annotated     0.01       19.5
                                                           no bars annotated        74.99       77.3
                                                           Figure 9: A Sample Conditional Probability Table
   Figure 7: Perceptual Task Node with Evidence Nodes
                                                      for achieving the posited intention of each graphic; the goal-
                                                      subgoal relationships, including the low-level perceptual and
municative signals that provide evidence about the intended cognitive tasks, were entered into the spreadsheet.
message of an information graphic. Using Wordnet, we de- Spreadsheet formulas were then constructed to compute all
veloped classes of verbs and adjectives where members of of the required conditional probability tables. Examples of
each class perform in a similar way within the domain of in- the needed probability tables include: 1) the conditional prob-
formation graphic captions. (In the case of adjectives derived ability of a particular perceptual task being easy, medium,
from verbs, such as the adjective growing in the caption A hard or impossible given that the perceptual task is (or is not)
Growing Biotech Market, the adjective is treated as a verb us- part of the plan, 2) the conditional probability, for each class
ing its root form.) For example, the class for the verb rise in- of verb, that the verb class appears in the caption given that
cludes verbs such as increase, grow, expand, climb, and soar. the communicative goal of the graphic does (or does not) fall
Verb class and adjective class evidence nodes record which into a particular category of intention, and 3) the conditional
verb and/or adjective class (if any) appears in the caption; probability of a bar being annotated given that recognizing
they are inserted as children of the top-level node as shown the intended message entails (or does not entail) performing
in Figure 8, since this type of evidence suggests a particular a particular perceptual task involving that bar. Figure 9 shows
category of high-level intention.                     this latter conditional probability table.

                                                      7   System Performance
                                                      7.1  Illustrative Examples
                                                      The following examples illustrate how different kinds of ev-
                                                      idence impact our system’s hypothesis. The examples are
                                                      based on the bar chart in Figure 6. The XML representa-
Figure 8: Top-Level Node with Verb and Adjective Evidence tion of each example was produced by the Visual Extraction
                                                      Module (VEM), augmented by the Caption Tagging Mod-
                                                      ule (CTM), and then processed by the Intention Recognition
6  Gathering the Probabilities                        Module (IRM) (see Figure 1). Given the graphic as it appears
In a Bayesian network, conditional probability tables capture in Figure 6, our system hypothesizes that the graphic is in-
the probability of each of the values of a child node given the tended to convey the relative rank in GDP of different coun-
value of its parent(s). In contrast to many other probabilistic tries and assigns this intention a likelihood of 87%. Other
plan recognition models where it is difﬁcult to empirically de- possibilities also have some probability assigned to them. For
termine the probabilities, the probabilities for our belief net- example, the intention of conveying that Luxembourg has the
work have been obtained through a corpus analysis.    highest GDP is assigned a probability of 12.4% because the
  We automated the construction of a spreadsheet containing bars are in sorted order according to height, thus making it
information from each graphic needed to compute the neces- relatively easy for the viewer to recognize the maximum, and
sary probabilities. Each graphic’s XML representation was because ﬁnding the entity in the graphic with the maximum
analyzed to determine for each possible instantiation of each value is a fairly common intention (occurring approximately
perceptual task:                                      22.7% of the time in our corpus). However, there is no other
  • the relative effort (categorized as easy, medium, hard, or evidence suggesting that the bar representing the maximum
    impossible) as estimated by our effort estimation rules value is salient (such as that bar being highlighted, or “Lux-
    discussed in Section 5                            embourg” being mentioned in the caption), so the system hy-
                                                      pothesizes that the viewer is intended to notice the relative
  • which parameters refer to elements that were salient in rank of all of the countries listed.
    the graphic and the kind of salience (highlighted bars, Suppose, however, that the bar representing the U.S. was
    annotated bars, bars with labels that appear as nouns in darker than the other bars. Now, the hypothesis that the in-
    the caption, etc.)                                tended message of the graphic is to convey that the rank of the
In addition, the occurrence in the caption of a verb or ad- U.S. is third is assigned a probability of 99.5%. The fact that
jective class that suggested a particular intention was entered the bar is highlighted provides strong evidence that it plays
into the spreadsheet.                                 a role in the intended message of the graphic. Elements of
  Two coders had previously identiﬁed the intention of each the graphic could also be made salient in other ways, such as
graphic in the corpus. We applied our plan operators to con- through annotations. Suppose that the bar representing the
struct a plan (constrained by what appeared in the graphic) U.S. was still darker than the other bars, but that the bars