                 Iterated Belief Change: A Transition System Approach
                                Aaron Hunter and James P. Delgrande
                                     School of Computing Science
                                      Faculty of Applied Sciences
                                        Simon Fraser University
                                         Burnaby, BC, Canada
                                       {amhunter, jim}@cs.sfu.ca

                    Abstract                          space, we do not review the approach here; instead, we simply
                                                      assume that the reader is familiar with the AGM postulates.
    We use a transition system approach to reason     Belief update, on the other hand, is the process in which the
    about the evolution of an agent’s beliefs as ac-  beliefs of an agent are modiﬁed in response to a world that
    tions are executed. Some actions cause an agent   has changed. One standard approach to belief update is the
    to perform belief revision and some actions cause Katsuno and Mendelzon approach, which follows the AGM
    an agent to perform belief update, but the inter- tradition by introducing a set of rationality postulates for be-
    action between revision and update can be non-    lief update [Katsuno and Mendelzon, 1992].
    elementary. We present a set of basic postulates
    describing the interaction of revision and update, 2.2 Reasoning about Action
    and we introduce a new belief evolution operator
    that gives a plausible interpretation to alternating We introduce some standard terminology for describing tran-
                                                                  [                        ]
    sequences of revisions and updates.               sition systems Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1998 . An action sig-
                                                      nature is a pair hF, Ai of non-empty sets, respectively called
                                                      the set of ﬂuent symbols and the set of action symbols. Infor-
1  Introduction                                       mally, ﬂuent symbols are propositional variables representing
Formalisms for reasoning about action effects typically focus properties of the world that may change over time and action
on the representation of actions that change the state of the symbols are atomic symbols representing deterministic ac-
world. However, several formalisms have been introduced tions that may be performed. A state is an interpretation over
for reasoning about actions that change the beliefs of an agent F, and a transition system is a directed graph where each node
without altering the state of the world [Shapiro et al., 2000; is labeled by a state and each edge is labeled by a set of ac-
van Ditmarsch, 2002; Herzig et al., 2004]. In order to rea- tion symbols. The edges in a transition system indicate how
son about multiple actions in this context, it is necessary to the ﬂuents change values in response to the execution of in-
                                                      dividual actions. We use the capital letter A, possibly with
consider sequences of alternating belief revisions and belief                                ¯
updates. However, to date there has been little explicit dis- subscripts, to range over actions. The notation A will be used
cussion about the formal properties of such sequences. to denote a ﬁnite sequence of actions of indeterminate length.
  This paper makes two contributions to the existing work A belief state is a set of states. We can think of a belief
on epistemic action effects. The ﬁrst contribution is the de- state as expressing a proposition. Informally, a belief state is
velopment of a transition system framework suitable for rea- the set of states that an agent considers possible. In this paper,
soning about belief change. The new framework provides a we use lower case Greek letters to denote belief states. We are
simple tool for reasoning about revision and update in a single interested in belief change resulting from two distinct kinds of
formalism, and it facilitates the treatment of conditional up- actions: ontic actions and epistemic actions. Ontic actions are
dates. The second contribution is the presentation of a princi- actions that change the state of the world, whereas epistemic
pled approach to the interaction between revision and update. actions change the beliefs of an agent without altering the
There are plausible examples in which agents appear to revise state of the world. Informally, after executing an ontic action,
a prior belief state in response to a new observation; such ex- an agent should update the current belief state on a point-wise
amples are difﬁcult to represent in existing formalisms. basis. On the other hand, if an agent executes an epistemic
                                                      action, then the current belief state should be revised.
2  Background and Motivation                          2.3  The Basic Problem
2.1  Belief Change                                    As noted above, belief update occurs when an ontic action
We distinguish two kinds of belief change. Belief revision is performed. Hence, we deﬁne belief update operators that
occurs when an agent receives new information about a static take two arguments: a belief state and an ontic action. Epis-
world. The original approach to belief revision is the AGM temic actions are identiﬁed with observations, which are sim-
approach [Alchourron et al., 1985]. Due to limitations on ply sets of interpretations. As a result, revision operators alsotake two arguments, each of which is a set of interpretations. Deﬁnition 1 A metric transition system is a triple hS, R, di
Informally, the observation α provides evidence that the ac- where
tual world is in α. Let  be an update operator and let ∗ be 1. S ⊆ 2F
a revision operator. We are interested in giving a reasonable
interpretation to sequences of the form                 2. R ⊆ S × A × S
                                                        3. d is a metric on S
             κ  A1 ∗ α1  · · ·  An ∗ αn.
                                                      Informally, if w1 is close to w2, then an agent considers w1
There are intuitively plausible examples in which applying
                                                      to be a plausible alternative to w2.
the operators iteratively results in an unsatisfactory result. In
the next section, we introduce one such example.      3.2  Belief Update
2.4  Illustrative Example                             In this section, we deﬁne belief update with respect to a tran-
                                                      sition system. Recall that we update a belief state by an action
We extend the litmus paper problem originally presented in with effects given by a transition system. This contrasts with
[Moore, 1985]. In the original problem, there is a beaker con- the standard approach, in which a belief state is updated by a
taining either an acid or a base, and there is an agent holding a formula. The advantage of our approach is that it facilitates
piece of litmus paper that can be dipped into the beaker to de- the representation of actions with conditional effects.
termine the contents. The litmus paper turns red if it is placed Intuitively, after executing an action A, an agent updates
in an acid and it turns blue if it is placed in a base. We extend the belief state by projecting every state s to the state s0 that
the problem by admitting the possibility that the paper is not would result if they executed A in s.
litmus paper, instead it is just plain white paper.
                                                      Deﬁnition 2 Let T = hS, R, di be a metric transition system.
  Boutilier points out that the standard approach to belief                S         S
change provides an unintuitive representation of this prob- The update function  : 2 × A → 2 is deﬁned as follows
lem [Boutilier, 1995]. One issue is that the standard approach α  A = {f | (e, A, f) ∈ R for some e ∈ α}.
does not allow conditional action effects; an agent simply up-
dates the initial belief state by the new color of the litmus Note that the distance function d does not play any role in
paper. Intuitively, this seems incorrect because there are ac- belief update.
tually two independent belief changes that occur. First, the We brieﬂy illustrate that transition systems can be used to
agent dips the paper in the beaker and projects each possi- deﬁne a standard update operator in which a belief state is
ble world to the outcome of the dipping action. Second, the updated by a formula rather than an action. Given F, let A
agent looks at the paper and observes the new color. Hence, be the set of action symbols of the form Aφ, where φ is a
                                                      conjunction of literals over F. Deﬁne TF to be the transi-
the problem involves an update followed by a revision.                     F           0           0
                                                      tion system with S = 2 and RsAφs  just in case s |= φ
  Even if the belief change is broken into two steps, the stan- 0
dard approach is limited in that an agent can only revise the and s agrees with s on every atom that does not occur in φ.
current belief state. Suppose that an agent initially believes Informally, the action Aφ corresponds to an update by φ.
that the paper is litmus paper, but then it remains white after Proposition 1 The update operator obtained from TF satis-
dipping it in the beaker. In this case, the agent should con- ﬁes the Katsuno and Mendelzon postulates.
clude that the paper was never litmus paper to begin with.
This indicates that it is sometimes necessary for agents to re- 3.3 Belief Revision
vise prior belief states in the face of new knowledge. With each metric transition system T , we associate a revi-
  We will return to this example periodically as we introduce sion function. The revision function associated with T is
formal machinery that provides a more natural representation. the distance-based revision function deﬁned in [Delgrande,
                                                      2004]. We choose this approach because it requires the in-
3  A Transition System Approach                       troduction of relatively little formal machinery and, provided
                                                      that d satisﬁes some natural conditions, this revision operator
3.1  Metric Transition Systems                        satisﬁes the AGM postulates.
Standard transition systems do not provide a useful basis for
                                                      Deﬁnition 3 Let T = hS, R, di be a metric transition system.
performing belief revision, because belief revision generally
                                                      The revision function ∗ : 2S × 2S → 2S is deﬁned as follows
requires some notion of plausibility among states or formulas.
In order to deﬁne a revision operator, we introduce a distance κ ∗ α = {w ∈ α | ∃v1 ∈ κ, ∀v2 ∈ α, ∀v3 ∈ κ,
function between states. A metric over 2F is a function d that
                                                                             d(w, v1) ≤ d(v2, v3)}.
maps each pair of states to a non-negative real number, and
satisﬁes the following conditions:                    Hence, if an agent is in belief state κ, then κ ∗ α is the set of
                                                      all worlds that are minimally distant from some world in κ.
 1. d(w1, w2) = 0 iff w1 = w2

 2. d(w1, w2) = d(w2, w1)                             3.4  Litmus Paper Revisited

 3. d(w1, w2) + d(w2, w3) ≥ d(w1, w3).                We revisit the litmus paper problem in the context of metric
                                                      transition systems. The problem can be represented with the
We will generally be concerned with metrics that return only
                                                      following action signature:
integral distances, so from here on we will use the term metric
to refer to integer-valued metrics.                            h{Red, Blue, Acid, Litmus}, {dip}i.                 {Litmus}          {Litmus, Acid}             ∅                 {Acid}

                      dip                  dip                  dip                  dip
                     ?                    ?                    ?                   ?
              {Litmus, Blue}     {Litmus, Red, Acid}          ∅                 {Acid}

                                   Figure 1: Extended Litmus Paper Problem

Intuitively, Red is true if the paper is red, Blue is true if the 1. If (2F  A¯) ∩ α 6= ∅, then (κ  A¯) ∗ α ⊆ α
paper is blue, Acid is true if the beaker contains an acid, and 2. If (2F  A¯) ∩ α = ∅, then (κ  A¯) ∗ α = κ  A¯
Litmus is true if the paper is litmus paper. The effects of
                                                               ¯            ¯
dipping are given by the transition system in Figure 1. We 3. (κ  A) ∩ α ⊆ (κ  A) ∗ α
can extend this to a metric transition system by deﬁning d to 4. If (κ  A¯) ∩ α 6= ∅, then (κ  A¯) ∗ α ⊆ (κ  A¯) ∩ α
be the Hamming distance between states. Note also that we
                                                        5. (κ  A¯) ∗ α ⊆ 2F  A¯
assume all actions are executable in all states, but self-loops
are omitted from Figure 1 for ease of readability.    We give some intuitive motivation for each postulate.
  Recall that we are interested in an agent that initially be- Postulate 1 is a straightforward AGM-type assertion that
lieves they are holding a piece of white litmus paper. Hence, α must hold after revising by α, provided α is possible af-
the initial belief state E is                         ter executing A¯. Postulate 2 handles the situation where it
                                                                                                 ¯
          E = {{Litmus}, {Litmus, Acid}}.             is impossible to be in an α-world after executing A. In this
                                                      case, we simply discard the observation α. These postulates
After dipping the paper, we update the belief state:  together formalize the underlying assumption that there are
  E  dip = {{Litmus, Blue}, {Litmus, Red, Acid}}.    no failed actions.
                                                        Taken together, Postulates 3 and 4 assert that revising by
At this point, the agent observes that the paper is neither blue α is equivalent to taking the intersection with α, provided
nor red. This observation is represented by the following set: the intersection is non-empty. These postulates are similar
     O = {∅, {Litmus}, {Acid}, {Litmus, Acid}}.       to the AGM postulates asserting that revisions correspond to
                                                      expansions, provided the observation is consistent with the
The naive suggestion is to simply revise E  dip by O, giving
                                                      knowledge base.
         E0 = {{Litmus}, {Litmus, Acid}}.               Postulate 5 provides the justiﬁcation for revising prior be-
However, this is not a plausible ﬁnal belief state. Given the lief states in the face of new knowledge. The postulate asserts
transition system in Figure 1, it is clear that white litmus pa- that, after revising by α, we must still have a belief state that
                                                      is a possible consequence of executing A¯. In some cases, the
per can not remain white after a dipping action. Hence, suc-                                 ¯
cessively applying the update and revision operators obtained only way to assure that α holds after executing A is to modify
from the transition system does not yield a plausible result. the initial belief state. We remark that the postulates do not
                                                      indicate how the initial belief state should be modiﬁed.
4  Rationality Postulates
                                                      5   Belief Evolution
In this section, we give a set of rationality postulates spec-
ifying some natural properties that we expect to hold when 5.1 Representing Histories
an update is followed by a revision. The postulates are not Transition systems are only suitable for representing Marko-
overly restrictive and they do not provide a basis for a cate- vian action effects; that is, effects that are determined entirely
gorical semantics; they simply provide a point for discussion by the current state and the action executed. However, exam-
and comparison. Our underlying intuition is that the most re- ples like the litmus paper problem indicate that sometimes
cent observation should always be incorporated, provided that agents need to look at prior belief states as well. Hence, even
it is consistent with the history of actions that have been ex- if ontic action effects are Markovian, it does not follow that
ecuted. Hence, the postulates are only appropriate for action changes in belief are Markovian. As such, we need to intro-
domains in which there are no failed actions.         duce some formal machinery for representing histories.
  Assume a ﬁxed propositional signature F . Let κ and α
be sets of worlds, and let A¯ be a sequence of actions. We Deﬁnition 4 A belief trajectory of length n is an n-tuple
adopt the shorthand notation κ  A¯ as an abbreviation for the hκ0, . . . , κn−1i of belief states.
sequential update of κ by each element of A¯. The following Intuitively, a belief trajectory is an agent’s subjective view
postulates describe some basic properties of the interaction of how the world has changed. We remark that a belief tra-
between an update operator  and a revision operator ∗. jectory represents the agent’s current beliefs about the worldhistory, not a historical account of what an agent believed at The action domains of interest for belief evolution will be
each point in time.                                   those in which it is reasonable to assume that action trajecto-
  We will also be interested in observation trajectories and ries are correct and actions are successful. This is intuitively
action trajectories, each of which is simply another n-tuple. plausible in a single agent environment, because it simply
Deﬁnition 5 An observation trajectory of length n is an n- amounts to assuming that an agent has complete knowledge
                                                 S    about the actions that they have executed. Hence, in the def-
tuple OBS = hOBS1, . . . , OBSni where each OBSi ∈ 2 .
                                                      inition of ◦, the belief trajectory returned will always be con-
Deﬁnition 6 An action trajectory of length n is an n-tuple sistent with the actions that have been executed.
ACT  = hACT1, . . . , ACTni where each ACTi ∈ A.
                                                      5.3  Infallible Observations
Each set OBSi is interpreted to be evidence that the actual
world is in OBSi at time i. An action trajectory is a history In this section, we assume that observations are always cor-
of the actions an agent has executed. Note that, as a matter of rect. Formally, this amounts to a restriction on the class of
convention, we start the indices at 0 for belief trajectories and admissible world views. In particular, we need not consider
we start the indices at 1 for observation and action trajecto- inconsistent world views.
ries. The rationale for this convention will be clear later. We We need to introduce a bit of notation.
also adopt the convention hinted at in the deﬁnitions, whereby Deﬁnition 9 Let T be a transition system; let A¯ =
    th                                                                                          −1
the n  component of an action trajectory OBS will be de- A0, . . . , An; and let α be a set of states. Then α (A¯) de-
                      th
noted by OBSn, and the n component of an action trajec- notes the set of all w such that there is a path from w to an
tory ACT will be denoted by ACTn                      element of α following the edges A0, . . . , An.
  We deﬁne a notion of consistency between action trajecto- Hence, α−1(A¯) is the set of states that can precede a world in
ries and observation trajectories. The intuition is that an ac- α, given that the sequence A¯ has been executed.
tion trajectory ACT is consistent with an observation trajec- For illustrative purposes, it is useful to consider world
tory OBS if and only if each observation OBSi is possible, views of length 1. Suppose we have an initial belief state
given that the actions (ACTj)j≤i have been executed.  κ, an ontic action A and an epistemic action α. Without for-
Deﬁnition 7 Let ACT = hACT1, . . . , ACTni be an action mally deﬁning the belief evolution operator ◦, we can give an
trajectory and let OBS = hOBS1, . . . , OBSni be an obser- intuitive interpretation of an expression of the form
vation trajectory. We say that ACT is consistent with OBS if
                                                                    κ ◦ hhAi, hαii = hκ0, κ1i.
and only if there is a belief trajectory hκ0, . . . , κni such that,
for all i ≥ 1,                                        The agent knows that the actual world is in α at the ﬁnal point
                                                      in time, so we must have κ1 ⊆ α. Moreover, the agent should
 1. κi ⊆ OBSi
                                                      believe that κ1 is a possible result of executing A from κ0. In
                                                                                    −1
 2. κi = κi−1  ACTi.                                 other words, we must have κ0 ⊆ α (A). All other things
If ACT is consistent with OBS, we write ACT ||OBS.    being equal, the agent would like to keep as much of κ as
  A pair consisting of an action trajectory and an observation possible; therefore, the natural solution is the following:
                                                                    −1
trajectory gives a complete history of all actions that have 1. κ0 = κ ∗ α (A),
occurred. As such, it is useful to introduce some terminology.
                                                        2. κ1 = κ0  A.
Deﬁnition 8 A world view of length n is a pair W =    This procedure can be applied to world views of length
hACT, OBSi, where OBS   is an observation trajectory and greater than 1. The idea is to trace every observation back
ACT  is an action trajectory, each of length n.       to a precondition on the initial belief state. After revising the
If ACT ||OBS, we say that hACT, OBSi is consistent.   initial belief state by all preconditions, each subsequent belief
                                                      state can be determined by a standard update operation.
5.2  A New Belief Change Operator                       We have the following formal deﬁnition for ◦. In the
We introduce a new operator ◦ that takes two arguments: a be- deﬁnition, let ACT i denote the subsequence of actions
lief state and a world view. Roughly speaking, we would like ACT1, . . . , ACTi.
κ ◦ hACT, OBSi to be the belief trajectory that results from Deﬁnition 10 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT be an action
the initial belief state κ and the alternating action-observation trajectory of length n and let OBS be an observation trajec-
sequence ACT1, OBS1, . . . , ACTn, OBSn. We call ◦ a be- tory of length n such that ACT ||OBS. Deﬁne
lief evolution operator because it takes a sequence of actions,
and returns the most plausible evolution of the world.           κ ◦ hACT, OBSi  = hκ0, . . . , κni
  The formal deﬁnition of ◦ is presented in the following sec- where
tions. The deﬁnition relies on a ﬁxed revision operator ∗ and 1. κ = κ ∗ T OBS−1(ACT )
a ﬁxed update operator . As such, it might be more accu-  0        i     i       i
                                                        2. for i ≥ 1, κ = κ  ACT   · · ·  ACT .
rate to adopt notation of the form ◦∗,, but we opt for the less    i    i−1      1          i
cumbersome ◦ and assume that the underlying operators are We remark that the intersection of observation preconditions
clear from the context. We remark, in particular, that every in the deﬁnition of κ0 is non-empty, because ACT ||OBS.
ﬁnite metric transition system generates a unique belief evo- The following propositions are immediate, and they
lution operator. However, it is worth noting that the deﬁnition demonstrate that ◦ subsumes both revision and update. In
of ◦ does not rely on any speciﬁc approach to revision. each proposition, we assume that ACT ||OBS.Proposition 2 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT = hAi and Deﬁnition 12 Let κ be a belief state, and let W be a world
let OBS = h2Fi. Then                                  view of length n. If W is inconsistent, then κ◦W = κ◦τ(W ).
            κ ◦ hACT, OBSi = hκ, κ  Ai.              We could equivalently have stated a single deﬁnition for ◦ by
                                                      passing all world views through τ. We have presented the
In the following, we assume that λ is a null action that never deﬁnition in two cases in order to highlight the distinct treat-
changes the state of the world.                       ment of fallible observations. The extended deﬁnition is still
Proposition 3 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT = hλi and let satisfactory from the perspective of the rationality postulates.
OBS  = hαi. Then
                                                      Proposition 5 The operators ∗ and  (obtained from ◦) sat-
          κ ◦ hACT, OBSi  = hκ ∗ α, κ ∗ αi.           isfy the interaction postulates (1)-(5).
Hence, both revision and update can be represented through Thus far, applying the ◦ operator requires tracing action pre-
the ◦ operator. As such, it is reasonable to adopt the following conditions back to the initial state for revision, then applying
notation for trajectories of length 1:                action effects to get a complete history. If we are only con-
                                                      cerned with the ﬁnal belief state, then there are many cases in
       κ  ACT ∗ OBS  = κ ◦ hhACT i, hOBSii.
                                                      which we do not need to go to so much effort.
Proposition 4 If ACT ||OBS, the operators ∗ and  (deﬁned Proposition 6 Let κ be a belief state, let ACT be an action
above) satisfy the interaction postulates (1)-(5).    trajectory of length n and let α be a belief state such that
The three preceding propositions demonstrate the suitability α ⊆ κ  ACT . If OBS is the observation trajectory with
of ◦ as a natural operator for reasoning about the interaction n − 1 null observations followed by α, then the ﬁnal belief
between revision and update.                          state in κ ◦ hACT, OBSi is (κ  ACT ) ∗ α.
5.4  Fallible Observations                            The proposition indicates that, given a single observation that
                                                      is consistent with the actions that have been executed, we can
We address fallible observations by allowing inconsistent
                                                      simply revise the outcome of the actions and we get the cor-
world views. If a world view is inconsistent, then there is
                                                      rect ﬁnal belief state.
no initial belief state that supports all of the observations,
so some observations need to be ignored. To deal with in- 5.5 Litmus Paper Concluded
consistency, we adopt the convention previously explored in
[Nayak, 1994] and [Papini, 2001], in which more credence is We conclude the litmus paper example by giving a plausible
given to the most recent observations. We demonstrate that treatment based on a belief evolution operator. The world
◦ can be extended naturally to represent belief change under view W V = hhdipi, hOii represents a dipping action fol-
this convention. In order to state the extended deﬁnition, we lowed by the observation that the paper is still white. If ◦ is
need to be able to extract a maximally consistent sub-view deﬁned from the metric transition system in Figure 1, the ﬁnal
from an inconsistent world view.                      belief state in E ◦ W V is given by
Deﬁnition 11 Let W = hACT, OBSi   be a world view of       E ∗ O−1(dip)  dip =  E  ∗ {∅, {Acid}}  dip
length n. Deﬁne τ(W ) = hACT, OBS0i, where OBS0  =
     0         0                                                              =  {∅, {Acid}}.
hOBS1, . . . , OBSni is deﬁned by the following recursion.
          −1                    0                     This calculation is consistent with our original intuitions, in
  • If OBSn  (ACT ) 6= ∅ then OBSn = OBSn,
                 0    F                               that the agent revises the initial belief state before updating by
    otherwise OBSn = 2 .
                                                      the dip action. This ensures that we will have a ﬁnal belief
  • For i < n, if
                                                      state that is a possible outcome of dipping. Moreover, the ini-
             −1         \       0 −1                  tial belief state is revised by the pre-image of the ﬁnal obser-
        OBSi   (ACTi) ∩   (OBSj)    (ACTj) 6= ∅
                        j>i                           vation, which means it is modiﬁed as little as possible while
                                                      still guaranteeing that the ﬁnal observation will be feasible.
             0
    then OBSi = OBSi,                                 Note also that the ﬁnal belief state given by this calculation is
                 0    F
    otherwise OBSi = 2 .                              intuitively plausible. It simply indicates that the contents of
The observations in τ(W ) are determined by starting with the the beaker are still unknown, but the agent now believes the
most recent observation, then working backwards through the paper is not litmus paper. Hence, a belief evolution operator
observations from most recent until the initial observation. employs a plausible procedure and returns a desirable result.
At each point, we keep an observation if it is consistent with
the observations that followed it; otherwise, we discard the 6 Relationship with Iterated Revision
observation as incorrect.
                                                      If the null action is the only action permitted, then belief evo-
  The following properties are immediate.
                                                      lution is closely related to iterated revision. We brieﬂy con-
  • If W is a world view, then τ(W ) is consistent.   sider the suitability of belief evolution operators for reasoning
  • If W is a consistent world view, then τ(W ) = W . about iterated revision. In the following proposition, let λ¯ de-
Recall that the original deﬁnition of ◦ applied only to consis- note a sequence of null actions of indeterminate length.
tent world views. By passing through τ, we can extend the Proposition 7 For any κ and OBS, there is a unique belief
deﬁnition to apply to arbitrary world views.          state κ0 such that κ ◦ hλ,¯ OBSi = hκ0, . . . , κ0i.