     Maximal Tractable Fragments of the Region Connection Calculus: 
                                    A Complete Analysis 

                                           Jochen Renz 
                         Institut fiir Informatik, Albert-Ludwigs-Universitat 
                             Am Flughafen 17, 79110 Freiburg, Germany 


                    Abstract                         Larger tractable subsets often lead to more efficient solu•
                                                     tions (cf. [Renz and Nebel, 1998]). The goal is to identify 
     We present a general method for proving         the boundary between tractable and NP-hard subsets, 
     tractability of reasoning over disjunctions of  i.e., all maximal tractable subsets containing all base re•
     jointly exhaustive and pairwise disjoint rela-  lations. 
     tions. Examples of these kinds of relations 
     are Allen's temporal interval relations and their Two examples of these1 types of relations are Allen's 
     spatial counterpart, the R.CC8 relations by     interval algebra [Allen, 1983] mainly used for temporal 
     Randell, Cui, and Colin. Applying this method   reasoning and their spatial counterpart, Randell, Cui, 
     does not require detailed knowledge about the   and Cohn's [1992] Region Connection Calculus RCC-8. 
     considered relations; instead, it is rather suffi• In the former case, the only maximal tractable subset 
     cient to have a subset of the considered set of containing all base relations has been identified [Nebel 
     relations for which path-consistency is known   and Burckert, 1995], in the latter case, only one max•
     to decide consistency. Using this method, we    imal tractable subset has been identified so far [Renz 
     give a complete classification of tractability of and Nebel, 1999], It was previously unknown whether 
     reasoning over RCC8 by identifying two large    there are others containing all base relations. For both 
     new maximal tractable subsets and show that     subsets path-consistency is sufficient for deciding consis•
                                                     tency. Tractability and sufficiency of path-consistency 
     these two subsets together with 'H8, the already 
     known maximal tractable subset, are the only    have been proven by reducing the consistency problem 
     such sets for RCC8 that contain all base re•    to a tractable propositional satisfiability problem which 
     lations. We also apply our method to Allen's    requires very detailed knowledge about the considered 
     interval algebra and derive the known maximal   set of relations and complicated proofs. 
     tractable subset.                                 We present a new method for proving tractability 
                                                     and showing sufficiency of path-consistency for this kind 
                                                     of problem which does not require detailed knowledge 
 1 Introduction                                      about the considered set of relations. Applying this 
                                                     method, we identify two large new maximal tractable 
 In qualitative spatial and temporal reasoning, knowledge 
                                                     subsets of RCC-8 and show that these subsets together 
 is often represented by specifying the relationships be•
                                                     with the already known maximal tractable subset are the 
 tween spatial or temporal entities. Of particular interest 
                                                     only such sets for RCC-8 that contain all base relations. 
 are disjunctions over a set of jointly exhaustive and pair-
                                                     We consider only sets containing all base relations, since 
 wise disjoint (JEPD) relations. JEPD relations are also 
                                                    only these sets enable efficient backtracking algorithms. 
 called base relations. Since any two entities are related 
 by exactly one of the base relations, they can be used to The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 
 represent definite information with respect to the given we introduce RCC-8. In Section 3 we present the 
 level of granularity. Indefinite information can be speci• new method for proving tractability. In Section 4 we 
 fied by disjunctions of possible base relations.    identify two large subsets of RCC-8 which are candi•
   An important reasoning problem is deciding consis• dates for maximal tractable subsets, and apply our 
 tency of a set of constraints using these relations, which new method in Section 5 to show that both sets are 
 is in many cases NP-hard. Sometimes deciding consis• tractable. In Section 6 the new method is used for find•
 tency is tractable if only a subset of all possible dis• ing a consistent scenario. In Section 7 we apply the 
 junctions is used. If this subset contains all base rela• method to Allen's interval algebra after which we dis•
 tions, then instances of the NP-hard consistency prob• cuss and summarize our results. Some of our proofs 
 lem can be solved by backtracking over tractable sub- are computer assisted. The programs are available at 
 instances [Ladkin and Reinefcld, 1992; Nebel, 1997]. http://www. informatik.uni-freiburg.de/~sppraum. 


448    CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION                                                    3 A New Method for Proving 
                                                       Traetability of Sets of Relations 
                                                   In this section we develop a new method for proving trae•
                                                   tability of reasoning over disjunctions of a set of 
                                                   binary relations over a domain Let be a finite set 
                                                   of binary relations. We assume in the following 
                                                   that there is a relation such that . is 
                                                   satisfied for all Id is called identity relation. The 
                                                   consistency problem CSPSAT(5) for sets over a 
                                                   domain is defined as follows [Renz and Nebel, 1999]: 
                                                   Instance: A set V of variables over a domain and a 
Figure 1: Examples for the eight base relations of     finite set of binary constraints where  
2 The Region Connection Calculus RCC8                  and  
                                                   Question: Is there an instantiation of all variables in 
The Region Connection Calculus RCC-8 [Randell et al., 
                                                       such that all constraints are satisfied? 
1992] is a language for qualitative spatial representation 
and reasoning where spatial regions are regular subsets denotes the closure of S under composition inter•
of a topological space. Regions themselves do not have section and converse can be poly-
to be internally connected, i.e., a region may consist, of nomially reduced to if the universal relation 
different disconnected pieces.                     is contained in [Renz and Nebel, 1999]. Therefore, we 
  RCC-8 contains eight JEPD base relations and all 28 consider in the following only sets with  
possible disjunctions thereof. The base relations are Before we present our new method for showing that 
denoted by                                                    is tractable for a set we define some ter•
and with the meaning of D is Connected, Ex•        minology. A refinement of a constraint is a con•
ternally Connected, Partial Overlap, Tangential straint such that For instance, the con•
Proper Part, Non-Tangential Proper Part, and their con• straint is a refinement of the constraint 
verses. Two-dimensional examples of the base relations                  A refinement of a set of con•
are shown in Figure 1. In the following we write sets of straints is a set of constraints that contains a re-
base relations to denote disjunctions of base relations. finement of every constraint of Everv solution of 
The disjunction of all base relations is called the univer• is also a solution of A consistent scenario of   
sal relation,. The subset of RCC-8 consisting of the eight is a refinement of such that is consistent and con•
base relations is denoted by                       tains only constraints over relations of We assume 
  An important reasoning problem in this framework, that a set of constraints contains ordered variables 
denoted by RSAT, is deciding consistency of a set of         The following definition will be central for 
constraints of the form where R is an RCC-8 rela•  our new method. 
tion and are spatial variables. The domain of spatial 
                                                   Definition 1 (reduction by refinement) 
variables is the set of all spatial regions of the considered 
                                                   Let can be reduced bv refinement to if 
topological space. is consistent if it has a solution, 
                                                   the following two conditions are satisfied: 
which is an assignment of spatial regions to the spatial 
variables of in a way that all constraints are satis• 1. for every relation S S there is a relation 
fied. When only relations of a specific subset         with  
are used in the corresponding reasoning problem is  2. every path-consistent set of constraints over S 
denoted by RSAT(S). RSAT is NP-complete in general.    can be refined to a set by replacing 
Consistency of can be approximated by using an         with for such that enforcing 
time path-consistency algorithm, which makes path-     path-consistency to does not result in an incon-
consistent by eliminating all the impossible1 labels (base sistency. 
relations) in every subset of constraints involving three 
variables [Mackworth, 1977]. If the empty relation oc• Lemma 2 If path-consistency decides for a 
curs during this process, then is inconsistent, other• set and S can be reduced by refinement to T, 
wise the resulting set is path-consistent.         then path-consistency decides CSPrSAT(S). 
  Renz and Nebel [1999] identified a tractable subset Proof. Let be a path-consistent set of constraints over 
of RCC-8 (denoted by containing all base relations    Since can be reduced bv refinement to there is 
which is maximal with respect to traetability, i.e., if any 
                                                      !Note that we only refine constraints for  
other RCC-8 relation is added to the consistency   This is no restriction, as by enforcing path-consistency the 
problem becomes NP-complete. They further showed   converse constraint will also he refined. Rather it 
that enforcing path-consistency is sufficient for deciding offers the possibility of refining, e.g., converse relations to 
             contains 148 relations, i.e., about G0% of other than converse sub-relations, i.e., if, for instance, R is 
all RCC-8 relations.                               refined to r, we can refine to a relation other than r 


                                                                                        RENZ 449  by definition a set of constraints over which is a 
 refinement of such that enforcing path-consistency to 
   does not result in an inconsistency. Path-consistency 
 decides sois consistent, and, hence,  
 is also consistent.  
 Since path-consistency can be enforced in cubic time, 
 it is sufficient for proving tractability of CSPSAT(5) to 
 show that S can be reduced by refinement to a set for 
 which path-consistency decides CSPSAT Note that 
 for refining a constraint to a constraint 
               it is not required that is also con•
 tained in 5. Thus, with respect to common relations, 
 the two sets 5 and are independent of each other. 
  We will now develop a method for showing that a set 
 of relations can be reduced by refinement to 
 another set In order to manage the different 
 refinements, we introduce a refinement matrix that con•
 tains for every relation S S all specified refinements. 
 Definition 3 (refinement matrix) A refinement 
 matrix of has Boolean entries such that           10. return succeed 
for true only if R 5.                                 Figure 2: Algorithm CHECK-REFINEMENTS 
 For example, if the relation {DC, EC,PO,TPP} is al•
lowed to be refined only to the relations {DC,TPP} and Proof. Suppose that CHECK-REFINEMENTS(5,M) re•
 {DC}, then M[{DC, EC, PO,TPP}][/?] is true only for turns succeed and GET-REFINEMENTS(S, M) returns 
 R = {DC,TPP} and for R = {DC} and false for all the refinement matrix Suppose further that enforc•
other relations M is called the basic refinement ing path-consistency to results in an inconsistency 
 matrix if M[S][R] = true if and only if S = R.  which is detected first for the three variables xa,Xb,xc. 
                                                 Suppose that for every pair of variables  
  We propose the algorithm CHECK-REFINEMENTS (see 
Figure 2) which takes as input a set of relations S and a and Enforcing path-consistency to  
refinement matrix M of 5. This algorithm computes all can be done by successively enforcing path-consistency 
possible path-consistent triples of relations    to every triple of variables of Suppose that we start 
of 5 (step 4) and enforces path-consistency (using a with the triple We have that — 
standard procedure PATH-CONSISTENCY) to every re• true for every After enforc•
finement for which = true                        ing path-consistency to this triple we obtain the rela•
for all {1,2,3}, (steps 5,6). If one of          tions for which again= true, other•
these refinements results in the empty relation, the al• wise CHECK-REFINEMENTS, M) would have returned 
gorithm returns fail (step 7). Otherwise, the result• fail. The same holds when we proceed with enforcing 
ing relations are added to M by setting          path-consistency to every triple of variables, we always 
                                       (step 8). end up with relations for which = true. 
This is repeated until M has reached a fixed point (step Therefore, for all possible relations we can 
9), i.e., enforcing path-consistency cm any possible re- obtain by enforcing path-consistency to we have 
finement does not result in new relations anymore. If no that = true for all  
inconsistency is detected in this process, the algorithm If this triple of relations were inconsistent, CHECK-
returns succeed.                                 REFINEMENTS(S,M) would have returned fail.  
  A similar algorithm, GET-REFINEMENTS, returns  If CHECK-REFINEMENTS returns succeed and GET-
the revised refinement matrix if CHECK-REFINEMENTS REFINEMENTS returns we have pre-computed all 
returns succeed and the basic refinement matrix if possible refinements of every path-consistent triple of 
CHECK-REFINEMENTS returns fail. Since is a finite variables as given in the refinement matrix Thus, 
set of relations, M can be changed only a finite number applying these refinements to a path-consistent set of 
of times, so both algorithms always terminate.   constraints can never result in an inconsistency when 
                                                 enforcing path-consistency. 
                                                 Theorem 5 Let and let M be a refinement 
                                                 matrix of S. GET-REFINEMENTS returns the re•
                                                 finement matrix If for every SS there is a  
                                                 with = true, then S can be reduced by refine•
                                                 ment to T. 


450    CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION Proof. By the given conditions, we can refine every Thus, any set of RCC-8 relations that contains all base 
path-consistent set of constraints overS to a set   relations plus the relations {EC, TPP}, {EC, NTPP}, and 
of constraints over such that = true for            {EQ,NTPP} is NP-hard. 
every xi and                                         This result rules out a lot of subsets of RCC-8 to be 
    is a fixed point with respect to GET-REFINEMENTS, tractable, but still leaves the problem of tractability open 
i.e., GET-REFINEMENTS returns thus it fol•          for a large number of subsets. We found, however, that 
lows from Lemma 4 that enforcing path-consistency to it is not necessary that both relations, {EC,TPP} and 
   does not result in an inconsistencv.             {EC, NTPP}, must be added to {EQ,NTPP} in order 
                                                    to enforce NP-hardness. It is rather sufficient for NP-
By Lemma 2 and Theorem 5 we have that the procedures hardness that only one of them is added to {EQ, NTPP}. 
CHECK-REFINEMENTS and GET-REFINEMENTS can be          This is shown in the following two lemmata. They 
used to prove tract ability for sets of relations.  are proven by reducing 3SAT, the NP-hard satisfiability 
Corollary 6 Let be two sets such that path-         problem of propositional formulas that contain exactly 
consistency decides and let M be a re•              three literals per clause [Garey and Johnson, 1979], to 
finement matrix of S. GET-REFINEMENTS re•           the respective consistency problem. Both reductions are 
turns M'. If for every S S there is                 similar to the reductions given in [Renz and Nebel, 1999): 
with = true, then path-consistency decides          every literal as well as every literal occurrence L is re•
CSPSAT(S).                                          duced to a constraint where and 
                                                            — L is true iff holds and false 
In the following sections we apply this method to the iff holds. "Polarity constraints  ' enforce that 
Region Connection Calculus RCC-8 and to Allen's inter•                                 1
                                                               holds iff holds, and vice versa. 
val algebra for proving certain subsets to be tractable. 
                                                    "Clause constraints" enforce that at least one literal of 
For RCC-8 it will help us make a complete analysis 
                                                    every clause is true. 
of tractability by identifying two large new maximal 
tractable subsets. Later, it will turn out that the new Lemma 8 If NTPP}, {EC, NTPP}}) 5, 
method can be used for identifying the fastest possible then is NP-complete. 
algorithms for finding a consistent scenario.       Proof Sketch. Transformation of 3SAT to RSAT(S). 
                                                       = {NTPP} and = {EQ}. Polarity constraints: 
4 Candidates for Maximal Tractable 
    Subsets of RCC8 
In order to identify maximal tractable subsets of a set of 
relations with an NP-hard consistency problem, two dif•
ferent tasks have to be done. On the one hand, tractable 
subsets have to be identified. On the other hand, NP-
hard subsets have to be identified. Then, a tractable Lemma 9 7/ , {EC, TPP}}) S, then 
subset is maximal tractable if any superset is NP-hard. RSAT(S) is HP-complete. 
If tractability has not- yet been shown for certain subsets, 
                                                    Proof Sketch. Transformation of 3SAT to RSAT(S). 
the NP-hardness results restrict the number of different 
                                                       - {NTPP} and = {EQ}. Polarity constraints: 
subsets that still have to be analyzed for tractability. 
  In this section we present new NP-hardness results for 
RCC-8 and identify those subsets that are candidates for 
maximal tractable subsets, i.e., if any other relation is 
added to one of those candidates they become NP-hard. Clause, constraints for each clause c =  
Before this, we summarize Renz and Nebel's [1999] NP-
hardness proofs that were necessary for showing that 
                                                    All the above relations are contained in S.  
is a maximal tractable subset of RCC-8. 
                                                      Using these results, four other relations can be ruled 
Lemma 7 (Renz and Nebel, 1999)  
                                                    out to be contained in any tractable subset of RCC-8, 
 is NP-hard if where: 
                                                    since the closure of the base relations plus one of the four 
                                                    relations contains {EQ,NTPP} as well as {EC,TPP}. 
                                                    Definition 10 The two sets and are defined as 
 (N)TPP indicates either TPP or NTPP. 
                                                    follows: 
  Renz and Nebel [1999] proved maximality of by 
showing that NTPP}) is NP-hard and 

that the closure1 of plus any relation of  
N) contains the relation {EQ, NTPP}. This NP-hardness 
 proof, however, does not make use of all relations of   contains 76 relations, contains 180 relations. 
 but only of the relations {EC, TPP} and {EC, NTPP}. Corollary 11  


                                                                                         RENZ 451    Lemmata 8 and 9 give us a sufficient but not neces• the propositional encoding of RCC-8. This propositional 
 sary condition of whether a subset of is NP-hard,  Horn encoding of was also used for proving that 
 namely, if contains {EQ, NTPP} and one of          path-consistency decides [Renz and Nebel, 
 {EC,TPP} or {EC, NTPP}, RSAT(S) is NP-hard, other• 1999], by relating positive unit resolution, which is a 
 wise the complexity of RSAT(S) remains open.       complete decision method for propositional Horn formu•
   We computed all subsets of that are candidates   las, to path-consistency. The propositional encoding of 
 for maximal tractable subsets with respect to the above and is neither a Horn formula nor a Krom formula 
 two NP-hardness proofs, i.e., we enumerated all subsets (two literals per clause), so it is not immediately possible 
 5 with S = that contain all base relations and     to reduce the consistency problem of these subsets to a 
 the universal relation, and checked whether they fulfilled tractable propositional satisfiability problem. Therefore 
 the following two properties:                      we have to find other ways of proving tractability. 
  1. S does not contain ({EQ,NTPP} and {EC,TPP))      Let us have a closer look at the relations of the two 
    or ({EQ,NTPP} and {EC, NTPP}), and              sets and and how they differ from  
  2. the closure of S plus any relation of contains Proposition 13 For all relations we have 
    ({EQ,NTPP} and {EC,YPP}) or ({EQ,NTPP} and      that {EQ} R. For all refinements of R with  
     {EC, NTPP}).                                   {EQ} = B and {EQ} we have that  
To our surprise, this resulted in only three different sub• and are both subsets of so if we can prove the 
sets of of which is of course one of them. The      following conjecture, then both sets tire tractable: 
other two subsets are denoted bv and                Conjecture 14 Let be a path-consistent set of con•
                                                    straints over or over If is obtained from by 
                                                    eliminating the identity relation from every con•
                                                    straint with then enforcing path-
                                                    consistency to does not result in an inconsistency. 
                                                    If we can prove this conjecture, then, by Proposition 13, 
                                                       contains only constraints over Since path-
                                                    consistency decides we then have that if is 
                                                    path-consistent, is consistent and, therefore, is also 
   contains 158 different RCC-8 relations, contains consistent, i.e., path-consistency decides consistency for 
 160 different relations. We have that              sets of constraints over and over In [Gerevini and 
                                                    Renz, 1998] it was shown that the relation can 
Lemma 12 For every subset S of RCC-8: // RSAT(S) 
                                                    always be eliminated from every constraint of a path-
is tractable, then                                  consistent set of constraints over without changing 
Proof. By computing the closure of every set contain• consistency of the set. This was, again, shown by ap•
ing the base relations, the universal relation, and two plying positive unit resolution to the propositional Horn 
arbitrary RCC-8 relations, the resulting set is either con• encoding of a method which is not applicable in our 
tained in one of the sets or is NP-hard             case. Instead, we can now apply the new method devel•
according to Lemma 8, Lemma 9, or Corollary 11.     oped in Section 3, namely, we can check whether and 
So far we did not say anything about, tractability of  can be reduced by refinement to Conjecture 14 
or or subsets thereof. It might be that both sets   gives the refinement matrix we have to check. We define 
are NP-hard or that there is a large number of different this particular refinement matrix for arbitrary sets 6" of 
maximal tractable subsets that are contained in the two disjunctions over a set of JEPD relations: 
sets. What we obtained so far is, thus, only a restriction 
of the number of different subsets we have to check for 
tractability. However, we will see in the next section that 
both and are in fact tractable. 

5 A Complete Analysis of Tractability               Proposition 16 
                                                      • CHECK-REFINEMENTS retains succeed. 
In [Renz and Nebel, 1999] tractability of was shown 
                                                      • CHECK-REFINEMENTS returns succeed. 
by reducing to HORN SAT. This was possi•
ble because contains exactly those relations that are Theorem 17 Path-consistency decides as 
transformed to propositional Horn formulas when using well as  
                                                    Proof. It follows from Proposition 13 and Proposi•
   "The names were chosen, since all -relations not con•
tained in contain and all not contained             tion 16 that Theorem 5 can be applied with 
in contain                                          Since path-consistency decides it follows 


452 CONSTRAINT SATISFACTION 