                  A Live-User Evaluation of Collaborative Web Search∗

Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Oisin Boydell, Keith Bradley, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, Jill Freyne
                        Smart Media Institute, Department of Computer Science,
                                   University College Dublin, Ireland
                                      {ﬁrstname.surname}@ucd.ie


                    Abstract                          to develop a Web search platform capable of adapting to the
                                                      needs of (ad-hoc) communities of users. In brief, the queries
    Collaborative Web search exploits repetition and  submitted and the results selected by a community of users
    regularity within the query-space of a community  are recorded and reused in order to inﬂuence the results of
    of like-minded individuals in order to improve the future searches for similar queries. Results that have been re-
    quality of search results. In short, search results liably selected for similar queries in the past are promoted.
    that have been judged to be relevant for past queries For example, users of an AI-related Web site might have a
    are promoted in response to similar queries that oc- tendency to select case-based reasoning results in response
    cur in the future. In this paper we present the re- to vague queries such as ‘CBR’, while largely ignoring al-
    sults of a large-scale evaluation of this approach, in ternatives such as Google’s higher-ranking ‘Central Bank of
    a corporate Web search scenario, which shows that Russia’ or ‘Comic Book Resources’ results. In this instance
    signiﬁcant beneﬁts are available to its users.    collaborative search will gradually adapt its result-lists to em-
                                                      phasise case-based reasoning results, for searches that origi-
1  Introduction                                       nate from such a site, perhaps through a search-box on the
                                                      site.
Collection size, document diversity, and limited searcher ex- While intuitively appealing, the collaborative Web search
pertise all combine to make the Web a very challenging in- approach has never been fully evaluated under realistic con-
formation retrieval environment. In 2000 the entire World- ditions. Previous evaluations have been limited to the use of
Wide Web consisted of just 21 terabytes of information; now artiﬁcial users [Freyne et al., 2004] or closed-world search
it grows by 3 times this ﬁgure every single day [Roush, 2004; scenarios [Smyth et al., 2003; In Press]. In our work we have
Lyman and Varian, 2003]. Moreover, the average search implemented the collaborative Web search technique as a ro-
query contains only about 2 query terms [Lawrence and Giles, bust and scalable meta search engine architecture and the cen-
1998] and the terms used are often poorly chosen [Bollmann- tral contribution of this paper is to evaluate its deployment in
Sdorra and Raghavan, 1993; Furnas et al., 1987]. These a realistic, real-world Web search setting involving the em-
problems have led to rapid developments in the term-based ployees of a local software company over an extended period
matching approaches at the heart of modern search engines. of time. While the results indicate that there is indeed a sig-
For the most part this has meant looking for new sources niﬁcant beneﬁt accruing from collaborative Web search, they
of knowledge with which to guide search. For example, also serve to highlight certain issues, in relation to the man-
Brin & Page [Brin and Page, 1998] and Kleinberg [Klein- ner in which promotions are made, that are likely to lead to
berg, 1999] have argued for the need to consider factors such critical problems over time. We conclude by discussing how
as link-connectivity information, while others have sought these problems have been overcome in our implementation.
to exploit context as a way to disambiguate vague queries
(see [Lawrence, 2000]). Still others have begun to con- 2 Regularity & Repetition in Web Search
sider the structure of the query-space as a new source of
search knowledge. For example, [Fitzpatrick and Dent, 1997; Collaborative Web search is motivated by regularity and repe-
Glance, 2001; Raghavan and Sever, 1995; Wen, 2002] have tition that is assumed to be inherent in Web search, especially
all demonstrated how query logs can be mined to identify use- among the searches of communities of like-minded individ-
ful past queries that may help the current searcher.  uals. It proposes to exploit these regularities when respond-
  In [Freyne et al., 2004; Smyth et al., 2003; In Press], a ing to new queries by reusing the result selections from simi-
novel approach to Web search—collaborative Web search— lar past queries. But how commonplace is community-based
was introduced. It combined techniques for exploiting knowl- search? And how regular and repetitive is its query-space?
edge of the query-space with ideas from social networking 2.1 The Case for Community-Based Web Search
  ∗The Support of the Enterprise Ireland Informatics Initiative and While most searches are conducted through generic search
Science Foundation Ireland is gratefully acknowledged. engines, servicing the needs of individuals, many are never-                                                                             Sheet1 Chart 1

theless examples of community-based searches. For instance, 100                                     80
                                                               89.7
the use of a Google search box on a specialised Web site (e.g.                        % Repetition
                                                                                      Mean Queries
                                                                     78.6
a motoring enthusiast’s site) means that its searches are likely 60
to be initiated by users with some common (motoring) inter- 75                                      60
est. Alternatively, searches originating from a computer labo-
ratory assigned to 2nd year students are likely to share certain           57.0
characteristics related to their studies (courses, projects etc.)
                                                          50                      44.1              40
and social lives (college societies, local gigs etc.)                                   41.6
  Of course, more formalised examples of community-based
                                                                                                        Mean  Similar Queries


search are also possible. The advent of blogging services and %  Repeating Queries
                                                          25         14                             20
social networking services such as Friendster and Orkut pave                                   15.5
the way for a growing number of community-based search ap-
                                                                            6     5      5
plications. While the precise nature of a community’s shared                                   5
interests may not be easy to characterise, they are neverthe- 0                                     0
less likely to be encoded within the search patterns (queries  >0   >0.25  >0.5  >0.75   1    Exact
and result selections) of the community’s members.                     Query Similarity Threshold
2.2  How Much Repetition?                             Figure 1: Query repetition inP theage 1 search logs of the commu-
                                                      nity used as part of the evaluation in Section 4.
If many searches can be traced back to ad-hoc communities
of searchers, what degree of regularity can be observed? We
can begin to answer this question by proﬁling the degree of
term overlap between queries from different communities of for a more comprehensive technical description. Brieﬂy, each
searchers. One way to measure query similarity is by the de- new user query, qT , is submitted to a set of underlying search
gree of overlap between query terms as in Equation 1; for engines and their results are combined to form a meta-search
example, Sim(‘jaguar pictures’,‘jaguar photos’)=0.33. result-list, RM . The novelty of collaborative Web search
                                                      stems from the way that this result-list is processed to pro-
                                 0
                            |q ∩ q |                  duce a new result-list, RT , that reﬂects the learned prefer-
                Sim(q, q0) =                    (1)
                            |q ∪ q0|                  ences of a community of like-minded searchers. It achieves
                                                      this by recording the selections of searchers. In other words,
  Previous analyses of a variety of search engine logs have collaborative search records the fact that a result si has been
shown that query repetition is prevalent in specialised search selected for query qT , and then reuses this information for
scenarios that are likely to attract communities of like-minded similar queries in the future, by promoting results that were
searchers. For example [Smyth et al., In Press] report how it reliably selected in the past.
is common to ﬁnd that up to 70% of search queries may share
at least 50% of their query terms with other queries’; this 3.1 Proﬁling Community Preferences
drops to 30% for more general search scenarios. Later in this The hit-matrix, H, is a key data structure for collaborative
paper we describe a major evaluation of collaborative Web Web search. It is a record of the results selected in past search
search involving the employees of a local software company. sessions by a speciﬁc community of users, and multiple hit
Prior to this evaluation, we performed a similar query analy- matrices can be readily maintained to reﬂect the separate pref-
sis over 9 weeks worth of search sessions extracted from the erences of many different communities. Each time a searcher
company’s Internet access logs. Our working hypothesis at
                                                      (from a speciﬁc community) selects a result page, pj, that
the time was that these employees would behave as a com- was retrieved for query, q , the value of H is incremented.
munity of like-minded searchers and that their search queries              T             T j
                                                      Thus, HT j represents the number of times that pj has been
would exhibit a high degree of similarity, thus motivating col- selected as a result for q . The row of H that corresponds to
laborative Web search.                                                    T
                                                      qT provides a complete account of the number of all page se-
  The results are presented in Figure 1 as the percentage of lections for this query over all search sessions that have used
queries at set similarity thresholds and the average number this query. Note that no record is maintained of which user
of similar queries for these different thresholds. The results selected which result, so in effect the hit matrix serves as an
show that the group of searchers do appear to behave as a anonymous account of community preferences.
community of like-minded users as high degrees of repetition
are noted for many similarity thresholds. For example, we see 3.2 Reusing Similar Queries
that nearly 60% of queries share at least 50% of their query
terms with other queries and that on average each of these The similarity between a new query, qT , and a search record
queries shares 50% of its terms with about 6 other queries. (row) in a hit-matrix can be estimated by the term overlap be-
                                                      tween the new query and the query of the past search record
                                                      (Equation 1); see [Balfe and Smyth, 2005] for a number of al-
3  A Review of Collaborative Web Search               ternative query similarity models. Collaborative Web search
The collaborative Web search technique is conceived of as a selects those rows from the hit matrix whose corresponding
form of meta-search; see Figure 2 for the summary architec- query has a similarity to qT that is above some speciﬁed
ture and refer to [Freyne et al., 2004; Smyth et al., In Press] threshold (typically 0.5). The pages associated with these                   UPDATE ENGINE

                                                          qT
             i
            s         E


             T        N
                      I
                      G
                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                     r
                      N
                                                                                                     o
                      E
                                                                                                     m
                       
                      E
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                     t
            R         C
              T                                                                                      e
                      N
                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                      
                      A
                                                                                                     R
                      V
                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                     s
                      E
                                                                                                     u
                      L
                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                     t
                      E
                                                                                                     s
            qT        R
                               Hit-Matrix, H
                        RM
                    META-SEARCH

          q 1   1  q 2   2      q n   n
           T   R    T   R        T   R                 Figure 3: The I-SPY result page for the ‘ijcai 2005’ query.
            Adapter  Adapter      Adapter

            1   1    2   2        n   n
          qT   R   qT   R       qT   R                ests, for a community of like-minded searchers. Collaborative
                                                      Web search contemplates the creation of multiple hit-matrices
              S        S            S                 to enable different communities of users to access a search
               1        2            n                service that is adapted for their query-space and their pre-
                                                      ferred pages. For example, a large Web portal might create
                                                      different hit-matrices for different portal sections (e.g. News,
   Figure 2: The collaborative web search architecture. Sports, Entertainment, Business sections) on the grounds that
                                                      searchers are more likely to submit queries that are related to
records (rows) are called promotion candidates and they are the content that is found within this portal section.
assumed to be potentially relevant to the new target query be-
cause they have been relevant for similar queries, and for the 3.5 An Example Session
same community of searchers, in the past.             Collaborative Web search has been implemented in the form
                                                      of the I-SPY search engine (http://ispy.ucd.ie). I-SPY can be
3.3  Result Relevancy & Ranking                       conﬁgured to use a range of different search engines as its
Consider a page, pj, that is associated with query, qi. The rel- base-level search engines, including Google, Teoma, HotBot
evance of pj to qi is estimated by the relative number of times etc., and it allows users to use existing search communities or
that pj has been selected for qi; see Equation 2. And the rel- to create new ones via a simple form-based interface.
evance of pj to qT is a combination of Relevance(pj, qi) for Figure 3 shows the results of a typical search for the query
all qi’s (q1, ..., qn) deemed similar to qT , as shown in Equa- ‘ijcai 2005’ by a particular I-SPY community. The result-list
tion 3. Each Relevance(pj, qi) is weighted by Sim(qi, qT ) is presented in the main panel, ﬂanked by recent and popu-
to discount the relevance of results from less similar queries; lar queries and web pages lists; certain sensitive information
Exists(pj, qi) = 1 if Hij 6= 0 and 0 otherwise.       items have been blanked out in the ﬁgure. In this case the
                               H                      top 4 results are shown and the ﬁrst 3 of these are result pro-
          Relevance(p , q ) =   ij              (2)
                     j  i   P    H                    motions; indicated by the ‘I-SPY eyes’ icon next to the pro-
                               ∀j ij                  moted result titles. This means that these results have been

           W Rel(pj, qT , q1, ..., qn) =        (3)   previously selected for this query or for similar queries. In
      P                                               fact we can see from the ‘related queries’ lists after the ﬁrst
        i=1...n Relevance(pj, qi) • Sim(qT , qi)
        P                                             and third results that these have been previously selected for
          i=1...n Exists(pj, qi) • Sim(qT , qi)       the similar query ‘ijcai’. The results shown are obviously
This weighted relevance metric is used to rank-order the pro- relevant to the target query. The top result is for the main
motion candidates. These ranked pages are then listed ahead IJCAI 2005 home page and the third result corresponds to
of the remaining meta-search results, which are themselves the main IJCAI Conferences page, for example. However it
ranked (according to a standard meta-search scoring metric), is also worth noting that the second result is for the forth-
to give RT . Of course, alternative promotion models can also coming user modeling conference, UM 2005. This page has
be envisaged but are omitted here for space reasons.  been promoted because it has been selected in the past, for the
                                                      current query, by members of the current community—these
3.4  Communities and Collaboration                    community members have a speciﬁc business interest in user
Obviously this approach assumes that the contents of a given modeling technology—but ordinarily this result would not be
hit-matrix reﬂect some relatively uniform domain of inter- expected to appear so high in the result list for ‘ijcai 2005’.                                                             850
This result is, however, relevant to this query given the com- 900
munity context, especially since UM 2005 takes place directly
before IJCAI 2005 and in the same city. This type of promo- 300                                   100%
                                                               275


tion speaks to the potential power of I-SPY to promote results                                          s
                                                                                                        n
                                                        s

that are uniquely relevant to the speciﬁc needs of a commu-                                             o
                                                                                                        i
                                                        n
                                                                                                        s
                                                        o                                         75%
                                                        i
nity of like-minded searchers results that would ordinarily                                             s
                                                        s
                                                                                                        e

                                                        s 200
                                                                                                        S


be lost among the competing results of traditional, generic                                              
                                                        e
                                                        S
                                                         
                                                                                                        %


search engines.                                         f
                                                                                                         


                                                        o                                         50%
                                                                                                        e
                                                         
                                                                                                        v
                                                        r
                                                                                                        i
                                                        e
                                                                 106                                    t
                                                        b
                                                                                                        a


4  Live-User Evaluation                                                                                 l
                                                         100        88
                                                        m
                                                                                                        u

                                                        u               61                        25%
Past evaluations of collaborative Web search have included a          54                                m
                                                        N
                                                                                                        u


                                       [                                   32                           C
mixture of artiﬁcial-user and live-user studies Smyth et al.,                28       26
                                                                               16
                                                                                  8 10   7 7
2003; Freyne et al., 2004; Smyth et al., In Press]. However                                  3  1
                                                          0                                       0%
these studies have been limited; for example, the live-user  0 1  2 3 4  5 6 7  8 9 1 0 1 5 2 0 2 5 3 0 M ore
evaluation studied a narrowly focused, single-shot, question-         Number of Promotions 
answering search task which did not allow for more realistic
open-ended search scenarios over an extended period of time. Figure 4: A histogram of the number of search sessions with
In this section we describe the results of a more realistic trial, different numbers of result promotions.
which took place over a 4-week period among the 50 staff
members of a local software company.
4.1  Preliminaries                                    allow users to indicate how well their information needs have
The trial began on Monday, November 8, 2004 and the re- been answered by search results, and while it would be pos-
sults presented in this paper account for the 4 working-weeks sible to add such a facility to I-SPY for the purpose of mea-
(Monday to Friday) up to and including December 3. During suring relevance in this trial, many users indicated that they
this time employees were asked to use I-SPY as their primary would ﬁnd this to be a nuisance. For this reason we examine
search engine; prior to the trial 90% of search sessions used a less direct measure of relevance.
Google. I-SPY was conﬁgured to draw on Google and Hot-  We propose that the selection of at least one result in a
Bot as a source of search results and a new community was given search session acts as a crude, but nevertheless useful
created for participants with a hit-matrix trained from search indicator of result-list relevance. We refer to a search session,
log data for the 9 weeks prior to the start of the trial. I-SPY’s where at least one result has been selected, as a successful
query-similarity threshold was set at 50%, so that only those session. If no results are selected (a failed session) then we
past sessions that shared more than 50% of their query terms can be relatively conﬁdent that the search engine has not re-
with the current target query would be considered to be simi- trieved a result that is obviously relevant to the searcher. Note
lar for the purposes of result promotion (see Section 3). Par- that we do not distinguish here between sessions with dif-
ticipants were introduced to I-SPY via a short explanatory ferent numbers of selected results, mainly because it is not
email and encouraged to use it as they would a normal search possible to conclude much from the frequency of result se-
engine. Over the 4 weeks more than 1500 queries were sub- lections. For example, one might be tempted to conclude that
mitted and more than 1800 result URLs were selected.  users selecting more results is a sign of increasing result rele-
  Figure 4 presents a histogram of the number of search ses- vance, except that a similar argument can be made in support
sions with different numbers of promotions. It shows that of decreasing result relevance, on the basis that the initial se-
46% of search sessions contained at least 1 promoted re- lections must not have satisﬁed the users.
sult; on average these sessions contained 3.7 promotions. To analyse the ability of collaborative search to deliver suc-
This speaks to the potential for I-SPY’s result-promotion cessful sessions, we split the search sessions into those that
technique to usefully inﬂuence a signiﬁcant percentage of contained promotions (promoted sessions) and those that did
searches. The results are in broad agreement with the pre-trial not (standard sessions). The former correspond to sessions
query-overlap analysis described in Section 2, which sug- where collaborative search has the potential to inﬂuence rele-
gested that we could expect up to 57% of new queries to have vance, whereas the latter serve as a pure meta-search bench-
50%-similar queries from the past to draw on as a source of mark against which to judge this inﬂuence. Incidentally, there
promotions (see Figure 1).                            appears to be no difference between the queries for the pro-
                                                      moted sessions when compared to those for standard sessions
4.2  Successful Sessions                              and both sets of queries have almost identical distributions;
While the above ﬁgures indicate that I-SPY is making pro- for example, an average of 2.4 terms per query for the pro-
motions in roughly half of the search sessions, the real moted sessions compared to 2.5 for the standard sessions was
test is whether these promotions turn out to be relevant for measured. Indeed, given enough time it is likely that many
the searcher, and whether they are more relevant than non- of the standard queries would eventually be paired with new
promoted results. Evaluating the relevance of search results similar queries and so participate in future promoted sessions.
in a trial such as this is difﬁcult to do, at least in a direct fash- Figure 5(a) presents the average percentage of success-
ion. Standard search interfaces do not provide a facility to ful sessions among the promoted and standard sessions and      1                      4                        in other search scenarios, such as mobile Web search, where
                                                      screen-space is so restricted as to severely limit the number of
    0.75                     3                        results that may be presented on a single screen. For instance,
                                                      on many mobile devices (eg. WAP phones), screen-space is
    0.5                      2                        so restricted that only 3 results can be presented per screen.
                                                      The positional advantage enjoyed by I-SPY results suggests
    0.25                     1
                                                      that it has the potential to ensure that relevant results will ap-


   %  Successful Sessions 0  0                        pear on the ﬁrst page of such mobile-search results. In fact
                            Mean  Selection Position
        Promoted Standard       Promoted Standard     99% of the result selections that occur in the promoted ses-
         Sessions Sessions      Sessions Sessions
 (a)                      (b)                         sions are for results in the top 3 of a result-list, compared to
                                                      only 79% of the standard session selections. Moreover, 93%
Figure 5: Promoted vs. Standard Sessions: (a) the percentage of promoted session selections are for the top result, com-
of successful sessions; and (b) the mean position of selected pared to only 63% of standard session selections.
results among successful sessions.
                                                      5   Discussion
                                                      The results so far indicate that I-SPY’s collaborative Web
demonstrates a clear advantage for the promoted sessions. On search has the potential to signiﬁcantly improve search per-
average, 80% of the promoted sessions were successful, com- formance. Result promotions are made frequently, and when
pared to 56% for the standard sessions, a difference that is they are they translate into more successful search sessions
signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level. In other words, the and a better ranking for relevant results. In this section we
collaborative search result-promotion mechanism leads to a brieﬂy consider the number of promotions made during a ses-
40% relative improvement in the chances that a given search sion and the likely success of this session. In our analysis to
will translate into a successful search session.      date we have noticed that promoted sessions can contain up to
                                                      10 or more promoted results; this may be a problem because
4.3  Selection Positions                              too many promotions may swamp result-lists to the detriment
As a complementary measure of result-relevance, it is also of search performance. In addition, sessions with many pro-
interesting to compare the promoted and standard sessions in moted results are likely to be caused by the reuse of large
terms of the average position of selected results within suc- numbers of past search sessions, some of which may be the
cessful sessions; that is, those sessions in which selections result of less reliable query overlaps, which in turn are more
have been made. We would like to see relevant results appear- likely to contribute results of limited relevance to the target
ing higher up in result-lists. Moreover, assuming that users query.
are likely to select results that at least appear to be more rel- One solution that we have adopted recently is to provide
evant than those that do not, then we would like to minimise the searcher with a facility to adjust the level of community
the mean position of a selected result.               personalization that is offered, by manipulating a slider-bar
                                                      to increase the number of promoted results that are displayed
  Figure 5(b) presents the mean position of the selected re-
                                                      (see Figure 6). We are also considering different result-
sults among the successful sessions of the promoted and stan-
                                                      integration strategies to allow for a more ﬂexible combination
dard sessions. This once again shows a clear advantage for
                                                      of I-SPY relevance and meta-search result scores.
the former. On average, the mean position of a selected result
                                                        We are concerned about issues relating to fairness, relia-
among the successful promoted sessions is 1.96, compared to
                                                      bility and security. For example, it should be clear that as it
3.51 for the successful standard sessions. This difference is
                                                      stands, older results will tend to be preferred over newer re-
statistically signiﬁcant at the 99% conﬁdence level and corre-
                                                      sults; the former will have had a greater opportunity to attract
sponds to a 44% reduction in the position of relevant results
                                                      selections. This may cause problems when it comes to the
for promoted sessions compared to standard sessions.
                                                      promotion of very recent results. We are currently looking at
  It is worth commenting on the importance of this observed
                                                      ways to address this issue, for example by using a suitable de-
difference in the selection positions. While there is an ad-
                                                      cay function to gradually erode the selections of older results.
vantage due to the promoted sessions, one might ask whether
                                                      We are also investigating ways to detect false selections by
the observed reduction of one or two places is likely to be
                                                      unreliable searchers as a way to defend against the fraudulent
important. We believe that it is, for a number of reasons, not
                                                      activities of self-interested parties; see also [O’Mahony et al.,
the least of which is that results should be ordered by their ex-
                                                      2002; Smyth et al., In Press].
pected relevance as a matter of course. In addition, users have
a tendency to focus their attention on the top-ranked results.
The fact that promoted sessions have a higher success rate 6 Conclusions
than the standard sessions is likely due to this difference in the Collaborative Web search is an approach to Web search that
position of apparently relevant results, because for the most exploits the natural regularity that exists within the search be-
part I-SPY promotes results from lower-down in the standard haviours of ad-hoc communities of users. It espouses the
result-lists (returned by Google and HotBot) to higher posi- reuse of search sessions for past queries that are similar to
tions.                                                the current target query, resulting in the active promotion of
  This observed difference may become even more important those results that have been preferred by the community in