                          Evaluating Significance of Inconsistencies 

                                            Anthony Hunter 
                                    Department of Computer Science 
                                       University College London 
                                              Gower Street 
                                        London WC1E 6BT, UK 
                                          a.hunter@cs.ucl.ac.uk 

                     Abstract                          World Cup match, where the first report says that Brazil beat 
                                                       Germany 2-0, and the second report says that Germany beat 
    Inconsistencies frequently occur in knowledge      Brazil 2-0. This is clearly a significant inconsistency. Now 
    about the real-world. Some of these inconsis•      consider two news reports on the same football match, where 
    tencies may be more significant than others, and   the first report says that the referee was Pierluigi Collina and 
    some knowledgebases (sets of formulae) may con•    the second report says that the referee was Ubaldo Aquino. 
    tain more inconsistencies than others. This creates This inconsistency would normally be regarded as relatively 
    problems of deciding whether to act on these in•   insignificant. 
    consistencies, and if so how. To address this, we 
                                                         In this paper, we extend the idea of measuring inconsis•
    provide a general characterization of inconsistency, 
                                                       tency via QC models by giving a new framework for measur•
    based on quasi-classical logic (a form of paracon-
                                                       ing the significance of inconsistencies in a knowledgebase. 
    sistent logic with a more expressive semantics than 
                                                       To do this, we review aspects of QC logic and a measurement 
    Belnap's four-valued logic, and unlike other para-
                                                       of inconsistency based on it. We then present our frame-
    consistent logics, allows the connectives to appear 
                                                       work for evaluating the significance of inconsistencies. We 
    to behave as classical connectives). We analyse in•
                                                       show this leads to a generalization of a four-valued seman•
    consistent knowledge by considering the conflicts 
                                                       tics where instead of a single truth value to denote inconsis•
    arising in the minimal quasi-classical models for 
                                                       tency, we have an infinite sequence of inconsistent truth val•
    that knowledge. This is used for a measure of co•
                                                       ues D  where . We then discuss how we can use QC 
    herence for each knowledgebase, and for a measure       x
                                                       logic together with significance functions for reasoning and 
    of significance of inconsistencies in each knowl•
                                                       analysing with heterogeneously sourced information such as 
    edgebase. In this paper, we formalize this frame-
                                                       news from different newsfeeds. 
    work, and consider applications in managing het•
    erogeneous sources of knowledge.                   2 Review of QC Logic 
                                                       We review the propositional version of quasi-classical logic 
1 Introduction                                         (QC Logic) [Besnard and Hunter, 1995; Hunter, 2000]. 
An approach to measuring inconsistency is to use proposi• Definition 1 The language of QC logic is that of classical 
tional quasi-classical (QC) logic [Hunter, 2002]. In this, each propositional logic. We let C denote a set of formulae formed 
inconsistent set of formulae is reflected in the QC models for in the usual way from a set of atom symbols A, and the con•
the set, and then the inconsistency is measured in the models. nectives , then Atoms(r) returns the 
Obviously, this is not possible in classical logic, or indeed set of atom symbols used in T. 
many non-classical logics, because there is no model of an Definition 2 Let a be an atom, and let be a complementa•
inconsistent set of formulae. QC logic, a form of paraconsis- tion operation such that The 
tent logic, can model inconsistent sets of formulae. There are operator is not part of the object language, but it makes some 
other paraconsistent logics that we could consider, for exam• definitions clearer. 
ple Belnap's four-valued logic [Belnap, 1977], or Levesque's 
3-interpretations iLevesque, 1984], or Grant's generalizations Definition 3 Let be a clause that includes a 
of classical satisfaction [Grant, 1978], but these, as we will il• disjunctThe focus of 
lustrate, involve the consideration of too many models. This denoted), is defined as the clause obtained 
increases the number of models that need to be analysed and by removing a%from 
it underspecifies the nature of the conflicts.         Example 1 Let be a clause where are 
  However, the original proposal for measuring inconsis• literals. Hence, 
tency based on QC logic does not provide an evaluation of Focus is used to capture a form of resolution in the seman•
the significance of inconsistencies. As an illustration of the tics of QC logic. A model in QC logic is a form of Herbrand 
need to evaluate significance, consider two news reports on a model. 


468                                                                         KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION Definition 4 Let A be a set of atoms. Let O be the set of     of a connective in classical logic may not yield the same set 
objects defined as follows, where is a positive object, and   of conclusions. For example, in QC logic, is entailed by 
—a is a negative object.                                                             and and is entailed by 
                                                                                    . QC logic is much better behaved in 
                                                              this respect than other paraconsistent logics such as [da 
We call any a QC model. So X can contain both                 Costa, 1974], and consistency-based logics such as [Benfer-
            for some atom                                     hat et al., 1993]. Furthermore, the semantics of QC logic 
                                                              directly models inconsistent sets of formulae. 
   For each atom and eachX 
means that in X there is a reason for the belief and that 
in X there is a reason against the belief Similarly, 
          means that in X there is a reason against the be•
lief a and that in X there is a reason for the belief This 
effectively gives us a four-valued semantics. Though for non-
                                                              Example 3 Consider the following sets of formulae. 
atomic formulae the semantics, defined next, is significantly 
different to [Belnap, 1977]. 
Definition 5 Let be a satisfiability relation called strong 
satisfaction. For a model X, we define as follows, where 
          are literals in , and is a literal in C. 
           iff there is a reason for the belief a in X 

                                                                Whilst four-valued logic [Belnap, 1977] also directly mod•
                                                              els inconsistent sets of formulae, there are too many Bel-
                                                              nap models in many situations. Consider for example 
                                                                     . There is one minimal QC model , but 
                                                              there are a number of Belnap models that satisfy this set. 
                                                              QC logic has a reduced number of models because of the 
                                                              constraint in the definition of strong satisfaction for disjunc•
                                                              tion that ensures that if the complement of a disjunct holds in 
                                                              the model, then the resolvent should also hold in the model. 
                                                              This strong constraint means that various other proposals for 
                                                              many-valued logic will tend to have more models for any 
                                                              given knowledgebase than QC logic. In particular, the short•
                                                              comings of Belnap's four-valued logic also apply to three-
                                                              valued logics such as 3-interpretations by [Levesque, 1984], 
                                                              and a similar proposal by [Grant, 1978]. 

                                                              3 Measuring coherence of QC models 
                                                              We now consider a measure of inconsistency called coher•
                                                              ence [Hunter, 2002]. The opinionbase of a QC model A" is 
                                                              the set of atomic beliefs (atoms) for which there are reasons 
                                                              for or against in X, and the conflictbase of A" is the set of 
                                                              atomic beliefs with reasons for and against in X. 
                                                              Definition 8 Let 
  Strong satisfaction is used to define a notion of entail•
ment for QC logic. There is also a natural deduction proof         Conflictbase(X) = 
theory for propositional QC logic [Hunter, 2000] and a              Opinionbase(Ar) — 
semantic tableau version for first-order QC logic [Hunter, 
2001]. Entailment for QC logic for propositional CNF for•       In finding the minimal QC models for a set of formu•
mulae is coNP-complete, and via a linear time transformation  lae, minimization of each model forces minimization of 
these formulae can be handled using classical logic theorem   the conflictbase of each model. As a result of this min•
provers [Marquis and Porquet, 2001].                          imization, if , then 
  The definitions for QC models and for strong satisfaction   (1) Conflictbase(X) = Conflictbase(r) and (2) either 
provide us with the basic concepts for measuring inconsis•    Opinionbase(X) = Opinionbase(y) or Opinionbase(A) is 
tency. QC logic exhibits the nice feature that no attention   not a subset of Opinionbase(Y). 
needs to be paid to a special form that the formulae in a set   Increasing the size of the conflictbase, with respect to the 
of premises should have. This is in contrast with other para- size of the opinionbase, decreases the degree of coherence, as 
consistent logics where two formulae identical by definition  defined below. 


KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION                                                                                            469 Definition 9 The Coherence function from into [0,1], 
is given below when X is non-empty, and Coherence i = 1. 


   If Coherence(X) = 1, then X is a totally coherent, and if     A significance function gives an evaluation of the signifi•
Coherence(AT) = 0, then X is totally incoherent, otherwise,   cance of the conflicts in a QC model. This evaluation is in the 
A" is partially coherent/incoherent.                          range [0,1] with 0 as least significant and 1 as most signifi•
                                                              cant. 


   Different minimal QC models for the same knowledgebase 
are not necessarily equally coherent. 

                                                                 The definitions for mass assignment and mass-based sig•
                                                              nificance correspond to mass assignment and belief functions 
                                                              (respectively) in Demspter-Shafer theory fShafer, 1976]. 
                                                              However, here they are used to formalise significance rather 
                                                              than uncertainty. To ease reading in the following, we drop 
                                                              the superscript and subscript for significance functions. 
                                                              Proposition 1 Let m be a mass assignment for If S is 
                                                              a significance function for m, then the following property 
                                                              of simple cumulativity holds for all X, Y 
                                                              Y implies 
                                                                 Given that simple cumulativity holds, we see that specify•
                                                              ing significance in terms of mass assignment is more efficient 
                                                              than directly specifying the significance. 


4 Significance functions 

We now present a new framework for measuring the signif•         So mass-based significance is not additive. Also the re•
icance of inconsistencies arising in QC models, and thereby   maining significance need not be for the complement of X 
in sets of formulae. The approach is based on specifying the 
                                                              (ie, Xc). Some may be assigned to models not disjoint from 
relative significance of incoherent models using the notion of X. We now consider some constraints on mass assignments 
a mass assignment which is defined below.                     that give useful properties for mass-based significance. 


                                                                A focal mass assignment puts the mass onto the totally in•
  We have the constraint = 0 to ensure that                   coherent models, and a solo mass assignment puts the mass 
for all Condition 1                                           on the smallest totally incoherent models. 
ensures mass is only assigned to models that contain conflicts Proposition 3Ifm is a solo mass assignment for then m 
and condition 2 ensures the total mass distributed sums to 1. is focal mass assignment for 
Given some , a mass assignment can be localized 
on small subsets of , spread over many subsets of , or lim•     Significance is additive for totally incoherent models when 
ited to large subsets of . A mass assignment can be regarded  the mass assignment is solo. 
as a form of metaknowledge, and so it needs to be specified   Proposition 4 Let m be a solo mass assignment for Let 
for a domain, where the domain is characterized by , and so   S be a mass-based significance function for m and let X 
the possible models of the domain are subsets of 


470                                                                                   KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION    A useful feature of a focal mass-based significance func•
tion is that as the number of conflicts rises in a model, then 
the significance of the model rises. This is formalized by the 
following notion of conflict cumulativity. It does not hold in 
general (see Example 9).                                         Since the conflictbase is common for all minimal QC mod•
                                                               els for a knowledgebase, we obtain the following. 

b is a significance function for in, then the following prop-

                                                                 The next two results capture notions of monotonicity for 
                                                               mass-based significance. 


                This is illustrated in the next example          In this section, we have augmented the measurement of in•
                                                               consistency in QC models with an evaluation of significance. 
                                                               In the next section, we provide a semantics. 

                                                               5 Semantics for mass-based significance 
                                                               A mass assignment can be regarded as transforming the four-
                                                               valued semantics of QC logic into a many-valued logic. 


   We now extend the significance functions to knowledge-


each of those models as equally acceptable, or equivalently 
we regard each of those models as equally representative of 

                                                                 The knowledge lattice is illustrated in Figure 1. It is a dis•
                                                               tributive lattice. The key difference between Belnap's lattice 
                                                               and ours is the value Doth has been split into a chain of truth 

                                                               values b0, •-. B1. If we equate the truth values {N, T, F, B0} 
   Some knowledgebases have zero significance.                 with the Belnap truth values {Neither, True, False, Both}, 
                                                               respectively, then Belnap's four-valued lattice is a sublattice 
                                                               of the knowledge lattice. 

                                                               Definition 17 A many-valued model is a tuple (K,^,t) 
                                                               where is the knowledge lattice and t is a truth as•
                                                               signment function from the set of atoms A to K. 
                                                                 In the following, we restrict consideration to solo mass as•
                                                               signments, though this restriction can be relaxed with slightly 
                                                               more complex definitions. 
                                                               Definition 18 Let m be a solo mass assignment for and 
                                                               let he many-valued model. We describe (X, M) and 


KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION                                                                                             471                                                                  This semantics relates to QC logic strong satisfaction rela•
                                                               tion with the mass-based significance function as follows. 
                                                               Proposition 10 Let m be a solo mass assignment for Also 
                                                               let _ and t be a truth assignment where (X, in) and 
                                                                        are isomorphic models. If < T 
              Figure 1: The Knowledge Lattice 
                                                               if 
                                                               Proposition 11 Let , Let where 
          as being isomorphic models when and the 
                                                               Coherence(A') = 0, and let m be a solo mass assignment 
following conditions hold: 
                                                              for Let be a many-valued model where 
                                                               and (A", in) and are isomorphic models. Let S be a 
                                                               significance function for m. 

                                                                 The semantics therefore extends QC logic so that in case 
   We can define a valuation function that extends a truth as•
                                                               of inconsistency, the B  truth value reflects the significance 
signment to any formula by an inductive definition on the                            i
                                                              of the inconsistency, where B  is the least significant and B
structure of a. However, for brevity, we will adopt a shortcut                             0                            1 
                                                               is the most significant. It is straightforward to extend this 
based on the relation. 
                                                               semantics to focal mass assignments. 
Definition 19 Let (X,m) and be isomorphic mod•
els. A valuation function, denoted Vt,from to K is defined     6 Significance of inconsistencies in news 
so that when a is an atom, and as follows when 
a is non-atomic.                                               In this section, we consider news reports. Having some un•
                                                              derstanding of the "degree of inconsistency" of a news report 
                                                              can help in deciding how to act on it. Moreover, inconsisten•
                                                              cies between information in a news report and domain knowl•
                                                              edge can tell us important things about the news report. For 
                                                              this we use a significance function to give a value for each 
                                                               possible inconsistency that can arise in a news report in a 
                                                              given domain. We may also use significance in the follow•
   Since we could have defined the valuation function equiv-   ing ways: (1) to reject reports that are too inconsistent; (2) to 
alently in an inductive definition on the structure of the for• highlight unexpected news; (3) to focus on repairing signifi•
mulae, we can obtain propositions such as the following that  cant inconsistencies; and (4) to monitor sources of informa•
relate the valuation function applied to a formula and applied tion to identify sources that are unreliable. 
to its subformulae.                                              How we use the significance function depends on the ap•
                                                              plication. In our simple example below, we assume a news 
                                                              report is a set of ground predicates. Each term is used to rep•
                                                              resent a piece of information in a news report and may be 
                                                              equivalent to a word, or number, or a simple phrase. The 
                                                              predicate symbol is used to tag or categorise each piece of 
                                                              information. 


                                                                 A potential inconsistency that can arise in a news report is 
                                                              any set of literals that may be rebutted by the domain knowl•
                                                              edge. 


472                                                                                   KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION 