    Maps for Verbs: The Relation Between Interaction Dynamics and Verb Use
        Paul R. Cohen    and  Clayton T. Morrison                   Erin Cannon
    Center for Research on Unexpected Events (CRUE)          Department of Psychology
            USC Information Sciences Institute               University of Massachusetts
             4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001                     Amherst, MA 01003
                Marina del Rey, CA 90292                     ecannon@psych.umass.edu
                 {cohen,clayton}@isi.edu

                    Abstract                          the distributions of words that children use to describe the
                                                      movies.
    We report a study of word meaning that tests
    whether dynamical aspects of movies predict word
    use. The movies were based on a novel represen-   2   Related Work
    tation of verb semantics called maps for verbs. We Interest in the perception of the dynamics of whole-body in-
    asked preschool-school-age children to describe the teractions is not new. Heider and Simmel [1944] report a
    movies, and demonstrated that their distributions of study in which adults were shown a ﬁlm of animated shapes
    words could be predicted by the dynamical aspects interacting with each other in and around a box. After watch-
    of the movies. These results lend support to the  ing the ﬁlm, participants were asked to describe what hap-
    empiricist position that word meanings are learned pened in the ﬁlm. Heider and Simmel found a strong ten-
    associatively.                                    dency to attribute a rich set of intentions to the moving ob-
                                                      jects and a story-line describing the interactions, even though
1  Introduction                                       the only information in the stimuli was the shape and size of
                                                      the objects and their motion dynamics.
Previous work has shown that robots can learn the meanings More recently, several psychologists and computer scien-
of words by associating aspects of the perceptual array with tists have explored dynamic maps as representations of activ-
utterances (e.g., [Steels, 1999; Oates, 2002; Siskind, 2001; ities, often for machine recognition and modeling of human
Vogt, 2002; Cohen and Oates, 1998]). In this paper we test the gesture and bodily movement (e.g., [Thelen and Smith, 1994;
conjecture that the dynamics of the perceptual array, specif- Rosenstein, 1998; Intille and Bobick, 1999; Bobick and
ically, the manner in which objects move and interact, ex- Davis, 2001].
plains the production of particular verbs. The work is part Blythe, Todd & Miller [1999] and Todd & Barrett [2000]
of a larger project to model human language development on present a preliminary study of adult and child perception of
robot platforms, and is based on the maps for verbs frame- intention based on the dynamics of motion between two sim-
work described in Section 3. A persistent question in the ple interacting bodies. Their work also uses the tools of dy-
project is whether the perceptual array contains enough in- namic map representation to characterize interactions. Their
formation to provide semantics for words, or, in a slightly results suggest that such dynamics are implicated in people’s
different formulation, what fraction of the variability of word categorization of interactions, although their focus was on in-
use is explained by information in the perceptual array? A tention, rather than more primitive verb classes.
concrete version of this question is posed here: What fraction For a comprehensive review of the psychological literature
of the variability of word use is explained by the dynamical on dynamics and word meanings see [Cannon and Cohen,
aspects of interactions between two objects?          2005].
  We developed 18 movies of interactions between objects.
Each movie was generated by a program written in breve
[Klein, 2002], an animation tool with good physics. A vec- 3 Maps for Verbs
tor of parameters of each program characterizes the dynamics In the maps for verbs representation of verb meanings, the
of the corresponding movie. We showed the movies to pre- denotations of verbs dealing with interactions between two
school children and asked them to describe the action in the bodies, such as push, hit, chase, and so on, are represented as
movies. After removing non-content words, we characterized pathways through a metric space, or map, the axes of which
each movie by a distribution of words. We ranked all pairs of are perceived distance, velocity, and energy transfer [Cohen,
movies in two ways: by the similarities of their word dis- 1998]. Verbs with similar meanings have similar pathways.
tributions and by the similarities of their vectors of program A scene, such as one object chasing another, is thought to
parameters. Then we compared the rankings. The results be perceived as a pathway through the map. To learn verb
are highly signiﬁcant: there is strong dependence between meanings, one simply associates verbs that describe scenes
the parameters of the programs that generated the movies and with the corresponding pathways.  Although maps are compact and objective representations expected just after completing the contact phase of a shove
of some verb meanings, we do not know whether they have (after phase b in Figure 1), and ends with a high relative ve-
psychological reality — whether humans use maps to assign locity that is ramping down (before phase b in Figure 1) just
meanings to verbs. Even if they do, the original maps for before a new shove occurs.
verbs representation might have the wrong axes, or the axes With this three-phase representation scheme, we deﬁne
might be correct but verbs might not be correlated with the six more interaction types corresponding to common English
particular features of pathways, as we thought. The experi- verbs:
ment in this paper does not test whether humans have maps in • Push hb, a, ai – begins like shove, but at contact relative
their heads. Instead it asks, “If one creates movies which are velocity is near or equal to zero and the actor smoothly
different according to the maps for verbs framework, will hu- imparts more energy to the target; after breaking contact,
man subjects use different distributions of words to describe the agent gradually decreases its velocity.
them?”
  In the maps for verbs framework, the dynamics of in-  • Hit hc/d, c, ci – may begin with the actor already at high
teraction are split into before, during (contact), and after velocity relative to the target or increasing in relative ve-
phases. Figure 1 depicts these phases with illustrative tra- locity, and thus is characterized by c or d in the before
jectories in eac. The axes of the maps are the same in the phase.
before and after phases: they are relative velocity and dis- • Harass hc/d, c, di – is similar to a hit, except the after-
tance between the two bodies. Relative velocity is the dif- phase involves the actor quickly recovering its speed and
ference between the velocity of one body, A, and another, B: moving back toward the target, not allowing the dis-
V elocity(A) − V elocity(B). Many verbs (e.g., transitive tance between the two to get very large (the d in the
verbs) predicate one body as the “actor” and the other as the after phase). Harass highlights that interactions may be
“target” (or “subject” or “recipient”) of the action. For exam- cyclic: the after phase of one epoch blends into the be-
ple, in a push interaction, the actor does the pushing, and the fore phase of the next.
target is the body being pushed. By convention, the actor is • Bounce hc/d, d, ei – along with counter-shove, bounce
designated as A and the target is B. Thus, when relative ve- involves the target making a more reactive response to
locity is positive, the actor’s velocity is greater than that of the actor’s actions. Bounce begins like a hit or harass,
the target; and when relative velocity is negative, the target’s but at contact, the target transfers a large amount of en-
velocity is greater than that of the actor. Distance, in turn, is ergy back to the actor.
simple Euclidean distance between the bodies.
                                                        • Counter-shove hb/c/d, e, ei – is a version of a shove
  The vertical dimension of the map in the during phase is
                                                          where the target imparts energy to the actor.
perceived energy transfer (from the actor to the target). If
energy transfer is positive, then the actor is imparting to the • Chase ha, −, −i – involves the actor moving toward the
target more energy than the target originally had; if energy target, closing the distance between the two, but never
transfer is negative, then the situation is reverse and the target quite making contact, so the during and after phases are
is imparting more energy to the actor. Since energy transfer is not relevant. This is depicted as the circular trajectory a
not directly perceivable, we approximate it by calculating the in the before phase.
acceleration of the actor in the direction of the target while
the actor and target are in contact.
  The labeled trajectories in Figure 1 characterize the com-
ponent phases of seven interaction types, as described by the
verbs push, shove, hit, harass, bounce, counter-shove and
chase.
  For example, hb, b, bi describes a shove. The actor ap-
proaches the target at a greater velocity than the target, clos-
ing the distance between the two bodies. As it nears the tar-
get, the actor slows, decreasing its velocity to match that of
the target. Trajectory b of the before phase in Figure 1 il-
lustrates these dynamics, showing the decrease in relative ve-
locity, along with decrease in distance. At contact, the rel-
ative velocity is near or equal to zero. During the contact Figure 2: (a) Example of maps-for-verbs simulation running
phase, the actor rapidly imparts more energy to the target in a the shove-wander action, as rendered in breve 1.4. (Note:
short amount of time, as illustrated by b of the during/contact dashed lines represent motions of colored patches for demon-
phase. And after breaking-off contact with the target, the stration purposes; only the moving color-patches themselves
agent rapidly decreases its velocity while the target moves were displayed in the stimuli movies.); (b) Dynamic map plot
at a greater velocity due to the energy imparted it.  of shove-wander action before contact, corresponding to the
  In Figure 2(b), below, we provide a plot of the dynamics of picture in (a) (x-axis = distance between agents, y-axis = rel-
a simulated shove action. The map in the ﬁgure plots the dy- ative velocity).
namics for a portion of the time between contact phases. The
trajectory begins with very low relative velocity, as would be                       Before                   During/Contact                    After
                                                                                e
                           c                 c
            +                            +      b                      +    d
                                b                                                c
                                                       a
                                                                                  a
             0                 d          0                             0

                                                                                   b


                       a                Energy  Transfer
           Relative-Velocity                    e                     Relative-Velocity
            -                            -    d                        -

                0                          starting                        0
                                            tick
                      Distance                       Time                        Distance

                         Figure 1: Maps-for-verbs model of the three phases of interaction.

4  Experiment                                         4.2  Analysis
4.1  Stimuli                                          The children used remarkably small vocabularies and very
                                                      terse sentences to describe the movies; the following tran-
We used breve 1.4, an environment for developing realis-
                                                      script is typical:
tic multi-body simulations in a three dimensional world with
physics [Klein, 2002], to implement a model of the seven in- E: Okay, last one. Can you tell me a good story
teraction classes described in the previous section. The mod- about this one?
els were rendered as two generic objects (a blue ball for the S: Even gooder than all of the other ones?
actor and a red ball for the target) moving on a white back- E: Make it the best story!
ground — see Figure 2(a). The models allowed us to generate S: It’s going umm gooder and it’s playing but the
multiple instances of each interaction type.                 red is letting the blue push him. And the red is
  We generated a set of movies based on each of the breve    letting the blue one push
interaction models. For several of the interaction classes we E: How come he’s letting the blue push?
also varied the behavior of the target object, as follows: the S: Because he wanted to.
target object, (a) did not move except when contacted (“sta- E: Why does he want to?
tionary”), (b) moved independently in a random walk (“wan- S: Because he likes to play like that.
der”), or (c) moved according to billiard ball ballistic physics,
                                                        All the content words for each trial were extracted and
based on the force of the collision (“coast”). We generated
                                                      “canonicalized,” converting verbs in different tenses or forms
a total of 17 unique movies. For the bounce and counter-
                                                      (e.g., ending in -ed, -ing, etc.) to a single form. Also, nega-
shove interaction types, we only implemented “stationary”
                                                      tion phrases, such as “it’s not zooming” or “red didn’t move,”
and “wander” target behavior, as “coast” would obliterate the
                                                      were also transformed into a single token, e.g., not-zooming
effect of the target transferring energy back to the actor. Also,
                                                      and not-moving. The total number of unique, canonical-
there was only one version of “chase,” as the target must al-
                                                      ized content words uttered by all the subjects in response to
ways be moving away from the actor. Chase was also unique
                                                      all the movies was 104, of which the following 30 words
because it was the only instance in which the two balls never
                                                      were uttered more than three times (words are listed with
contacted each other.
                                                      their frequencies): PUSHING, 85; MOVING, 57; BONKING, 54;
  The 17 movies were recorded and presented on a G3 iMac
                                                      AWAY, 46; TRYING, 38; PLAYING, 28; FAST, 27; RUNNING, 27;
with 14 inch screen. The children’s responses were recorded
                                                      AROUND, 25; UP, 25; GETTING, 21; CHASING, 19; FRIENDS,
and later transcribed.
                                                      18; BUMPING, 17; SLOW, 16; HITTING, 16; DOWN, 16; CIR-
Participants                                          CLE, 11; CATCHING, 10; STANDING, 7; TAG, 7; ZOOMING, 6;
Sixteen children participated in this study, ranging in age STOPPING, 6; COMING, 4; FLYING, 4; KNOCKING, 4; FOL-
from 26-60 months old (average age = 50 months). Partici- LOWING, 4; BOUNCING, 4; ABOUT, 4; TOGETHER, 4.
pants were recruited and tested at a local daycare in Amherst, Note that some of these words are not verbs; for instance,
MA.                                                   “friends” and “away.”
                                                        Each movie is characterized by a vector of relative frequen-
Procedure                                             cies of these 30 words. For example, here is the vector for the
For each child, a total of 18 movies was presented, each movie SHOVE-STATIONARY:
movie instance appearing once — with the exception of   PUSHING, 0.192; MOVING, 0.115; BONKING, 0.0; AWAY,
chase, which the child watched twice. An experimenter told 0.115; TRYING, 0.038; PLAYING, 0.0; FAST, 0.115; RUNNING,
each child that she would be watching movies on the com- 0.077; AROUND, 0.0; UP, 0.0; GETTING, 0.0; CHASING, 0.038;
puter screen with two balls, one blue and one red, and that FRIENDS, 0.077; BUMPING, 0.038; SLOW, 0.038; HITTING,
the task was to tell a story about what the balls were doing. 0.0; DOWN, 0.0; CIRCLE, 0.0; CATCHING, 0.038; STANDING, :BEFORE-SUBJECT-ACTION        ’agent-coast
 :BEFORE-ACTOR-ACTION          ’approach-slow-down    the similarity score when symbolic (and numeric values) are
 :BEFORE-ACTOR-ORIGINAL-SPEED  2                      identical, decreases the score by a constant when symbolic
 :BEFORE-ACTOR-DESIRED-SPEED   .5
 :BEFORE-ACTOR-DISTANCE-FOR-SLOW-DOWN 1.5             values don’t match, and decreases the score proportional to
 :BEFORE-ACTOR-DISTANCE-FOR-STOP 0                    the mismatch between numeric values. We added some con-
 :DURING-ACTOR-ACTION          ’agent-approach-speed-up
 :DURING-ACTOR-SPEED-UP-START-TIME ’self              ditions for missing values. We are aware that this function
 :DURING-ACTOR-SPEED-UP-END-TIME .4
 :DURING-ACTOR-ORIGINAL-SPEED  ’self                  might conceivably be “tuned” to make the parameter vectors
 :DURING-ACTOR-DESIRED-SPEED   6                      better predict the word vectors, so we wrote it once and did
 :DURING-ACTOR-SELF-WAIT       .6
 :DURING-2-ACTOR-ACTION        ’agent-halt            not revise it. The results presented below are for the ﬁrst and
 :DURING-2-ACTOR-SELF-WAIT     .5                     only evaluation of this function on these data.
 :AFTER-SUBJECT-ACTION         ’agent-coast
 :AFTER-ACTOR-ACTION           ’agent-run-away-speed-up As a ﬁnal step, we ranked pairs of movies according to
 :AFTER-ACTOR-SPEED-UP-START-TIME ’self               Sim      (i, j)  Sim       (i, j)
 :AFTER-ACTOR-SPEED-UP-END-TIME 1                         words    and     params    .
 :AFTER-ACTOR-ORIGINAL-SPEED   ’self
 :AFTER-ACTOR-DESIRED-SPEED    2                      4.3  Results
 :AFTER-2-SUBJECT-ACTION       ’agent-halt
 :AFTER-2-ACTOR-SELF-WAIT      1                      Each  pair of movies  i, j gets two similarity scores,
                                                      Simwords(i, j) and Simparams(i, j), so we can look at
Table 1: A vector of parameters for the movie SHOVE-STATIC
                                                      the simple correlation of these scores and the regression of
                                                      Simparams(i, j) on Simwords(i, j). Figure 3 shows these
0.0; TAG, 0.0; ZOOMING, 0.038; STOPPING, 0.0; COMING, 0.0; score plotted against each other and the linear regression line
FLYING, 0.0; KNOCKING, 0.0; FOLLOWING, 0.0; BOUNCING, that ﬁts them best. Clearly, the similarity of two movies ac-
0.038; ABOUT, 0.038; TOGETHER, 0.0.                   cording to their parameters is a good predictor of the similar-
  That is, of the content words used to describe the movie ity of distributions of words used to describe the movies. The
SHOVE-STATIONARY, 19% of them were  PUSHING, 11.5%    correlation between them is 0.949, which means the similar-
were MOVING, and so on. Let Vwords(movie) denote the vec- ity of two movies according to their parameters accounts for
tor of relative frequencies of words used to describe a movie. 90% of the variance in the similarity of the word vectors for
  The movies also can be characterized by the parameters of the movies. This result is highly signiﬁcant (p < .0001).
the breve programs that generated them. These parameters
include the current speed and desired speed of the objects,
the subroutines that implement patterns of movement, the dis-
tance between objects at which one slows down, the latency
before starting the next movement, and so on. Table 1 shows
the vector for the movie SHOVE-STATIC. Let Vparams(movie)
denote the vector of parameters for the program that generates
the movie.

  The next step of the analysis is to test whether there is
an association between the vectors of parameters for movies,
Vparams(movie), and the vectors of words used to describe
the movies, Vwords(movie). A simple method is to calculate
the similarities between pairs of movies i and j, rank the pairs
by similarity, and see whether the ranking based on word vec-
tors is predicted by the ranking based on parameter vectors.
Let

     Simwords(i, j) =   f(Vwords(i), Vwords(j)) (1)   Figure 3: Regression plot of similarity scores for movie pairs
    Simparams(i, j) =   g(Vparams(i), Vparams(j)) (2) according to movie parameters and movie word descriptions.
where f and g are methods for comparing word-frequency
vectors and parameter vectors, respectively. The ques-  Another way to analyze the data is to compare the rank-
tion is whether, averaged over pairs of movies i and j, ings of pairs of movies according to the two similarity
Simwords(i, j) is predicted by Simparams(i, j). We let f scores. To illustrate, suppose we have four movies, a, b, c, d,
be generalized Euclidean distance between the probabilities and so six pairs of movies, ranked by function f from
p(wi) and p(wj) of hearing word w uttered in response to most to least similar: ((a, b)(a, c)(b, d)(a, d)(b, c)(c, d)).
movies i and j, respectively:                         Now  suppose function g produces a different ranking:
                                                      ((b, d)(a, c)(a, d)(c, d)(b, c)(a, b)). According to f, the most
           s        X                                 similar movies, with rank 1, are (a, b) whereas the rank of
  f(i, j) =                   (p(w ) − p(w ))2  (3)
                                   i      j           these movies is 6 according to g. We can characterize the dif-
             w∈{pushing,moving,..}                    ference of two rankings by summing the differences in rank
  The function g, for comparing parameter vectors, cannot over items; for instance, the item (a, b) contributes 6 − 1 = 5
be simple Euclidean distance because parameter vectors in- to the sum.
clude non-numeric values. We wrote a function that increases For the data in Figure 3, the summed rank difference isδ = 104, but how can we tell whether this is a statistically rected to a couple of colored blobs moving on the screen,
signiﬁcant number? We perform a randomization test as fol- lends force to his argument. It seems likely to us that per-
lows: There are 21 pairs of movies, so construct two vectors, ceived movement is one cue to word meaning, but the inten-
v1 and v2, each containing the numbers 1...21. Now shufﬂe tional aspects of words are generated by the subjects them-
                            P
v2 thoroughly and calculate δ∗ = i=[0,21] abs(v1,i − v2,i). selves. We are currently designing studies to tease apart these
Repeat 1000 times. The resulting distribution of δ∗ is the em- contributors to word meanings.
pirical sampling distribution of the summed rank difference Finally, we relate an anecdote about our word-learning
under the null hypothesis that the ranks of items in the vec- robot: It learned that “forward” is associated with the wheels
tors are unrelated. If the actual summed rank difference, δ, rotating in one direction and “backward” with the opposite di-
has low probability according to this sampling distribution, rection of rotation, but it never learned that forward and back-
we reject the null hypothesis with residual uncertainty (the p ward are antonyms. We realized then that word meanings can
value) equal to the quantile of δ in the sampling distribution be arbitrarily “deep” and that associating percepts and words
(see [Cohen, 1995] for details).                      produces a shallow kind of meaning. But it’s a start.
  As it happens, the ranking of movie pairs according to the
movie parameters is not independent of the ranking according References
to word frequencies. The summed rank difference δ = 104 [Blythe et al., 1999] P. W. Blythe, P. M. Todd, and G. F.
is just the 0.0016 quantile of the sampling distribution, so we Miller. How motion reveals intention: Categorizing so-
can reject the null hypothesis and conclude with conﬁdence cial interactions, pages 257–285. Oxford University Press,
that the rankings are related.                           New York, NY, 1999.
                                                      [Bobick and Davis, 2001] A. Bobick and J. Davis. The
5  Discussion                                            recognition of human movement using temporal tem-
These results are supported by another study, using the same plates. IEEE Transaction on Pattern Analysis & Machine
movies, with adult subjects. (The ﬁnal paper will present both Intelligence, 23(3), 2001.
sets of results.) They show conclusively that the dynamics of [Cannon and Cohen, 2005] E.N. Cannon and P.R Cohen.
interactions between two bodies, as represented by the param- Word choice as a conditional probability: Motion-based
eters of the programs that generate movies, predict the dis- semantics. Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 2005.
tributions of words that children use to describe the movies.
                                                      [Cohen and Oates, 1998] P. R. Cohen and T. Oates. A dy-
This result is surprisingly strong when one considers how few
                                                         namical basis for the semantic content of verbs. In
words children actually use. Although our study involved 16
                                                         Grounding of Word Meaning: Data & Models Workshop,
children, only 30 content words were uttered more than three
                                                         AAAI-98, pages 5–8, 1998.
times in the entire study. Nevertheless, by concentrating on
the distributions of these words for each movie we were able [Cohen, 1995] Paul R. Cohen. Empirical Methods for Artiﬁ-
to show a strong dependence on the dynamics of the movies. cial Intelligence. The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1995.
  Returning to the question that motivates this work, is there [Cohen, 1998] P. R. Cohen. Maps for verbs. In Proceedings
sufﬁcient information in the perceptual array, particularly dy- of the Information and Technology Systems Conference,
namical information, to supply semantics for some words, Fifteenth IFIP World Computer Congress, pages 21–33,
particularly some verbs? By demonstrating a dependency be- 1998.
tween dynamical information and word choice (especially in
                                                      [            ]
young children) we strengthen the empiricist case that word Dennett, 1987 D. Dennett. The Intentional Stance). MIT
meanings can be learned as associations between the words Press, 1987.
and percepts. Our evidence is only suggestive, however, be- [Heider and Simmel, 1944] F. Heider and M. Simmel. An
cause we demonstrated a dependence of word use not on the experimental study of apparent behaviour. American Jour-
child’s percepts but, rather, on the parameters of the movies nal of Psychology, 57(2):243–59, 1944.
shown to the child. Only by assuming that these parameters [Intille and Bobick, 1999] S. Intille and A. Bobick. A frame-
affect how the movie is perceived can we argue for associative work for recognizing multi-agent action from visual evi-
learning of word meanings. The assumption is very reason- dence. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Confer-
able; after all, the parameters were tuned to make the movies ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 518–525, Orlando,
look different and distinctive.                          FL, July 1999.
  Still, we think it likely that associative learning of word
meanings “needs help,” probably from prior domain knowl- [Klein, 2002] J Klein. breve: a 3d simulation environment
edge. Although researchers such as Todd and Barrett [Todd for the simulation of decentralized systems and artiﬁcial
and Barrett, 2000] argue that motion is a cue to intention, they life. In Proceedings of Artiﬁcial Life VIII, the 8th Inter-
do not argue that it is the only cue, and one is hard-pressed national Conference on the Simulation and Synthesis of
to see how the intentional aspect of, say, “chasing,” can be Living Systems, 2002. http://www.spiderland.org/breve/.
learned from nothing but the relative motions of two bodies. [Oates, 2002] T. Oates. Peruse: An unsupervised algorithm
We think Dennett [Dennett, 1987] is probably right when he for ﬁnding recurring patterns in time series. In Proceed-
says we adopt an intentional stance even to non-intentional ings of the Nineteenth International Conference on Ma-
scenarios, and the intentional language of our subjects, di- chine Learning, 2002.