                   Collective AI: context awareness via communication

                                 S. Kornienko, O. Kornienko, P. Levi
                  Institute of Parallel and Distributed Systems, University of Stuttgart,
                            Universitatsstr.¨ 38, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany


                    Abstract                            Generally for AI and especially for ”swarm intelligence”
                                                      not only the transferred message is important (”I ﬁnd some-
    Communication among participants (agents, ro-     thing”), but also the context of the message (”where is it
    bots) is central to an appearance of Collective AI. found”) [Doyle and Dean, 1996]. One robot cannot provide
    In this work we deal with the development of lo-  this context, because e.g. it does not know its own posi-
    cal communication mechanisms for real microro-    tion. Retrieving and providing this context represents also the
    botic swarms. We demonstrate that despite of very collective task performed during communication. However
    limited capabilities of the microrobot, the speciﬁc not all communication approaches can provide the context of
    construction of communication hardware and soft-  information and can generally be implemented in a swarm.
    ware allows very extended collective capabilities of In this paper we demonstrate that the well-known package-
    the whole swarm. We propose mechanisms provid-    based routing is not useful for swarms and suggest instead an
    ing information content and context for collective approach that ”diffuses” information with its context.
    navigation, coordination and spatial perception in a Achieving collective capabilities in real microrobotic sys-
    group of microrobots.                             tems, we are very limited by hardware. Therefore not all
                                                      approaches from AI domain are feasible here. The sec-
                                                      ond question of this paper is ”Which collective capabilities
1  Introduction                                       a swarm are feasible by very limited communication hard-
Communication is the central issue in collective systems such ware ?” We demonstrate that the speciﬁc composition be-
as collective/swarm robotics, multi-agent systems, sensor net- tween multi-directional communication hardware and ”dif-
works and so on. Communication provides and supports  fusing” software protocols allows emerging some interesting
(among others) ”awareness” about relevant events, collec- spatial and functional collective capabilities of a swarm.
tive decision making and coordination in a group, execution The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
of cooperative activities, etc. Due to communication all ro- we investigate the local communication between robots. Sec-
bots/agents behave in a coordinated way like one ”organism”, tions 3, 4 and 5 are devoted for describing the hardware plat-
they can even emerge new behavior types [Kornienko et al., form, logical protocols and communication context. Finally,
2004]. There are many phenomena that appear in this way; in in Section 6 we discuss some preliminary experiments and
the vast literature they are denoted as collective/swarm intel- conclude our work.
ligence [Bonabeau et al., 1999].
  In this paper we investigate the communication mecha- 2 Information diffusion, swarm density and
nisms for large microrobotic swarm [I-Swarm, 2003 2007].  communication radius
Due to very small size and limited capabilities of microrobots,
swarm robotics differs from other collective robotic systems For collective systems a communication plays the role of ner-
in a couple of essential points [Sahin, 2004]. The most im- vous system in human body. Since microrobots in a swarm
portant are inaccessibility of global coordinates, global per- can communicate only locally with their neighbors, such a
ception and global communication. Despite of the ”very lim- ”swarm nervous system” can be produced only by a mech-
ited intelligence” of individual microrobots, the collective in- anism that propagates information through multiple robot-
telligence of the whole swarm does not change essentially. robot connections. Parameters of a global circulation of in-
The swarm is still able for distributed spatial sensing, collec- formation (like global propagation speed or global propaga-
tive decision making, building spatial formation, coordinated tion time) depend on characteristics of local communication
acting and so on. This swarm intelligence primarily appears (communication radius Rc, the number of robots within Rc).
due to speciﬁc communication between robots. We are in- In this section we derive this relation, which is necessary for
terested in the following question: ”Which communication further development of the robot’s communication hardware.
mechanisms among microrobots do allow emerging collective Since parameters of local communication between robots
properties of a swarm ?”                              depend on their behavior, we differentiate three following be-havioral cases:                                       the area available for the whole swarm Ssw:

1. Robots move only in small areas, so called clusters. In this         N             2RcυtN
                                                                Dsw  =           nc =         .       (1)
case robots are situated more or less closely to each other, so        S     →          S
that swarm peer-to-peer network (SPPN) is created ”automat-              sw               sw
ically”. The main problem is a communication between such In the relation (1) we assume only one robot moves whereas
clusters.                                             other are motionless. More exact relation, when all robots
2. Robots move in large areas (typical swarm scenario). Ro- move, differs from (1) only by the numeric coefﬁcient √2
bots exchange information only when they meet each other. (as proved by Maxwell for a diffusion in ideal gas). For the
The inter-cluster communication belongs to this case.                             2√2RcυtN
                                                      further calculation we use nc =       . Now we have
3. Part of robotic swarm purposely creates and supports the                          Ssw
SPPN. This is the most interesting case, that provide stable to estimate how the information will be propagated after the
communication in swarm (see more in Section 6).       ﬁrst communication contact. This propagation dynamics is
In the further calculation we consider the most hardest case similar to ”epidemic infection” dynamics, estimated as the
of a large-area swarm. We can intuitively assume that the series:
communication radius Rc, the swarm density Dsw, the ro-
                                                       [nc + 1] + nc[nc + 1] + nc[nc + 1 + nc(nc + 1)] + ... (2)
bots motion velocity v and the time t are closely related in
propagating the information. For deriving a relation between and written iteratively as
them, we take several analogies to molecular-kinetic theory
                                                         k  = n k −  + k −  = k − (n  + 1),  k  = 1.  (3)
of ideal gas, more exactly diffusion in ideal gas (by these n  c n 1    n 1    n 1  c         0
                                                                                              n
analogies we denote also a ”diffusion of information”). We that is the ”standard” exponential form (nc + 1) . We are in-
                                                                                                     n
introduce the following notions: the sensor radius Rs, where terested in the case when all robots are ”infected” (nc +1)
                                                                                                       ≥
a collision-avoiding procedure is started; lc the length of free N or n = log(nc+1)N. From real experiments we know that
path from the start of motion till the ﬁrst communication con- for establishing a communication contact and transmitting
tact; ls the length of free path from the start of motion till messages, robots need some time pt, that can be measured
the ﬁrst collision-avoiding contact; nc and ns are correspond- experimentally. The information transfer starts when the ﬁrst
ingly the number of communication and collision-avoiding robot ”infects” one additional robot(nc = 1); the time till the
contacts; Sc and Ss are the area of the ”broken” rectangles ﬁrst infection tfirst and the total time ttotal = n tfirst +Npt
built by a motion in some time interval t with Rc and Rs. In for infecting the whole swarm can be obtained as:
Figure 1(a) we sketch our consideration. Firstly, we are in-
                                                                 Ssw                      Ssw
                                                      tfirst =         ,  ttotal = Npt +         log2(N).
                                                              2√2RcυN                  2√2RcυN
                200                                                                                   (4)
                                        1: v=10 , N=100
        Sc                   5                        In the performed simulations (pt = 0), the swarm areal is
     S s                                2: v=15 , N= 50               2
                                        3: v=5, N=100 800   650 pixels , N =  50 with Dsw    10 pix./sec.,
                150                                       ×                                ≈
                                        4: v=5,   N=50 Rc = 40 pix. Formula (4) gives us ttotal 52 sec.. In many
                                        5: v=5,   N=25                                   ≈
                         4                            performed simulation cycles we observed ttotal between 30
                                                      and 90 sec. Formula (4) is also useful in estimating the en-
               , sec. 100


                total


               t                                      ergy needed for each robot. For example, swarm during the
                      3
                     2                                running time has to propagate 100 different messages; it takes
                 50 1                                 about 2 hours in the mentioned example. So the power supply
           l                                          should provide energy at least for 2 hours.
    2R     s
       s                                                For developing a real microrobotic swarm we can take
       l          0
       c           40  60  80 100 120 140 160 180 200                       2,       and assume ﬁrst
R                                                     Ssw = 1000   1000 mm    N = 50               pt = 0
  c                                                              ×
                                 R c , mm             (see Section 6 for the real pt). In Figure 1(b) we plot ttotal de-
     (a)                        (b)                   pending of Rc with different values of N and v. We see, that
                                                      for the average propagation time 1 min, the Rc for N = 50
                                                      lies between 50 mm and 140 mm. Thus, for the targeted ro-
Figure 1: (a) Motion path of a robot with communication and
                                                      bots body of 23 mm, the communication radius Rc is of 4-5
collision-avoiding contacts; (b) Total propagation time ttotal as a
                                                      times larger then the size of the robot.
function of communication distance Rc with different values of ve-
    v                    N                              At the end of this section we discuss such an important
locity and the number of robots .                                                    crit
                                                      point as the critical swarm density Dsw . The critical swarm
                                                      density and the ”coefﬁcient of swarm efﬁciency” (the rela-
terested in the number of communication contacts nc happen tion between the number of robots with useful/desired and
during the motion. This value is equal to the average num- useless/undesired activities) determine the minimal number
ber of robots in the area Sc, nc = ScDsw, where Dsw is the of robots Nmin in some areal Sws required to perform some
swarm density. We assume that the collision avoiding radius operation successfully. For the considered example with
                                                                                       2
and the robot’s rotation radius are small so that we can ne- the given Ssw = 1000 1000 mm , ttotal = 30 sec.,
                                                                            ×
glect the area of fractures. In this case Sc = 2Rcυt. Dsw can Rc = 100 mm and v = 20mm/sec. (related to the random
be calculated as the number of robots N in swarm divided by motion), the minimal number Nmin 29 and the critical
                                                                                      ≈              crit       −6
swarm density Dsw = 28.46  . This relation is not exact, has to know not only a message itself, but also the context of
because it does not involve the size of a robot into this calcu- this message (e.g. the direction from which the message is
lation, however in the microrobotic case with Srobot Ssw, received, intensity of signal, communicating neighbor and so
it can serve as a good approximation.       ≪         on). Without directional communication hardware, we can-
                                                      not implement algorithms providing a spatial context. From
3  Requirements and restrictions imposed on           many software requirements the communication radius Rc
   communication in real swarms                       and the number of directional communication channels are
                                                      the most important ones. From this viewpoint, the IR is
The requirements concern choosing the transmission equip- more suitable for robot-robot communication than the RF.
ment, the number of directional communication channels, The host-robot communication can also be implemented with
communication radius and the hardware reduction of com- IR (a sensor with PCM-ﬁlter for receiving global modulated
munication deadlocks. The communication equipment of a signal). Such a signal can be thought as of a remote control
microrobot should consume as less energy as possible and be or a global information exchange between robots and host.
of small size (the robot’s size is 23x23x28 mm). Finally, the
communication equipment should include, as far as possible,        I
other functions, like proximity or distance measurement. The
communication radius Rc = 50  140 mm   can be imple-
mented in the radio-frequency (RF)− and infrared (IR) way. VI
  The RF provides two-way communication channel, the             “close”      II
communication radius Rc is of several meters and modern           robot
one-chip RF modules, even 802.11b/802.11g modules, con-       50mm
                                                                       “near”
                                                       V   100mm Deadlock
sume energy in mW area. However we have a serious ob-             free     “far”
                                                       150mm
jection against RF in microrobotic swarms. Firstly, a simul-  50% 2R Deadlocks
taneous transmission of many (80-150) microrobots leads to                III
massive RF-interferences. Secondly, the RF-system (with the   50% 2R Deadlocks
                                                                  IV
large Rc) transmits local information exchange between ro-
bots globally in a swarm. This local information does not         (a)                       (b)
have too much sense for all robots, so that we have high com-
munication overhead in this case.                     Figure 2: (a) Problem of IR-interferences in the ”close”, ”near”
  The IR communication is recently dominant in the so- and ”far” communication zones; (b) The sensors board with
called small-distance-domain, as e.g. for communication be- Megabitty board that supports 6-x directional robot-robot and host-
tween laptops, hand-held devices, remote control and others. robot communication, proximity sensing and perception of surfaces
In IR domain we can choose between several different tech- geometry.
nologies, like IrDA1, 34-38 Khz PCM-based devices and so
                                                        Speaking about IR communication we have to mention
on. Additional advantage of the IR-solution consists in com-
                                                      the problem of ambient light. It represents generally a very
bining communication equipment with sensors; we can think
                                                      critical issue, because it can essentially distort or even com-
about proximity or distance sensors on the base of IR re-
                                                      pletely break IR-communication/sensing. We performed ex-
ﬂection. The IR-solution is not new in robotic domain (see
                                                      periments with luminescent lamps, ﬁlament lamps and day-
e.g. [Kube, 1996], [Suzuki et al., 1995]), however there are
                                                      light. Even for IR-receivers with daylight ﬁlter, swarm has
almost no solutions that combine perception, proximity sens-
                                                      to be protected against a light of ﬁlament lamps. As far as
ing and communication.
                                                      possible, the direct daylight should be also avoided. Use
  The IR-equipment has also the problem of interferences.
                                                      of modulated light can essentially improve communication
They appear, like in RF case, when several neighbor robots
                                                      against ambient light, however this solution is not always ac-
transmit simultaneously. The problem of IR-interferences
                                                      ceptable/feasible.
can be avoided by restricting an opening angle of a pair IR-
                                                        The ﬁlament lamps can be used as a global pheromone to
receiver-transmitter. For four communication channels, the
                                                      control a swarm [Bonabeau et al., 1999]. When it is emitted
opening angle of each channel is 90o. In this case we have 2-
                                                      simultaneously with luminescent light, the robot reacts more
and 3-robots IR-interferences even in the ”closest” radius (50
                                                      intensively on ﬁlament light. This effect can be utilized in
mm). Reducing the opening angle to 60o or to 40o allows
                                                      many purposes, like ﬁnding the food source, navigation or
avoiding IR-interferences in the ”close” and ”near” radius
                                                      even a quick message about some global event. This commu-
(100 mm) (Figure 2(a)). Since many microcontrollers have
                                                      nication way does not require any additional sensors, however
8-channel ADC (one ADC input is used by the distance sen-
                                                      should be used only as an exception, because it essentially
sor), we choose 6-channel directional communication (Fig-
                                                      distorts a regular communication.
ure 2(b)).
                                                        In the following we brieﬂy describe the developed hard-
  Directional communication is extremely important in a
                                                      ware solution for the directional IR-communication and sens-
swarm also from another reason. The point is that a robot
                                                      ing. More details for hardware can be found in [Kornienko
  1IrDA requires additional chips, and if we think about 4-6 chan- et al., 2005]. In the hardware we do not use such popular
nels communication, this solution is not really suitable for the im- sensors as IS471F or Sharp’s GP2Dxxx with binary output,
plementation in microrobots.                          because they do not assume active control needed for com-munication. We encountered that small integrated transistor- Context N    Swarm Capability
diode pairs like SFH9201, TCNT1000, TCRT 1000/1010,                  1    Spatial orientation
GP2D120, QRB1134 are not suitable as distance, proximity   Spatial   2    Building spatial structures
and communicating sensors for Rc of 130-150 mm. There                3    Collective movement
are also several problems with spectral matching of some             4    Building informational structures
receiver-emitter pairs, despite they use the same wavelength.        5    Collective decision making
In the tested phototransistors with 60o angle, we choose Information 6    Collective information processing
TEFT4300 (60o, collector light current 3,2 mA, 875...1000            7    Collective perception/recognition
nm), TSKS5400-FSZ as IR-emitter for proximity measure-               8    Building functional structures
ment and communication (60o, 950 nm, 2-7 mW/sr) and                  9    Collective task decomposition
GaAs/GaAlAs IR-emitter TSAL6100 (20o, 950 nm,  >80       Functional  10   Collective planning
mW/sr) for distance measurement. This pair is very small             11   Group-based specialization
(emitter 5x5x2.65 mm and receiver 4,5xφ3 mm) so that they
can easily be integrated in the sensors board. In experiments Table 1: Some collective activities performed by the whole swarm.
the current IF of IR-emitters was limited to 20 mA, that
corresponds to I/O port of the microcontroller. For control-
ling we use the Megabitty board (23 23 2 mm) with At-   The main point of this work is that the required context can
mel AVR Mega 8 microcontroller with× 8 kB× ROM and 1 kB be processed/provided by communication. However which
RAM  [Megabitty, 2005]. The sensors board and Megabitty level of communication can do it ? After hardware level, there
board are assembled in one chassis with accumulators and 2 are four such levels: level of physical signal transmission,
DC motors as shown in Figure 3. The tested communication level of communication protocols and level of informational
                                                      structures, that require communication. In swarm-based sys-
                                                      tems we have the additional level concerned to the robot’s be-
                                                      havior for creating and supporting required communication.
                                                        1. On the level of physical transmission, the prob-
                                                      lem of communication is related to a choice of modula-
                                                      tion/transmission approaches suitable for the IR-based sig-
                                                      nal transmission. On this level such properties of signals as
                                                      strength, IR-interferences, directions can be extracted and in-
                                                      corporated into high-level protocols (it is closely related with
                                                      the robot embodiment).
    Figure 3: The prototype of the ”Jasmine” microrobot. 2. Level of communication protocols concerns the propa-
                                                      gation of information in a swarm. Generally, there are only
speed is about 1000 bit/sec with low error rate, so that an ap- two main ways of such a propagation:
plication of error-correction approaches is not required. - each robot routes communication packages from other ro-
                                                      bots without any changes (package-based communication);
4  Communication and Intelligence: logical            - each robot processes the information from other low-level
   protocols                                          packages and sends only its own messages further.
After a description of the communication hardware of the mi- In the package-based communication each package consists
crorobot, we return to our original question about Collective of a header with IDs of sender and receiver, routing informa-
Intelligence. The question is ”which degree of collective in- tion and the package content. The package ID can be coded
telligence is still feasible in the group of microrobots ?” and by 10 bits, IDs of sender/receiver by 12 bits (6 bit each), so
”How to implement it ?” In Table 1 we collect some ”swarm the header is of 22 bits, the package content is only of 8 bits.
activities” that microrobots can collectively perform. These For recording the package history each robot needs about 900
collective activities build a basis of swarm intelligence. We bytes RAM only for routing 300-600 packages within a few
take the most simple example of spatial orientation. Let us minutes (N = 50 robots, each sends max. 1-2 messages
assume, a robot has found a ”food source” being relevant for each 10 sec, propagation time of 1 min.). In order to use the
the whole swarm. It sends the message ”I, robot X, found (spatial) context of message (e.g. the spatial location of the
Y, come to me”. When this message is propagated through sender), the robots can follow the propagation way by using
a swarm, each robot knows there is a resource Y at the ro- ID-history. However since all robots are continuously mov-
bot X. However robots cannot ﬁnd it because they do not ing, the propagation way does not exist a long time. In the
know a coordinate of this ”food source”. The robot X cannot simulation, when a particular robot tries to achieve the source
provide these coordinates because it does not know its own of a message by following the propagation way, it fails in 80-
position. Therefore even for the simple collective feature of 90% ! After many experiments we came at the conclusion,
spatial orientation, a local context of messages determines that pure routing is not really suitable for propagating infor-
a global capability of the whole group. Collective systems mation thought a swarm (however package-based communi-
often have many different contexts, so that we have a context cation is used for local communication between neighbor ro-
hierarchy.                                            bots). Thus, the second approach represents the main way ofincorporating the information context into communication.
  3,4. Levels of informational structures and speciﬁc collec-
tive behavior belong to the high level of information process-
ing in a swarm. These levels deal with optimal representa-
tion of information, a minimization of communication ﬂow,
availability of information and supporting multiple peer-to-
peer connections for a large-distance information transmis-      (a)                       (b)
sion. We demonstrate some ideas in Section 6, but generally,
these levels overstep the framework of swarm-based commu-
nication.

5  Diffusion of messages context
As presented in the previous section, the context of message     (c)                       (d)
cannot be extracted from the message itself. This point has
been discussed many time in collective AI community. In ”AI Figure 4: Propagation of the pheromone ﬁeld from the initial to
world” there exist some approaches to retrieve the required the ﬁnal states. (a) Initial state of pheromone ﬁeld; (b,c) Intermedi-
context, however the microrobots are too limited to use them. ate states where propagation of ﬁeld is not ﬁnished; (d) Final state
Our proposal is that robots work with communication context of pheromone ﬁeld, where all robots get the message and know its
during communication.                                 spatial origin.
  There are many different approaches to work with mes-
sages context. One of them is to incorporate the embod- ciﬁc input (e.g. only robots that see something transmit a
ied information (signal intensity, direction, neighbors) into pheromone), embodied information. Diffusion ﬁeld can con-
non-routed packages. The robots during ”normal” com-  sist of many different subﬁelds, i.e. with hierarchical struc-
munication process this context, so that it diffuses over a ture.
swarm. In this way a speciﬁc collective activity can be co-
                                                        1. Diffusion of the size context. The diffusion ﬁeld is
ordinated/created/controlled (see Section 6).                                                          i
                                                      a function of the connectivity degree: Φn+1 = f(Pi Φn)
  Another approach is a pheromone-based communication, where goes over all local neighbors. The more large is the
                   [                  ]                     i
well-known in natural Bonabeau et al., 1999 as well as in group of robots, the more higher is the value, so that a context
                     [                ]
technical/robotic systems Payton et al., 2001 . Pheromone- is the size of the whole group.
based communication can be divided into two main groups:
with pheromone leaved on immovable objects (ground, ﬂoor 2. Diffusion of the spatial context. The source emits
                                                      a constant value. All other robots subtract some con-
and so on) and pheromone leaved on moving objects like ro-                                    source
                                                      stants Ci from this value (see Figure 4): Φn+1 = C1,
bots. Whereas the ﬁrst type of pheromone assumes usually            i
                                                      Φn   =  f(P  Φ  )  C  and transmit it further. Disadvan-
real (physical) pheromone, like chemical substances or elec- +1   i n  −  2
tromagnetic marks, the second type of pheromone can also tage of this relation is that robots can move in clusters, so that
have some virtual nature. For instance, robots exchange the we can have local maximums of the diffusion ﬁeld. Instead
                                                                               1      i
                                                      we can use Φn  = f(max(Φ   , ..., Φ , )) C . In this case
values of some variables, these variables are ”located” on a      +1           n      n   −  2
robot and we can speak about ”virtual pheromone”.     the clusterization effect is removed (however it cannot be
  Basic idea of pheromone-based communication is quite completely removed from a swarm).
simple. Let assume that the information source, robot X, 3. Diffusion of the directional context. As already
sends a message, say ”I found Y”. This message is binary, mentioned, robots support directional communication. The
however the robot X represents it by some integer value. This source emits a speciﬁc signal only in one direction. All other
value is maximal at the origin. Any other robot, when getting robots transmit this signal also only in one direction, as op-
this value, subtracts some constant and sends it further. In this posite to a receiving direction (received on ”north”, send to
way, the far away from the source the value is propagated, the ”south”). In this way, ”communication streets” appear, that
less is its intensity. Based on this gradient every robot can can be used for e.g. navigation.
conclude about the source Y and its origin (Figure 4). In this 4. Diffusion of the temporal context. The diffusion ﬁeld
                                                                                        1     i
way not only a content of information (”something is found”) is a function of time: Φn+1 = f(max(Φ , ..., Φ , )) f(t).
                                                                                        n     n    −
is propagated, but also a spatial context (spatial origin of this This can be useful for coordinating some temporary event (ac-
”something”). More generally, different temporary, spatial or tivities) in a swarm.
functional context can be provided by this ”ﬁeld”.      5. Diffusion of the activity context. This kind of ﬁeld
  Independently of the implemented mechanism, the ”diffu- transmits a stimulus for a speciﬁc activity. Since all robots are
sion ﬁeld” can be of four different types: non-gradient (used heterogenous, a robot can need an assistance of only speciﬁc
simply for transmitting some signals), gradient (to provide robots (with some speciﬁc functionality). Field can have a
spatial context of a message), oriented (some speciﬁc direc- gradient and non-gradient character.
tion), functional (e.g. repelling or attracting). The values of 6. Multiple diffusion. The context, especially spatial one,
this ﬁeld can be calculated as a function of connectivity (the can be useful not only for information transfer, but also for
number of neighbors, see [Nembrini et al., 2002]), time, spe- many other spatial operations like navigation, localization