                Dynamics of Coalition Formation in Combinatorial Trading 

                                             Yiming Ye and Yuhai Tu 
                                        IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 
                                       Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA 
                               yiming@watson.ibm.com and yuhai@us.ibm.com 


                        Abstract                               constructed to perform real-time procurement of bundles 
                                                               of complementary goods and services on multiple simul•
    This paper studies the dynamics of agent medi•
                                                               taneous Internet auctions and exchanges. Alternatively, a 
    ated combinatorial trading at the macroscopic 
                                                               travel service agent can be constructed to provide combi•
     level. The combinatorial marketplace consists of 
                                                               nations of hotel and flight arrangements to potential cus•
    a retailer who wishes to sell bundles of items, 
                                                               tomers. Recently, research on combinatorial auctions has 
    and a large number of agents with different pur•
                                                               attracted considerable attention (Fujishima et al 1999; 
    chasing goals. These agents dynamically form 
                                                               Leyton-Brown et al 2000; Klcmperer 1999; Sandholm 1999; 
    coalitions to exploit the benefits of grouping 
                                                               Lehmann 1999; Rassenti 1982; Rothkopf 1998; Yokoo et 
    based on their complementary needs. A novel 
                                                               al 2001) due to the sheer interconnectedness of the Inter•
    physics based dynamic equation is proposed to 
                                                               net. One way to analyze combinatorial auctions is to use 
    capture the essence of the movements of agents 
                                                               search algorithms such as branch and bound. This ap•
    among different sized coalitions. Simulation ex•
                                                               proach can produce optimal solutions, however, it is ex•
    periments are performed to study the global be•
                                                               ponential in the worst-case. An alternative approach, 
    havior of the agents and the effectiveness of the 
                                                               which uses approximation algorithms, is typically poly•
    agent mediated combinatorial trading. 
                                                               nomial but the quality of the solutions cannot be guaran•
                                                               teed. 
1 Introduction                                                    This paper addresses the issue in a combinatorial market 
The pervasive connectivity of the Internet and the powerful    where the retailer prefers to sell bundles of goods. A large 
architecture of World Wide Web are changing many market        number of buyer's agents dynamically form coalitions to 
conventions. Tremendous opportunities for conducting           exploit the benefits of grouping based on their complemen•
business on the Internet are emerging. Intelligent agents will tary needs. The transaction is done at the coalition level 
play a crucial role in electronic commerce where dynamic       such that the price for each buyer's agent is cheaper than if 
and heterogeneous interactions between thousands of or•        buying independently. Coalition formation has been ad•
ganizations and millions of individuals are involved. So far,  dressed by researchers from both the game theory commu•
we have already witnessed the involvements of e-commerce       nity and the multi-agent community. Game theory empha•
agents in traditional business settings. Furthermore, this     sizes the issues of N-person games formation under differ•
involvement is re-shaping the way in which business is con•    ent settings and the distribution of the benefits among play•
ducted in areas such as comparison shopping, dynamic pric•     ers (Kraus et al 1991). It concentrates on the stability and 
ing, negotiation, auction, and brokerages, to name a few.      fairness issues for given coalitions. Multi-agent research 
The automation brought by e-commercc agents will dra•          emphasizes the special properties of a multi-agent environ•
matically reduce certain types of frictional costs and time    ment and considers the effects of communication costs and 
incurred in the exchange of commodities.                       limited computation time on the coalition formation process 
   In e-commerce, the virtual distance separating produc•      (Sandholm 1999a; Sandholm 1999b). 
ers, wholesalers, distributors, retailers, and consumers         We use a physics-based approach to study the dynamic 
has collapsed to near zero. All of the parties involved are    behavior of agents in the combinatorial market where coali•
faced with rich choices, and it is natural for them to util•   tions are involved. There are efforts to study large-scale 
ize situations to their best advantage. As the population      multi-agent systems using a physics-based approach (She-
of e-commerce agents increases, automated negotiations         hory et. al; Lerman et. al. 1999). For example, Lerman and 
among them on behalf of their parties will be prevalent.       Shehory (Lerman et. al. 2000) propose a physics-motivated 
One of the areas in which agent negotiations will be           mechanism for coalition formation in non-combinatorial 
heavily involved is combinatorial markets, where combi•        markets. The problem addressed in our work is different 
nations of goods and services are being traded and effi•       because we study the issue where the retailer prefers to sell 
ciently allocated. For example, a trading agent can be         complementary goods. In contrast, the formulation of Ler-


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                    625  man and Shehory deals with the case where the retailer only   tion in order to obtain a discounted price. Since the agent 
 has one category of goods. Thus, the agents in our study are  cannot have a global view of the whole marketplace at a 
 heterogeneous because they may be interested in different     given time instant, the coalition chosen might not be the 
 goods. Agents in their study are homogeneous in the sense     best one for the agent at that time. An agent may also leave 
 that they are all interested in one category of goods.        a coalition to look for better opportunities. We assume that 
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The    the retailer is able to monitor the coalitions of the whole 
 next section proposes a combinatorial market model and a      marketplace and to decide when to perform the combinato•
 physics-motivated dynamic equation for structured coalition   rial transactions. Our goal is to study the dynamics of the 
 formation. Section 3 presents simulation experiments to       coalition formations in the marketplace and the effective•
 study the global behavior of the system. Section 4 briefly    ness of the marketplace. 
 concludes the paper.                                            We first define the price for a given item associated with 

                                                               a given coalition. We consider a coalition formed by nA of 
 2 Combinatorial Market Model                                  type A agent and nB of type B agent. If all of the agents in 
                                                               this coalition voted to perform the coalition transaction (i.e., 
   Figure 1 shows the marketplace to be discussed in this      to buy their items in a bundle), then we use to 
paper. Suppose that the retailer has two types of items to     denote the price the seller prefers to set for an item of type A 
sell: item of type a and item of type b . Suppose that there   and to denote the price the seller prefers to set 
are two categories of agents for buyers in the Marketplace.    for an item of type B. Suppose that the retailer set the prices 
An agent of category A is only interested in buying one item   as follows: 
of type a . An agent of category B is only interested in buy•
ing one item of type b . Each agent represents one buyer 
and receives instructions from the buyer on what item to 
buy. Before an agent enters the marketplace, it needs to 
register and obtain authorizations from the retailer. Then it    Here and are the base prices for item A and 
can interact with other agents in the marketplace and per•     item B respectively. The real price for an item is deter•
form purchase related activities. In the rest of this paper, we mined hy the size of the coalition. 

assume that in the marketplace there arc in total mA of A               and are the price reduction rates due to 
type agents and mB of B type agents registered.                grouping for item of type A and for item of type B respec•
                                                               tively. In a coalition, as the number of items of a given type 
                                                               increases, the price per item of that type decreases. 

                                                                  The variable r0 gives the preferred ratio of the 
                                                               two types of items in a bundle for the retailer. The term 
                                                               gives the price penalty rate for item of type a if the ratio of 
                                                               the items in the coalition does not match the retailer's pre•
                                                               ferred ratio. Similarly, the term gives the price penalty 
                                                               rate for item of type b . This kind of combinatorial prefer•
                                                               ence is fairly common in traditional commerce as well as in 
                                                               e-commerce. For example, a furniture retailer may prefer to 
                                                               sell a sofa and the accompanying coffee table as a set, rather 
                                                               than sell each piece separately. In this case, the price for a 
Figure 1: The combinatorial market place discussed in this     complete bundle (one coffee table and a sofa) may be 
paper. The small circles represent agents. The character con•  cheaper than the sum of the prices for the components. The 
tained in a circle represents the item in which the agent is   ratio of the number of coffee tables to the number of sofas 
interested.                                                    is important, since the retailer might prefer the ratio to be 1 
                                                               if there is equal number of table-sofa pairs in the storage. In 
  There are many ways the retailer may sell its items. It      any case, buyers who are interested in separate pieces can 
might simply sell an item to a buyer's agent when the agent    form coalitions to save money. This kind of coalition form•
requests the item. However, retailer can save resources if it  ing process might be time consuming in traditional com•
can sell items in bundles composed of the two types of        merce, because location and time constraints make it diffi•
items. The retailer can give a cheaper price for each item in  cult to find complementary buyers. However, it will be to•
the complementary bundle and at the same time still obtain     tally different in an agent-mediated e-commerce combinato•
a higher utility value. In order for agents benefit from bun• rial marketplace. The sheer interconnectedness of the World 
dles, they need to form coalitions. We assume that the         Wide Web will enable the e-commerce agents to work at 
agents and the marketplace are fully connected. However,      any time from anywhere in cyberspace. Furthermore, agents 
agents do not have a global knowledge of the whole situa•     can negotiate instantly provided that the requirements of the 
tion, and their decisions are based solely on local condi•    task can be clearly specified, and the interaction protocols 
tions.                                                        can be clearly defined among agents and between agents 
  Now we discuss the dynamics of the changes of coali•        and the corresponding enterprise system (as is assumed in 
tions in the marketplace. A single agent might join a coali•  this paper). 


626                                                                                             MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS   In order to study the dynamics, we use to Figure 3 shows the transitions that could happen with re•

represent the number of coalitions composed by n A of type    spect to coalition type when it is within the lat•
                                                              tice. Please note that when is at the boundary of 
A agents and nB of type B agents at time Different 
types of coalitions can be represented by a lattice as shown  the lattice, some of the transitions in Figure 3 will not hap•
                                                              pen. The dynamics of the transition can be characterized by 
in Figure 2. Where represent the value of 
                                                              the following equation (for all the pairs, except 
                                                               (1,0) and (0,1)): 


                                                              Here, Kt and Kt are rate constants, which depend on 
                                                              the price change for each transition. In the above equa•
                                                              tion, the total number of agents of the market is con•
                                                              served during the dynamic process. The single agent pool 
Figi4re 2. The coalition lattice in a marketplace that con•
                                                              serves as the source sink of the system. Please note that 
tains 5 A type agents and 5 B type agents. 

   The number of different types of coalitions will change       The term gives the rate 
while the system approaches equilibrium. Our goal is to       for a type A agent joins a coalition of category 
study the value of and other associated indica•
tors of the effectiveness ot the combinatorial markets as        The term gives the rate when a 
time evolves.                                                 category coalition becomes a category 
   We assume that for a given coalition, at most one agent                 coalition. In other words, it gives the rate for a 
can join or leave at a time. Thus, the only translation in the type A agent leaves a coalition. 
coalition lattice is between neighbors as illustrated by the     The term _ gives the rate for a 
following:                                                    type A agent joins a category coalition. In 
                                                              other words, it gives the rate for a category 
                                                              coalition becomes a category coalition. 
                                                                 The term gives the rate for a type A 
When a category A agent joins a coalition of type             agent leaves a category coalition. In other 
          , this coalition becomes a coalition of type        words, it gives the rate for a category coalition 
              . When a category A agent leaves a coalition    becomes a category coalition. 
of type this coalition becomes a coalition of type               Other terms in the above equation arc related to type B 
                Similar analysis can be applied to type B     agent and can be similarly explained. 
agent.                                                           When the value of is outside the boundary of 
                                                              the lattice, the corresponding term in the above equation 
                                                              will equal to 0 . In other words, in the above equation, we 
                                                              set , or 

                                                                Now, we need to study the rate constants involved in the 
                                                              dynamic equation. 
                                                                One simple model would be to let all of the escape rates 
                                                              be the same (i.e., the rate at which an agent leaves a coali•
                                                              tion, a.k.a., the opportunist's rates): 

                                                                 We assume that the rate an agent joins a coalition is 
                                                              closely related to the changes in price for this coalition. Let 
              Figure 3. Coalition transitions                 the change in price serves as energy in Boltzman distribu•
                                                              tion. 

                                                               K] is a constant that is related to the transition of a coali•
                                                              tion from . Thus, this constant is 
                                                              only related to type A agent. 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                   627 At point we have the price for a type A                       In the first set of experiments, we study the evolution of the 
agent:                                                        coalitions in the market as a function of time. Table 1 shows 
                                                              the parameter values that are used. 

At point , we have the price for an A type agent: 

The price change is: 
                                                                                Table 1 
                                                              Figure 4 (a), (b), (c), and (d) show the evolutions of coali•
                                                              tions as a function of the iterations. Notice that at beginning, 
Thus, we can set the transition rate as:                      most of the agents are in coalitions that contain small num•
                                                              ber of type A and type B agents. Then, as a result of dy•
                                                              namic movements of agents, the number of coalitions with 
Here, K0 is the base rate in the above equations.             small size decreases and the number of coalitions with large 
Similarly, we can set other rates:                            size increases until equilibrium is reached. Further note that 
                                                              the distribution of A type agents and B type agents is not 
                                                              symmetric. The reason for this is that the ratio r0 = 0.5, 
                                                              rather than r0 = 1 . Thus coalitions with twice as many A 
                                                              agents as B agents receive the least price penalty. Although 
                                                              intuitively most of the agents should stay in large coalitions 
                                                              at equilibrium, Figure 5 shows that this is not the case. This 
  To analysis the dynamics of the above system, we can        result is different from that of (Lerman et al., 2000) in 
study, under different values of parameters, the evolution of which most agents join the largest coalitions. One reason for 
              i and other indicators of the marketplace as a  this difference is that the price settings in combinatorial 
function of and at the equilibrium state. Based on the        markets are quite different from those in non-combinatorial 
calculated derivatives, we can update a coalition using the   markets. Our situation is much more complex, and the coa•
following formula (for all the pairs, except (0,1)            lition size is only one of the factors that influence the 
and (1,0) ):                                                  movements of agents. The escape rate is a parameter that 
                                                              has a bigger effect on the size distribution of coalitions. The 
                                                              greater the escape rale, the more the agents escape from the 
                                                              larger coalitions. Compare Figures 6(a), 6(b), and 5(d), we 
During the update process, the time step should be            can notice that the number of the small sized coalitions is 
adaptively selected such that it is small enough and the up•  bigger when the escape rate is larger. 
dated results for any coalitions should not be less than 0 . 

The updated value of and 
                 can be obtained from the following equa•
tion after all the other are updated: 


3 Simulation Results                                                  (a) Iteration = 10       (b) Iteration - 10000 
We have conducted various experiments to test the market•
place. At first, we set all the values of equals 
to 0, except that and = 
In our experiments, we set , and 
Please note that and have no influence on the 
derivatives. 


628                                                                                            MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                  Similarly, the entropy for type B agent within different coali•
                                                              tion sizes can be calculated as: 


                                                                 We can notice that the values of both entropies increase 
                                                              with the iteration until the system reaches its equilibrium. 

  (c) iteration^ 100,000 (d) equilibrium state. 
   Figure 4. Coalitions change as a function of iterations. 


                                                                    (a) Coalitions           (b) Type B Agents 
                                                              Figure 7. The entropies for (a) coalitions and (b) the num•
                                                              ber of B type agents in coalitions. 
  (a) Number of A agents (b) Number of B agents                  The average price per type A item and the average price 
Figure 5. Number of agents in different coalitions at equilib• per type B item are principal indicators of the effectiveness 
riums state. Parameters are same as in Table 1, except that   of the proposed combinatorial marketplace. These average 
K , =0.005, AP, =0.001.                                       prices can be calculated with the following formulae respec•
                                                              tively. 


                                                              Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the evolution of the average 
                                                              prices of a type A item and that of a type B item. We can 
                                                              notice that the average prices keep decreasing until the sys•
                                                              tem reaches the equilibrium. This demonstrates the advan•
Figure 6. The influence of the escape rale. All the parame•   tages of using agents in combinatorial markets. 
ters are the same as in Table 1, except the escape rates. 

Figure 7 shows the value of entropy as a function of the 
iterations. We use the same values for parameters as those in 
Table 1, except thatand  
set the initial prices as and 
Please note that these initial prices are set to make sure that 
all the prices are positive for any coalitions at any given 
moment. 
  To calculate the entropy with respect to the number of      Figure 8. The average price for a type A agent 
coalitions of various sizes, we first calculate the probability 
that a given sized coalition within the population of all the 
coalitions: 


The entropy with respect to coalition sizes is given by: 


                                                              Figure 9. The average price for a type B agent. 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                   629 