         Biologically-Inspired Self-Assembly of Two-Dimensional Shapes Using 
                                        Global-to-Local Compilation 

                Attila Kondacs, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, kondacs@mit.edu 


                                                               providing a framework for the design and analysis of self-
                                                               organizing, spatially-controlled systems. 
     In this paper, we present a programming lan•
     guage approach for the assembly of arbitrary two-         2 The Problem 
     dimensional shapes by decentralized, identically-
     programmed agents. Our system compiles a prede•           Here, we apply the above approach to the synthesis of arbi•
     termined global shape into a program that instructs       trary two-dimensional shapes from tiny distributed comput•
     these agents to grow the shape via replication and        ing units amorphously. An amorphous computing medium 
     location-based control mechanisms. In the global-         [Abelson et ai, 2000; 1999] is a system of irregularly placed, 
     to-local compilation phase, an input shape is de•         locally interacting, identically-programmed, asynchronous 
     composed into a network of covering-discs. The            computing elements. We can model these computing units as 
     disc network parameterizes the agent program, a           cells with identical DNA. These cells have modest computing 
     biologically-inspired framework allowing agents to        power, with limited ability to retain local state, and they may 
     amorphously produce the shape using replication           die. The communication radius is large relative to the radius 
     and local interaction. Our system is robust to ran•       of a cell, yet small compared to the size of the whole struc•
     dom agent failure, and regenerates in the event of        ture. Despite all these limitations, we would like the cells 
     region death.                                             to exhibit highly complex collective behaviour: our goal is 
                                                               to compile a predetermined global shape into an amorphous 
1   Introduction                                               cell program that instructs the cells to grow into the shape. 
                                                               In other words, starting from one cell, the cells continuously 
Biological cells assemble into complex structures with im•     replicate into a configuration that geometrically approximates 
pressive robustness. They exhibit advanced global behav•       the input shape. 
iors without centralized control or strict sequentiality of ex•  The global-to-local compilation proceeds in two phases: 
ecution, despite random cell death or malfunction. In con•     first, the input shape is decomposed into a semi-efficient 
trast, modern artificial systems are highly centralized and se• packing of covering discs; second, adjacent discs are linked 
quential, rendering them vulnerable to failure and encourag•   into a bidirectional network using a local, relative coordinate 
ing the production of more complex, precise components.        system ("reference points"). This choice of representation 
Our ability to embed millions of tiny chips with sensors       permits the structure to be produced in the growing phase 
[Abelson et ai, 1995; McLurkin, 1999], or program bio•         amorphously by cells whose internal program relies on the re•
logical cells to serve as logic gates [Weiss et al, 1999;      cursive execution of only two key primitives: locating the ref•
1998J, marks a shift in technology to a reliance on cheaper,   erence points of discs, and growing into a disc. The cells use 
decentralized parts [Butera, 2001]. Traditional programming    replication, messaging, and competition - mechanisms in•
techniques are no longer sufficient for engineering systems,   spired by cell differentiation and morphogenesis [Lawrence, 
such as self-assembling nanostructures, to exhibit a robust•   1992; Wolpert, 1969] - to achieve these primitives robustly. 
ness comparable to biological cells. How will we program 
                                                                 The system compiles and grows any connected two dimen•
large numbers of unreliable, locally-interacting parts to en•
                                                               sional shape. The size of the compiled cell program is linear 
gage in coherent behaviors? 
                                                               in the number of covering discs of the shape. The growth 
  In this paper, we present a programming language ap•         process is robust to random cell-death. 
proach to designing self-assembling systems [Nagpal, 2001; 
Coore, 1999]. We use morphogenesis and developmental bi•       3 The Model 
ology [Wolpert, 1998; Bard, 1990] as motivation for organiz•
ing robust local behavior. However, unlike current approaches  Our objects of discourse are locally-interacting, asyn•
to designing emergent systems, the general principles are for• chronous computing units, here referred to as cells. Cells 
malized as a programming language - with explicit primi•       have a center location and a fixed radius r. A cell can repli•
tives, means of combination, and means of abstraction - thus   cate, and will place a given child between 2r and AT away 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                    633                                                                   High-level actions are always associated with a reference 
                                                               point role. Reference points are cells that have been desig•
                                                               nated as "coordinates" of a local grid; these cells must exude 
                                                               gradient messages that allow nearby cells to triangulate their 
                                                               relative positions. Reference point roles can be activated and 
                                                               deactivated in any cell. Reference points will be discussed 
                                                               in great detail in sections 4 and 5. When such a role is ac•
                                                               tivated, the cell enters a local competition for that role with 
                                                               other activated cells in its local neighborhood in an attempt to 
                                                               determine a unique role-holder for the given reference point. 
                                                               The details of the local competition are discussed in section 
 Figure 1: Compiled disc network with the spanning tree and 
                                                               5.1. 
 the fully grown versions of a letter E shape. 
                                                                 The execution model of the cell is analogous to a Turing 
                                                               machine. The cell transfer function takes the internal state 
                                                               and the messages heard, maps these into a sequence of high-
 from its center. Cells are identically-programmed, differing 
                                                               level cell actions, and translates these into a sequence of low-
 only by a limited amount of local state. They have limited 
                                                               level cell actions. In each cell-step, the cell determines the 
 computing power and are vulnerable to random death. They 
                                                               next in the sequence of low level cell-actions, using the output 
have no a priori knowledge of their positions or orientations. 
                                                               of the transfer function, and then executes this action. 
 Our model for a cell substrate is analogous to living tissue: 
 cells are tightly packed, cannot move around nor can they       Asynchronous execution is achieved by using 5 threads, 
overlap.                                                       and each thread cycles through 70% of the cells in random or•
                                                               der. A scheduler ensures that any cell that is more than 8 cell-
3.1 Cell Primitives and Communication                          steps ahead of the average number of cell-steps will not be 
                                                               chosen for execution in the next cycle, and that any cell that 
A cell can execute five basic low-level actions actions. It may: 
                                                               is more than 8 steps behind the average will certainly be in•
  1. Change its internal state                                 cluded. The rest of the 70% of the cells are chosen randomly. 
  2. Emit gradient messages                                    The difference in the number of cell executions between any 
                                                               two cells cannot exceed 2 * (5 + 8) = 26 cell-steps. 
  3. Hand messages to immediate neighbors 
  4. Reproduce 
                                                               4 Compilation 
  5. Die. 
                                                               In our system the two-dimensional shape is compiled di•
   A gradient message has a specified amplitude and carries 
                                                               rectly into the cell program. The complexity of the pro•
a numeric id. Amplitudes have an upper bound of 30 times 
                                                               gram grows linearly with the complexity of the input shape 
the cell radius. Just as chemicals diffuse in fluid, a gradi•
                                                               - that is the number of discs the compiler covers the 
ent message's strength decays with distance from the source 
                                                               shape with. This approach differs significantly from mod•
[Nusslein-Volhard, 1996]. In our model, the decay is lin•
                                                               els based on cellular automata [Margolus, 1996], in which 
ear, and without noise. The amplitude of a given message 
                                                               local rules are constructed empirically and creation of com•
is known by all cells, thus the strength of a received mes•
                                                               plex shapes would be intractable; and from those based on 
sage will determine the distance from the source. In this 
                                                               evolution [Forrest and Mitchell, 1993; Mitchell et al, 1994b; 
way, cells can accomplish differentiation through triangula-
                                                               1994a], in which the relationship between local and global 
tion: after receiving gradients and observing distances from 
                                                               behaviors is not well understood. 
at least three nearby non-collinear cells, a cell can determine 
its position relative to the source cells.                       The compilation is a regular sequential (non-amorphous) 
  A local message carries a fitness value, a reference point   procedure whose input is the pixel map of the 2 dimensional 
id, and a state bit. Local messages are delivered only to im•  shape, and whose output is the amorphous cell program or 
mediate neighbors, or "touching" cells: cells within a fixed,  transfer function. It operates in six simple stages. In the first 
short radius. There is always some local message exchange      stage, we select a disc-covering for the input shape. Second, 
between immediate neighbors. Note that the lack of noise       we form a graph using our discs for our vertex set, in which 
in messaging is a simplifying and unrealistic assumption in    two vertices form an edge if they intersect. A spanning tree 
amorphous computing.                                           is then selected from this graph; pairs of discs will be called 
                                                               neighboring discs if they are connected in the spanning tree. 
  The low-level actions are combined to form the following 
high-level actions:                                              Third, we locate the positions for reference points within 
                                                               each disc. In order to do this, we pick an arbitrary global ori•
  1. Grow a disc of cells                                      entation. Then we find, along with the disc center, the north, 
  2. Activate or deactivate a cell as a competitor for a role  south, east and west cardinal reference points (i.e. points on 
  3. Turn reference point role on or off                       the circumference of the discs that lie north, south, east and 
                                                               west of the the disc centers) in each disc. We proceed to lo•
  4. Hand over a role to a neighbor                            cate the intersection points of neighboring discs in the span•
  5. Triangulate another set of potential role holders         ning tree. Two problems can arise at this stage of the compi-


634                                                                                             MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS lation. (1) Consider a neighboring pair of spheres (A) B). If  tion of a step varies among cells. Collectively, cells execute 
the intersection points of A and B are too close to each other two major operations recursively: (a) growing a disc via cell 
the reference points in A and B used for triangulating refer•  replication, and (b) triangulating target cells that will assume 
ence points of B may be almost collinear, which makes the      reference point roles. 
outcome of triangulation procedure ambiguous. To remedy          Let's call line messages, and messages from disc centers 
this, if this problem arises we locate an extra reference point and temporary centers, grow messages. In every cell-step of 
called the temporary disc center. (2) If the center of disc B  its existence, the cell listens for grow messages. If it detects 
is not inside the fully grown disc A, there may be no cells    one, it will attempt to reproduce, placing a cell in the sur•
where B's center is supposed to be. In order to place cells    rounding empty space. It will suspend replication after 20 
at J3's center location in the growing phase, a sequence of    unsuccessful trials until there is a new opening in the sur•
temporary discs are grown, whose centers hand over the tem•    rounding area, i.e. until a nearby ceil dies. Thus the gap in 
porary disc center role called line reference point to a better the shape left by a dead cell is filled by the offspring of the ex•
positioned neighboring cell as soon as there is one. During    pired cell's neighbors. In case the cell does not hear any grow 
the compilation phase the first line reference point is located. messages for 50 steps, the cell dies and is removed from the 
Sections 5.3 and 5.4 give a more detailed description of how   space. 
the growth phase proceeds in these two cases.                    In each cell-step the cell processes the gradient messages 
   Fourth, we designate activating sets and deactivating sets  it hears, let us call this its in-message set. It selects the state•
for each reference point. An activating or deactivating set is ments from the set of boolean statements stored in the transfer 
a set of reference point messages whose combined presence      function that evaluate to true. To evaluate a boolean state•
and/or absence can activate or deactivate another reference    ment the cell should match its in-messages against the list of 
point role.                                                    messages that are required to be present or missing by the 
   Next the (de)activating sets are converted to boolean state- boolean. Each of the true boolean statements asserts that a 
ments that specify exactly when a cell should consider acti•   reference point role should activate or deactivate in this cell. 
vating or deactivating a reference point role. The boolean lan• The cell makes the final decision of whether to (de)activate as 
guage is the heart of the cell transfer function. It contains only a competitor for the reference point role based on the prox•
one primitive: a message from a reference point can be heard.  imity of the perceived strengths of the messages (that are 
The language has the usual And, Or and Not constructors,       required to be heard by the boolean) to the ideal message 
as well as two additional constructors: AtJeast(k, set) and    strengths stored in the transfer function. In the next cell-step 
At-most(k, set). These express that at least (or at most) k of the activated cell enters (and the deactivated cell exits) the 
the statements in set must (may) be true. The primitives are   competition for holding this role with other activated cells in 
combined, using the constructors, to form compound state•      its neighborhood. 
ments, thus forming a concise description of the complex ge•
ometric and logic relations existing among reference points.   5.1 Local Competition for a Reference Point Role 
The boolean statements would, for example, compactly de•       Activated (or competing) cells keep track of 4 things: whether 
scribe the following simplified scenario: A cell should con•   they have settled into a steady winner or loser state from the 
sider competing for the north cardinal point role in disc B if: competing state; their own fitness value; the best received fit•
(it does not hear other north cardinal point messages from B)  ness value, A competing cell will send local messages to its 
And (it hears a message from B's center) And (it hears at      neighbors with (a) the reference point id for which it is com•
least three other cardinal points of disc B). A more complete  peting, (b) a state bit showing whether it has stabilized, and 
example boolean statement is listed in section 5.2.            (c) the best fitness value it observes (possibly its own). The 
   In the last, sixth stage of the compilation, we calculate   cell's active neighbors will keep doing the same. Thus if its 
the ideal message strengths associated with messages in the    fitness value is better than anyone else's, this value will spread 
boolean statements. The latter distances, together with the    accross its competing neighbors and its neighbors' neigbors, 
compound boolean statements, make up the transfer function.    and so forth. If a cell has had a better fitness score than 
                                                               any of the fitness values it sees in the local messages for 40 
5 Growing Phase                                                steps, it stabilizes as a winner. This triggers all its compet•
                                                               ing neighbors to settle (end the competition) as losers, which 
Each cell executes the same cell program.The compilation       will induce all their competing neighbors (and in turn their 
procedure outputs this program from a given connected two-     competing neighbors neighbors, and so on) to stabilize as 
dimensional shape. The program consists of the transfer func•  losers. Eventually, all the cells competing for this particu•
tion and an interpreter. The cell maps the combination of its  lar reference point role that can be reached via a sequence 
internal state and received messages to a sequence of high-    of immediate active neighbor relationships from the winner 
level actions.The cell proceeds to translate the high-level ac• cell stabilize as losers. Once a cell has stabilized as a win•
tions into a sequence of low-level actions that determine (a)  ner, it becomes the holder of the particular reference point 
which messages a cell must prepare to send, (b) whether the    role for which the cells have competed. It instantly sends 
cell should produce a child, (c) the internal state it must as• out the corresponding reference point gradient message. In 
sume during the next cell-step. While over a long period of    the event that there is a topologically disconnected pocket of 
time all of the cells' average running speeds are the same,    cells still competing for the same role, the presence of the 
the cell-steps are not synchronized, and the expected dura•    reference point gradient will supress any further competition 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                   635  with lower leading score. If the gradient message or the win•    The scheme described so far is the most preferred method 
 ner disappears the passive loser cells resume competition for of growth, i.e. the one followed when nothing is damaged. 
 the reference point role until a new leader stabilizes. Thus the However, in the event that cells die unexpectedly, or if some 
 competition never ends, but reaches equilibrium, and resumes  of the cardinal points are covered by other complete discs, for 
 competition as soon as the equilibrium is disturbed. The 40   example, the order may be different. This complex growth or•
 step wait before a cell stabilizes ensures that the local mes• der is determined by a sequence of boolean statements in the 
 sages with the maximum score have time to spread through      transfer function of the cell program. Consider the following 
 the competing cells in spite of the asynchronous execution of simplified statement for activating B.N: 
 cell-steps. 
                                                               And[Not[B.N]\ 
   If various competing cells die, local competition will, with 
                                                                    B.C] 
 high probability, finish succesfully. We may consider the 
                                                                    Or[At.least 3 (cardinalsAn.disc B); 
 following cases. If a non-leading cell dies its loss does not 
                                                                        (opposite-cardinal-point-in-disc North B); 
 disturb the outcome of the competition. If a non-stabilized 
                                                                        Or[map 
 leading cell dies, the neighboring cells will sense the absence 
 of the local message with the winner state bit and will start 
 broadcasting a special local message containing the reference 
 point role. This will spread through the competing cells and 
 restart the local competition for this particular role. It is un• The cell will check if the statement evaluates to true on the 
 likely that all the cells surrounding the now missing leading presently observed in-message set. It finds the first boolean in 
 cell die before they could trigger a new competition. How•    the normal form that evaluates to true, which we will call the 
 ever, if this does occur, the rest of the competing cells that satisfied boolean. Thus, in this example, it will most prefer 
have stabilized in loser states will realize that the end of the to use, along with B.C, the 3 other cardinals of B to locate 
competition for this role has not been followed by a corre•    B.N, then B.S, then the two intersection points with A, or 
sponding gradient message from the winner in 50 cell-steps,    some other neighbors. If the first, most preferred boolean is 
and will automatically resume competition for this role.       not satisfied (that is, the messages that would satisfy it are 
                                                               not heard), perhaps because some cells died, it will try to use 
5.2 Triangulating the Reference Points of a Disc               the second most preferred boolean, then the third, and so on. 
Assume that the fully grown disc A has a neighbor, disc B,     If there is no satisfied boolean, the cell will wait, thus the 
that has not been grown yet. Let's denote .4's center reference triangulation is unaffected by asynchronous execution of cell 
                                                               cell-steps. 
point A.C, cardinal reference points A.N, A.S, A.E, A.W, 
(north, south, east and west respectively) and the intersection 
points with disc B, ABJl and AB.I2. I will describe a pos•     5.3 Handing down a Reference Point Role 
sible sequence of reference point activation path that will lead If B.C is outside disc A, the cells in A proceed to triangu•
to a fully grown B disc with its reference points in place.    late the line reference point B.LI midway between AB.Il 
   An outline is as follows: first triangulate J5's center, B.C, and AB.I2 on the circumference of A. As soon as B.LI has 
then grow disc B, proceed to triangulate the cardinal points   stabilized, it starts exuding a temporary disc center message 
of B. Once all the cardinal points of B have stabilized, trian• with range equal to the distance between B.LI and AB.Il. 
gulate the intersection points of B with its neighboring discs This induces cells in the range to reproduce. Cells around 
simultanously, and recursively do the same with B's yet un-    B.LI constantly communicate their fitness score for the role 
grown neighbors.                                               of B.C via local messages to the cell holding B.LI. Once 
   In this section, we will consider the ideal case: when A    a cell with a better fitness than that of B.LI has showed up, 
contains B.C. Using A's cardinal point gradient messages       B.LI role is replaced by a temporary disc center role, B.T1. 
B.C can be located easily. In this case all cardinal points of At the same time the cell holding this role sends a local mes•
B that lie inside A are triangulated using reference points of sage to the better scoring neighbor that turns on the role B.L2 
A. We need to consider three cases. (1) Assume that there are  in it. The latter cycle continues until a cell can find no imme•
at least two such cardinal points of B that lie in A. After these diate neighbor that scores better than itself for 50 cell-steps. 
have stabilized, they, along with B.C are used to triangulate  At this stage the B.L role is turned off and the B.C role sta•
the remaining cardinals of B. (2) If there is only one cardi•  bilizes in its place, the appropriate center gradient message 
nal, say B.E, in A then after this one has stabilized, first the is sent out, which in turn turns off all temporary centers in 
opposite direction cardinal, B.W is located: B.E and B.C       B. Note that during this passing on of reference point roles 
are used to find the cell in B that is furthest away from B.E, the local competition procedure plays no part other than sta•
but is still in B. Next the cardinal point that is closer to the bilizing 5.L1. The procedure is still robust because if a cell 
intersection points ABJl and AB.I2 is triangulated, using      with a B.L role dies, and as a result, there are no more B.L 
ABJl, AB.I2, B.E, B.W and B.C. Finally, the last re•           (or B.C) messages observed by the cell, then the temporary 
maining cardinal point of B is triangulated using the 3 other  center B.Ti that hears no larger id B.Tj temporary center 
cardinals and the center of B. (3) If there is no cardinal in A message will turn into a B.Li, and the handing down proce•
then ABJl, AB.I2, and B.C are used to locate the cardinals     dure restarts from that point. 
of B that are closest to A.C, then the opposite cardinals using  The first disc is special as it cannot be grown by any other 
the same procedure as described above.                         disc. The latter reference point role handing over procedure 


636                                                                                             MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                6 Overall Robustness and Simulation Results 

                                                               One of the main goals of this research is to explore how the 
                                                               robustness of computing can be improved using spatial con•
                                                               trol mechanisms. We ask ourselves, to what types of failures, 
                                                               and to what degree of failure, is our system robust? Further•
                                                               more, what imperfections can we introduce that will expose 
                                                               vulnerabilitcs in our system? 
                                                                 Let us consider the robustness of our parallel system in the 
                                                               face of random cell death, that is, if we continuously exter•
                                                               minate cells at random with a certain frequency. Whether the 
                                                               shape can effectively continue to grow depends on the rate at 
                                                               which we cause cells to die. Certainly, the rate of cell death 
                                                               can not be faster than the rate of regeneration. 
                                                                 All high level actions of cells, including local competi•
                                                               tion, role handing, triangulation, disc creation, can function 
                                                               in spite of a high death rate. The robustness of the competi•
Figure 2:1: Center, cardinal and intersection reference points tion procedure against cell death was discussed in section 5.1. 
                                                               Let us discuss some of the other various aspects of how our 
of discs A and B. 2-6: Growing phase. Grey cells are stabi•
                                                               system can accomodate cell death. 
lized loser competitors, white cells are still competing for a 
role. Black cells surrounded by white or grey cells are lead•    If a cell with a cardinal, intersection point, disc center or 
ing competitors or stabilized reference points. Local compe•   temporary center reference point role dies, its missing gradi•
tition for the intersection points (AB.I1, AB.I2) and B's cen• ent message will trigger a new local competition among all 
ter (B.C) (2); growing disc B (3); local competition for south the cells competing for the role, and this will eventually lead 
(B.S) and east (B.E) (4) and north (B.N) and west (B.W) (5)    to the selection of a new reference point holder cell. If a line-
cardinal reference point roles in disc B; and the grown shape  reference point dies, the role-handing down procedure will 
(6).                                                           backtrack to the last still available line-reference point. If the 
                                                               first disc's center dies before the first disc's cardinal refer•
                                                               ence points stabilize a neighboring cell will resume the first 
                                                               disc center role. 
is used to pick the first, north, and the second, east cardinal  If multiple reference points vanish simultanously, it is pos•
points in the first disc. The orientation of the first north cardi• sible that an entire set of cells competing for a reference point 
nal is chosen randomly and the orientation of the first east car• role will stop competing for the role. This is very unlikely for 
dinal point will randomly choose between the east and west     two reasons: first, deactivation will take place only after the 
directions relative to the already picked north. On the figures boolean statement of the satisfying set in the deactivating set 
these are externally forced to be up and left.                 has evaluated true for 100 consecutive cell-steps. Therefore, 
                                                               some reference point role holders and thus their gradient mes•
                                                               sages will be missing for 100 steps. In this many steps, how•
5.4 Temporary Discs                                            ever, they will be replaced by new role holder cells, which 
                                                               will turn the booleans in the deactivating set false before they 
                                                               can take effect. Second, each reference point role has multi•
If the distance between AB.I1 and AB.I2 is too small rela•     ple activating sets, each of which must be missing for the role 
tive to the radius of A or the cell size, or either of the radii are to be deactivated. 
too small relative to the other one or to the cell size, then trian- In case such a deactivation occurs to a disc center, it will 
gulation of the cardinals may be ambiguous. In these cases, if cause the cells only in this disc to die, after a 50 cell-step 
simple geometric checks confirm the ambiguity, a temporary     wait period. Let's call the discs that can regenerate all their 
helper disc, T, is grown. T's center, T.C is at the midpoint   neighbors regenerating discs. The compilation is designed so 
of the arc between AB.Il and AB.I2 on A's circumference.       that any disc with radius larger than 8 times the cell radius is 
After T.C has stabilized, if T does not cover B completely,    a regenerating disc. Assume a whole disc of cells has been 
T's intersections with JB, TBJl and TB.I2 are triangulated.    destroyed because all the cells competing for the center refer•
The diameter of T is chosen such that the distance between     ence point have died. As long as at least one of the regenerat•
TBJl and TB.I2 is large enough to avoid the original am•       ing disc neighbors of the missing disc is relatively unharmed, 
biguity. If T contains B, TBJl and TBJ2 are picked on          the disc will regrow under normal growth procedures. On the 
the circumference of T. In either case TBJl and TB.I2 are      other hand, to make regrowth impossible, all disc centers and 
used in place of ABJl and ABJ2 in all the above discussed      at least two of the cardinals of all regenerating disc would 
procedures. Once at least 2 cardinal points and the center of  have to die, all in a very short amount of time. 
B have stabilized, T.C is turned off, and any cells that fall    Overall, our system is quite robust to random cell death. 
outside the ranges of all the presently existing grow messages Consider the following experiment. After there exist at least 
die in 50 cell-steps.                                          50 cells, in each cell-step in which a new cell is created, a 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                    637 