                           Protocol Conformance for Logic-based Agents 

               Ulrich Endriss and Nicolas Maudet and Fariba Sadri and Francesca Toni 
                              Department of Computing, Imperial College London 
                                     180 Queen's Gate, London SW7 2AZ, UK 
                                           {ue,maudet,fs,ft}@doc. ic.ac.uk 


                        Abstract                               by a particular protocol. It is then crucial to provide proper 
                                                               means of evaluating how well agents are adapted to these pro­
     An agent communication protocol specifies the 
                                                               tocols, in a sense that has to be precisely defined in the context 
     "rules of encounter" governing a dialogue between 
                                                               of the interaction. In this paper, we introduce three different 
     agents in a multiagent system. In non-cooperative 
                                                               levels of conformance (weak, exhaustive, and robust confor­
     interactions (such as negotiation dialogues) occur­
                                                               mance) and show that a logical representation of the protocols 
     ring in open societies it is crucial that agents are 
                                                               for logic-based agents greatly facilitates determining (both a 
     equipped with proper means to check, and possi­
                                                               priori and at runtime) whether or not these agents behave in 
     bly enforce, conformance to protocols. We identify 
                                                               conformance to the protocols. We also show how to enforce 
     different levels of conformance (weak, exhaustive, 
                                                               conformance at runtime for such agents and suggest a pre­
     and robust conformance) and explore how a spe­
                                                               liminary definition for the notion of protocol competence, an 
     cific class of logic-based agents can exploit a new 
                                                               attempt to measure how well an agent is adapted to a given 
     representation formalism for communication proto­
                                                               protocol beyond the basic requirements of conformance. 
     cols based on simple if-then rules in order to either 
                                                                 The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In 
     check conformance a priori or enforce it at runtime. 
                                                               Section 2 we introduce a new formalism for the representa­
                                                               tion of protocols based on if-then-rules. Section 3 motivates 
1 Introduction                                                 the introduction of our three levels of conformance. Abduc-
                                                               tive logic programming has recently been used as a basis for 
A protocol specifies the "rules of encounter" governing a di­
                                                               defining (private) strategies for agents negotiating over the 
alogue between two or more communicating agents [Rosen-
                                                               distribution of resources [Sadri et ai  2001]. Section 4 intro­
schein and Zlotkin, 1994]. It specifies which agent is allowed                                   }
                                                               duces these agents, illustrates how to check protocol confor­
to say what in any given situation. It will usually allow for 
                                                               mance for them, and shows how the agents themselves can 
several alternative utterances in every situation and the agent 
                                                               ensure their conformance without requiring any extra reason­
in question has to choose one according to its strategy. The 
                                                               ing machinery. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
protocol is public, while each agent's strategy is private. Pro­
tocols can help to define a suitable standardised semantics 
for agent communication languages in order to allow actual     2 Representing Protocols 
interoperability in open environments. Instead of being re­    In this paper, we will assume some restrictions on the kind 
lated to some (virtually inaccessible) private mental state of of dialogues that we want to deal with. The dialogues we are 
the agent as proposed by KQML [Labrou and Finin, 1998] and     considering only involve two agents which sequentially al•
FIPA [2002], the meaning of a dialogue move refers to some     ternate dialogue moves. These restrictions (notably avoiding 
publicly agreed and verifiable conversational state. For in­   concurrency) allow us to concentrate on a particular class of 
stance, one may equate the meaning of a dialogue move with     protocols, namely those reprcsentable by means of determin•
the set of possible responses to this dialogue move as defined istic finite automata (DFAs), of which there are numerous ex­
by the public protocol [Pitt and Mamdani, 1999]. Of course,    amples to be found in the literature [Pitt and Mamdani, 1999; 
this does not disqualify the idea of a private semantics, but  Dignum and Greaves, 2000]. Our aim for this section is to in­
simply emphasises that standardisation cannot be achieved at   troduce a protocol representation formalism based on simple 
this level. Following these ideas, Pitt and Mamdani [1999]     if-then-rules and to show that it is adequate to represent the 
have established the notion of a layered semantics for agent   kinds of protocols that we are interested in here. 
communication languages which integrates both private and        We recall here that a DFA consists of (i) a set of states (in­
public levels, and each agent must implement both of them to   cluding an initial state, and a set of final states), (ii) a set of 
actually be able to converse with other agents.                events, and (iii) a transition function 6 which maps pairs of 
  When considering interactions that are not necessarily co­   states and events to states. Figure 1 shows an example, taken 
operative (typically negotiation), it cannot be safely assumed from [Pitt and Mamdani, 1999]. Events are occurrences of 
that agents will always follow the rules of encounter specified dialogue moves; states are the possible stages of the conver-


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                    679                                                                the initiator, and one for its partner. We will refer to these 
                                                               two subprotocols as and . They can be translated into 
                                                               a set (composed of two subsets) of if-then-rules as illustrated 
                                                               in Table 1. In general, given a protocol we shall refer to 
                                                               the subprotocol guiding the behaviour of agent as  
                                                                 This example suggests that we can simply translate proto•
                                                               cols into if-then-rules where we have a single performative 
                                                               on the lefthand side. We call protocols that permit such a 
                                                               straightforward translation shallow. Shallow protocols corre•
                                                               spond to DFAs where it is possible to determine the next state 
          Figure 1: The continuous update protocol             of the dialogue on the sole basis of the previous event. Of 
                                                               course, this is not always the case since it may be necessary 
                                                               to refer to the current state of the dialogue to determine the 
 sation. The protocol, entitled "continuous update protocol",  new state (think of two transitions with the same label leav•
 aims at continuously updating the other agent about the value ing two different states and leading to two different states). 
 of some proposition. Note that it is always the same agent    In principle, any automata-based protocol can be transformed 
 A (the initiator) who informs the other agent B. The legal    into a protocol that is shallow in this sense (by simply renam•
 communicative behaviour of both agents is captured by such    ing any duplicate transitions). In fact, we have observed that 
a protocol. We make this notion of legality precise in the fol• many of the automata-based protocols proposed in the multia-
 lowing definition:                                            gent systems literature happen to be shallow already or could 
 Definition 1 (Legality) Given a DFA with transition func•     at least be made shallow by renaming only a small number of 
tion S, a dialogue move P is a legal continuation wrt. a state transitions. 
S iff there exists a state S' such that                          Now suppose Px,...,Pn are the dialogue moves of our 
                                                               communication language (including START and STOP). In 
We shall refer to legal inputs (respectively outputs) for an 
                                                               the light of the above remarks, we will more generally trans•
agent X as those legal continuations where X is the receiver 
                                                               late DFAs into two sets of rules of the form 
(respectively the utterer) of the dialogue move. 
   Protocols such as that of Figure 1 can alternatively be rep•
resented as sets of if-then-rules which specify the set of cor•
rect responses for a particular incoming dialogue move. For    where the righthand side of the rule defines the possible con•
example, to express that agent B could react to an inform      tinuations wrt. the protocol after the input P3 (that we will 
move sent by A either by sending an acknowledgement or by      sometimes refer to as the trigger of the rule). To ensure that 
terminating the dialogue, we may use the following rule:       this protocol is well-formed, we will require that the two sets 
                                                               of rules meet some requirements (R1-R5): there has to be at 
                                                               least one rule with START on the lefthand side in the protocol, 
                                                               and START may never occur on the righthand side (Rla, ini•
Note that variables arc implicitly universally quantified, ex• tial); there is at least one rule with STOP on the righthand side 
cept those that only appear on the righthand side of an impli• and STOP never occurs on the lefthand side (Rib, final); any 
cation, which are existentially quantified. In general, in this dialogue move occurring on the righthand side of the first sub-
representation, dialogue moves are instances of the schema     protocol also occurs on the lefthand side of the second one, 
                                                               and vice versa (R2, matching); every subprotocol includes the 
                                                               additional rule 
where X is the utterer, Y is the receiver the iden•
tifier of the dialogue, and T the time when the move is uttered. 
Subject is the type of the dialogue moves, i.e. a performa•   to avoid concurrent moves (R3, non-concurrency); for each 
tive (such as end) of the communication language, possibly    rule occurring in a subprotocol, if X is the receiver and Y the 
together with a content (as in inform(P)). We shall mostly    utterer of the dialogue move occurring on the lefthand side, 
use the abbreviated form P{T) to dialogue moves, omitting      it must be the case that X is the utterer and Y the receiver of 
the parameters not relevant in the discussion. For the sake   every dialogue move occurring on the righthand side (R4, al•
of simplicity, we will assume that the start of the protocol  ternating); all dialogue moves occurring on the lefthand side 
is triggered by some external event START—it is possible to   of the rules of each subprotocol are distinct from each other 
conceive this as the result of some meta-level negotiation pro• (R5, distinct triggers). 
cess to agree on a particular protocol. The start signal START   The meaning of each rule which appears in a protocol is 
is sent by the system to exactly one agent and exactly once   intuitively clear: it specifies for any expected dialogue move 
during a dialogue. Similarly, a dialogue ends once one of the the set of correct responses the agent may utter in reply. The 
agents sends the signal STOP to the system. Dialogue inputs   following definitions make these notions more precise: 
for the agents are either dialogue moves sent by other agents Definition 2 (Expected inputs) The set of expected inputs 
or a START signal sent by the system.                         for an agent a wrt. a protocol V is defined as: 
  Going back to the example of Figure 1, we observe that 
this automaton in fact represents two subprotocols, one for 


680                                                                                             MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS Definition 3 (Correct responses) The set of correct re•                  Definition 5 (Exhaustive conformance) An agent is ex•
sponses for an agent a wrt. a protocol V and a dialogue move             haustively conformant to a protocol V iff it is weakly con•
Pj is defined as:                                                       formant to V and it will utter at least one legal output move 
                                                                        for any legal input ofV it receives. 

                                                                         Exhaustive conformance is certainly what is intuitively ex­
Intuitively it is not sufficient for a dialogue move to be merely 
                                                                         pected in most interactions—it is indeed often preferred to 
expected in order to be considered legal; it is also necessary 
                                                                         avoid considering silent moves as part of a protocol, at least 
that the move takes place at the right moment in the history 
                                                                         to avoid confusion with lost messages. One may then argue 
of the dialogue. But note that it follows from the property 
                                                                         that exhaustive conformance should be the minimum require­
of matching (R2) that the set of legal inputs for an agent at a 
                                                                         ment for any interaction. We believe, however, it is worth 
certain stage of a dialogue is a subset of its expected inputs. 
                                                                         making the distinction between weak and exhaustive confor­
3 Levels of Conformance                                                  mance. The first reason is that there are examples where the 
                                                                         lack of response can be considered to be part of the protocol. 
Taking for granted that agents share the same language of                In such circumstances, it can be sufficient to design a weakly 
communication, we are now going to define three different                conformant agent, provided that silent moves will not have 
levels of conformance to a protocol. Note that we define                 undesirable consequences. For instance, in a Dutch auction 
these notions on the basis of the observable conversational              process "when there is no signal of acceptance from the other 
behaviour of the agents (i.e. what they utter) without making            parties in the auction (other agents in the negotiation) the auc­
further assumptions on how they actually come to generate                tioneer makes a new offer which he believes more acceptable 
these utterances. We start with the notion of weak confor•               (by reducing the price). Here, because of the convention (pro­
mance:                                                                   tocol) under which the auction operates, a lack of response is 
Definition 4 (Weak conformance) An agent is weakly con•                  sufficient feedback for the auctioneer to infer a lack of ac­
formant to a protocol V iff it never utters any illegal dialogue         ceptance." Uennings et al., 1998J. In this case, the agent can 
moves (wrt. V).                                                          safely be designed to react appropriately only to the proposals 
                                                                         it is ready to accept. But if we consider recent argumentation-
The following theorem shows that, in the context of our shal­
                                                                         based protocols inspired by dialectical models it is sometimes 
low protocols, the concept of legality is reducible to that of 
                                                                         assumed that "'silence means consent" [Amgoud et al. 20001. 
correctness, meaning that we can avoid to inspect the legality 
                                                                         In this case, a lack of response can commit the receiver to 
of the input and thus avoid to deal with the complete dialogue 
                                                                         some propositions—this is a typical case where it is crucial 
history. 
                                                                         that agents are exhaustively conformant. The second reason 
Theorem 1 An agent that never utters an incorrect response               for our distinction of weak and exhaustive conformance is 
in reply to an expected input of a shallow protocol V is weakly          that they are conceptually different since weak conformance 
conformant to V.                                                         only involves not uttering (any illegal moves), while exhaus­
Proof (sketch) For shallow protocols, the current dialogue               tive conformance involves uttering (some legal move). This 
state is uniquely identifiable given the latest move in the              implies substantially different approaches when the issues of 
dialogue. Hence, the notions of correct response and legal               checking and enforcing conformance are raised, as we shall 
move coincide, i.e. an agent that never utters an incorrect              see below. 
response will never choose an illegal continuation and will                 Another important problem of agent communication is the 
therefore be weakly conformant to the protocol. □ need to deal with illegal incoming messages, and to react ap­
                                                                         propriately to recover from such violations. For instance, any 
It is clear that any application governed by a protocol at least         Fl PA-compliant communicative agent has to integrate a per­
requires the level of weak conformance—otherwise it would                formative not-understood as part of its language [FIPA, 
not make sense to define a protocol in the first place. The              20021. This motivates us to introduce the following notion of 
notion of weak conformance captures that the agent does not              robust conformance: 
utter any illegal moves, but does not actually require that the 
agent utters any dialogue move at all. For interactions where            Definition 6 (Robust conformance) An agent is robustly 
"silent moves" are undesirable, a stronger version of confor­            conformant to a protocol V iff it is exhaustively conformant 
mance is usually required. We make this idea precise with the            to V and for any illegal input move it will utter a special dia•
notion of exhaustive conformance:                                        logue move (such as 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                                       681  Robust conformance goes a step further than exhaustive con•  That is, the response space is, essentially, the set of protocol-
 formance since it requires that an appropriate response is ut• constraints we get by first dropping all private conditions C 
 tered also in reply to illegal moves. Technically, this neces• and then conjoining implications with identical antecedents 
 sitates that the agent is able to identify the legality of an in• by collecting the corresponding consequents into a single dis•
 coming dialogue move, i.e. it needs to be able to check con• junction. The reason why we define the disjunction of the 
 formance wrt. the other agent's subprotocol.                 empty set as will become clear when we consider the next 
   Note also that in the case where all agents in the society theorem, which offers a very simple way to check weak con•
are known to be weakly conformant, it is theoretically un•    formance a priori for a logic-based agent. In particular, it 
necessary to deal with robust conformance (since no agent     avoids dealing with the dialogue history, and it does not make 
will ever utter an illegal move). Such an assumption would,   any assumptions on the content of the agent's knowledge base 
however, somewhat contradict the "spirit" of an open soci•    (except to require that it is possible to extract the response 
ety. We should also point out that in dialogues with a very   space, as previously described). 
high contingent of illegal utterances the additional not-
                                                              Theorem 2 Let V be a protocol and let S* be the response 
understood moves may in fact burden communication 
                                                              space of an agent A wrt. the language of moves occurring 
channels unnecessarily and simply ignoring illegal moves 
                                                              in then agent A is weakly conformant to V. 
would in fact be a better strategy. 
                                                              Proof Let 5* be the response space of agent A wrt. the lan•
4 Logic-based Agents                                          guage of protocol Then for every rule 
                                                              in , will contain an implication 
We are now going to consider the case of a specific class of 
                                                              (with the same antecedent P)—and possibly a number of ad•
agents based on abductive logic programming that have re•
                                                              ditional implications for dialogue moves in the language 
cently been used in the context of negotiation scenarios [Sadri 
                                                              that do not occur as triggers in (All the antecedents of 
etal, 2001]. The communication strategy S of such an agent 
                                                              the implications in 5* are distinct.) Now suppose 
(which forms part of its so-called knowledge base K) is repre•
                                                              holds. Observe that a formula of the form 
sented as a set of integrity constraints of the following form: 
                                                              in can only be the consequence of an implication in S* 
                                                              with the same antecedent will 
                                                              only follow from provided we have 
On receiving dialogue move P at time T, an agent imple•
menting this rule would utter P' at time T+1, provided con•
                                                                In other words, whenever holds, then will 
dition C is entailed by its (private) knowledge base. Again, 
                                                              have the shape of a protocol that is a "syntactic restriction" of 
variables are understood to be implicitly quantified in the 
                                                              the protocol , possibly together with a number of irrelevant 
same way as our protocol-rules. 
                                                              rules (with triggers not present in Furthermore, by 
4.1 Checking Conformance                                      construction, any agent will be weakly conformant to the 
                                                              "protocol" represented by its response space. Hence, agent A 
There are different ways of checking conformance. One way 
                                                              will also be weakly conformant to because any dialogue 
is to check conformance on-the-fly, i.e. to check step by step 
                                                              continuation that would be legal wrt. would certainly 
that every dialogue move uttered by an agent is conformant 
                                                              have to be legal wrt. .  
to the protocol. Another way—much more interesting when 
one has to design an agent to take part in an interaction—is 
                                                              The opposite direction of Theorem 2 does not hold, because, 
to check conformance a priori, i.e. to check conformance by 
                                                              looking at the form of strategies, it is clear that private con•
examining the specification of the agent rather than an actual 
                                                              ditions may prevent the agent from uttering a particular dia•
dialogue. In general, this is a difficult task, because (i) the 
                                                              logue move. In other words, it could be the case that S* ^ V 
behaviour of the agent depends on some hardly tractable no•
                                                              but that the agent is still weakly conformant to V because of 
tions (e.g.. beliefs and intentions), and (ii) conformance may 
                                                              its specific knowledge base. 
depend on the history of the dialogue. We are now going to 
                                                                The same argument prevents us from having a theorem 
discuss some simple sufficient conditions for weak confor•
                                                              similar to Theorem 2 in the case of exhaustive conformance 
mance (in the context of the logic-based agents introduced 
                                                              (and of course for robust conformance). Here we would have 
earlier) that may be checked a priori. 
                                                              to look more precisely at how dialogue moves are actually 
  To begin with, we introduce the notion of response space. 
                                                              being generated. The basic idea would be to check that, for 
Intuitively, the response space of an agent specifies the possi•
                                                              every expected input in the protocol, the disjunction of the 
ble moves that the agent can make when using a given strat•
                                                              conditions C related to this move in the agent's strategy is 
egy 5, without considering the specific conditions relating to 
                                                              entailed by the agent's knowledge base. 
its private knowledge base. 
Definition 7 (Response space) The response space of an        4.2 Enforcing conformance 
agent with strategy S (henceforth noted S*) wrt. a commu•
                                                              Even when Theorem 2 is not applicable and an agent cannot 
nication language C is defined as the following set: 
                                                              be proven to be weakly conformant a priori, it is still pos•
                                                              sible to constrain the agent's behaviour in such a way as to 
                                                              simply prevent it from uttering illegal moves. The problem of 
                                                              enforcing conformance (referred to as regimentation by Jones 


682                                                                                            MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                          Table 2: Examples of dialogue strategies 

and Sergot [1993]) is then to try to find easy (and hopefully    Note that this filtering function will not block correct re­
automatic) ways to ensure that an agent will always be con­    sponses generated by the agent, unless two or more moves 
formant to a given protocol.                                   are being generated at the same time. This is again due to the 
   We will now show how a simple filtering function may        non-concurrency condition (R3). 
be defined in the context of our logic-based agents. Since       We should also point out that it is possible that an agent 
this relies on the concrete behaviour of our agents, this re­  with knowledge base would not utter any dialogue move 
quires some details about the operational model which un­      given a particular input P(T), while an agent with knowl­
derlies these agents. By a generated response we now mean      edge base (i.e. the same agent after "downloading" 
a response produced by the abductive IFF proof procedure of    the protocol would utter a (legal) move. This may, for in­
Fung and Kowalski [ 1997]. In our case, the abducibles are the stance, be the case if P{T) never occurs on the lefthand side 
dialogue move(s) that the agent will actually generate as the  in the agent's original strategy and V includes a "determinis­
consequence of the observation of another agent's dialogue     tic" protocol rule such as . If this type of 
                                                               behaviour is not intended, we have to ensure that the commu­
move (see [Sadri et aly 2002] for details). 
                                                               nication languages of the agent and the protocol match (for 
Theorem 3 An agent generating its dialogue moves wrt. the      instance, by adding the constraint to the agent's 
knowledge base will be weakly conformant to                    strategy for every move P that is an expected input in  

Proof, (sketch) Let us assume that P{T) is a legal input       4.3 Examples 
(wrt. protocol ) that our agent receives, and that             We are now going to illustrate some of the points made ear­
is a move generated as a response by the agent. Since the      lier by means of example. Consider again the continuous up­
move is legal, it is expected in The proof procedure will      date protocol of Table 1, and more specifically subprotocol 
produce a tree and each branch of this tree will have one of   VB. The set of constraints given in Table 2 represents two 
the correct responses together with the constraints            possible strategies for an agent a. Here, the -^-operator is 
of the dialogue strategy and the additional condition of non-  understood as negation as failure. We assume that the pred­
concurrency (R3). Now if is a generated response               icates friend and enemy are fully defined in the knowledge 
of the proof procedure, must also be a conjunct                base of our agent (that is, it can determine whether or not 
on one of these branches. But such a branch will evaluate      an agent X is a friend or an enemy), and we also assume 
to false if precisely because of the                           that an integrity constraint stipulates that it is not possible 
condition of non-concurrency. This means that the procedure    to be at the same time friend and enemy of the same agent 
will never generate an incorrect response. Therefore, by       (friend\  
Theorem 1, our agent will be weakly conformant to □ Dialogue strategy S\ relies upon the commu­
                                                               nication language which is based on the set 
Thus the filtering function is provided by the protocol itself. {inform{P),question{P),ack,end}. It is interesting to 
This result has very practical consequences. For instance, be­ note that no rule can be triggered after a question about P 
fore entering an interaction, an agent can ensure its weak con­ if it is the case that the agent a does not consider X as a 
formance to the public protocol which regulates the interac­   friend. However, the agent a is still weakly and exhaustively 
tion (and thereby avoid possible penalties imposed by soci­    conformant to since this move can never be legally 
ety), by adding the protocol to its own knowledge base. Now,   uttered within the protocol by its partner (it is not a legal 
while we can prevent an agent from uttering illegal dialogue   input for subprotocol  
moves, it is difficult to see how we could force it to utter     Next consider dialogue strategy S2, which relies 
some dialogue move (exhaustive conformance) without con­       upon the communication language based on the set 
sidering its private knowledge base and modifying its private  {inform(P), challenge{P),ack, end). Agent a is not weakly 
strategy. We therefore believe that exhaustive conformance     conformant to VB since, in some situations (namely, when it 
cannot be enforced automatically and should ideally be en­     does not consider X as friend, neither as an enemy), it may 
sured during the specification of the agent by the designer.   want to challenge the initiator X. This move is not expected 


 MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                  683 