               Accurate and Low-cost Location Estimation Using Kernels
           Jeffery Junfeng Pana       James T. Kwoka       Qiang Yang    a    Yiqiang Chenb
a Department of Computer Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
               b Institute of Computer Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
                          {panjf,jamesk,qyang}@cs.ust.hk, yqchen@ict.ac.cn

                    Abstract                          locations in the area of interest. These values comprise the
                                                      training data gathered from a physical region, which are used
    We present a novel method for indoor-location esti-
                                                      to calibrate a probabilistic location-estimation system. In the
    mation using a vector-space model based on signals
                                                      online localization phase, the real-time signal strength sam-
    received from a wireless client. Our aim is to ob-
                                                      ples received from the access points are used to estimate the
    tain an accurate mapping between the signal space
                                                      current location based on the learned model.
    and the physical space without incurring too much
                                                        In the training phase, the learned model is essentially a
    human calibration effort. This problem has tradi-
                                                      mapping function f(S, P) between the signal space S and
    tionally been tackled through probabilistic models
                                                      the physical location space P. Deterministic techniques build
    trained on manually labeled data, which are expen-
                                                      such a mapping function by assuming a signal propagation
    sive to obtain. In this paper, we present a novel
                                                      model based on properties of electro-magnetic ﬁelds. These
    approach to building a mapping between the signal-
                                                      signal-propagation models often cannot accurately describe a
    vector space and the physical location space using
                                                      realistic environment due to uncertainty in the devices and the
    kernel canonical correlation analysis (KCCA). Its
                                                      obstacles in the signal paths. Probabilistic techniques are of-
    training requires much less human labor. More-
                                                      ten more accurate by directly handling the uncertainty. These
    over, unlike traditional location-estimation systems
                                                      techniques construct the function f(·, ·) by maximizing the
    that treat grid points as independent and discrete
                                                      likelihood of the observation given the probabilistic distribu-
    target classes during training, we use the physical
                                                      tion of the training data used for calibration.
    location as a continuous feedback to build a similar-
                                                        However, the probabilistic methods suffer from several
    ity mapping using KCCA. We test our algorithm in
                                                      major shortcomings. First, these techniques require a huge
    a 802.11 wireless LAN environment, and demon-
                                                      amount of labeled data for the trained model to be accurate.
    strate the advantage of our method in both accu-
                                                      In reality, the data collection is a time-consuming process.
    racy and its ability to utilize a much smaller set of
                                                      In our experience, for example, in our earlier test it took
    labeled training data than previous methods.
                                                      many hours to collect and label the signal-strength data in
1  Introduction                                       a limited indoor environment. Second, the mapping between
Location estimation is a major area of pervasive comput- the signal and physical spaces are very difﬁcult to construct
ing applications that range from context-dependent content due to nonlinearity. Nonlinearity exists when similar loca-
delivery to people monitoring . However, accurate loca- tions have very different signal signatures. Therefore, a direct
tion information may not be always available. For example, mapping between the two spaces may not always work well,
many buildings cannot be reached by location-determination even when much data are collected. Third, many probabilistic
devices such as GPS. In such environments, a commonly- techniques adopt a classiﬁcation-based approach, by treating
used technique is to leverage the signal strength values of the locations as discrete classes to be classiﬁed. However,
a wireless network such as the IEEE 802.11b wireless LAN this approach ignores the important information inherent in
network (WLAN). Many systems utilize the signal strength the physical proximity of the locations. Furthermore, pre-
values received from the access points to infer the location vious methods that apply regression based techniques treat
of mobile devices, based on deterministic or probabilistic the physical dimensions (x, y) separately, they cannot fully
techniques [Ladd et al., 2002; Gentile and Berndt, 2004; exploit the geometric information imparted by considering x
Youssef et al., 2003; Bahl and Padmanabhan, 2000; Ni et al., and y together.
2003]. Similarly, in a sensor network, the location informa- In this paper, we present a similarity-based approach to
tion must also be inferred from signals received from various building a mapping function. Our main intuition is to per-
deployed sensors. A major issue in these applications is how form a kernel-based transformation of the signal and physical
to build an accurate mapping between the signal space and spaces to capture the nonlinear relationship between the sig-
the physical space while incurring minimal human effort. nals and locations. Furthermore, we perform a kernel canoni-
  In general, location-estimation systems using (RF)-based cal correlation analysis (KCCA) in the two spaces for feature
signal-strength values function in two phases: an ofﬂine train- extraction. This allows the pairwise similarity of samples that
ing phase and an online, localization phase. In the ofﬂine are measured in both spaces to be maximally correlated. We
phase, a probabilistic model is trained by considering the sig- apply a Gaussian kernel to adapt the noisy characteristic of
nal strength values received from the access points at selected signal strength and use a Matern´ kernel to sense the changein physical locations.                                a maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) method to infer the
  A major advantage of our proposed technique is that we most probable location within the cluster.
can obtain higher accuracy while reducing the training cost by More recently, intense research efforts have been spent to
requiring only a fraction of the labeled samples as compared seek additional knowledge in order to boost the accuracy of
to previous methods. We demonstrate this result in a series of the location determination systems. For example, to handle
tests on WLAN location estimation using the data collected the sequential characteristic of user traces, [Ladd et al., 2002]
in a realistic environment.                           suggest a sensor fusion model and shows a strong correla-
                                                      tion between consecutive samples. The robotics-based loca-
                                                      tion sensing system in [Ladd et al., 2002] applies Bayesian
2  Related Work                                       inference to compute the conditional probabilities over lo-
2.1  Location Estimation                              cations based on received signal-strength samples from var-
                                                      ious access points. Then a postprocessing step, which uti-
Location-estimation systems are an integral component for lizes the spatial constraints of a user’s movement trajectories,
probabilistic plan-recognition systems in AI [Liao et al., reﬁnes the location estimation and rejects the estimates that
2004; Bui et al., 2002]. In general, they operate in two show signiﬁcant changes in the location space. Depending
phases: an ofﬂine training phase and an online localization on whether the postprocessing step is used or not, the accu-
phase. During the ofﬂine phase, a radio map is built which racy of this method is 83% or 77% within 1.5 meters. [Yin et
tabulates the signal strength received from the access points al., 2005; Ni et al., 2003] study the dynamic features of signal
at selected locations in the area of interest. During the local- strength and build a regression model to adapt the change of
ization phase, the signal strength samples received from the radio map with reference points. A radio map is constructed
access points are used to search the radio map to estimate a using data mining methods in an effort to reduce the samples
user’s location. In building the radio maps, two techniques collected for calibration[Chai and Yang, 2005].
have been attempted: deterministic and probabilistic.   In contrast to the above works, our approach builds a simi-
  Deterministic techniques rely on radio propagation models larity based mapping function by making full use of the con-
which take into account such environmental factors as path- tinuous location information in kernel-based transformation.
loss functions [Roos et al., 2002a; Kaemarungsi and Krishna- In the next section, we ﬁrst review kernels and kernel canon-
murthy, 2004]. When this is possible to do where uncertainty ical correlation analysis.
is relatively low, signal distribution models can be derived
with a relatively small number of samples using knowledge 2.2 (Kernel) Canonical Correlation Analysis
on propagation channels [Hashemi, 1993]. This also enables Canonical Correlation Analysis
the nearest neighbor or triangulation techniques to be used Given two sets of variables, canonical correlation anal-
[Bahl and Padmanabhan, 2000; Smailagic and Kogan, 2002; ysis (CCA) [Hotelling, 1936] attempts to ﬁnd a ba-
Bhasker et al., 2004]. For example, the RADAR system  sis for each  set such  that the correlation between
by Microsoft Research [Bahl and Padmanabhan, 2000] uses the projections of the variables onto these basis vec-
nearest neighbor heuristics and triangulation methods to in- tors are mutually maximized. Mathematically, given
fer a user’s location. Each signal strength sample is com- n instances S = {(x1, y1), (x2, y2),...,(xn, yn)} of
pared against the radio map and the coordinates of the best the pair (x, y), CCA ﬁnds directions (canonical vec-
matches are averaged to give location estimation. The accu- tors) wx and wy so that the transformed variables
racy of RADAR is about three meters with ﬁfty percent prob- (canonical variates) (wx, x1, wx, x2,...,wx, xn) and
ability. In [Bhasker et al., 2004], an online procedure based (wy, y1, wy, y2,...,wy, yn), are maximally corre-
on feedback from users was employed to correct the loca- lated. Now, deﬁne the total covariance matrix by
                                                                                
tion estimation of the system. A similar technique for sensor                              
networks has been applied; for example, the LANDMARC                 x      x          Cxx   Cxy
                                                           C  = Eˆ                =                ,
system [Ni et al., 2003] utilizes the concept of reference tags      y      y          Cyx   Cyy
to alleviate the effects caused by the ﬂuctuation in RF signal
strength. The method ﬁrst computes the distance between the where Eˆ[·] is the empirical expectation operator, Cxx, Cyy
                                                                                                     
signal-strength vectors received from the tracking tags and are the within-sets covariance matrices and Cxy = Cyx is
those from different reference-tags’ respectively. It then uses the between-sets covariance matrix. It can be shown that
k nearest reference tags’ coordinates to calculate the approx- wx can be obtained by solving the generalized eigenprob-
                                                                −1           2
imate coordinate of the tracking tag.                 lem CxyCyy  Cyxwx  =  λ Cxxwx, and then subsequently
  Probabilistic techniques confront the uncertainty in an              1  −1
                                                      obtain wy as wy =  Cyy Cyxwx  [Hardoon et al., 2004].
indoor wireless environment, by constructing the signal-               λ
strength distributions over different locations in the radio Kernel Canonical Correlation Analysis
map and use probabilistic inference methods for localization A major limitation of CCA is that it can only exploit linear
[Roos et al., 2002b; Youssef et al., 2003]. [Youssef et al., relationships between x and y. As is now well-known, the
2003] used a joint clustering technique to group locations to- use of kernels offers an efﬁcient, nonlinear extension of CCA.
gether in order to reduce the computational cost of the sys- Kernel canonical correlation analysis (KCCA) [Hardoon et
tem. The method ﬁrst determines a most likely cluster within al., 2004] implicitly maps x and y to φx(x) and φy(y), and
which to search for the most probable location, then applies then performs traditional CCA in the two high-dimensionalfeature spaces. To control the ﬂexibility of the projections,
the norms of the associated weight vectors are penalized.
  Using the dual representations for the projection directions
w         w
 φx(x) and  φy (y):
     w        S    α        w       S    β
       φx(x) = φx(x) ,  and   φy (y) = φy (y) , (1)
       S               x          x    S
where   φx(x)  =[φx(     1),...,φx( n)]   φy (y) =
                               n
[φy(y1),...,φy(yn)] , and α, β ∈ R . Denote the corre-
sponding kernel functions by kx(·, ·) and ky(·, ·), and the ker-
nel matrices (deﬁned on all n instances) by Kx and Ky.It
can be shown that α can be obtained by solving the general- Figure 1: Correlation between the signal and physical spaces.
ized eigenproblem
                −1            −1         2              1. Signal strengths are collected at various grid locations.
      (Kx  + κI)  Ky(Ky  + κI)  Kxα  =  λ α,    (2)
                                                        2. KCCA, with appropriate choices for the two kernels
where I is the identity matrix and κ is a user-deﬁned regular- (Section 3.3), is used to learn the relationship between
ization parameter. Subsequently, β can be obtained as     the signal and physical spaces. In particular, λi’s and
                                                          αi’s are obtained from the generalized eigenproblem in
                  1          −1                                                  β
              β =   (Ky + κI)  Kxα.             (3)       (2), and the corresponding i’s from (3).
                  λ
                                                        3. For each training pair (si, i), its projections
         x˜              w
Given any , its projection on φx(x) is given by                                                  
                                                                  P (si)=[P1(si),P2(si),...,PT (si)]  (5)
               x˜      x˜ w      k α
           Px(  )=φx(   )  φx(x) = x˜ ,         (4)       on the T canonical vectors are obtained from (4).
                                           
where kx˜ =[kx(x˜, x1),kx(x˜, x2),...,kx(x˜, xn)] . Simi- Online Localization Phase
                       y˜    w           y˜   k β
larly, the projection of any onto φy (y) is Py( )= y˜ , In the localization phase, the location of a new signal strength
                                          
where ky˜ =[ky(y˜, y1),ky(y˜, y2),...,ky(y˜, yn)] .   vector ˜s is estimated as follows:
  The generalized eigenproblem in (2) can be solved by us- 1. Use (4) to project ˜s onto the canonical vectors and obtain
ing the (complete) Cholesky decomposition. However, the                                
                                                          P (˜s)=[P1(˜s),P2(˜s),...,PT (˜s)] .
kernel matrices Kx and Ky are of size n, and so obtaining
                                                        2. Among the projections (5) from the training samples,
the Cholesky decomposition can become computational ex-                                  ˜s
pensive for large training sets. In that case, the incomplete ﬁnd the M neighbors closest to P ( ). In this paper,
                                                                                            T        ˜s −
Cholesky decomposition or the partial Gram-Schmidt orthog- the weighted Euclidean distance di = j=1 λj(Pj( )
                                                                 2
onalization can be used instead [Hardoon et al., 2004].   Pj(si)) is employed.
                                                        3. Interpolate these neighbors’ physical locations to predict
3  Location Estimation using KCCA                         the physical location of ˜s. In this paper, we simply out-
3.1  Motivation                                           put the median (or mean for continuous location estima-
                                                          tion) of the (x, y) coordinates of these M neighbors.
Consider the two-dimensional location estimation problem1.
Its goal is to obtain a mapping between the space of sig- 3.3 Choice of Kernels
nal strengths obtained at p access points S = {s ≡
             ∈ Rp}                     P     { ≡    Signal-strength values are often noisy. The empirical dis-
[s1,s2,...,sp]      and the physical space =          tribution (radio map) is difﬁcult to obtain, especially when
     ∈ R2}
[x, y]     . Traditional approaches typically learn the two the training samples are scarce. As a ﬁrst approximation, the
         S→{    }    S→{}
mappings,      x  and      y , independently [Brunato Gaussian distribution has been used in characterizing the non-
and Battiti, 2004]. In this paper, we consider x and y together linearity of the signal strengths [Roos et al., 2002b]. Hence,
and emphasize the correlation between signal and physical in this paper, we also use the Gaussian kernel G(x1, x2):
spaces, observing that the pairwise similarity in the signal
                                                                          −  2 x − x 2
space should match the pairwise similarity in the physical            exp( wG    1   2  )             (6)
space. For example, in Figure 1, signal SA should be more
                                                      for the S space. Here, wG is a user-deﬁned parameter that
similar to SB than SC , since A is closer to B in the physical
space. Consequently, we consider both x and y together and reﬂects the smoothness of the radio map.
use KCCA to learn the mapping between the two spaces.   On the other hand, measurements of the physical locations
                                                      are relatively clean. As in [Schwaighofer et al., 2004],we
3.2  The LE-KCCA Algorithm                            adopt the Matern´ kernel M(x1, x2) (Figure 2):
                                                              √             ν
Ofﬂine Training Phase                                       2(  νwx1 − x2)      √
                                                                              K (2  νw  x1 − x2),   (7)
In the training phase, the following steps are taken:              Γ(ν)        ν       M
  1Extension to the three-dimensional (or even higher- where ν is a smoothness parameter, Γ(ν) is the Gamma func-
dimensional) case is straight-forward                 tion and Kν (r) is the modiﬁed Bessel function of the secondkind. It can be shown that when ν →∞, the Matern´ ker- slightly (within 1%) when M varies in the range 7 to 31.
nel degenerates√ to the Gaussian kernel, and to the exponential Moreover, ν in (7) is set to 0.5, and thus the Matern´ kernel
kernel exp(− 2wx1 − x2) when ν =0.5. Note that both degenerates to the exponential kernel.
the Gaussian and Matern´ kernels are isotropic and so are in-
variant to the location of origin and to arbitrary rotation. 4.2 Location Estimation Accuracy

           1
                                                     Figure 4 plots the average testing accuracies (and the cor-
            Mν,w (x, x ),w =0.4  ν=+∞ Gaussian
          0.9
                                 ν=1.5                responding standard deviations) at different acceptable error
          0.8                    ν=0.5 Exponential
          0.7                                         distances. At an error distance of 3.0m, the accuracy of LE-
          0.6                                         KCCA is 91.6% while those of SVM, MLE and RADAR are
          0.5

          0.4                                         87.8%, 86.1% and 78.8% respectively. Thus, by utilizing
          0.3                                         the pairwise distance similarities in physical locations, LE-
          0.2                                         KCCA obtains better performance than the other methods.
          0.1

           0
          −6   −4   −2    0   2    4    6
                        ||x −x||
             Figure 2: The Matern´ kernel.
4  Experiments
In this Section, experiments are performed to measure the ac-
curacy of LE-KCCA, and also test whether this is useful in
reducing calibration effort. For comparison, we also run: (1)
support vector machine (SVM) [Brunato and Battiti, 2004];
(2) maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) [Youssef et al.,
2003]; and (3) RADAR [Bahl and Padmanabhan, 2000].
4.1  Setup
Experiments are performed based on the ofﬁce layout in the Figure 4: Testing accuracies at different error distances.
Department of Computer Science , The Hong Kong Univer-
sity of Science and Technology (Figure 3). There are four 4.3 Reduction in Calibration Effort
hallways with a total of 99 grids, where each grid measures In the ﬁrst experiment, we use all the 99 grid locations but
1.5m × 1.5m. There are only three access points in Fig- only a random subset of the signal samples available at each
ure 3, though a total of eight access points (including some location for training. Figure 5 shows the testing accuracies at
from other ﬂoors) are detected. Each sample is thus an 8- error distances of 1.5m or 3.0m. As can be seen, by using only
dimensional signal strength vector, with the measurements 10-15 random training samples at each location, LE-KCCA
averaged in one second. 100 such samples are collected at can already outperform the other methods that use a full set.
the center of each grid, with a total of 9,900 samples obtained. In the second experiment, we select a subset of the avail-
We randomly use 65% of the 9,900 samples for training and able grid locations, and then use all the training signal sam-
the rest for testing. To reduce statistical variability, results ples at those selected locations for training. Evaluation is
here are based on averages over 10 repetitions.       performed on both the unseen signal samples at the selected
                                                      grid locations and also at the unseen locations. Again, Fig-
                                                      ure 6 shows that LE-KCCA yields better performance. Thus,
                                                      LE-KCCA, by maximizing the correlation between signal
                                                      and physical spaces, can reduce the calibration effort dra-
                                                      matically. With the physical location similarity as feedback,
                                                      samples from the same locations move closer together, while
                                                      those from different locations are pushed away under the
                                                      feature-space mapping built by LE-KCCA.
                                                        We believe that LE-KCCA performs well. To validate this
                                                      claim, we conduct another three experiments for comparison.
                                                      The ﬁrst one treats all the grid locations separately, which can
                                                      be achieved by using a large value for wM in the Matern´ ker-
                                                      nel (in this experiment, we set wM =50). This is denoted
                                                      as Isolated-KCCA in the sequel. Another extreme case is to
                                                      modify the LE-KCCA algorithm so that the signal space is
                                                      correlated with x and y separately (denoted 1D-KCCA). A
     Figure 3: Ofﬁce layout used in the experiments.  third experiment is to modify both Gaussian and Matern´ ker-
  We set wG  in (6) to 0.1, wM in (7) to 0.05, and M  nels to linear ones (Linear CCA). Experiments are performed
(the number of neighbors used in the localization phase) to in the same setting as for Figure 5. As can be seen in Figure 7,
17. Preliminary studies show that the accuracy only changes all three variants lead to degraded performance as expected.                   Figure 5: Effect on varying the number of training samples at each grid location.


                        Figure 6: Effect on varying the number of grid locations in training.


Figure 7: The effect when the information in both physical dimensions (x and y) are not used together. Isolated-KCCA
considers each grid location as independent, while 1D-KCCA considers x and y as independent. Linear CCA has even lower
accuracy and the curve is not shown in the ﬁgure.