          On Identifying and Managing Relationships in Multi-Agent Systems 

                                        Ronald Ashri and Michael Luck 
                   University of Southampton, Southampton, SO 17 IB J, United Kingdom 
                                           {ra00r,mml }@ecs.soton.ac.uk 

                                                  Mark d'lnverno 
                        University of Westminister, London, El 4NS, United Kingdom 
                                            dinverm@westminster.ac.uk 

                        Abstract                              between agents that will take place are those explicitly speci•
                                                              fied at design-time, especially when dealing with autonomous 
     Multi-agent systems result from interactions be•
                                                              entities operating in open environments where agents may 
     tween individual agents. Through these interac•
                                                              join or leave the system at any time and no assumptions are 
     tions different kinds of relationships are formed, 
                                                              made about agent behaviour. As a result, open agent systems 
     which can impact substantially on the overall sys•
                                                              must incorporate mechanisms, beyond the design of individ•
     tem performance. However, the behaviour of 
                                                              ual agents, to constrain agent actions and allow only desirable 
     agents cannot always be anticipated, especially 
                                                              interactions. We refer to these as relationship management 
     when dealing with open and complex systems. 
                                                              mechanisms. 
     Open agent systems must incorporate relationship 
                                                                 To address the problem of relationship management, we 
     management mechanisms to constrain agent ac•
                                                              must be aware of the different types of management that may 
     tions and allow only desirable interactions. In con•
                                                              be required in a multi-agent system and also be able to iden•
     sequence, in this paper we tackle two important is•
                                                              tify and characterise relationships in order to understand what 
     sues. Firstly, in addressing management, we iden•
                                                              type of management is best suited for the situation at hand. It 
     tify the range of different control mechanisms that 
                                                              is exactly these concerns that we attempt to tackle in this pa•
     are required and when they should be applied. Sec•
                                                              per. This paper advances the current understanding of how 
     ondly, in addressing relationships, we present a 
                                                              to deal with the issue of relationship management in two im•
     model for identifying and characterising relation•
                                                              portant ways. Firstly, in addressing management, we identify 
     ships in a manner that is application-neutral and 
                                                              the range of different control mechanisms that are required 
     amenable to automation. 
                                                              and when they should be applied. Secondly, in addressing 
                                                              relationships, we present a model for identifying and charac•
1   Introduction                                              terising relationships in a manner that is application-neutral 
                                                              and amenable to automation. 
Agent-based computing is often presented as a viable 
                                                                 We begin by presenting a motivating scenario that out•
paradigm for tackling problems where the main challenge is 
                                                              lines some realistic situations that require relationship man•
the need to enable dynamic interactions between heteroge•
                                                              agement mechanisms. Subsequently, we identify situations 
neous components, in which each component may have its 
                                                              in which mechanisms for managing relationships can be ap•
own thread of control [Jennings, 2000]. Agents are under•
                                                              plied and we define a space of possible management mecha•
stood as independent entities, capable of individual action and 
                                                              nisms types. We then focus on the issue of relationship iden•
working towards their design goals and, as such, represent a 
                                                              tification through an analysis of individual agent actions and 
natural, intuitive approach to these problems. Furthermore, 
                                                              perceptions. Finally, we conclude with a brief look at related 
agents are also social entities that interact by performing ac•
                                                              work and outline the way in which the contributions of this 
tions that affect their environment and other agents in the en•
                                                              paper add to such work. 
vironment. Such actions can enable coordination (in which 
agents arrange their individual activities in a coherent man•
ner), collaboration (in which agents work together to achieve 2   Motivating Scenario 
a common objective) or competition (in which agents contend   Let us consider a typical computer science research lab, 
for access to common resources), and so on. Through these     where communication and cooperation between researchers 
interactions, different kinds of relationships are formed be• is facilitated by an application developed as a multi-agent sys•
tween agents, and they can impact substantially on the overall tem. Each researcher is represented by an agent that makes 
system functioning.                                           public to the lab's network, through the researcher's per•
  The challenge for the system designer is to ensure that     sonal computer, their personal profile (interests, publications, 
only the right kinds of relationships develop so that the over- availability) as well as research material (downloaded papers, 
all system functions within acceptable parameters. It is not  presentations, software, links to online material) that they 
enough for a designer to assume that the only interactions    have stored locally. The application also supports researchers 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                   743 while working away from their desks through wireless con•
nections on laptops or more limited personal digital assis•
tants. Finally, visitors to the lab are provided with similar 
functionality, through mobile devices, so that they can more 
easily locate people within the lab. 
  For such an application to be successful we must, at the 
very least, ensure that agents make available the right kinds 
of information about the researcher they represent, so as to 
add to the overall system functioning, and that agents do not 
abuse the system, causing degradation of the abilities of oth•
ers, e.g. by making too many queries and using up bandwidth. 
Such overarching system goals can be achieved by the appro•
priate management of relationships between agents. Below 
we present some situations that call for relationship manage•            Figure 1: Space of management types 
ment. 
  1. When retrieving files from a researcher's local hard disk of long term commitments between a group of agents, such 
     limits on how much can be retrieved, and how many        as forming interest groups (Example 4) or short term com•
     agents can simultaneously retrieve at any given moment   mitments for the fulfilment of a specific goal, such as dealing 
     should be set. This would ensure that no single machine  with access through limited capability devices (Example 5). 
     suffers from too much demand.                            Finally, the needs of the application may call for agents to 
  2. A researcher may want to tailor access to locally stored adopt a specific stance due to their individual characteristics, 
     research material based on who is accessing it. For ex•  such as in Example 2 and Example 5 where we have super•
     ample, those working on common projects might access     visors and supervisees, and local and visiting researchers re•
     work in progress, while PhD students might not have ac•  spectively. 
     cess to all material of their supervisor. 
                                                                  Relationship Management Types 
  3. Each agent should follow certain conventions. A re•      3 
     searcher should not restrict access to their own material These different cases provide a guide for a more comprehen•
     while expecting to have full access to others.           sive categorisation of situations that may activate the need for 
  4. Groups of researchers in the lab could benefit from      management and the kind of management that can be applied. 
     closer relationships due to a common interest in a spe•    We identify three different criteria that may activate the 
     cific subject or project. This tighter relationship could need for management. Management of relationships can be 
     be reflected by the creation of special interest groups  required when a specific event occurs (e.g. an agent access•
     where the sharing of materials between them takes place  ing a researcher's profile), when the environment corresponds 
     at a more frequent rate and without explicit requests to to a predefined situation (e.g. the number of agents simul•
     receive them.                                            taneously accessing a profile exceeds four) or when a spe•
                                                              cific agent is performing an action (e.g. a student access•
  5. Different devices offer different capabilities. A docu•  ing a supervisor's profile). Thus we can divide the cases 
     ment may not be retrieved by a a visitor's PDA if it is  into event-based, situation-based and agent-attribute-based. 
     not capable of displaying it, but the PDA may request    These cases are not mutually exclusive but can occur at the 
     a commitment to send the document to the visitor via     same time. For example, management may be needed for an 
     e-mail.                                                  agent with specific attributes in a particular situation when a 
  The examples illustrate the different types of problems and specific event occurs. 
the different needs relating to the management of relation•     The kind of management can be defined along three dif•
ships between agents. Even though some may seem to be         ferent dimensions: firstly, the number of agents it refers to; 
amenable to traditional file management techniques (e.g. the  secondly, the rigidity of the applied regulation, which indi•
first two) the range of situations described is more complex  cates to which extent agents can choose not to follow the 
and the envisaged application of regulation is more dynamic   regulation; and finally, the duration of management, which 
and fine-grained, and is handled by the agent system and not  indicates for how long agents should follow the applied regu•
a human administrator.                                        lation. Using these dimensions we can define a management 
  The examples can be roughly divided into those that may     space, illustrated in Figure 1. By using the notion of a space, 
demand the establishment of compulsory, rigid control of re•  rather than rigid categories, we want to emphasise that the 
lationships and those where control could be more flexible or understanding of relationship management needs to better re•
even optional. The first two examples could fall in the former flect the range of situations that may occur. So, for example, 
category and the last three in the latter. Furthermore, some  management may not need to be simply rigid or optional but 
define the need for control based on the current situation (Ex• also the whole range of flexibility in between. 
ample 1), while others view it based on who is interacting      With knowledge of when management may be applied and 
with whom (Example 2) or past history of interactions (Ex•    what form it can take we can more clearly characterise and 
amples 3 and 4). Agents can benefit from the establishment    compare different management methods. For example, re-


744                                                                                            MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS  turning to our scenario, we could control the level of access of the agent's respective actions and perceptions of the envi•
 to material (Example 1) via a regulation that agents could    ronment. 
 choose to obey, which is activated when the agent performs      We begin by defining the state of an agent as those aspects 
 the action of accessing the information (i.e. it is event based) of the environment it can perceive, along with its actual situ•
 and applies only to that agent accessing information (i.e. it ation in the environment. 
 refers to only one agent). Alternatively, the same problem 
 could be tackled through a long-term regulation that applies         AgentState 
 to all agents and cannot be questioned. Each method has its          Agent 
 own pros and cons and can be characterised through the con•          possiblepercepts : P Attribute 
 cepts we provide.                                                    situation : P Attribute 

 4   Identifying Relationships                                   The state of the entire multi-agent system would then be 
 However, before one can manage relationships one must be      given by the environment and the states of each individual 
 able to identify and characterise them. We begin by briefly   agent in that environment. 
 outlining some foundational concepts that we will use to for•
                                                                      MAState. 
 malise the model later on. To do so, we adopt the Z specifi•
                                                                      environment: PAttribute 
 cation language [Spivey, 1992]. Based on the SMART frame-
                                                                      agents : P AgentState 
 work [d'Inverno and Luck, 2001], we start by defining two 
 primitives, attribute and action. Formally, these primitives           a : agents a.attributes   environment 
 are specified as given sets which means that we say nothing 
                                                                               a.situation   environment 
 about how they might be represented for any particular sys•
                                                                           agents  a .possiblepercepts 
 tem. In addition, two secondary concepts, goal and environ•            a 
 ment, are specified in terms of attributes. Attributes arc sim•               environment 
 ply features of the world, and are the only characteristics that 
 are manifest. Actions can change environments by adding or      Now, if we consider that an agent usually takes into ac•
 removing attributes.                                          count some measure of the current state of the environment 
                                                               and performs actions based on those measures which, in turn, 
      [Attribute .Action]                                      may change the environment, we have an indication of which 
                                                               aspects of an agent we should investigate to understand un•
   Goals, in this context, are desirable environmental states  der which conditions two agents may be related. We must 
 described by non-empty sets of attributes. An environment     examine the overlaps between the aspects of the environment 
 is a set of attributes that describes all the features within that that one agent can view, through its sensing capabilities, and 
 environment.                                                  those aspects it can affect, through its actuator capabilities, in 
                                                               relation to other agents. We call the former the viewable en•
     Environment == Attribute                                  vironment and the latter the region of influence. The Viewable 
     Goal === Attribute                                        Environment schema formalises the former notion. 
   Using these primitive concepts we can describe an agent as 
                                                                       ViewableEnvironment 
 shown in the following schema. An agent is described by a 
                                                                      MAState 
 set of attributes, can perform certain actions and has a number 
 of goals to achieve.                                                 viewable : AgentState   p Attribute 
                                                                      dom viewable = agents 
        Agent 
                                                                                                 environment 
        attributes  Attribute                                          a : agents • viewable a 
        actions   Action 
                                                                 An analogous schema describes the region of influence. 
        goals    Goal 
                                                                      Region Oflnfluence 
   The model for relationship identification builds on just           MAState 
 these concepts and can deal with a wide variety of situations.       regioninfluence : AgentState  P Attribute 
4.1   Influence Types                                                 dom regioninfluence — agents 
As discussed above, relationships can take a number of forms           a : agents • regioninfluence a  environment 
ranging from cooperation towards a common goal to com•
petition for possession of, or access to, a common resource.     In Figure 2, we illustrate these concepts. The regions of the 
When such relationships occur they may affect the actions      environment that agents view and take into account are repre•
agents perform or were intending to perform. In such situ•     sented as ellipses while the regions they are able to affect, 
ations, the ability of one agent to achieve its goals becomes  i.e. the regions of influence, are represented as pentagons. 
dependent on another agent's actions. It is these dependencies Given this information we can infer that Agent A and Agent 
between agents that we are categorising through an analysis    B could be related, with A able to directly affect the viewable 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                   745                                                                fall under that agent's viewable environment that agent would 
                                                               not be able to view the results of its actions, a situation that 
                                                               is not improbable. Even humans often do not fully realise the 
                                                               ramifications of their actions. The more usual case is when 
                                                               only part the region of influence of an agent falls under the 
                                                               viewable environment. In other words, the agent may not be 
                                                               fully aware of all the implications of its actions. 
                                                                 Now, through the concepts discussed so far we can outline 
                                                               four different ways in which one agent can influence another. 
                                                                 Weak influence A weak influence relationship occurs 
                                                               when an agent is able to affect aspects of the environment 
                                                               that another agent uses to decide what actions to perform (i.e. 
 Figure 2: Region of influence affects viewable environment    aspects of the environment the agent can perceive). Although 
                                                               an influence relationship can lead to a different outcome for 
                                                               the influenced agent's goal it cannot directly affect actions of 
                                                               that agent. 
                                                                 Agent B is weakly influenced by Agent A if and only if (i) 
                                                               the intersection of A's region of influence and B's viewable 
                                                               environment is non-empty, and (ii) the intersection of A's re•
                                                               gion of influence and B's region of influence is empty. 

                                                                       Weaklnfluence 
                                                                      Regio nOflnfluenee 
                                                                      Viewable Environment 
                                                                      weakinfluenced : AgentState AgentState 

           Figure 3: Regions of influence overlap                       a,b : AgentState  
                                                                        {b,a) weakinfluenced 
                                                                          regioninfluence region influence a = {} 
environment ot b since it partly tails under A s region or in•            viewable b regioninfluence a {} 
fluence. In other words, B can be influenced by the actions of 
A. Agent A, on the other hand, can in no way be influenced 
                                                                 Strong influence A strong influence relationship occurs 
by 13. Crucially, A cannot directly affect the results of an ac•
                                                               when an agent is able to affect both the viewable environment 
tion of B because it has no influence in the region of influence 
                                                               of another agent as well as its region of influence. In this case 
of B. Returning to our scenario, such a situation could occur 
                                                               an agent can directly affect the goals of another agent because 
if the overlap between the viewable environments represented 
                                                               it can act on exactly those aspects of the environment that may 
the documents stored in A's desktop computer. Agent B, with 
                                                               represent desirable environmental states for the other agent. 
the task of reporting to other agents on all documents of a 
                                                                 Agent B is strongly influenced by Agent A if and only if (i) 
specific type (e.g. papers on multi-agent systems), could pe•
                                                               the intersection of A's region of influence and B's viewable 
riodically view the documents stored by A (i.e. sample the en•
vironment) waiting for a relevant document to appear before    environment is non-empty, and (ii) the intersection of A's re•
informing other agents about its existence. So, whenever A     gion of influence and B's region of influence is non-empty. 
performs an action that adds a relevant document to its public 
                                                                      Stronglnfluence 
document store, it will eventually influence B's actions, since 
                                                                      Regio nOflnfluenee 
B must now inform interested parties about this addition. 
   In Figure 3, the situation is one where the regions of influ•      ViewableEnvironment 
ence overlap. This means that both agents can have a direct           stronginfluenced : AgentState - AgentState 
impact on the actions of each other. Thus, an action from ei•           a,b : AgentState  
ther agent could affect the environment in such a way that a 
                                                                        (b,, a) stronginfluenced -
goal of the other agent is upset. Returning to our scenario, 
                                                                         regioninfluence b regioninfluence a {} 
this could happen if the two agents were both attempting to 
retrieve a document from a public document store that sets a             viewable b regioninfluence a {} 
limit to the number of documents retrieved. 
  At this point, we should clarify that although in our dia•     Sneaky influence A sneaky influence relationship occurs 
grams the regions of influence have always fallen under the    when an agent is able to affect the region of influence of an•
viewable environment of the respective agents this is only for other agent but not the viewable environment. This, of course, 
illustrative reasons. In fact, there is no requirement for the implies that the influenced agent cannot view the results of its 
viewable environment and the region of influence of an agent   actions, so cannot be aware that some other agent is affecting 
to overlap at all. If the region of influence of an agent does not those results. 


746                                                                                             MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS    Agent B is sneakily influenced by Agent A if and only if (i) Weak influence relationships 
the intersection of A's region of influence and B's viewable   When only weak influence relationships occur, the influenc•
environment is empty, and (ii) the intersection of A's region  ing agent cannot directly impact goals. Nevertheless, it can 
of influence and B's region of influence is non-empty.         still have a significant effect on the way the influenced agent 
        Sneakylnftuence                                       achieves a goal, or whether the goal can be achieved at all. In 
                                                               essence, an agent could either be influenced so as to change 
        Region Oflnfluence 
                                                               its actions in order to achieve a goal or to change the goal 
        ViewableEnvironment 
                                                              completely. Below, we outline the different scenarios. 
        sneakyinjiuenced : AgentState AgentState                 Goal does not change In the first type of case, the goal 
         a, b : AgentState \ a b •                            of the agent does not change as a result of the influencing 
         (b,a)   sneakyinjiuenced                             agent. However, the actions performed to achieve the goal 
                                                              might change, as might the exact results of the actions, be•
           regioninfluence b  regioninfluence a 
                                                              cause of the goal. 
           viewable b   regioninfluence a = {) 
                                                              No effect The influencing agent has no impact on the out•
   No influence Finally, when an agent cannot affect the           come of the goal because the attributes of the environ•
viewable environment or the region of influence of another         ment that are affected by the influencing agent arc not 
agent, no direct relationship can develop between them.            taken into account lor the execution of an action by the 
   Agent B is not influenced by Agent A if and only if (i)         influenced agent. 
the intersection of A's region of influence and B's viewable 
environment is empty, and (ii) the intersection of A's region Outcome of action changes Here the influencing agent af•
of influence and B's region of influence is empty.                 fects the environment in such a way that the outcome of 
                                                                   the action performed by the influenced agent changes. 
        NoJnfluence                                                However, the goal of the influenced agent does not 
       RegionOflnfluence                                           change. For example, consider an agent with the goal of 
        ViewableEnvironment                                        compiling a list of all researchers with an interest in the 
       notinfiuenced : AgentState AgentStaU                        subject of argumentation. The goal is satisfied as long as 
                                                                   such a list exists. The agent compiles the list by asking 
         a, b : AgentState                                         other agents to declare their interest or not in the subject. 
         (b,a)   notinfiuenced                                     The queried agents influence the outcome of the action 
           regioninfluence b  regioninfluence a =                  by providing an answer. In any case, the goal is even•
           viewable b   regioninfluence a = {}                     tually achieved. However, the exact values described in 
                                                                   the list have been influenced by others. 
   These four types of influence can now act as a guide to 
                                                              Action changes Agents may influence another agent to such 
characterise a range of specific kinds of relationships. For 
                                                                   an extent that the agent needs to change its planned ac•
example, a competitive relationship for access to common re•
                                                                   tions in order to achieve the goal. For example, if some 
sources can only take place if both agents can strongly in•
                                                                   agents refuse to declare whether they are interested in 
fluence each other, i.e. their regions of influence and view•
                                                                   argumentation, the agent may need to follow an alterna•
able environments overlap. A supervisor-student relationship 
                                                                   tive route, such as looking at their list of publications for 
is one where the supervisor can strongly influence the stu•
                                                                   evidence of an interest in the subject. 
dent (e.g. by providing direct guidance on what research the 
student should do) and the student can weakly influence the      Goal changes The second type of scenario is when the in•
supervisor (e.g. by coming up with new results that may con•  fluencing agent may change the environment in such a way 
vince the supervisor to change research direction).           that the influenced agent has to change its goal entirely. For 
                                                              example, let us assume that Agent A has two goals. The first 
4.2 Effect of influence on actions and goals                  goal, of primary importance, is to discover any paper on ne•
In order to have a clearer understanding on exactly how one   gotiation, and the second goal, of secondary importance, is 
agent could affect the goals or actions of another we provide to discover papers relating to middleware. If A was pursuing 
an analysis of the different cases. This is based on two as•  the secondary goal and discovers that new papers relating to 
sumptions: firstly, that agents perform actions because they  the primary goal have been posted by B, A must then change 
want to achieve goals; and secondly, that goals agents are try• goals to reflect the change in the environment. As such, B 
ing to achieve fall under their region of influence. As such, has sufficiently influenced A, through actions that impacted 
it makes sense to define the relationships that evolve through on just the agent's viewable environment, so that A changed 
the interactions between agents in terms of the contribution  its goal. 
that such interactions have towards the achievement of their 
goals. However, if an agent's goal cannot be achieved within  Strong and sneaky influence 
that agent's region of influence the agent must seek assistance Strong and sneaky influence relationships can impact on a 
from another agent that has access to the region of the envi• goal in a more immediate way since agents could change ex•
ronment within which the goal can be achieved. In this paper  actly those attributes that represent a goal state for another 
we do not look at those situations.                           agent. We identify three main cases below. 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                  747 