                 Minimally intrusive negotiating agents for resource sharing* 

               Fariba Sadri Francesca Toni                                    Paolo Torroni 
                    Department of Computing                                        DEIS 
                         Imperial College                                University of Bologna 
                         180, Queens Gate                                 V.le Risorgimento, 2 
                        SW7 London, UK                                    40136 Bologna, Italy 
                     {f s, ft}@doc.ic.ac.uk                           ptorroni@deis.unibo.it 

                        Abstract                              sets of activities. Drawing inspiration from [El Sakkout and 
                                                              Wallace, 2000], we model an activity a (a is a unique identi•
     We study the problem of agents negotiating pe•           fier) as a tuple denoting that a re•
     riods of time during which they can have use of 
                                                              quires resource Ra, has duration Da, earliest start time Tsa 
     resources, thus allowing for the sharing of re•          latest end time Note that, without loss of generality, 
     sources. We define a multi-stage negotiation frame•
                                                              we assume that each activity requires only one resource 2. In 
     work where agents, in order to obtain resources,         the extended framework, the knowledge of agents includes a 
     step through a sequence of stages, each charac•          (possibly empty) concrete schedule for activities, where if 
     terised by an increased chance of a mutually agree•
                                                                               then a, R, D, 'T 'sa, Tea J, such that 
     able deal but at the price of disclosing more and                               , and  
     more information. In the sequence, the agents may 
     agree to move to the next stage if the previous stage       We develop negotiation protocols and policies that allow 
     fails to produce a deal amongst them. In this pa•        agents to exchange resources and strike deals for agreed time 
     per, we concentrate on two early negotiation stages,     windows. We introduce a multi-stage process of negotiation, 
     characterised by minimal disclosure of informa•          each characterised by a protocol and a policy. A higher stage 
     tion. Thus, the agents negotiating at these stages       involves more information passing between agents and more 
     can be thought of as "minimally intrusive".              sophisticated negotiation, possibly including re-planning by 
                                                              the agents aimed at trying to help satisfy each other's con•
                                                              straints and requirements. The following example illustrates 
1   Introduction                                              the sort of problems and solutions we propose in this paper. 
                                                              Example 1 Let x and y be two agents, x's intentions contain 
Negotiation of resources is an important research area in     an activity a requiring a resource 
multi-agent systems. In general, agents may negotiate to ob•  y's intentions contain an activity b also requiring r. x owns 
tain resources that they are missing but that are necessary to r from time 1 to 3 and from time 5 onwards, and y owns r 
carry out their plans. In this paper, we assume that negotiation from time 3 to 5. x needs r for three consecutive time slots 
for resources takes place within the framework of [Sadri et   between 1 and 5, but it currently owns r for only two time 
al, 2002], where the knowledge of the agents is represented   slots. Let us consider the three scenarios below. 
as a tuple < B, R, X, D, G > with B: beliefs about the world,   1. The problem is solved by y 
the self and the other agents, as well as the negotiation poli•    agreeing to give r to x for [3,4]. 
cies of the agent; R: initially owned resources; X: intentions, 
                                                                2. and y has a concrete schedule 
i.e., the plans1 that the agent intends to carry out, in order to 
achieve its goals, together with the resources required for that                    for b to be carried out between 3 and 
plan; V: store of past dialogues; and Q: agent goals.              4. The problem is solved by y agreeing to postpone its 
  We extend [Sadri et al., 2002] to negotiate not just re•         schedule by 1 time slot and giving r to x for [3,4]. 
sources, but also time windows during which resources           3. cannot give r away, because 
can be used by agents, thus allowing for sharing of (non-          otherwise b becomes unfeasible. The problem can be 
consumable) resources over time, The extended framework            solved by an exchange: y agrees to give r away to x for 
allows solutions for a wider range of resource re-allocation       [3,4], in return for x giving r to y for [5,6]. _ 
problems. In the extended framework, agent intentions are     2   Background and Preliminaries 
   This work is partially funded by the 1ST programme of the Eu• In this section we review and adapt some concepts from back•
ropean Commission under the IST-2001-32530 SOCS project.      ground papers, needed in the rest of the paper. 
   'It is beyond the scope of this paper to provide a general and 
exhaustive representation of the agent knowledge. Instead, we con• Indeed, it is possible to model any activity requiring multiple 
centrate on those elements relevant to the resource sharing problem. resources by a number of activities, one for each resource, with the 
In particular, for simplicity, we identify here intentions with plans. same duration and times. 


796                                                                                             MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS Definition 1 An agent system is a finite set <S, with at least 
two elements, where each is a ground term, represent•
ing the name of an agent. All elements of S are distinct (agent 
names must be uniquely identifiable). Each agent _ is 
equipped at each time with a knowledge base  
namely a tuple , as explained 
in the introduction. 
   Note that, in this paper, we assume that the only parts of 
the knowledge base of an agent that change over time are the                  Figure 1: Protocol for Stage 1 
dialogue store, which grows in time, and the concrete sched•   the interval J if Y will give R to X for the interval 
ule. We will also assume that, in , all activities that require [T.s, Te]. (5) is used to refuse a proposed deal and ask for a 
the same resource have disjoint time windows. In the sequel,   new one (there is no refuse .promise move which only termi•
when clear from the context, we will sometimes refer to the    nates a protocol), (6) is used to accept a deal. 
knowledge base of an agent x simply as                           Given a language for negotiation , we define the set of 
Definition 2 Let S be an agent system. Let Ties be a set       final moves, .In particular, is the subset of 
of resources.3 Let be the resource                                     that contains all the moves whose content is (2), (3) 
allocation in the system at time (this can be determined,      or (6). 
for example, from and of all agents at time . The                Dialogues can be generated by means of policies, held by 
allocation of resources is defined for time periods [TS,TC],   the knowledge base of the agents. 
                      where is the maximum schedul•            Definition 4 Policies are expressed as dialogue constraints of 
ing time, defined as follows:                                  the form , where and are moves. The 
                                                               conditions C are to be evaluated in the knowledge base of the 
                                                               agent or in extensions to it. The intended use of these policies 
   The negotiation process we will define modifies the re•
                                                               is that if the agent receives a move p , and the conditions C 
source distribution in the agent system through time. The                                          t
                                                               are satisfied in its knowledge base, the agent generates 
Temporal Resource Reallocation Problem (T-RRP) is the 
                                                               An operational model for policies is defined in [Sadri et al., 
problem of answering to the following question: Does there 
                                                               2002J. 
exist a time r during the negotiation process when the re•
                                                               Definition 5 Given an agent system S equipped with a lan•
source distribution is such that each agent has the resources it 
                                                               guage for negotiation and two agents X and Y in S 
requires for time periods that would allow it to perform the ac•
                                                               equipped with policy Pol, a dialogue induced by Pol be-
tivities in its intention, within their specified time windows? 
   The purpose of this work is to show how it is possible to 
find a solution to the T-RRP (when one exists) by using agents 
that negotiate by means of dialogues. We will assume that all 
agents in a system share the same communication language, 
in terms of syntax, semantics, ontology, and pragmatics. We 
refer to [Sadri et al, 20021 for a formal definition of a lan•
guage for negotiation. In brief, a language defines the set of 
allowed dialogue moves. Each dialogue move is coded into a 
tell predicate, which has 5 arguments: sender, receiver, con•
tent, dialogue identifier, and time of the move. We will use 
the communication language defined below: 
Definition 3  


                                                                 Note that this definition prevents agents from being in•
                                                               volved in more than one dialogue at a time (e.g., dialogues 
where Ts, Te are positive integers between 0 and Tmax, for     cannot be nested). 
all dialogue moves, and for (4)-(6),                             An important property of policies used to induce dialogues 
  The first three moves are of intuitive meaning. (4) is used  as in Definition 5 is conformance to protocols, known to all 
by X to propose a deal (promise): X will give R to Y for       agents involved in the dialogue. A dialogue protocol can be 
                                                               defined as a set of states, representing the current state of dia•
   3Without loss of generality, we assume that all resources in the 
system arc non-consumable (for resource reallocation, consumable logue, a set of allowed dialogue moves, and a set of transition 
resources differ from non-consumable ones in that the former can rules that, given a state and a move, produce a state. A pro•
be allocated only for maximal intervals and not for any        tocol is therefore defined as a finite state machine, consisting 
sub-intervals, where is given below in the definition).        of states and arcs, which has among its states an initial state 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                    797 So, two final states, (successful termination) and            initiated (an agent cycle very similar to the one in [Sadri et 
(unsuccessful termination), and possibly a number of inter•   al.t 2002] will achieve this atomicity). 
mediate states St. The arcs can be viewed as allowed transi•
tions mapping one state to another given a label. These labels 3  Negotiation Stages 
correspond to the content of moves. An example of protocol 
                                                              We define two different stages of negotiation, each character•
is in Fig. 1. When we show the protocols, we use some ab•
                                                              ized by the degree of flexibility of the agents and the amount 
breviations, such as for instance: 
                                                              of information disclosed and used by them: 
      request for request(give I, 
                                                                   Stage 1: Request/flexible schedule 
      refuse req for refuse(request(give 
                                                                   Stage 2: Blind deal 
   In order to define the concept of conformance, we define 
                                                                In this section, for each stage we define the protocol, the 
dialogues in relation with protocols. 
                                                              policies adopted by the agents, and the properties of the stage. 
Definition 6 Given an agent system S equipped with a lan•
                                                              The properties that we study are (i) conformance of the policy 
guage for negotiation and a protocol . , a dialogue con•
                                                              to the protocol, (ii) properties of single dialogues (termina•
forming to , between two agents X and Y in 5, is a set of 
                                                              tion and characterization of the class of problems that can be 
ground dialogue moves in , , such that, for 
                                                              solved), (Hi) properties of sequences of dialogues happening 
a given set of time lapses 
                                                              at that stage, and (iv) subsumption of earlier stages (in terms 
  1. 2. 4. 5. as for Definition 5; 
                                                              of solvable problems). In particular, for each stage we give 
  3. the content of must label an arc from if the 
                                                              an example of a problem that can be solved within it, and an 
     content of is the label of an arc into a final state, then 
                                                              example of a problem that cannot. 
     there is no in the dialogue.the contents of pi 
                                                                In defining the policies and in stating the results, we rely 
     and , if they both exist, must be labels, respectively, 
                                                              upon some predicates, whose formal definition is given in ap•
     of an arc going into a state, and an arc coming out of the 
                                                              pendix. We use the notation to indicate that at 
     same state. 
                                                              time the knowledge of X entails a certain predicate p. The 
  A dialogue , is terminated if is 
                                                              proofs of the results are omitted for lack of space 
the label of an arc into a final state. 
  We are now ready to define the concept of conformance of    3.1   Stage 1 - request/flexible schedule 
policies to protocols. 
                                                              Protocol. The protocol is given in Figure 1. 
Definition 7 Given a policy Pol and a protocol , Pol con•
                                                              Policy. The policy is shown in Figure 2: an agent will accept 
forms to if every dialogue induced by Pol is a dialogue 
                                                              a request for R if it can find a concrete schedule of its own 
conforming to  
                                                              activities that does not make use of R during the requested 
  We define sequences of dialogues for a resource R and an 
                                                              interval. It will refuse it otherwise, leading to an unsuccessful 
activity A, between two agents X and Y. 
                                                              final state. Note that it is up to the requesting agent to find 
Definition 8 Given an agent system S, a sequence of dia•
                                                              good heuristics to formulate a request or a series of requests 
logues o between two agents X and Y in S for a resource R 
                                                              which can be accepted. 
and an activity A is a set of terminated dialogues between X 
and Y, , where  
for all , such that, for a given set of time lapses  

                                                              There is no solution if y sticks to : but if y was happy with 
                                                              a different schedule, e.g. , then x and 
                                                              y could both do their activities by sharing resource r. Thus, 
                                                              this example can be solved by the following negotiation 
                                                              dialogue d(l) occurring at Stage 1 (i.e., induced by the policy 
                                                              of Fig. 2): 

                                                              Properties. Stage I is computationally demanding for the 
                                                              agent who is replying to a request. The problems that can be 
                                                              solved at this stage are all those that can be solved by means 
                                                              of a (possibly empty) modification in the agents' current 
                                                              concrete schedule. 
                                                              (i): protocol conformance. It is possible to prove that the 
  We assume the atomicity of sequences of dialogues: agents   policy of Stage 1 is conforming to the protocol in Fig. 1. 
will not react to any incoming request about a resource r if  (ii): properties of single dialogues. A request/flexible sched•
they are participating in an ongoing sequence of dialogues    ule interaction enjoys the property of termination. In fact, di•
regarding r, and moreover they themselves will not make a     alogues following this protocol have a fixed number of steps. 
request for r with respect to another activity while they are Theorem 1 Let us consider a system composed of two 
participating in an ongoing sequence of dialogues which they  agents, x and y. Then, for all system resources r, all activities 


798                                                                                            MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                           Figure 2: Stage J policy for an agent y 
a assigned to x, all times r, and all intervals [Ts, Te] s.t. 

there exists a dialogue d induced by the policy of Stage 1, 
starting at time r, and ending at time , such that 

                                    Intuitively this theorem 

states that if there exists a time window tw such that an agent 
x needs r in it and another agent has r available in , then 
there also exists a dialogue induced by the policy of Stage                  Figure 3: Protocol for Stage 2 
 1 which solves x's reallocation problem about r. This intu•  3.2   Stage 2 - blind deal 
itive understanding of the theorem is the result of the formal Protocol. The protocol is shown in Fig. 3. After the initial 
predicate definitions given in appendix.                      move by y, request{give which makes the di•
{iii): properties of sequences. It is up to the agent who is 
                                                              alogue reach state Sl the other agent x can either accept or 
missing a resource to find good heuristics to formulate the   refuse, as in Stage 1, or can propose a deal (promise). Af•
requests, which can lead to a successful dialogue sequence    ter a promise, the agent y who made the request can either 
(provided it is possible to find a solution at this stage). Given accept the deal, causing a successful termination, or refuse it 
an agent x, a resource r, and an activity a, one possibility  (change prorn), which brings back to S1. 
could be a cycle starting at a time r where x successively asks Policy. The policy is shown in Fig. 4.4 An agent will accept a 
for intervals [Ts, Te] such that miss{r, {Ts, Te), a),        request about a resource R for the period [Ts, Te] if it would 
until all such intervals are exhausted, or the request for one of do it at Stage 1, but it will refuse it only if it does not have any 
the intervals is accepted. We call this Strategy!.            deal to propose (promise). In particular, an agent x will pro•
Theorem 2 Let us consider a system composed of two            pose a deal, in reply to a request made by an agent y, if there 
agents, x and y, negotiating at Stage 1. Then, for all resources exists an interval [IV, Te'], disjoint from [Ts, Te], which has 
r in the system, and all activities a assigned to x that require the following property: Once y obtains R for [T.s',Tc'], it 
r, if x follows Strategy 1 in its attempt to acquire r from y, will not need it anymore for [Ts, Te]. In that case, if y ac•
starting at T with a request for r for an interval [Ts, Te] such cepts to give R away for the interval [Ts', Te'], the negotia•
that miss(r, {Ts, Te), a), then either the resulting se•      tion process reaches a successful final state, otherwise x may 
quence of dialogues will be finite and will terminate at a time continue proposing different deals (if they exist), until y ac•
  , and feas{a, for some or cepts one (successful termination), or there exist no new ones 
  TV, Te; such that                                           to propose, in which case x will refuse the initial request, thus 
                                                              leading to an unsuccessful final state. 
{iv): subsumption of earlier stages. Stage 1 subsumes our        Since there might be several alternative proposals for a deal 
previous work done in [Sadri et al, 2002], in the sense that  at a given time, but we want the agent's policies to be deter•
the resource reallocation problems it solves include those    ministic, we use in the definition of the policies of an agent 
solved by [Sadri et a/., 2002].                               x at Stage 2 a predicatepick((Ts,Te),T), that at any given 
   We now give a counterexample for Stage 1.                  time T uniquely determines a time period, having made ref•
Example 3 Let us consider the following modification of       erence possibly to  
Example 2, where there is a different initial resource assign•   Example 3 can be solved by the following negotiation dia•
ment, and different time windows for the activity b (b must be logue d(2) occurring at Stage 2: 
completed by 15): 

                                                              Properties. At Stage 2 agents are more cooperative than at 
We do not give any concrete schedules for the agents' activi- Stage 1. This is achieved by both agents - and in particu-
ties since they play no role here. There is no solution to this 
problem that can be found at Stage 1. In fact, if y gives away   4We use the notation where is a set of atoms, 
r, it will not be possible for it to carry out a any more.    to mean that , enlarged with , entails p. 


MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS                                                                                                  799                                           Figure 4: Stage 2 policy for an agent y 
lar the agent to whom the request is addressed - to do more 
reasoning in order to be helpful in response to requests. 
(?): protocol conformance. It is possible to prove that the 
policy of Stage 2 is conforming to the protocol in Fig. 3. 
(ii'): properties of single dialogues. Stage 2 docs not enjoy 
the fixed dialogue length property of Stage 1, but it termi•  (iv): subsumption of earlier stages. More problems can be 
nates if we have a finite scheduling horizon Tmax and we do   solved by Stage 2 than by Stage 1, namely: 
not allow the same move twice at different times, in the same Theorem 5 Let us consider a system composed of two 
dialogue (which is a reasonable requirement). Stage 2 is com• agents, x and y. For all resources r in the system, all ac•
putationally more demanding than Stage 1 for both agents.     tivities a assigned to x, all times r and intervals [T.s, Te] s.t. 
Theorem 3 Let us consider a system composed of two 
agents, x and y, each having an initial resource assignment. 
Then, for all resources r in the system, all activities a and b, there exists a dialogue d induced by the policy of Stage 2, 
all times r and all intervals [Ts, Tc], such that             starting at time r, and ending at time , such that 

                                                                Although this enlarges the set of problems that can be 
                                                              solved, it does not solve, for instance, the problems where 
for some [Ts'' Te"], there exists a dialogue d induced by the more than one exchange is needed. We now give the follow•
policy of Stage 2, starting at time r, and ending at a time T', ing counterexample for Stage 2. 
such that                                                     Example 4 Let us consider the following modification of 
                                                              Example 2, where there is a different resource and activity 
                                                              assignment: 
(iii): properties of sequences. 
Theorem 4 Let us consider a system composed of two 
agents, x and y, negotiating at Stage 2. Then, for all re•
sources r in the system, and all activities a assigned to x   There is no solution to this problem that can be found at Stage 
which require r, if starting at time r x follows Strategy!    2. In fact, the (minimal) requests that will make to obtain 
to request r from y, either the sequence of dialogues will      for 5 consecutive time periods are: [13,15] and [15,17]. y 
terminate at r' after a finite number of dialogues, and       may reply to the first one with a deal to obtain for [10,12] 


800                                                                                            MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS 