                                         Ordering Default Theories 

                                                    Chiaki Sakama 
                             Department of Computer and Communication Sciences 
                                                Wakayama University 
                                      Sakaedani, Wakayama 640 8510, Japan 
                                           sakama @ sys. wakayama-u. ac. jp 


                        Abstract                               conclusion flies is still derived from the inconsistent theory 

                                                               T\ U { -iflies }, while it is withdrawn from T3 U { -iflics }. 
     In first-order logic, a theory T1 is considered 
                                                               Thus, two theories T] and T3 have the same extension, but 
     stronger than another theory T2 if every formula 
                                                               conclusions derived from T\ are stronger than those of T3. 
     derived from T   is also derived from T   . Such 
                    2                         1                  To compare and order default theories, it is necessary to 
     an order relation is useful to know relative value 
                                                               distinguish different sorts of information derived from a the•
     between different theories. In the context of de•
                                                               ory. Such consideration is meaningful and important with the 
     fault logic, a theory contains default information 
                                                               following reasons. 
     as well as definite information. To order default 
     theories, it is necessary to assess the information         • Studies in nonmonotonic logics have been centered on 
     content of a default theory. To this end, we intro•            answering the question: "What information is concluded 
     duce a multi-valued interpretation of default the•             from a theory (with common-sense)?" On the other 
     ories based on a nine-valued bilattice. It distin•             hand, few studies answer the question: "What sort of 
     guishes definite and credulous/skeptical default in•           information is concluded from a theory?" Since default 
     formation derived from a theory, and is used for               theories contain definite and default information, distin•
     ordering default theories based on their informa•              guishing different sorts of information is meaningful to 
     tion contents. The technique is also applied to or•            assess the information content of a theory. Default the•
     der nonmonotonic logic programs. The results of                ories contain incomplete information, so that the assess•
     this paper provide a method for comparing differ•              ment provides a theoretical ground to measure the de•
     ent default theories and have important application            gree of "incompleteness" of a theory. These arguments 
     to learning nonmonotonic theories.                             are also effective in the field of nonmonotonic logic pro•
                                                                    gramming [Baral and Gelfond, 1994]. 
1 Introduction                                                   • It is important to know relative value between theories. 
                                                                    A theory is considered more valuable than another the•
In knowledge representation based on logic, the relative value 
                                                                    ory if the former contains more information than the lat•
of a given theory is formally assessed by comparing the 
                                                                    ter. Comparison of theories is especially important when 
amount of information between theories. In first-order logic, 
                                                                    there exist multiple sources of information as in multi-
a theory T  is considered stronger than another theory T  if 
           1                                            2           agent systems. In first-order logic, theories are ordered 
every formula derived from T   is also derived from T\ but 
                             2                                      by logical entailment. In default logic, however, exten•
not vice-versa For instance, the 
                                                                    sions of theories are not necessarily helpful forjudging 
theory                                                              relative strength between theories (as presented above). 
                                                                    To order default theories, it is necessary to provide a bet•
is stronger than the theory                                         ter ability of comparing default theories beyond their ex•
                                                                    tensions. It should distinguish different sorts of informa•
                                                                    tion in a default theory, and order theories according to 
   In the context of default logic [Reiter, 1980J, however, the     their information contents. 
problem is not so simple. For instance, consider the default     • In first-order logic, a theory is called more general than 
theory:                                                             another theory if the former is stronger than the latter. 
                                                                    Generality relations over first-order clauses have been 
                                                                    extensively studied in the fields of machine learning and 

In this case, both T\ and T3 imply flies, but the fact flics        inductive logic programming [Nienhuys-Cheng and de 
from T\ is a conclusion from definite information, while            Wolf, 1997]. In these fields, generalization is used as 

the same fact from T3 is a conclusion from default infor•           a basic operation for inductive learning, but it is un•
mation. Introducing another fact flies to each theory, the          known how to extend the notion to nonmonotonic the-


NONMONOTONIC REASONING                                                                                                839       ones. To construct induction systems that learn non•
      monotonic theories, it is necessary to extend the gen•
      eralization operation and to build a theory for ordering 
      nonmonotonic theories. Ordering default theories thus 
      has potential application to the theory of induction in 
      nonmonotonic logics and nonmonotonic inductive logic 
      programming. 
    With these background and motivation, this paper studies a 
 method for ordering default theories. To this end, we first pro•
 vide a multi-valued interpretation for default theories based 
 on a nine-valued bilattice. It can distinguish different sorts 
 of information derived from default theories. We then intro•
 duce ordering over default theories, which orders different 
 default theories based on the multi-valued interpretations of 
 formulas. The techniques are also applied to order nonmono•
 tonic logic programs under the answer set semantics. The 
 rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews 
 the framework of default logic. Section 3 develops a theory                 Figure 1: A lattice for logic IX 
 of ordering default theories. Section 4 applies the technique 
 to nonmonotonic logic programming. Section 5 discusses re•
 lated issues and Section 6 summarizes the paper.              3 Ordering Default Theories 
                                                               In classical logic, a formula F is interpreted true/false if 
 2 Default Logic                                                      is a logical consequence of a theory; otherwise it is 
 A default theory is defined as a pair = (D, W) where D        undefined. In default logic, on the other hand, a formula is 
 is a set of default rules and W is a set of first-order formulas either a definite consequence by W or a default consequence 
 (called facts). A default rule (or simply default) is of the form: by D. Moreover, default consequences are brought by two 
                                                               different modes of inferences - skeptical or credulous reason•
                                                               ing. To characterize these different types of inferences, we 
                                                               first introduce a multi-valued logic for default reasoning. 
 where and are first-order formulas and re•
 spectively called the prerequisite, the justifications and the Definition 3.1 The logic IX has the nine truth values 
 consequent. In this paper, any default is assumed to have at  t,f, , dts,dfs,dtc,dfc, , which respectively mean 
 least one justification . A default theory is called          true, false, contradictory, undefined, skeptically true by de•
 super-normal if every default is of the form As defaults      fault, skeptically false by default, credulously true by default, 
 and facts are syntactically distinguishable, we often write a credulously false by default, and contradictory by default. 
 default theory as a set as far as no confusion 
 arises. Any variable appearing in D and W is free and any        The truth values of IX constitute a bilattice under the 
 default/fact with variables represents the set of its ground in•
 stances over the Herbrand universe of Throughout this 
 paper we assume a default theory which is already ground-
 instantiated, i.e., for any default theory (D, W), D and W 
 contain no variable. Also, a formula means a propositional 
 formula unless stated otherwise. 
   A set E of formulas is an extension of (D,W) if it co•

 incides with the smallest deductively closed set E1 of for•
 mulas satisfying the conditions: , and (ii) for 
 any ground default " " from D, and 
                        imply A default theory may 
 have none, one or multiple extensions in general. The set of 
 all extensions of is written as . Given a default 
 theory , a formula is a credulous conclusion of if it be•
 longs to some (but not all) extensions. By contrast, a formula 
 is a skeptical conclusion of if it belongs to all extensions.    Under IX the interpretation of a formula in a default the•
An extension E is inconsistent if it is the set of all formulas ory is defined as follows. 
in the language. 
                                                               Definition 3.2 Given a default theory = (D, W), the 
Proposition 2.1 [Reiter, 1980]    A default theory = 
                                l                              mapping <j>A associates a propositional formula F with a truth 
 (£>, W) has the inconsistent extension iffW is inconsistent. 

    'This property holds for defaults with non-empty justifications. 


840                                                                                       NONMONOTONIC REASONING                                                                  The relation <DL is a pre-order, i.e., a reflexive and transi•
                                                               tive relation on the set of all default theories in the language. 
                                                               Throughout the paper, when we compare different default 
                                                               theories, we assume that they have the same underlying lan•
                                                               guage. 
                                                                 Intuitively, a default theory A i is stronger than another de•
                                                               fault theory A2 if Ai entails more certain information than 
                                                               A2. In other words, when A2 <DL AI, conclusions derived 
                                                               from Ai are relatively more stable and reliable than those de•
                                                               rived from A2. The 'stronger' relation reduces to the relation 
                                                               between (propositional) first-order theories when default the•
                                                               ories have no defaults. 
                                                               Proposition 3.4 be 
                                                               two default theories. Then,  
                                                                 Thus, the relation is a natural extension of the one for 
                                                               (propositional) first-order theories. 
                                                               Proposition 3.5 Given two default theories and  
                                                                            implies , but not vice-
                                                               versa. 


NONMONOTONIC REASONING                                                                                               841    The above proposition presents that the order-equivalence 
 relation c^/, provides an equivalence relation which is 
 stronger than the equivalence based on extensions. 
 Example 3.5 (introductory example) Let and be two 
 default theories:                                                Theorem 3.7 provides a sufficient condition to judge 
                                                                            using extensions of default theories. 
                                                               4 Ordering Nonmonotonic Logic Programs 
                                                               In logic programming, default reasoning is realized by nega•
                                                               tion as failure (NAF). Logic programs containing NAF are 
                                                               called nonmonotonic logic programs. 
                                                                 Nonmonotonic logic programs considered in this paper are 
                                                               the class of extended logic programs (ELPs) iGelfond and 
                                                               Lifschitz, 1991], which contain two kinds of negation; ex•
                                                               plicit (or classical) negation -* and NAF (or default negation) 
                                                               not. An extended logic program (or simply a program) is a 
                                                               set of rules of the form: 


                                                               where each is a positive/negative literal and 
                                                               not represents NAF. The literal Lo is the head and the con•

                                                               junction ..., not Ln is the body of 
                                                               the rule. A rule or a program is called not-free if it contains 
                                                               no NAF (i.e., m = n). Given an ELP 11, the set of not-
                                                               free rules from II is denoted by rule with the empty 
                                                               body is identified with the literal L. The head of any 

                                                               rule is non-empty.4 Like default theories, every variable in 
                                                               a program is interpreted as a free variable. A program II is 
                                                               semantically identified with its ground instantiation, i.e., the 
                                                               set of ground rules obtained from II by substituting variables 
                                                               with elements of the Herbrand universe of II in every possible 
                                                               way. We handle ground programs throughout the paper. 
                                                                 The semantics of ELPs is given by the answer set se•
                                                               mantics [Gclfond and Lifschitz, 1991]. Let Lit be the set 
                                                               of all ground literals in the language of a program (called 
   The introduction of new information may block the appli•    the literal base). Suppose an ELP II and a set of literals 
cation of some default rules, which would cause the with•                . Then, the reduct ITS is the program which con•
drawal of some default conclusions in a theory. This is a typ• tains the ground rule iff there is a rule 
ical feature of default reasoning.                                                                not Ln in the ground in•
   We finally provide a connection between the order relation  stantiation of II such that . Given 
     , and default extensions.                                 a not-free ELP II, Cn(II) denotes the smallest set of ground 
                                                               literals which is (i) closed under , i.e., for every ground 
Theorem3.7 Let " _ = (Di.Wi) and = (D2,W2) be                  rule from the ground instantiation of H, 
two default theories. Then, if the following                                           implies and (ii) logi•
conditions are satisfied:                                      cally closed, i.e., it is either consistent or equal to Lit. Given 
                                                               an ELP II and a set S of literals, 5 is an answer set of II if 

                                                                 Answer sets represent possible beliefs of a program, and an 
                                                               ELP may have none, one, or multiple answer sets. In particu•
                                                               lar, every not-free ELP has the unique answer set. An answer 
                                                               set is consistent if it is not Lit. The set of all answer sets of 
                                                               an ELP II is written as AS(U). 
                                                               Proposition 4.1 An ELP II has the unique answer set Lit iff 


                                                                  4Under the answer set semantics which we consider in this paper, 
                                                               a rule with the empty head F is expressed by the semantically 
                                                               equivalent rule not L with a literal L. 


842                                                                                      NONMONOTONIC REASONING   According to [Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1991 ], the rule L0 <-
                             not Ln is interpreted as the 
default rule: 


                                                                 The relation AS is a pre-ordcr on the set of all ELPs in 
where for a positive literal L. ln this case, there is 
                                                              the language. A program II j is stronger than if the answer 
a 1-1 correspondence between the answer sets of a program 
                                                              sets of entail more certain information than . Different 
and the extensions of the corresponding default theory.
                                                    5         from the case of default logic, we compare programs in terms 
Proposition 4.2 [Gelfond and Lifschitz, 19911 Let II be an    of literals included in answer sets. This is because in non•
ELP and its corresponding default theory. If S is an an•      monotonic logic programs the meaning of a program is deter•
swer set ofU, then the deductive closure ofS is an extension  mined not by individual rules in a program, but by consequent 
of Conversely, every extension of is the deductive            literals included in selected models of a program. Thus, we 
closure of exactly one answer set of II.                      capture the information content of a program as consequences 
  Using the correspondence, a multi-valued interpretation for brought by answer sets. 
ELPs is defined under the logic IX.                           Proposition 4.3 Let and be two not-free ELPs which 
Definition 4.1 Given an ELP II, the mapping <pu associates    have the same literal base. Then,  
a positive literal L € Lit with a truth value of IX as follows: 
                                                              Proposition 4.4 Given two ELPs  
                                                              implies . , but not vice-versa. 
                                                              Example 4.3 Let and j be two programs: 


                                                              where IIi and U2 have the same answer set . Then, 
                                                                                                                  = dfs. 

                                                                 It is easily verified that the order has nonmonotonic 
                                                              properties which correspond to Proposition 3.6 with respect 
                                                              to the introduction of new rules to a program. 
                                                                 A connection between the order relation and answer 
                                                              sets is given as follows (The proof is similar to Theorem 3.7). 
                                                              Theorem 4.5 Let and be two ELPs which have the 
                                                              same literal base. Then, if the following condi•
                                                              tions are satisfied: 
  Remark that literals L and L are included in every answer 
set of II iff they are in Cn(II+) (Proposition 4.1). So it does 
not happen that takes both dts and dfs for any L. 
  The intuitive meaning of i is analogous to that of  
Example 4.1 Let II be the program: 
                                                              5 Discussion 
                                                              In the context of multi-valued logics, Ginsberg [19881 firstly 
                                                              introduces a bilattice for default logic. He distinguishes 
                                                              definite and default conclusions obtained from a (super•
                                                              normal) default theory using the bilattice of Figure 2. How•
Example 4.2 Let II be the program: 
                                                              ever, Ginsberg's bilattice is seven-valued and does not distin•
                                                              guish between skeptical and credulous default conclusions. 
                                                              For instance, suppose the super-normal default theory = 
which has two answer sets {p\ and Then,  
                                                                           which has two default extensions Th( 
      has properties obtained from Proposition 3.2 by replac•
                                                              and Then, dtc, and 
ing with and formulas with literals. 
                                                                           = dts in our framework, while Ginsberg in•
  Ordering between ELPs is defined as follows. 
                                                              terprets p as * but handles both q and as dt. Thus, to 
   Precisely speaking, no/,-free rules in an ELP correspond to distinguish skeptical/credulous default inference, additional 
justification-free defaults. Although we supposed defaults with non• truth values are necessary as introduced in this paper. Dion-
empty justifications in the previous sections, the following discus• isio etal. [1998] distinguish skeptical/credulous default in•
sion is valid apart from the results of Section 3.            ference in super-normal default theories using modal logic. 


NONMONOTONIC REASONING                                                                                               843 