                            Weak Conditional Logics of Normality 

                                           James P. Delgrande 
                                      School of Computing Science, 
                                         Simon Fraser University, 
                                     Burnaby, B.C., Canada V5A 1S6 
                                              jim@cs.sfu.ca 

                     Abstract                          the models of a theory; in the resulting subset of the mod•
                                                       els one obtains strengthening of the antecedent, transitivity, 
     A default conditional has most often              or (effectively) modus ponens, wherever feasible. Essentially 
     been informally interpreted as a defeasible ver•  then, there are two components to default reasoning within 
     sion of a classical conditional, usually the mate• such a system. First, there is a standard, monotonic logic 
     rial conditional. That is, the intuition is that a de• of conditionals that expresses relations among defaults that 
     fault should behave (implicitly or explicitly) as its are deemed to always hold. Second, there is a nonmonotonic 
     (say) material counterpart "by default" or unless mechanism for obtaining defaults (and default consequences) 
     explicitly overridden. In this paper, we develop  where justified. Representative (but not even remotely ex•
     an alternative interpretation, in which a default is haustive) work in this area includes [Geffncr and Pearl, 1992; 
     regarded more like a rule, leading from premises  Pearl, 1990; Kraus et al, 1990]. In essence, these approaches 
     to conclusion. To this end, a general semantic    treat the default conditional like its classical counterpart, the 
     framework under a "rule-based" interpretation is  material conditional, where "feasible" or "by default". 
     developed, and a family of weak conditional log•    While this work captures an important notion of default 
     ics is specified, along with associated proof theo• entailment - perhaps the most important notion - it is not 
     ries. Nonmonotonic inference is defined very eas• without difficulties. As described in the next section, some 
     ily in these logics. One obtains a rich set of non• principles of the "core" logic are not uncontentious; as well, 
     monotonic inferences concerning the incorpora•    there are examples of default reasoning in which one obtains 
     tion of irrelevant properties and of property in• undesired results. Lastly, there are more recent approaches, 
     heritance. Moreover, this interpretation resolves notably addressing causality, in which one requires a weaker 
     problems that have been associated with previous  notion of default inference, rejecting, for example, contrapos-
     approaches.                                       itive default inferences. In response to these points, we sug•
                                                       gest that there is a second, distinct, interpretation of default 
1 Introduction                                         conditionals, in which a default is regarded more like a rule, 
                                                       with properties more in line with a rule of inference, than a 
A major approach in nonmonotonic reasoning has been to weakened classical conditional. 
represent a default as an object that one can reason about, ei• In the following sections we describe our proposed ap•
ther as a conditional as part of some object language, or as a proach informally and formally. We begin by proposing an 
nonmonotonic consequence operator. Thus for example "an exceptionally weak logic of conditionals; from this basis a 
adult is (typically or normally) employed" might be repre• family of conditional logics is defined. Given a default con•
sented represents a default conditional, dis•          ditional the underlying intuition that is formalised 
tinct from the material conditional Given a suitable proof is that supplies a context in which, all other things being 
theory and semantics, one can derive other defaults from a equal, normally holds or, more precisely, in the context of 
given set of defaults. There has been widespread agreement     is more "normal" than Notably, all of the 
concerning just what principles should constitute a minimal logics that we consider are weaker than the aforementioned 
logic, a suggested "conservative core," of defaults. However, "conservative core". It proves to be the case however that 
the resulting conditional is quite weak, at least compared with a nonmonotonic operation is very easily defined; this non•
the material conditional, in that it does not (in fact, should monotonic step essentially specifics that a property is irrele•
not) fully support principles such as strengthening of the an• vant with respect to a default unless it is known to be rele•
tecedent, transitivity, and modus ponens.              vant. This nonmonotonic step easily admits inferences that 
   Since one would want to obtain these latter properties "by in other approaches have taken significant formal machinery 
default," such logics are extended nonmonotonically by a to obtain. As well, we show that the aforementioned diffi•
"closure" operation or step. This closure operation has, for culties that arise in interpreting a default as a weak classical 
example, been defined by selecting a (preferred) subset of conditional do not arise here.    This distinction between treating a default as a condi• CA/Or: 
tional or as a rule has been noted previously; see for example These principles are not uncontentious; for example, [Poole, 
[Geffner and Pearl, 1992]. As well, work on inheritance net• 1991 ] can be viewed as arguing against a derived principle 
works [Horty, 1994] can be viewed as investigating proof the• CC/And obtained 
ories for the latter interpretation; and work on causality such via RT and ASC). Likewise, [Neufeld, 1989] suggests against 
as [McCain and Turner, 1997] falls in the rule-based frame• CA in some cases. 
work. However a logic (that is, with both semantics and proof Nonetheless, the resulting logic (and proposed strengthen•
theory) capturing this interpretation has not (to our knowl• ings of the logic) are weak. A central difficulty is that seem•
edge) been investigated previously, nor has a fully general ingly irrelevant properties will block a desired inference. For 
nonmonotonic closure operator been developed under this in• example, given that a bird is asserted to fly by default, one 
terpretation. Last, we suggest in the conclusion that this alter• cannot thereby conclude that a green bird flies by default. 
native interpretation may be widely applicable, extending to The problem, essentially, is that there is nothing requiring 
areas such as counterfactual reasoning, generally treated via preferred worlds in which birds fly to include among them 
the stronger interpretation.                          green-bird worlds. Consequently, various means of strength•
                                                      ening the logic to incorporate irrelevant properties in a prin•
2 Background                                          cipled fashion have been proposed. Thus for "birds fly," since 
In recent years, much attention has been paid to conditional being green is presumably irrelevant with respect to flight, 
systems of default reasoning. Such systems deal with defeasi• one would want to have, among the preferred worlds in which 
ble conditionals based on notions of preference among worlds birds fly, a (preferred) subset in which there are green birds. 
or interpretations. Thus, the default that a bird normally flics Rational closure [Lehmann and Magidor, 1992], for exam•
can be represented propositionally as These ap•       ple, assumes that a world is ranked as unexceptional as pos•
proaches are typically expressed using a modal logic in which sible. In conditional entailment [Geffner and Pearl, 1992], 
the connective is a binary modal operator. The intended a partial order on possible worlds is determined by ranking 
meaning of is approximately "in the least worlds (or  worlds based on the highest-ranked default that distinguishes 
most preferred worlds) in which is true, is also true". between the worlds. In both cases, defaults are evaluated with 
Possible worlds (or, again, interpretations) are arranged in at respect to the resulting ranking. Thus, since there is no rea•
least a partial preorder, reflecting a metric of "normality" or son to suppose that greenness has any bearing on flight, one 
"preferredness" on the worlds. Given a set of defaults de• assumes that greenness has no effect on flight. 
fault entailment with respect to can be defined via:     However there are difficulties with both approaches. Ra•
                                                      tional closure employs a very strong minimization criterion; 
     If then                                          see [Geffner and Pearl, 1992] for a number of problematic ex•
There has been a remarkable convergence or agreement on amples. As well, consider an elaboration of an example given 
what inferences ought to be common to all nonmonotonic by John Horty: 
systems; space considerations preclude a full listing of ap•
proaches and references. The resulting set of principles has                                           (1) 
been called the conservative core in [Pearl, 1989]. It was (Normally one does not eat with the fingers but one does 
originally considered in [Adams, 1975], and has been studied when eating asparagus normally one uses a napkin 
extensively, as the system P, in [Kraus et at., 1990]. One ex• but not when one is out of napkins The rational closure 
pression of the logic of conditionals is as follows. The logic of these conditionals gives that, if one is not out of napkins 
includes classical prepositional logic and the following rules one is not eating asparagus Clearly this inter•
and axioms:2                                          action between unrelated defaults is undesirable. As well, 
                                                      in neither conditional entailment nor rational closure does 
                                                      one obtain inheritance of properties (however see [Benferhat 
                                                      et ai, 1993]). In addition, consider the following example 
                                                      [Geffner and Pearl, 1992]: 

                                                                                                       (2) 
                                                      (That is, adults are normally employed, university students 
   1 An alternative is to treat the conditional as a nonmonotonic in• are normally adults but are not employed, and Frank Sina•
ference operator, In a certain sense these approaches can tra fans are normally adults.) In both conditional entailment 
be considered equivalent; here, for simplicity, we remain within the and rational closure we obtain the default inference that Frank 
conditional logic framework.                          Sinatra fans are not university students. But this is a curious 
  2Two systems of nomenclature have arisen, one associated with inference, since there is nothing in the example that would 
conditional logic and one with nonmonotonic consequence opera• seem to relate Frank Sinatra fans to university students. 
tors. We list both (when both exist) when first presenting an axiom 
or rule; for example the conditional logic rule for substitution of We suggest that at least some of these examples do not nec•
logical equivalents in the antecedent is called RCEA; its nonmono• essarily reflect a problem with the approaches per se. Rather, 
tonic consequence operator, Left Logical Equivalence is abbreviated our thesis is that there are (at least) two distinct interpreta•
LLE. Hence we first list the rule as RCEA/LLE.        tions that can be given to a default. First, there is the intuition 


874                                                                          NONMONOTONIC REASONING that a default is essentially a weak version of the material The difference is that usually the interpretation of (3) is along 
conditional (or, in more recent approaches, necessary entail• the lines of "the least worlds where is true are less nor•
ment), and should behave as such a conditional, except that mal than the least worlds"; our interpretation refers to 
it is defeasible. This intuition is seen most clearly in the ex• the proposition expressed by these formulas. Consequently, 
pression of defaults by circumscriptive abnormality theories our relation is not an accessibility relation in the normal 
[McCarthy, 1986]. In this case a default is repre•     sense, since it is a relation on sets of worlds. 
sented as the formula The circumscription                Filling in the (formal) details yields a weak logic of condi•
of A asserts that A is false (roughly) if consistently pos• tionals, significantly weaker than the so-called "conservative 
sible. Obviously, if A is asserted to be false, the result is core". We also consider various strengthenings of the logic, 
exactly the material conditional. As well, conditional entail• but these strengthenings are still weaker than this "core" set of 
ment adopts this intuition: the default is basically the defaults. We subsequently define a notion of nonmonotonic 
same as (and so together inference with respect to these logics. It proves to be the case 
with specificity information implicit in [Geffner and Pearl, that this is very easy to do in our approach. Basically, the 
1992, p. 232]. This interpretation also underlies approaches (semantic) relation X Y asserts that in the "context" (set 
that assume that defaults are founded (formally or informally) of possible worlds) X Y, partitioned by X,Y, we have that 
on notions of probability.3                            Y is more normal than X. Our nonmonotonic assumption 
  The second interpretation regards a default more as an is that this obtains in all "feasible" subcontexts. That is, for 
(object-level) whose properties are closer to those of a proposition Z, unless there is reason to conclude otherwise, 
rule of inference. Thus, given a conditional if the    we assert that The next section develops the 
antecedent a happens to be true, we conclude by default. formal details. 
Given we specifically do not want to conclude This 
latter interpretation covers an important class of defaults that 4 The Approach 
have not been addressed as a logic of conditionals per se (al•
though this distinction has been noted in [Geffner and Pearl, 4.1 The Base Logic 
1992]; and inheritance networks [Horty, 1994] can be viewed Let be the language of propositional logic defined, for 
as proof theoretic accounts of this interpretation). A further simplicity, over a finite alphabet P of propo•
motivation for exploring this interpretation is that there has sitional letters or atomic propositions, and employing the log•
been recent interest in conditional accounts of causality (for ical symbols and The symbol is taken to be 
example [McCain and Turner, 1997]), in which reasoning via some propositional tautology, and is defined as The 
a default contrapositive is explicitly rejected. Thus, from language is PC extended with the binary operator as 
causes we don't want to conclude causes                a weak conditional. For convenience, arguments of are 
                                                       members of hence, we do not allow nested occurrences 
3 Defaults as Rules                                    of Formulas are denoted by the Greek letters ... and 
The general approach is the same as those described in the sets of formulas by upper case Greek letters Sen•
previous section: we begin by specifying a logic of defaults tences are interpreted with respect to a comparative condi•
and subsequently provide a principled, nonmonotonic, means tional model M = where: 
to extend the logic to account for irrelevant properties. Our 1. W is a set (of states or possible worlds); 
point of departure is that we informally treat defaults more 
like rules of inference; in particular, defaults are intended to 2. with properties described below; 
be applied in a "forward'' direction only. Our interpretation, 3. P: 
roughly, is that the antecedent of a default establishes a con•
                                                       We use the upper case letters X, X1, Y, ...to denote sets 
text in which the consequent (normally) holds, or holds all 
                                                       of possible worlds. P maps atomic sentences onto sets of 
other things being equal. Thus, for default our in•
                                                       worlds, being those worlds at which the sentence is true. The 
terpretation is roughly that, in the context established by a, it relation associates with each world W a binary notion 
is the case that is more normal (typical, etc.) than We of relative normality between propositions; we write X 
express this semantically by                           Y to assert informally that, according to world w, proposition 
                                                 (3)   Y is more normal than X. That is, given a partition 
                                                       of a context X Y, the relation X Y asserts that Y is more 
that is, the proposition (see the next section) is more normal (unexceptional, etc.) than X. We assume that is a 
normal (typical, etc.) than It seems reasonable        strict partial ordering on its last two arguments, that is for 
that our binary relation of relative normality be asymmetric W, is asymmetric and transitive. As well, we assume that 
and transitive, and so we generally assume that these condi• the incoherent proposition is maximally abnormal: 
tions hold. We note that the form of (3) has appeared regu•
larly in the literature, going back at least to [Lewis, 1973].4                                         (4) 

   3 We note in passing that there are examples of defaults that have Truth of a formula at a world in a model is as for propositional 
nothing to do with probability, for example (1).       logic, with an addition for 
   4We use in the opposite sense of Lewis and many other au•
thors. For our interpretation, it seems to make more sense to express "Y is more normal than X" by A' Y rather than by Y X. 


NONMONOTONIC REASONING                                                                                 875  Definition 4.1                                        4.2 Extensions to the Logic 
                                                       In the logic C most properties of the relation stem from 
                                                       its being a strict partial order (viz. asymmetric and transitive). 
                                                       We also look at strengthening by considering properties 
                                                       that seem reasonable for a notion of normality. Consider the 
                                                       following: 

A formula is valid, written just if it is true at every 
world in every model. We identify the proposition expressed 
by a sentence with the set of worlds in which is true, 
denoted , that is, 

Thus is true just if the proposition expressed by      For CD, if X is less normal than Y, then a stronger propo•
is more normal than that expressed by is necessarily   sition than X (viz. X\Z) is also less normal than Y. CD 
true, is defined as                                    is a dual: if X is less normal than Y, then a weaker propo•
   Consider the logic closed under classical propositional sition than Y (viz. Y Z) is also more normal than X. UD 
logic along with the following rules of inference and axioms: combines these conditions, and WDjU is a weak version of 
                                                       disjoint unions, described below. Interestingly, the first two 
RCEA/LLE: From infer 
                                                       of these conditions have appeared in the belief revision lit•
RCECA:                                                 erature. Our relation is what [Alchourron and Makinson, 
     From                                              1985] call a (transitive) hierarchy; while with CD and CU 
Rl/SupraCI: From                                       is a regular hierarchy. Their interpretation of echoes ours 
WeakCEM:                                               for X y, that "X is less secure or reliable or plausible 
                                                       ... than Y" [Giirdenfors and Rott, 1995, p. 75]. 
Trans:                                                   Consider next the following rules and formulas: 
We call the smallest logic based on the above axiomatisation 
C. Theoremhood of a formula a is denoted, as usual, by 
This system is quite weak; however in the full paper we con•
sider the even weaker logic C- consisting of propositional 
logic and RCEA, RCECA, and Rl. RCEA asserts that con•
ditionals with the same consequent and equivalent (in propo•
sitional logic) antecedents are equivalent. RCECA asserts Space considerations preclude a full discussion of these con•
the same thing with respect to consequents, but is somewhat ditions. WeakRCM is a weaker version of both the rule 
more general, in that the consequents need be equivalent just RCM and the formula ASC in conditional logic. CM 
in the "context" given by the antecedent. RI asserts that if ("Conditionalisation" in nonmonotonic consequence rela•
  is logically implied by then it is also normally implied. tions) gives a conditional version of one half of the deduc•
WeakCEM gives a weak version of the excluded middle for tion theorem. Combining WeakRCM and CM yields the 
a weak conditional; in the semantics this is reflected by asym• rule RCM, allowing weakening of the consequent of a con•
metry of Similarly Trans reflects transitivity of in the ditional. D supplies a certain "reasoning by cases" for the 
semantics. We obtain the following basic results:      conditional. 
Theorem 4.1                                              We obtain the following correspondence between semantic 
                                                       conditions and the axiomatisation: 
                                                       Theorem 4.3 C + CD (CU, UD, WDjU) is complete with 
                                                       respect to the class of comparative conditional models closed 
                                                       under WeakRCM (CM, RCM, D) 
                                                         We could go on and add other conditions in the semantics. 
As well, we obtain:                                    Again space considerations dictate against a lengthy discus•
Theorem 4.2 a is valid in the class of comparative condi• sion, but two conditions are worth noting here: 
tional models C. 
  For those familiar with conditional logic, the formulas 
RCM, RT, ASC, CC, and CA (and their nonmonotonic con•
sequence operator counterparts: Right Weakening, Cut, Cau• Connectivity: 
tious Monotonity, And, and Or) are not valid in C. Nonethe• Disjoint union has appeared frequently in the literature, for 
less, despite its (monotonic) inferential weakness, the logic example [Savage, 1972; Fine, 1973; Dubois et al, 1994]. The 
already allows a rich set of nonmonotonic inferences, as cov• addition of disjoint union requires that the notion of a model 
ered in the next section. However, before proceeding we first be altered slightly (from a relation the resultant se•
consider various extensions to the logic.              mantic framework would correspond to the basic definition 


876                                                                           NONMONOTONIC REASONING of a plausibility structure [Friedman and Halpern, 2001]. The as do non-green flying penguins. As well and so pen•
addition of connectivity would make a qualitative proba• guins inherit the property of having wings by virtue of neces•
bility in the terminology of [Savage, 1972].           sarily being birds. Note that if we replaced (7) by p 6, we 
                                                       would no longer obtain however we would obtain the 
5 Nonmonotonic Reasoning                               weaker We justify this by noting that a normality 
                                                       conditional does not imply a strict specificity relation 
We claimed at the outset that the logic C and its strengthen•
                                                       between and whereas does. 
ings would allow a simple approach to nonmonotonic infer•
                                                         The next example further illustrates reasoning in the pres•
ence, having just the "right" properties for a rule-based in•
                                                       ence of exceptions. 
terpretation of a conditional. For the logics, the central idea 
was that, given a partition of a context                                                               (9) 
the relation X Y asserts that Y is more normal (unexcep•
tional, etc.) than X. To obtain nonmonotonic inference, we So Quakers are pacifists while Republicans are not, and 
simply assume that this relation holds in any subcontext, that Quakers are generous. We obtain and 
is wherever "reasonable". More formally,               Thus in the last case, while Quakers that are Republican are, 
we have the following:                                 informally, exceptional Quakers, they are nonetheless still 
                                                       generous by default. 
Definition 5.1 Let be a comparative condi•               Concerning our original motivating examples, in (1) we do 
tional model in C.                                     not obtain the undesirable inference and in (2) we 
                                                       do not obtain Last, we note that while we obtain full 
                                                       incorporation of irrelevant properties, we do not obtain full 
                                                       default transitivity. Thus 


                                                       6 Discussion 
Theorem 5.1 is a comparative condi•
tional model then so is                                We have argued that there are two interpretations of a default 
                                                       conditional: as a weak (typically material) implication, or as 
   We define as validity in the class of augmented com• something akin to a rule of inference. The former interpreta•
parative conditional models; that is iff a is true at every tion is explicit in, for example, circumscriptive abnormality 
world in every augmented comparative conditional model. theories, and implicit in an approach such as conditional en•
Nonmonotonic inference is defined as follows:          tailment. It is clear that there are many, and varied, applica•
                                                       tions in which the first interpretation is appropriate. However 
                                                       we have also noted that there are various reasons to suppose 
We say that is a nonmonotonic inference from with re•  that this is not the only such interpretation: First, work such 
spect to or just is a nonmonotonic inference from if   as [Poole, 1991] and [Neufeld, 1989] can be viewed as ar•
                                                       guing against principles of the "core" logic underlying this 
the set is clear from the context of discussion. 
                                                       first interpretation (the former arguing against the principle 
  We illustrate nonmonotonic inference first by a familiar 
                                                       CC/And and the latter against CA/Or). Second, there are ex•
example: 
                                                       amples of inferences in approaches such as rational closure 
                                                 (5)   or in conditional entailment that are either too weak or too 
                                                 (6)   strong. Last, there are emerging areas (such as causal reason•
                                                 (7)   ing) in which a "weak material implication" interpretation is 
                                                       not appropriate. While this distinction has been recognized 
                                                 (8)   previously, what is new here is the development of a fam•
Thus birds fly and have wings, and penguins are (necessarily) ily of logics, with a novel semantic theory and proof theory, 
birds that do not fly. We obtain the following:        along with a specification of nonmonotonic inference, for the 
                                                       "rule-based" interpretation. 
                                                         All of the logics presented here are quite weak, at least 
                                                       compared to the "conservative core" or, equivalently, the 
                                                       system P of [Kraus et al, 1990]. We argue however that 
                                                       such lack of inferential capability is characteristic of a "rule-
                                                       based" interpretation of a conditional. Moreover it proves to 


NONMONOTONIC REASONING                                                                                 877 