             What is Artificial Intelligence? Psychometric AI as an Answer 
                               Selmer Bringsjord & Bettina Schimanski 
                               selmer@rpi . edu • schimb@rpi . edu 
                                    Department of Computer Science 
                                    Department of Cognitive Science 
                                 Rensselaer AI & Reasoning (RAIR) Lab 
                                  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) 
                                          Troy NY 12180 USA 
                     Abstract                          2 What is AI? Psychometric AI as an Answer 
                                                       Presumably the 'A' part of 'A1' isn't the challenge: We seem 
    We propose an answer to the "What is AI?" ques­    to have a fairly good handle on what it means to say that 
    tion, namely, that Al is really (or at least really something is an artifact, or artificial. (We can ignore here co­
    ought in significant part to be) Psychometric AI   nundrums arising from self-reproducing systems, systems that 
    (PAI). Along the way, we: set out and rebut five ob­ evolve without human oversight, etc.) It's the T part that 
    jections to PA1; describe PERI, a robot in our lab seems to throw us for a bit of a loop. What's intelligence? This 
    who exemplifies PAI; and briefly treat the future  is the big, and hard, question. Innumerable answers have been 
    of Psychometric AI, first by pointing toward some  given, but most thinkers seem to forget that there is a partic­
    promising PAl-based applications, and then by rais­ ularly clear and straightforward answer available, courtesy of 
    ing some of the "big" philosophical questions the  the field that has sought to operationalizc the concept in ques­
    success of Psychometric AI will raise.             tion; that field is psychometrics. Psychomctrics is devoted 
                                                       to systematically measuring psychological properties, usually 
                                                       via tests. These properties include the one most important in 
                                                       the present context: intelligence. In a nutshell, then, the ini­
1 Introduction                                         tial version of our account of intelligence is this: Some agent 
                                                       is intelligent if and only if it excels at all established, validated 
What exactly is AI? We'd be willing to wager that many of tests of intelligence. (This account is inadequate, for reasons 
you have been asked this question — by colleagues, reporters, we explain below before supplanting it with a more sophisti­
friends and family, and others. Even if by some fluke you've cated one.) AI then reduces to Psychometric AI: the field de­
dodged the question, perhaps you've asked it yourself, maybe voted to building a computational system able to score well 
even perhaps (in secret moments, if you're a practitioner) to on such tests. This may strike you as a preposterously narrow 
yourself, without an immediate answer coming to mind. At definition of AI. The first step (in a series taken as this paper 
any rate, AI itself repeatedly asks the question — as the first unfolds) in diffusing this attitude is to take a look at some in­
chapter of many AI textbooks reveals. In this paper we want to telligence tests, some of which, we surmise, are a good deal 
propose an answer, namely, that Al is really (or at least really richer than you might at present think. 
ought in significant part to be) Psychometric AI (sometimes 
just 'PAI1 (rhymes with for short). We also want to tell you 
something about both PHRI, a robot in our lab who exemplifies 
PAI, and the future we envision for PAI. 
  Our plan herein is as follows. In the next section, 2, we an­
swer the "What is AI?" question from the standpoint of Psy­
chometric AI, and introduce some of the tests at the heart of 
this brand of AI. In section 3 we rebut some objections that 
will inevitably be brought against Psychometric Al. The re­
buttal to the first of these objections will reveal the foundation 
for PAI: the Turing Test (TT) and its more demanding cousin, 
the Total TT (TTT). In section 4 we introduce you to PERI. 
Our penultimate section briefly treats the future of Psychome­
tric Al, first by pointing toward some promising PAI-based ap­
plications, and then by raising some of the "big" philosophi­
cal questions the success of Psychometric AI will raise. We 
end by addressing a second round of objections, formulated Figure I: Sample Problem Solved by Evan's (1968) ANAL­
by those who read earlier versions of the present paper. OGY Program. A is to B as C is to ...? 


ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS    In the early days of AI, Psychometric AI was at least im­ to build agents able to solve broad tests of intelligence ETS 
plicitly entertained. After all, in the mid 1960s, the largest tests that include sub-tasks demanding the kinds of commu­
Lisp program on earth was Evans' 1968 ANALOGY program, nicative capacities Fischler & Firschein have in mind. 
which could solve problems like those shown in Figure 1. 
Evans himself predicted that systems able to solve such prob­
lems would "be of great practical importance in the near fu­
ture," and he pointed out that performance on such tests is 
often regarded to be the "touchstone" of human intelligence. 
Unfortunately, ANALOGY simply hasn't turned out to be the 
first system in a longstanding, comprehensive research pro­
gram: after all, we find ourselves, at present, trying to start 
that very program. What went wrong? Well, certainly Psy­
chometric AI would be patently untenable if the tests upon 
which it is based consist solely of geometric analogies. This 
point is entailed by such observations as this one from Fischler 
& Firschein 1987:                                      Figure 2: Simple RPM Problem "Cracked" by RA1R Lab's 
    If one were offered a machine purported to be intelligent, PERI 
    what would be an appropriate method of evaluating this 
    claim? The most obvious approach might be to give the Psychological Corporation's popular WAIS (Wechsler 
    machine an IQ test. ... However, [good performance on Adult Intelligent Scale) is a paradigmatic example of a broad 
    tasks seen in IQ tests would not] be completely satisfac­ intelligence test that includes the full array of "Thurstonean" 
    tory because the machine would have to be specially pre­
                                                       sub-tests (the complete array is enumerated in Baron 2000). 
    pared for any specific task that it was asked to perform. 
    The task could not be described to the machine in a nor­ While we don't have enough space to explain all these 
    mal conversation (verbal or written) if the specific nature sub-tests, we point out that Fischler & Firschein's criticism of 
    of the task was not already programmed into the machine. simplistic versions of Psychometric AI certainly evaporates 
    Such considerations led many people to believe that the in the face of the WAIS. That this is so follows from the 
    ability to communicate freely using some form of natural sub-test on the WAIS known as "Comprehension," in which, 
    language is an essential attribute of an intelligent entity. in ordinary conversation, subjects are asked fiendishly tricky 
    ([Fischler & Firschein, 1987], p. 12)              "general knowledge" questions. For example, examinees 
  Unfortunately, while this quote helps explain why ANAL­ might be asked to explain why the tires on automobiles are 
OGY in and of itself didn't ignite a research program to made of rubber, rather than, say, plastic. Perhaps you'll agree 
drive AI, Fischler & Firschein apparently are familiar with that such a question would make a nice challenge to any 
only what we call narrow, as opposed to broad, intelli­ system purported to have commonsense intelligence. Were 
gence tests. Arguably, this distinction goes back to Descartes' CYCORP (http://www.cyc.com) to herald a system 
(descartcs.haldane.ross.voll, p. 116) claim that while a ma­ having general, common-sense intelligence, the WAIS would 
chine could in the future pass any test for a particular men­ be a vehicle for verification. There are other sub-tests on the 
tal power, no machine could pass a test for any mental power WAIS that are just as challenging. 
whatsoever. This rather speculative claim can be seen to be With help from additional researchers in the RAIR Lab, we 
cashed out in two different and longstanding views of intelli­ are in the process of "cracking" the WAIS, by way of the de­
gence within psychology: Thurstone's 1938 and Spearman's sign and construction of PERI. The sub-test we have cracked 
1927. In Thurstone's view (put barbarically), intelligence most recently is "Block Design:" PERI, when given any con­
consists in the capacity to solve a broad range of problems, figuration of blocks in the space of all possible ones, deduces 
e.g., verbal analogies, geometric analogies, digit recall, story the solution in under a second of CPU time, and proceeds to 
understanding, commonsense reasoning, arithmetical calcu­ assemble this solution with its manipulator/gripper. In sec­
lation, and so on. In Spearman's view (again, put roughly), tion 4 we provide some details about PERl's exploits. (Read­
intelligence is a specific, narrow, underlying capacity (noto­ ers wanting to peek ahead should see Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7.) 
riously) referred to as g, summoned up to the highest degree At present we are tackling the much more difficult sub­
when solving highly focused and abstract problems like those test "Picture Arrangement," which requires of examinees that 
ANALOGY solved. The most famous set of "g-relevant" prob­ they arrange jumbled snapshots to form coherent stories. (For 
lems is the tightly guarded and much-used Raven's 1962 Pro­ readers wanting to look ahead, a home-grown example is 
gressive Matrices, or just 'RPM.' An example of a problem shown in Figure 3. For legal reasons, actual WAIS examples 
from RPM is shown in Figure 2, which is taken from [Car­ cannot be shown.) Here our research attempts to make use 
penter et al., 1990]. As part of PERI, we have built theo­ of prior work in story generation (e.g., Bringsjord & Ferrucci 
rem prover-based agents able to infallibly crack not only geo­ 2000). 
metric analogies, but RPM items they have never seen before We anticipate that some will insist that intelligence tests, 
(Figure 2 shows part of an OTTRR [Wos etal, 1992] proof that even broad ones, are still just too narrow, when put in the con­
serves to identify the solution). (The algorithms deployed by text of the full array of cognitive capacities seen in homo sapi•
these agents were devised as part of contracted research for ens. Well, we agree! But we are understanding intelligence, 
The Educational Testing Service, or ETS.) It is much harder from the standpoint of psychometrics, to include many varied 


888                                                                       ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS                                                        3 Objections 
                                                       Objection J: "Can you be serious? PAI is so idiosyncratic!" 
                                                       Recall that we mentioned at the outset that AI textbooks tend 
                                                       to be self-reflective. Let's look a bit at some of these volumes. 
                                                       Doing so will reveal that Psychometric AI is far from idiosyn­
                                                       cratic, because it is (at least arguably) a generalization of a 
                                                       longstanding answer to the "What is AI?" question, namely, 
                                                       the answer that appeals to the Turing Test (TT) and its rela­
                                                       tives. To see this answer in action, let's turn to AIMA [Russell 
                                                       & Norvig, 1994], which tells us that there arc four general, dif­
                                                       ferent ways to define intelligence (pp. 4-8): we can say that an 
                                                       entity is intelligent if and only if it "thinks like humans", "acts 
                                                       like humans", "thinks rationally", or "acts rationally." 
Figure 3: Examinees must arrange to make a coherent story. Russell & Norvig 1994 opt for the fourth route, but we want 
                                                       to draw your attention to the first and third ones, which don't 
                                                       seem exactly promising, because 'thinking' is probably no 
tests of intellectual ability. Accordingly, we now move to a 
less naive definition of PAI:                          clearer than 'intelligence.' However, Turing came up with the 
                                                       test that now bears his name precisely because he found the 
    Psychometric Al is the field devoted to building   concept of thinking hopelessly vague. As Russell and Norvig 
    information-processing entities capable of at least solid point out, TT and other more stringent tests, e.g., Stevan Har-
    performance on all established, validated tests of intelli­ nad's 1991 Total Turing Test (in which a passing robot must 
    gence and mental ability, a class of tests that includes not display not only human-level linguistic performance, but sen­
    just the rather restrictive IQ tests, but also tests of artistic 
    and literary creativity, mechanical ability, and so on. sorimotor performance at this level as well), provide a way to 
                                                       clarify the first route in the quartet. Specifically, it can be said 
  This definition replaces the old, provisional one: the new that AI is the field devoted to building artificial entities (or sys­
definition, when referring to tests of mental ability, is referring tems) able to pass TTT. 
to much more than IQ tests. For example, following Stern­ We could go on to present case after case in which TT or 
berg, someone with much musical aptitude would count as variants are used to define AI (e.g., see Ginsberg's 1993 in­
brilliant even if their scores on tests of "academic" aptitude troductory Al text), but perhaps you will agree that whether 
(e.g., on the SAT, GRE, LSAT, etc.) were low. But specifi­ or not you affirm the TT-based answer to the "What is AI?" 
cally what sorts of additional tests would be involved? We question, you have to admit that Turing, by the lights of a good 
don't have space to canvass the myriad tests that psychometri- many, is definitely on to something. But what, exactly? Well, 
cians have validated. To give a quick sense of how latitudinar- no doubt there is more than one reason for the apparent im­
ian (and therefore challenging) Psychometric AI is intended to mortality of the TT. But surely one reason for its longevity is 
be, we mention The Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking [Tor­ simply that it's a clean, crisp test. Tests are attractive in no 
rance, 1990; 1988]. This test comes in both "visual" and "ver­ small part because they have determinate starts and ends, and 
bal" forms. In the visual form, test takers are asked to draw yield concrete verdicts that can silence unproductive debate. 
pictures (often by enriching existing sketches); in the verbal (Of course, computability theory relics heavily on tests. E.g., 
form, test takers are asked to write — creatively. For exam­ when we say that a set A is decidable, we are among other 
ple, one of the activities subjects engage in on the verbal test things saying that we can successfully apply a test to some ob­
is the following.                                      ject o in order to determine whether or not o A.) Turing's 
    Most people throw their tin cans away, but they have 1950 goal in his seminal "Computing Machinery and Intelli­
    thousands of interesting and unusual uses. In the spaces gence" was indeed to supplant the maddeningly vague "Can a 
    below and on the next page, list as many of these inter­ computing machine think?" with "Can a computing machine 
    esting and unusual uses as you can think of. Do not limit pass the Turing test?" We're not concerned here with whether 
    yourself to any one size of can. You may use as many cans he reached his goal. Rather, the idea is that PAI extends and 
    as you like. Do not limit yourself to the uses you have clarifies Turing's approach. 
    seen or heard about; think about as many possible new Objection 2: "But Don 't TT and TTT Subsume Psychome•
    uses as you can. (From the verbal version of [Torrance, tric AI? " We offer a three-part rebuttal: (1) In an attempt to 
    1990].) 
                                                       build a robot able to pass for a human, certainly "divide and 
  Believe it or not, after the Torrance Test is administered, conquer" is a prudent strategy, and Psychometric AI automat­
one can send it out to be professionally judged by fixed and re­ ically enforces that methodology: tests are crafted to check 
liable criteria. Building an intelligent agent capable of scoring for different capacities in focused fashion. Since all topics 
well on the Torrance Test is a tall order, but some researchers are fair game in TT and TTT, they have much less value as 
hitherto unaware of Psychometric Al are apparently in the engineering goals. (2) There is another reason why PAI can 
process of working specifically toward this aim, and variants be viewed as a helpful generalization of the Turing/Harnad 
thereof (e.g. see Bringsjord & Ferrucci 2000 and Bringsjord approach. This reason is that, let's face it, neither TT nor 
1998).                                                 TTT is currently a meaningful objective: they are both gi-


ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS                                                                             889  gantically ambitious goals, so much so that no one has really 4 The Robot PERI 
 made any progress toward reaching them. (At Turing 2000, 
                                                 PERI, whose name stands for "Psychometric Experimental 
 the conference held at Dartmouth to commemorate both Tur­
                                                 Robotic Intelligence," is a system capable of logic/reasoning, 
 ing's 1950 prediction that a TT-passing machine would be cre­
                                                 vision, physical manipulation, speech, and hearing. It is im­
 ated before the new millennium and Al's inaugural 1956 con­
                                                 portant to note that PERI was not designed to simulate how a 
 ference at Dartmouth, no system better at conversation than 
                                                 human thinks. Our work in connection with this robot is AI, 
a toddler appeared.) Psychometrics offers us an abundance of 
                                                 not cognitive modeling. 
tests, many of which are reasonable challenges for an artificial 
                                                   PERI interacts with the environment via its fivc-degree-of-
agent. Psychometric Al appropriates these tests. (3) The tests 
                                                 freedom vertically articulated mechanical arm, a SCORBOT-
 in question haven't been picked out of thin air. These tests al­
                                                 ER IX model from the Intelitek Corporation, and a pneu­
 low us to look into the heart of mind/brain. That's the beauty 
                                                 matic two-finger parallel grippcr which can either be com­
and power of tests, when they have been empirically and sta­
                                                 pletely open or closed around an object. Its vision is based' 
tistically validated. Tests have a gem-like character, and PA1 
                                                 on the output of a Sony Black-and-White XC55 Video Cam­
piggybacks on this. Given this, if we build an agent able to 
                                                 era and Cognex MVS-8100M frame grabber. PERI'S speech 
pass established tests, we can be fairly confident that as a wel­
                                                 is transmitted through computer speakers and it hears through 
come side-effect we will have an agent capable of many sig­
                                                 a microphone attached to the speaker's head while using the 
nificant higher-level feats. 
                                                 Dragon Naturally-Speaking Professional Solutions Version 
  Objection 3: "But AI has applications that need to be 6.0 software. At the core of PERI resides its brain and nervous 
built! "Of course. And Turing wasn't saying all that anybody system — a complex Lisp program and an associated Scor-
would work on was passing the TT. After all, few work di­ bot Advanced Control Language Library. Due to the lack of 
rectly on building an agent able to pass it. An agent able to space, this is as much technical detail as we can prudently re­
pass the tests in question will have the capacity to provide the veal about PERI. 
desired applications. Momentarily we present some applica­ The rest of this section will focus on the Block Design task 
tions we are working toward that stem directly from PAL and PERI'S success with it. PERI can not only solve the par­
                                                 ticular Block Design problems in the WAIS, but any Block 
  Objection 4: "But PAI will only tap logicistAI!" Actually, Design puzzle given to it. For legal reasons we are unable to 
the tasks in question will unite logicist and sub-symbolic ap­ disclose the Block Design task from the WAIS, therefore we 
proaches. For example, "Block Design" on the WAIS requires discuss another similar yet even more challenging block puz­
robotic manipulation, and therefore cognitive processing that zle (courtesy of the Binary Arts Corporation). (In the intents 
is rapid and reactive. This processing is not reasoning-based of space, and in keeping with the "Philosophical Foundations" 
in PERI. The same can be said for PERI'S vision and speech category under which this paper falls, we leave aside the math-
systems.                                         ematization of the WAIS block puzzle and the harder one from 
  Objection 5: "Butplenty of Al researchers don't do PAI'" Binary Arts. For ease of exposition, we refer to the space in 
This objection can be fleshed out as follows: "1 fail to sec question as S.) 
how you can be seriously proposing a foundation for AI, given 
that plenty of AI researchers don't deal with tests of any kind. 
Would we be wrong in regarding such people to be doing AI?" 
  This is an important objection. It raises the general question 
of whether we are promoting Psychometric AI as descriptive 
or prescriptive. Do we mean to suggest that AI is in fact PAI? 
Or do we mean to maintain that Al ought to be, or at least be 
viewed as, PAI?                                          Figure 4: One Puzzle Block Folded Out 
  The answer is this: Our overall claim about Psychometric 
Al is that it's both descriptive and prescriptive. If an AI ap­ In this particular puzzle there are a total of four blocks, each 
plication is sufficiently ambitious, we hold that Psychometric of which is different. There are only three colors (pink, pur­
AI will automatically kick in: the theory is descriptive, in that ple, and yellow) used to make the design on each side; that de­
the developers will inevitably modularize the challenge, and sign is either a combination of up to four triangles or one solid 
set about building sub-agents that successfully negotiate the color. This is done merely to give a specific color to each edge 
tests associated with these modules. On the other hand, if the of a block. In fact, all the sides of all four cubes are different 
Al application is a "humble" one, it probably itself constitutes from one another. This means there are a total of 24 unique 
a miniature test: our claim is once again that PAI is descrip­ sides. Refer to Figures 4 and 5 for a closer look. 
tive. But how is it then that the theory is also prescriptive? The task is, after having been presented with the cubes for 
Well, again, we submit that R&D dedicated to building test- the first time, to place them together so that every edge that 
taking agents will produce building blocks for accomplishing touches another is the same color. All cubes must be used, but 
some very helpful systems. Some examples of such systems obviously there are quite a few different solutions. One solu­
are presented in section 5. But first, as planned, we say a few tion is shown in Figure 6. Does the task sound easy to you? If 
things about PERI.                               so, you are supremely confident. While PERI solves the hard-


890                                                               ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS                                                        difficult "Picture Arrangement" subtask of the WAIS, which is 
                                                       discussed in the next section. 


   Figure 5: Blocks (from Binary Arts' 5766) Scattered 

est configuration in a matter of seconds, after having visually 
examined the blocks, in our experience it can take a clever hu­
man several long minutes, if not a half hour, to conquer the 
entire task. Figure 7 shows PERI assembling a solution. 
                                                             Figure 7: PERI Solving a Block Design Puzzle 

                                                       5 The Future of Psychometric AI 
                                                       We very briefly offer some thoughts on the future of PAI, from 
                                                       the standpoints of both applications and philosophical founda­
  Figure 6: A Solution to Binary Arts Corp.'s Puzzle 5766 tions. 
                                                         Much of our prior Al work in automated test generation 
  The same basic algorithm (described below) that PERI uses has been supported by ETS, in connection with wide-scale 
for the WAIS Block Design task can be used to solve any "high stakes" tests. Our efforts to crack the WAIS should 
such puzzle in the overall mathematical space S 3D reg­ lead to systems able to generate both new items for other es­
ular solid with each side having a characteristic capturable in tablished tests, and new tests. In general, it seems to us that 
extensional first-order fashion). The first step is to encode the there is a growing symbiosis between AI and the test indus­
pieces as declarative information about geometric shapes in try. It isn't just the generation side that holds promise: essays 
PERl's "mind." Before the test is administered to a human par­ written by examinees taking the Educational Testing Service's 
ticipant, he is given a chance to examine the blocks (or other GMAT (Graduate Management Admission Test) are now read 
shapes), as would PERI. What follows is a general algorithm and graded by machine (though there is human input as well), 
which PERI can apply to any 3D physical shapes within a limit and this trend promises to accelerate. Another application is 
of size (i.e., which its gripper can properly hold and manipu­ the use of tests as security devices. For example, our work 
late).                                                 in Psychometric AI yields a fairly rigorous account (presenta-
      General Algorithm fur "Cracking" any 3D Block Design in S tests a machine can solve, versus what tests positively stump 
      1. Document original pieces by color, dimension, characteristics on 
        each side, and total number.                   machines, but are solvable by humans. This account can be 
      2 Input goal configuration (a picture that will need to be deciphered) used, for instance, to devise tests designed to weed out trou­
      3. Partition the goal into distinguishable pieces that match similar as­ blesome softbots from human users in situations where hack­
        pects of those that are available pieces in the original. Start first ers attempt to build bots in order to overwhelm online systems 
        with the entire goal as one piece. Some aspects of the pieces may 
        be ignored at this stage.                      (e.g., polling systems). 
      4. Once the goal has been partitioned, determine if original puzzle We believe that the "Picture Arrangement" task (see again 
        pieces match the partitioned ones If not, go back to step 3 and par­ Figure 3) provides a helpful microworld for another appli­
        tition it into two pieces, three pieces, etc. (An exceedingly large 
        cutoff is imposed to handle cases where no partitioning is valid, cation: the problem of threat anticipation in the the intelli­
        otherwise non-halting is possible.) If there are matching original gence community. Currently, ETS is supporting research in 
        puzzle pieces to the goal partitioning, go on to step 5. our lab devoted to augmenting the predictive power of intel­
      5. Start with a goal piece and match it to an original piece that has ligence analysts, as that power is described, for example, in 
        not yet been used There will be a finite search for each matching 
        piece since step 4 has been passed, indicating the goal is known to [Heuer, 1999]. However, we intend to pursue a new dimen­
        be solvable. When a match is found, the onginal piece is physi­ sion in this work, one based on the notion that predicting what 
        cally added to the solution "arena" by changing the po­
        sitioning of the onginal piece as well as the angle, side, or any other (say) a terrorist will do is in significant measure the comple­
        necessary aspect. Continue the present step until no more pieces in tion of a story based on "snapshots" earlier in the "narrative" 
        the goal exist that need a match.              in which the terrorist is an actor. Our attempt to enable PERI 
  In the case of the puzzle from the Binary Arts Corporation, to crack "Picture Arrangement" is the first step in the explo­
the goal configuration is not specified ahead of time (as it is in ration of this new dimension. In our initial work on this prob­
the WAIS). Therefore, we assume that the goal is given ahead lem, once a snapshot in a group like that shown in Figure 3 
of time and are then able to use the above general algorithm is selected, a search for a consistency proof that a particular 
without any modification. PERI can solve the original version successor is possible under narrative constraints is fired. If a 
of Binary Arts' puzzle; however, the original version doesn't proof is found, the successor is selected, and the process it­
correspond to the WAIS Block Design task, the cracking of erates. Narrative constraints are declarative formalizations of 
which was our goal. The next challenge PERI faces is the more plots, themes, and characters. 


ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS                                                                             891 