                            Tucking RCC in Cyc's Ontological Bed 

                                             Pierre Grenon 
                     Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science 
                                          University of Leipzig 
                            Haertelstrasse 16-18, D-04107, Leipzig, Germany 
                                     pgrenon@ifomis.uni-leipzig.de 


                     Abstract                          Two main questions arise: (i) does the formal theory support 
                                                       an interpretation compatible with that intended for the em•
    Formalisms and axiomatic theories are designed to 
                                                       bedding framework? (ii) is it possible to bend the theory and 
    support reasoning, they are often intended with a 
                                                       its intended interpretation such as to allow maximal integra•
    preferred interpretation and a targeted ontology. 
                                                       tion? This may lead either to non-trivial changes in the 
    Questions of proper interpretations and of the pos•
    sible challenge of an intended interpretation arise embedding ontology or to the choice of a peculiar interpre•
    when integrating a particular theory in pre-existing tation for the theory to be integrated. In turn, it becomes 
    formal and ontological settings. This paper reports necessary to check whether the chosen interpretation is 
    on an instance of this general problem of ontologi• really allowed by the integrated theory (given its axioms) 
    cal engineering. The case study is that of the inte• and that it does not generate ontological monsters, so to 
    gration of the Region Connection Calculus for spa• speak, according to the standards of the larger ontology. 
    tial reasoning in the Cyc knowledge base. We show  When starting a work of integration, one tends to be maxi•
    that given the assumptions on the Cyc ontology,    mally conservative from the standpoint of the embedding 
    RCC had to be interpreted within a substantivalist framework (this is, at least, our experience), for the obvious 
    metaphysic of space as a Boolean algebra of spatial reason that, a priori, it might be simpler and more efficient 
    regions which are distinct from their occupants.   to adapt a specific theory to an existing larger ontology 
    The RCC literature suggests such an intended in•   rather than the converse. Changes in the embedding ontol•
    terpretation, and this paper intends to show that this ogy are always perilous and their consequences are not 
    was a necessary condition of integration in Cyc's  always easily anticipated. Moreover, from the standpoint of 
    ontology. This led to the enrichment of the Cyc    an allegedly total or universal ontology, it is very tempting 
    knowledge base, rather than to a radical modifica• when integrating presumably specific theories to generalize 
    tion of the upper-level ontology.                  their relevance by extending their domain of interpretation, 
                                                       and even relaxing not only the intended interpretation, but 
1 Introduction                                         also the axiomatization. The present paper can be taken as a 
                                                       reminder to be cautious when making a methodological 
Our standpoint is that of ontological engineers attempting to maxim of this tendency. 
integrate a comparatively small and allegedly domain spe•
cific theory within a larger, multipurpose formal framework. The axiomatic theory of interest is the so-called Re•
Bluntly put, our ontological interest is concerned with types gion Connection Calculus (RCC as put forward in [Ran-
of entities admitted by the respective theories (and their dell et al., 1992]), a theory prototypically applied to spa•
domains of variables), the intended interpretations of these tial reasoning. The embedding ontology in which we 
theories, and issues of relative coherence and soundness. introduced RCC is that of the Cyc knowledge base (Cyc 
We consider that ontological engineering in this sense is KB), as described by [Lenat and Guha, 1990], and which 
distinct from a work of implementation. Indeed, the power stands as a larger theory of reality. In part 2, we give 
of information science ontologies lies in their semantic some elements regarding the background of Cyc's spatial 
aspects and their ontological foundations. These elements ontology. In part 3, we present RCC's underlying meta•
will guide, but ought to remain independent from, a work of physics as informally rendered in the most significant 
implementation within a peculiar computing system. In this sources. Part 4 exposes how we were led to question 
context, it clearly appears that in order to use an existing RCC's ontological significance in our work of integra•
axiomatic theory, it is important to know which are its pos• tion. We present in part 5 the resulting ontological set•
sible interpretations and, especially, if one is the intended tings and some extensions of the basic theory that we 
one. It is indeed crucial to evaluate how the theory has to be were able to introduce in a Cyc framework. 
interpreted in order for it to fit within an existing ontology. 


894                                                                       ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS 2 Cyc's original spatial ontology                      piece of atmosphere which can be seen as empty space in a 
                                                       particular context, not in another. A substantivalist view of 
The Cyc KB is intended to serve as an encyclopedic reposi• space considers space and regions of space as substances 
tory of all human knowledge, primarily common-sense    independent for their existence of what occupies them. Un•
knowledge. It purports to provide a medium for the repre• der this view, it is not contextual for an entity to be a region 
sentation of facts and the inscription of rules about all exist• of space, it is essential. In other words, regions of space as 
ing and imaginable things. Cyc's knowledge is represented portions of an existentially independent (spatial) substance 
in a language called CycL, described in [Cycorp, 2002], did not exist in Cyc. We will not delve further into the Cyc 
which here can be seen as a first order language. The Cyc ontology. For our purpose, it suffices to observe that at•
KB is structured and compartmented into theories (called tempting to integrate RCC in Cyc meant starting to look at 
microtheories), additional theories can be introduced a volo RCC from an essentially relational spatial ontology. 
in order to account for the specificity of a given domain or 
context. Since our objective was to produce an integration 3 RCC and its canonical interpretation 
of RCC supporting spatial reasoning in the Cyc system, we 
will focus on Cyc spatial ontology.                    Was this approach allowed by RCC itself? RCC is techni•
  The relevant fragment of the KB is nonetheless extremely cally referred to as a mereotopology, that is, a theory with 
broad. Cyc's declared goal of achieving common-sense   both a mereological fragment (a theory of part and whole) 
reasoning has, as an objective, carved up the ontology in a and a topological fragment articulated together. The basic 
metaphysically determinate way. In particular, "spatial rea• part of the theory, so-called RCC-8, has only one topologi•
soning" has been understood primarily as a type of reason• cal primitive: Connects-With (or C). We will assume famili•
ing about objects in space, and not primarily about space arity with the basics of RCC which can be gathered in [Ran-
itself. Roughly, this view can be outlined by the position dell et al., 1992] and, informally, in the introduction of 
that in the world there are objects only, in particular physi• [Cohn et ai, 1997]. The calculus can be assimilated to a 
cal ones, delimitating their 'place'. In this context, spatial Boolean algebra, which, as we shall see, is not without onto-
reasoning as such refers to the relations that exist between logical consequences. Our interest here is mostly in the 
such objects, say, in virtue of being in such and such relative ontological significance of the theory. RCC is said to sup•
positioning. We shall refer hereafter to this understanding as port both a spatial and a temporal interpretation. Here, only 
the 'relational' approach. Cyc's spatial ontology was primar• a putative spatial interpretation is of interest, so regions will 
ily relational in this sense. Its ontology's top spatial cate• be spatial regions. RCC is, with respect to spatial reasoning, 
gory, #$SpatialThing, is defined in [Cycorp, 1997] as that of a theory of regions of space and of their relations, not a 
entities "with a spatial extent or location relative to some theory of physical objects nor of their relations to regions. It 
other [instance of SpatialThing]". A large part of the is already an other form of spatial reasoning than the one we 
hierarchy under SpatialThing was covered by the cate•  encountered in Cyc. Characteristically, regions are consid•
gory so-called PartiallyTangible which is, in a word, that ered as extended (RCC is originally introduced in analogy to 
of objects with a material constituent, concrete things. In Allen's interval logic). In purely model-theoretic terms, 
addition, SpatialThing also includes certain events. But intended models are regular open sets of Rn. For common-
many specializations were geometrical or otherwise abstract sense reasoning, n is equal to either 1, 2 or 3. Going further 
in some sense (so-called #$Intangible). Meanwhile, Cyc had in the specification of regions would be mostly irrelevant, as 
already a large body of spatial and topological relations, specializations derive straightforwardly from the theory. 
most of them over PartiallyTangible. These were typi•  However, what is arguably not trivial is precisely what 
cally documented as relations holding between objects in regions are, or, in other words, what their ontological status 
virtue of the relations between these objects' spatial extents. is: are they dependent or independent ontologically, that is, 
Indeed, many of the spatial entities in Cyc could be handled for their existence, on other entities which arc not them•
as spatial extents, metonymically, but were not properly selves spatial regions? In fact, depending on whether the 
speaking identical with their extents. This is notably the term 'region' refers to a part of a substantival space or to a 
case with geopolitical entities (on the other hand, Cyc has a portion of a relational space, the answer and the ensuing 
microtheory in which geopolitical entities are geographical interpretation of the theory would be significantly different 
regions, not merely located at such a region), but also with ontologically speaking. In other words, the alleged reality 
persons (which are examples of composite entities, with a that the theory intends to capture is not that evident. 
tangible part, a body, and an intangible part), or even books It is useful to remark that the relations in RCC are re•
(composed of a material support and an informational con• quired to hold between regions of equal dimensionality. 
tent). However, spatial extents (intuitively, spatial regions) This indicates the possibility of treating uni-dimensional 
were not 'reified' nor mentioned in assertions. Their onto- and bi-dimensional regions of space, even if the respective 
logical status was, so to speak, implicit and mostly intuitive. domains are independent. This means an acceptance of 
On the other hand, still in [Cycorp, 1997], Cyc had a notion objects of lower dimensionality than that of physical objects 
of (pure) spatial region used essentially to define contextu- (which are uncontroversially tri-dimensional). Thus, if RCC 
ally empty space. But then, for an entity, its being an in• is a fragment of a theory of reality, its underlying ontology 
stance of this collection was overtly and essentially context probably is not restricted to physical objects and assimilated 
dependent. The documentation discusses as an example a things, or, in Cyc's terms, PartiallyTangible. However, so 


ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS                                                                            895  far it remains open whether one can conceive in a RCC-like Let us assume that generalization is possible. C is then to 
 framework objects of lower dimensions that are not spatial be interpreted as a relation between objects such that these 
 regions or, alternatively, only regions of lower dimensions spatially connect along the RCC lines ([Cohn and Varzi, 
 at-which material objects are somehow located. The rejec• 1996] situates RCC's C among a variety of interpretations). 
 tion of boundaries from RCC after [Randell and Cohn,  Modulo the issues with openness of regions in RCC, Cyc 
 1989] is yet another evidence that the theory is about rela• had a relation of touching among PartiallyTangible which 
 tions among regions of a given non-null dimension.    intuitively was close enough to C to suggest the possibility 
   More generally, in RCC, the distinction between regions of a sound generalization at the level of SpatialThing. 
 and their putative occupants is almost systematic in the Most RCC-8 relations (the basic set of binary relations in 
 informal litterature, especially in [Randell and Cohn, 1989; RCC) had proxies in Cyc (with exception of inverses for 
 Randell et al, 1992; Cohn et aL, 97]. These sources suggest implementation reasons). More precisely, there were rela•
 the acceptance of a substantivalist view of space; that is, the tions at the level of PartiallyTangible which were holding 
 view that space consists in a substance in its own rights true in virtue of their relata's putative spatial extents in 
 distinct from the objects that occupy portions of it. For• RCC-like relations themselves. In particular, Cyc already 
 mally, the issue is scarcely addressed before [Bennett, 2001] had a relation of co-spatiality, a relation holding true of 
 which represents a dramatic broadening of the scope of things with identical spatial extents. Meanwhile, [Randell et 
 application of the theory (in addition to the stronger geomet• al, 1992] defines as identity between regions. However, 
 rical approach it presents). In multi-sortal axiomatizations, in Cyc, co-spatiality was not identity. There were conceiv•
 the domain is always restricted to the sort REGION (and able cases of entities with the same (spatial or geographical) 
 secondarily to the sort NULL), a sort PhysObj for occupants extent and which were not identical as alluded to in Part 2. 
 of regions is mentioned only to limit the scope of the theory. The question of whether a generalization of RCC's relations 
The first order axiomatizations are seen as fragments of was possible could be rephrased as whether in RCC was 
more complete theories. It is not clear how much this is, or indeed identity or could be interpreted as a co-spatiality 
is not, an artifact of the sortal approach which is itself an relation on SpatialThing. If the former, we would have 
artefact of a putative implementation. Presumably, however, applied RCC straightforwardly to the Cyc ontology. We will 
first-order axioms should incorporate quasi-sortal restric• see that the status of = in the RCC literature is something of 
tions implicit in the multi-sortal settings.           a puzzle. 
                                                         In [Randell and Cohn, 1989; Randell et al, 92], we find 
4 Path to Integration                                  the following axiom: 
Cyc's general maxim for ontological integration is generali•
zation. On the one hand, the foregoing considerations on the where P is "Part-Of. That is, x is identical to y if and only 
use of sorts in RCC provide a starting point for expanding if x is a part of y and y is a part of x. (1) simply states the 
the RCC schema by generalizing over sortal restrictions. anti-symmetry of P, i.e., if two objects of the domain are 
Overlooking any sortal restriction, on the other hand, is part of the other, they are actually one and the same. Ob•
tantamount to claiming generalization of RCC to putatively serve that given the definition of P: 
all entities, namely, Thing in Cyc. This is clearly not 
desirable: the scope has to be at least restricted to spatial 
things. For Cyc, objects in space (and physical events) are that is, x is a part of y if and only if everything that connects 
primitives. If RCC is generalizable to SpatialThing and if with x connects with y, we can infer the extensionality of C: 
regions SpaceRegion) are but a subtype of spatial things, 
it would be redundant and sub-optimal to develop the theory There is however a progressive terminological and ideologi•
on regions only. Yet, RCC takes regions as primitives. cal shift in the RCC literature concerning the status of =. In 
Pushed to the extreme, this latter position leads to defining [Gotts, 1994], 'EQ' is the privileged notation for the relation 
spatial objects in terms of regions. There would be only one of identity and '=' is only mentioned as an alternative nota•
substance, space. An object would be no more than a quali• tion. With [Bennett, 1995], the matter becomes allegedly 
tative singularity in space. Such an eliminatist view (doing more than a notational issue. [Bennett, 1995] argues in sec•
away with the primitivity of entities in space) is not con• tion 3 that an axiom of extensionality for C (and thus the 
ceivable for Cyc's upper-level ontology. The compromise anti-symmetry of P) is optional in RCC. The choice depends 
still appears to be straightforward generalization of RCC's on the way we construe (1), either as an axiom or as a defi•
notions at the level of SpatialThing in Cyc. After all, nition. A similar claim is made with the note 2 of [Bennett, 
there seems to be no prima facie objection to this in the 1996]: 
RCC literature. Indeed, the intended interpretation for RCC 
is as a calculus of 'spatial regions'. But the sources are all "[Randell et al, 1992] define[s] the relation 
starting from the introduction of regions as primitives. There EQ(x,y) as equivalent to If this 
seems to be no claim in the other sense, namely that RCC  definition is regarded as an axiom rather than a 
means, specifically and necessarily, spatial regions, and not, definition and if EQ is treated as logical equality 
more generally, spatial things in the sense of the Cyc KB. then this axiom is equivalent to Cext." 


896                                                                       ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS Cext is the right to left implication in (3), the use of 'EQ' and 2. What is crucial in deciding of the possibility of gen•
for '=' is [Bennett, 1995]'s import. Using '=' is just a con• eralizing the full RCC calculus (RCC-8 and additional Boo•
venient abuse of notation, this symbol is not really that for lean operators) is the behavior of operators in the absence of 
equality. In order to follow the rationale, let us adopt mo• (1) or equivalently the extensionality of C. The operator for 
mentarily this shift of notation, and reserve '=' as a symbol sum, for instance, is defined by [Randell et al, 1992] by: 
for equality. The thesis is radically defended by [Stell, 2000] (4) sum(x,y) 
that because EQ is allegedly defined and not simply intro•
duced as a logical primitive, EQ is not equality. EQ would RCCs literature generates a new puzzle for interpreting (4). 
simply be an equivalence relation. [Stell, 2000] mentions [Randell and Cohn, 1989; Randell et al 1992] suggest that 
the note 11 in [Cohn et al., 1997]:                    while (4) uses the iota operator of definite description, its 
                                                       method of elimination is not necessarily, although possibly, 
    "For notational convenience we will sometimes      to follow Russell's. Rather, it is intended to be eliminated 
    write x = y rather than EQ(x, y); technically the lat• such as to produce the following assertion: 
    ter is preferable, since EQ is a relation defined in 
    terms of C rather than true logical equality." 
[Stell, 2000] claims that this note provides evidence sup• This has the effect of virtually allowing plural reference, if 
porting intuitively his claim. In our opinion, this is a misdi• EQ is to be interpreted otherwise than as equality (since 
agnosis and the note warrants a better interpretation. without (1), (1) is not sufficient to rule out that there may 
Namely, it is an indication that the introduction of EQ be more than one entity substitutable to the sum of two 
(originally, =) by way of definition in RCC reflects a desire entities in (5) and thus more than one candidate for being 
of reducing the number of primitive relations in the theory. such a sum). The trouble with operators which may lose 
The equality relation is defined via P, P is defined via C; their intended functionality, goes seemingly unnoticed. 
thus far, there is only one primitive in the theory, C, instead Moreover, (5) does not even secure the existence of a value. 
of two, C and = Interestingly, although not addressing this By suggesting this transcription, the authors merely seek to 
point of detail, [Smith, 1996] stigmatizes this general ten• ensure that the Boolean operators are totally defined on their 
dency in RCC as inherited from the classical schools of domain. For this purpose, providing for a conventional 
mereology.                                             value in cases where the operators do not properly denote, 
  There is a more serious rationale than such footnotes the introduction of the NULL sort, or, in other words, a 
exegesis for not endorsing the [Bennett, 1995; Stell, 2000] notion of null region, is required. It is clear, even for these 
alternative. It seems now that the contentious part of the authors, that this move is not ontologically defendable (see 
argument rests on the claim that EQ is capable of taking also page 13 of [Simons, 1987] for its vehement dismissal). 
different interpretations according to the way (1) is con• Rather, this is an algebraic desiderata and an implementa-
ceived. Let us assume that EQ is not = (logical identity) and tional requirement (in short, codes have to return a value). 
rewrite (1), (2) and (3) with EQ in place of = (call the result• In the context of a putative generalization, this is even more 
ing propositions (T), (2') and (3')). Let us see the possible puzzling. What could possibly be the mereological product 
consequences for the ontology. This choice apparently en• of two people? A null person (or null person's part)? Such a 
ables the generalization of the intended domain of interpre• question leads to nonsense from Cyc's common-sense 
tation from the domain of pure space to that of objects in standpoint. Cyc's uneasiness with the ontological prodigality 
space. EQ is merely an equivalence relation, "EQ(x,y)" of RCCs Boolean operators goes further. If Boolean opera•
means that x and y have the same region, the same spatial tors denote, they denote objects in space. The sum of this 
extent. This corresponds (again, abstracting away fine de• cup and the spill of coffee on this desk is constructible in the 
tails of the topology) to the co-spatiality relation in Cyc. theory as a spatial thing. Both the cup and the puddle are in 
Note how accommodating this interpretation might be. If we space, that is consensual. The question is whether it is desir•
can still include in our ontology regions of space and pre• able (and needed) to consider that there are sums of such 
serve the ability to interpret on this restricted domain EQ as arbitrarily united objects. Ontologically speaking, there 
=, EQ gives the identity criterion for space regions (= entails were no incentives to go after a notion of null object and 
EQ and, on regions, EQ entails =). So, it seems that choos• totally defined operators, although even in Cyc, the imple•
ing a weak interpretation is rather positive and optimal for mentation would eventually require an apparatus mimicking 
the resulting ontology.                                the function of the null region. 
  But there is a drawback. If EQ is but an equivalence rela• So, conversely, what was the meaning of a Russellian 
tion over a broader domain, then P, which is now a relation elimination of definite description? This would result in the 
on objects (such that the extent of one is part of the other's following transcription of (4): 
extent), is no longer anti-symmetric. This means that RCC 
no longer warrants that two objects with the same (spatial) 
extents are one and the same thing. In particular, there could 
be several distinct entities which are all the sums of a given Observe that (5) is indeed entailed by (6). But there is some•
set of objects, say three bricks. Without (1) and only (1), thing new in (6). Namely, = is indubitably logical identity 
the sum of brick 1 and of the sum of brick 2 and 3 is distin• and we verify that (6) entails the uniqueness of sum. If EQ 
guishable from the sum of brick 3 and of the sum of brick 1 was not =, there could be two objects, a and b, in the domain 


ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS                                                                            897 such that EQ(a,b) but not a=b. However, by (3'), these two ticulars). This afforded us to define three specializations of 
objects would connect the same objects. Since trivially any extended spatial regions which were homogeneous in di•
object is a sum, any object in the EQ relation with it con• mensionality, i.e., regular in the intended sense. We were 
nects its parts (by (3') and the first conjunct of (6)). But then only requiring our relations to take as arguments homoge•
a and b are identical (by the second conjunct of (6)). EQ is neous extended regions and were axiomatically enforcing 
therefore -. This, in turn, entails the extensionality of C. constraints on co-dimensionality of the relata. So, in the 
  So, if the iota operator is eliminated a la Russell, C is end, we had a single set of RCC relations and operators 
indubitably extensional, P is anti-symmetric, and EQ is =. which were applicable within each dimension independently 
We took this to be a reductio ad absurdum of the [Bennett, of other dimensions. 
1995; Stell, 2000] thesis, and, in fine, as an indication that Anecdotally, we carried on in a specific microtheory an 
Cyc's co-spatiality was not an RCC relation. In other words, atomic extension of RCC along the lines suggested in [Ran-
we had to interpret RCC as a calculus of regions of a sub• dell et al, 1992] by imposing categorial restrictions on the 
stantival space at which entities of various kinds could be relevant axioms. Despite RCC being a region based calcu•
located, and not as a theory of these entities. The alternative lus, a larger ontology such as Cyc could make use of point-
would have been either going forward with a non exten• based reasoning and zero dimensional elements. We devel•
sional mereo(topo)logy of objects-in-space departing sig• oped a variant of RCC in a specific microtheory introducing 
nificantly from both RCC and Cyc or going back precisely the category of #$SpatialPoint as a primitive and a relation 
to the more restricted domain of space regions.        of incidence of points in a region as suggested by [Randell 
                                                       et al., 1992]. We refined this elementary treatment with 
5 Extending Cyc's spatial ontology                     more topologically oriented primitives of interior and 
                                                       boundary point incidence. Additionally, we developed a set 
We thus chose to go for an interpretation according to which of trans-dimensional relations among entities of other di•
RCC was a theory of regions of substantival space. We  mensions. If material objects are always located at a three 
therefore developed an ontology of space as an entity with dimensional region, they can be geographically located at a 
an independent existence, choosing to rework and have  given parallel for instance. Moreover, their footprints (geo•
#$SpatialRegion for domain of RCC relations. In order to graphical projection) are two-dimensional extents with 
bridge the gap between spatial things and spatial regions, we similar locational properties. So, on the one hand, we al•
developed a locative apparatus inspired largely by [Casati lowed partial location of entities at regions of lower dimen•
and Varzi, 1996]. This enabled us to formalize the meaning sionality, possibly at points. On the other hand, we designed 
of object level spatial categories and relations, and make projective locations, typically intended to account for geo•
explicit their metonymical character: spatial relations among graphical positioning. More generally, this allowed ap•
objects were holding in virtue of similar relations between proaching regional boundaries in terms of incidence. 
these objects' spatial extents. Originally, only spatial objects 
were in the ontology. We introduced (pure) spatial regions, 
RCC relations among some of these regions, and relations 6 Concluding Remarks 
of location between spatial objects and regions. We used There exist alternatives in the metaphysics of space. The 
these in order to explicitly define spatial relations. This main distinction being between substantival and relational 
resulted in a spatial reasoning language with greater expres• space. This paper intended to provide evidence that the RCC 
sive power, clearer semantics, and an enriched ontology. It contributors are 'right' in putting forward certain ontological 
also facilitated spatial reasoning with access to a greater basics as a frame for using their theory, namely a substanti•
variety of data. We could use spatial regions for instance as val view of space. The reason why it could not be relational 
handles when manipulating datasets for GIS based reason•
                                                       is that the distinction between co-spatial and identical ob•
ing. There is unfortunately not enough room here to give 
                                                      jects would be lost, while co-spatiality is not an identity 
specifics. 
                                                       criterion of objects in space. Once the ontological independ•
  In a dedicated microtheory, we put some basic constraints ence of spatial regions is endorsed, however, two solutions 
on our calculus following RCC's intended interpretation, 
                                                       exist. On the one hand, objects are themselves independent 
these motivated in particular further categorial distinctions. 
                                                       from the regions they occupy or they are not. If they are, as 
To begin with, RCC is region based: relationships are un•
derstood as holding among extended regions, i.e., neither in Cyc, RCC has to be interpreted as we put forward here. 
points or scattered sets of points are in the domain. We However, there might be a way in which we could mimic if 
interpreted the regularity of the open sets in the alleged not secure a relational formalism. RCC predicates could be 
models of RCC as founding yet another category of spatial predicated of objects and events in space, nonetheless, the 
regions, namely regions homogeneous in dimensionality. denotations of operators such as sum, for instance, provided 
We wanted to apply RCC to regions of the three basic spa• they exist, would be spatial extents. In that context, the sum 
tial dimensionalities (namely, one, two and three dimen• of two entities in the RCC sense would be the sum of their 
sional regions), consistently with Cyc's common-sense  extents. As the extensionality of C would be preserved by 
reasoning leanings. We chose to introduce dimensionality as this functionality of sum, this would be identical to the ex•
primitive notions (at the topological level) and as instances tent of any of their putative sums (in a purely mereological 
of Attribute Value (properties of entities as abstract par- sense). One can then endorse the thesis that such extents are 


898                                                                       ONTOLOGIES AND FOUNDATIONS 