                        Generalized     Amazons      is PSPACE–Complete

                 Timothy   Furtak1,  Masashi  Kiyomi2,  Takeaki  Uno3,  Michael  Buro4
 1,4 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. email: {1furtak,4mburo}@cs.ualberta.ca
               2,3 National Institute of Informatics, Japan. email: 2masashi@grad.nii.ac.jp, 3uno@nii.jp


                    Abstract                              serve as a testbed for research on selective search and
                                                          adversarial planning.
    Amazons is a perfect information board game with
    simple rules and large branching factors. Two play- • Like Hex, Go-moku, Tic-Tac-Toe, and Othello, Ama-
    ers alternately move chess queen-like pieces and      zons has the property of being monotonically increasing
    block squares on a 10×10 playing ﬁeld. The            (each move blocks one square), so the underlying struc-
    player who makes the last move wins. Ama-             ture of the game is a directed acyclic graph, rather than
    zons endgames usually decompose into indepen-         a general graph. This eliminates some potentially com-
    dent subgames. Therefore, the game is a nat-          plicating variables for scientiﬁc research. Also like Hex,
    ural testbed for combinatorial game theory. It        Amazons  cannot end in a draw.
    was known that determining the winner of simple     • Endgames  regularly decompose into independent sub-
    generalized Amazons endgames is NP-equivalent.        games (Fig 1). At this stage, combinatorial game theory
    This paper presents two proofs for the PSPACE-        can be applied to vastly reduce the search space, and thus
    completeness of the generalized version of the full   speed up good move selection compared with full-board
    game.                                                 analyses. Hence, Amazons is a suitable test-domain for
                                                          new  ideas in this area. See for instance [Berlekamp,
1  Introduction                                           2000; Muller¨ and Tegos, 2002; Snatzke, 2004].
Amazons is a two-person perfect information board game that Establishing the computational complexity of various prob-
combines elements of chess and Go. Both players start with lems associated with generalized games is also interesting.
four pieces called amazons which are symmetrically posi- For example, proving NP- or PSPACE-hardness is convincing
tioned at the edges of an otherwise empty 10 × 10 square evidence that a problem does not possess a simple solution in
board. Moves consist of picking an amazon of the player’s general (although effective methods may exist for speciﬁc in-
colour, moving it like a chess queen, and then shooting an stances).
arrow straight in one of eight directions from the amazon’s Generalizing the standard Amazons game is straight-
destination square to an empty square. This square becomes
blocked for the remainder of the game and no amazon or ar- a b c d e f g h i j     a b c  d e f g h  i j
row can pass it. Arrows are not allowed to pass amazons 1                        1
either and amazons cannot be captured. Blocking squares is 2                     2
mandatory. The game proceeds in turns and the ﬁrst player 3                      3
without any legal move loses. Fig. 1 shows two typical Ama- 4                    4
zons positions.                                        5                         5
  The game of Amazons is interesting for AI research for at 6                    6
least the following reasons:                           7                         7
                                                       8                         8
  • Compared with other popular games its rule set is sim- 9                     9
    ple — and yet, it leads to interesting strategic concepts 10                 10
    which need to be addressed when designing evaluation  Black to move:  c7−b7,e10    Endgame position
    functions [Lieberum, 2005].
  • The number of legal moves in Amazons positions on the Figure 1: Typical Amazons positions. On the left, the black
    standard board is often in the hundreds or even thou- amazon at c7 is about to move to b7 and block e10 to prevent
    sands. This puts pressure on sound backward pruning the white amazon at g8 from entering the SW corner area.
    search techniques such as the alpha-beta algorithm, be- On the right, Black can make 24 unopposed moves, whereas
    cause the number of positions to be searched even at White can make only 20, so Black can win regardless of who
    small depths is astronomical. Amazons can therefore is to move.forward: we allow arbitrary square-shaped boards (n × n)
with at least one and up to n2 amazons. It is known that solv-
ing generalized Amazons puzzles (i.e. determining whether
in a single-player Amazons game the player can make at
least k consecutive moves) is NP-complete and determining
the winner of simple generalized Amazons endgames — in
which players do not interact anymore — is NP-equivalent 2(n2 + 2) + 4
[Buro, 2000]. In what follows, we present two proofs for
the PSPACE-hardness of deciding the winner of generalized1

Amazons positions. While the ﬁrst proof is more intuitive, 2(n2 + 2) + 5                          2(n2 + 2) + 9
the second one leads to a stronger results, namely that the
problem remains PSPACE-complete even if each player has
only one amazon.
2  Hex  Reduction
In this section we show that determining the winner in Hex
positions, which is known to be PSPACE-complete, can be Figure 2: The arrangement of rooms relative to each other
reduced to the related Amazons problem. We begin with the and the connecting corridors. There is slack space for arrows
deﬁnition of the sets we like to relate to each other: in each corridor and at the top and bottom of each room suf-
                                                      ﬁcient to allow a large number of amazons to pass through.
Deﬁnition 1:
  • AMAZONS    is a set of succinct encodings of all gen-
                                                      and one White amazon (Fig. 2,3). These amazons are placed
    eralized Amazons positions with a winning strategy for
                                                      across from each other so that each is able to contain the
    Black (to move).
                                                      other in one move, and so gain control of the room. Occu-
  • HEX  is a set of succinct encodings of all Hex positions pied tiles on the Hex board are represented by removing the
    with a winning strategy for Black (to move).      opposing piece. In this way the ﬁrst stage of the transformed
                                                      game is effectively a game of Hex where players alternately
Theorem 1: HEX ≤p AMAZONS.                            select rooms, blocking the opponent’s amazons. Indeed, if
                                                      any player does not take control of a room when such a move
Corollary 1: AMAZONS  is PSPACE-complete.             is available then the opposing player may take a room “for
                                                      free,” which in Hex (and similarly here) can only help.
Proof: [Reisch, 1981] shows that HEX is PSPACE-complete The rooms are connected by corridors which require a cer-
by reducing QBF   to HEX.   Moreover, AMAZONS    ∈    tain minimum number of steps to traverse. This traversal time
                                                      for each corridor is chosen such that no adjacent rooms may
PSPACE, which is obvious by the existence of a depth-ﬁrst                                               2
minimax search algorithm that decides the winner of a given affect either player from securing a room. Each of the n
Amazons position in space polynomial in the length of its en- rooms may be sealed off from enemy rooms by blocking off
coding. Note, that the number of moves in an Amazons game the appropriate corridors. As there are at most 6 entrances to
played on an n × n board is at most n2.          2    each room and each can be blocked in one move, minimum
                                                      corridor traversal times of 7n2 are sufﬁcient.
Proof of Theorem 1: We describe a function f that maps ar- To force the outcome of the Amazons game to be equiv-
bitrary code words w into the encoding of an associated Ama- alent to that of the initial Hex game, White must win if and
zons position with the following properties:          only if he can form a connecting path from top to bottom.
                                                                                              2
 1. If w encodes a Hex position, then the ﬁrst player (Black) This is accomplished by placing an army of n + 2 White
    in decode(w) has a Hex winning strategy if and only if amazons at the bottom of the board with a path to all of the
    the ﬁrst player in decode(f(w)) (Black) has an Amazons bottom rooms (Fig. 4). As with adjacent rooms, these ama-
    winning strategy.                                 zons are also sufﬁciently far away that they cannot inﬂuence
                                                      the initial choosing of rooms.
             f(w)                                                                 2
 2. Otherwise,    encodes a ﬁxed Amazons position with  At the top of the board are 2n + 5 strips of open space.
    a second player (White) winning strategy.         The size of these strips is chosen large enough so that each
 3. There exists a Turing machine F and a polynomial p is larger than the rest of the board when ignoring the other
    such that for all w, F started on input w computes f(w) strips. This ensures that the outcome of the game is entirely
    in at most p(|w|) steps.                          determined by which player is able to control a majority of the
It follows that w ∈ HEX ⇔ f(w) ∈ AMAZONS   and HEX    strips. Strips are positioned such that once a White amazon
≤p AMAZONS.   We now describe the transformation f.   has captured one, it is unable to capture any others. At the top
  From a given n × n Hex position, each of the n2 hex tiles of each strip is a long path connecting to a single Black ama-
are represented by a rectangular room containing one Black zon (Fig. 5). The path is made long enough so that while the
                                                      amazon may eventually reach the strip, the number of moves
  1We drop “generalized” from now on when the context is clear. required to do so is greater than that needed by White to cap-                                                      path from enemy inﬂuence. Since there are no draws in Hex,
                                                      a winning strategy for the second player is equivalent to pre-
                                                      venting White from forming such a sequence of rooms.
                                                        If White can form a connecting path then the one White
                                                      amazon at the top and the army (of size n2 + 2) at the bottom
                                                      may be moved one at a time to take control of n2 + 3 strips,
                                                      a majority allowing White to win the game.
                                                        If White cannot form a connecting path then the number of
                                                      strips he may capture is at most n2 + 1: the number of White
                                                      amazons on the board not counting the army. Black will then
                                                      eventually be able to take control of the remaining strips with
  Figure 3: Sample transformation of a 3 × 3 Hex board. the amazon at the top of each. This gives Black a majority of
                                                      free space allowing him to win. The winner of this game is
                                                      therefore the same as for the original Hex position.
                                                        The connecting corridors must allow for the entire army to
                                                      pass through them. The given structure requires long slack
                                                      tunnels so that arrows may be ﬁred while moving. These tun-
                                                      nels must be at least as long as the size of the army, n2 + 2.
                                                      Not counting the boundary walls, the height of the horizontal
                                                      corridors then is 2(n2 + 2) + 5, and the diagonal corridors
                                                      one less. Ensuring that the corridors are long enough to pre-
                                                      vent room interference is a simple matter of adding additional
          n2 + 2                                      bends in the path, with each bend increasing the travel time
                                                      by 2. Since each corridor only needs to be 7n2 moves long
                                                      constructing this new board is clearly polynomial.
Figure 4: White’s army at the bottom of the board. The ﬁrst Each room is a rectangle with slack tunnels running
amazon can block off paths to enemy rooms.            through the middle. This tunnel is easily sufﬁcient with al-
                                                      most twice the space of those in the diagonal corridors. Mov-
                                                      ing an amazon through a room is straightforward: move to the
                very long tunnel (~size of lower board) center column when entering, then move to the exit row, and
                                                      ﬁnally into the next corridor. To enter and exit on the same
                                                      row simply move straight across. The initial amazon in the
                > rest of board                       room may be considered as part of the army or moved out of
                                                      the way to the side.
                                                        Rooms  and corridors may clearly be arranged without con-
                                                      ﬂict (Fig. 2). The entire transformation takes polynomial time
                                                      in the size of the original Hex board. The strategy to move
                                                      the army to the top of the board when a connecting series of
                                                      rooms exists is then trivial. It is also clearly impossible to do
                                                      this when a connecting series of rooms does not exist. 2

                                                      3   Geography   Reduction
Figure 5: 2n2 + 5 large strips of space at the top of the board.
White has a gatekeeper to prevent enemy rooms from reach- Here we show a stronger result, namely that even if the num-
ing them. Black has an amazon at the top of each strip that ber of Amazons is bounded by a constant, the problem re-
will eventually be able to take control of it if White cannot. mains PSPACE-complete. We again start with deﬁnitions of
                                                      the sets we consider:
                                                      Deﬁnition 2:
ture as many strips as he can. This is the time needed to
decide the control of each room, secure those rooms, and to • AMAZONS-2 is a set of succinct encodings of all
move the army from the bottom of the board to each of the n × n Amazons  positions with exactly one Black and
strips. A very loose upper bound for this distance is the num- one White amazon and a winning strategy for Black (to
ber of free squares in the lower section of the board, every- move).
thing beneath the strips. In this manner Black is eventually • GEOGRAPHY-BP3 is a set of succinct encodings of
able to take control of any strips that White cannot.     GEOGRAPHY     positions — consisting of a directed bi-
  If the ﬁrst player (White) has a winning strategy in the ini- partite planar graph, whose node types are shown in
tial Hex position that player may capture a set of rooms such Fig. 7,8,9, and a distinguished start node (Fig. 6) with
that a path exists from the bottom of the playﬁeld to the top. two leaving edges — for which the ﬁrst player has a win-
By blocking all corridors to hostile rooms he may isolate this ning strategy.                                                      only once, vertices cannot be marked twice. We force the two
                                                      amazons to go along the same paths. If one amazon advances
                              Figure 7: Path vertex.  toward a path different from the path chosen by the acting
                                                      player (the player placing the marker) then the amazon will
     Figure 6: Start vertex.                          be locked out by the acting player at some gadget.
                                                        We  implement a path, which has a one-square width, as
                                                      blank squares with surrounding blocked squares, as shown in
                                                      Fig. 10. We assume an amazon is currently at the left en-
                                                      trance a and proceeds to the right exit A. At each player’s
                                                      respective turn, the amazon is moved forward and blocks a
   Figure 8: Branch vertex.    Figure 9: Join vertex. square behind it. If the player blocks a square in front of him
                                                      the amazon becomes trapped. The amazons need to travel at

Theorem 2: GEOGRAPHY-BP3    ≤p AMAZONS-2.             maximum  speed, otherwise they will be locked out by the op-
                                                      ponent’s amazon at some point. In Fig. 10, the amazon needs
Corollary 2: AMAZONS-2  and AMAZONS    are PSPACE-    at least 12 moves to travel from the entrance to the exit. The
complete.                                             amazon can also get there in 13 moves. We use gadgets that
                                                      force the amazons to travel in the minimal numbers of moves
Proof:  Analog to Proof of  Corollary 1.  Note that   (in this case 12). Thus, amazons have to traverse any straight
AMAZONS-2   ≤p AMAZONS.                         2     line section of a path in one move. If we want to force an
                                                      amazon to take several moves, we bend the path an appro-
Proof of Theorem 2: Geography is a game played by two priate number of times as shown in Fig. 10. Moreover, it is
players on a given directed graph with a marked start node. obvious that we can change the direction a path aims as we
The players alternately put a marker on any unmarked node like. We now discuss the sub-gadgets shown in Fig. 11 to 14.
from which there exists an edge from the node marked last. Type 1 top speed gadget (Fig. 11). Assume the amazon
The ﬁrst player who cannot move loses. Note that in case for player X (denoted X) comes to the bottom left entrance,
of GEOGRAPHY-BP3,   the graph is bipartite and planar with a, and the amazon for player Y (Y ) comes to the bottom right
node types that are shown above. The game always ends in entrance, b. This gadget forces Y to come to the entrance as
a vertex with two entering edges and one leaving edge at the quickly as possible. That is, if Y comes to the entrance just
second visit of that vertex. [Lichtenstein and Sisper, 1980] after X comes to the entrance (we say that they arrive at the
show that GEOGRAPHY-BP3   is PSPACE-complete.         entrances at the same time in this situation), then X cannot
  We present a polynomial-time transformation that maps in- trap Y and X should exit this gadget at A, and Y should exit
put words — which are now encodings of planar bipartite at B. If Y comes to this gadget late then X can lock Y out in
graphs with a start marker — into encodings of Amazons po- 3 moves by moving to E, C, then D and blocking F . Thus
sitions with two amazons, such that the ﬁrst player wins the Y should come to the entrance as quickly as possible. If Y
geography game if and only if the ﬁrst player wins the associ- comes to entrance b at the same time X enters, Y can move
ated Amazons game. We emulate the Geography game with to F and block D. Thus, Y cannot be trapped. In this case
two amazons — one for each player — and with blocks that both X and Y can exit this gadget in ﬁve moves; X’s exit is
ﬁll the board with the necessary structure. The structure has A, Y ’s exit is B. Note that if we use two paths to connect this
two separate paths for each edge of the given graph. One path gadget to a symmetrical one, we can force both X and Y to
(Fig. 10) is for player one and the other path is for player two. move at top speed along those paths.
The two amazons simultaneously proceed along the paths as Type 2 top speed gadget (Fig. 12). If X enters this gadget
quickly as possible, otherwise one player locks up the other from a and Y enters from b (resp. d and c), the gadget forces
player. We construct the structure such that player one win- X to proceed to exit A and Y to proceed to exit B (resp. D
ning in generalized geography is equivalent to the amazon of and C). Otherwise the player being late will be trapped by
player one being able to trap the amazon of player two. We the other player. This gadget is somewhat complex, so ﬁrst
embed the given directed graph in the board using a pair of we will simply refer to its functionality. Assume amazon X
paths to represent an edge. To embed the vertices we use two comes to the entrance a and amazon Y comes to the entrance
gadgets that force the players to proceed along the paths in b (resp. d and c). This gadget forces Y to come to the entrance
pairs and in the same direction as the original directed edges.
  Putting a marker on a vertex in GEOGRAPHY-BP3 cor-
responds to the two amazons going from a vertex gadget to             A         B
another vertex gadget. Since each vertex gadget can be used

                                                                        C  D

                              A
                                                                        E     F

                   a
                                                                    a        b
               Figure 10: Path example.                         Figure 11: Top speed gadget (type 1).as quickly as possible. If Y ’s entrance is b, this is the same as out by X. We can check the other properties analogously.
type 1 top speed gadget, and Y should come to b at the same Type 3 top speed gadget (Fig. 13). This gadget is almost
time that X enters. If Y ’s entrance is d, this gadget forces Y identical to the previous gadget. The only difference is the
to come to d at least before X reaches G, or otherwise Y will direction of the right hand side paths which have been mir-
be locked out by X. If Y ’s entrance is c, then even if Y comes rored.
to c at the same time that X enters, X can trap Y . In addition, Cross gadget (Fig. 14). We can cross a path of player X
if X enters from b (resp. c) and Y enters from c (resp. b), Y and a path of player Y with this gadget. Assume the entrance
should come to c at the same time that X enters. Otherwise for X is a, and the entrance for Y is b. If X and Y come to
X can lock Y out. If X’s entrance is a and Y ’s entrance is b, the gadget at the same time, X is forced to exit the gadget at
X is forced to exit at A and Y is forced to exit at B. Amazons A and Y is forced to exit this gadget at B. Both X and Y
can use the gadget twice, once to enter at a and b and once to take ﬁve moves in that case. If X comes later, then X will be
enter at d and c. At the ﬁrst use of the gadget they cannot put locked out. If Y comes two moves later than X, then Y will
blocks to obstruct the next use of the gadget.        be trapped. Similarly, if a player goes to another exit, or tries
  Now we detail the amazons’ sequence of moves in this gad- to obstruct the opponent player, the opponent player can lock
get. First we will describe the moves when X’s entrance is the amazon out. In addition, if X comes to the gadget and Y
a and Y ’s entrance is b and they come to the entrance at the never comes, then if X exits at B, X takes two more moves
same time. X moves to N, Y moves to Q; X then moves   than if X exits at A. If Y comes to the gadget and X never
to G and blocks I, Y moves to O and blocks H. Then they comes, then if Y exits at A, Y takes two more moves than if
proceed to their respective exits at top speed. If X blocks a Y exit at B. We can easily check these properties.
position other than I, Y can then proceed to other exits. This We now explain the main vertex gadgets corresponding to
increases the number of moves available to Y , so X should the four types of vertices in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8 and Fig. 9.
not play this way if he wants to win. Thus we can assume that It is easy to emulate a vertex in Fig. 7. We do this with two
X blocks I. If Y blocks a position other than H, X can trap paths, one for each player, on which player one needs one
Y . Thus Y should block H to prevent being locked out. If more move to travel from entrance to exit than player two
X’s entrance is a and Y ’s entrance is c and they arrive at the does, effectively reversing which player is next to act. We
entrance at the same time, X moves to N and Y moves to R. illustrate gadgets for branching vertices (Fig. 8) and joining
X then moves to G and blocks L, Y moves to P and either vertices (Fig. 9) in Fig. 15 and 16, respectively. We can use
blocks F (option 1) or blocks any other position (option 2). the gadget in Fig. 15 for the start vertex (Fig. 6), too. We draw
In the case of (1), X moves to K and blocks M. In the case paths for amazon X, who is expected to enter this gadget
of (2), X moves to J and blocks E. In both cases, Y is locked ﬁrst, as solid lines and paths for amazon Y as dotted lines.
                                                      Two amazons always come to the paired entrances at the same

    A         B   C         D                         time, otherwise an amazon being late will be locked out by
                                                      the opponent’s amazon at the top speed gadget just after the
                      E                               entrance.
                   F                                    Branch  gadget (Fig. 15). This gadget corresponds to a
       G H    I   J K  L
                   M                                  vertex with an entering edge and two leaving edges (Fig. 8),
       N     O     P                                  from which a player selects one of the leaving edges to fol-
          Q           R                               low.Since we can adjust the number of moves amazons re-
   a        b       c        d                        quire along paths by bending these paths arbitrarily, we set
         Figure 12: Top speed gadget (type 2).        those from X’s entrances to X’s exits and those from Y ’s
                                                      entrances to Y ’s exits to be the same length. Because of the
                                                      cross gadget, X requires two more moves if X wants to take
                                                      Y ’s exit, therefore doing so will result in X being trapped by
                                                      Y in the type 2 top speed gadget. Thus player X cannot select
                                                      Y ’s path. Y must select the exit in the same direction that X
                                                      did, otherwise Y is locked out at the type 2 top speed gadget.
                                                      Note that if X slows down inside the gadget Y can lock X

         Figure 13: Top speed gadget (type 3).

                   B     A


              a     b
               Figure 14: Cross gadget.                              Figure 15: Branch gadget.