                      An Extension of the ICP Algorithm for Modeling 
                             Nonrigid Objects with Mobile Robots 

                        Dirk Hahnel , Sebastian Thrun , Wolfram Burgard 
                   Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science, PA, USA, 
                    University of Freiburg, Department of Computer Science, Germany 

                     Abstract 
    The iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm [2] is 
    a popular method for modeling 3D objects from 
    range data. The classical ICP algorithm rests on 
    a rigid surface assumption. Building on recent 
    work on nonrigid object models [5; 16; 9], this pa•
    per presents an ICP algorithm capable of model•    Figure 1: The essential idea: Rather assuming that the relation 
    ing nonrigid objects, where individual scans may be of measurement coordinates are fixed relative to the location from 
    subject to local deformations. We describe an inte• which the measurement was taken, the approach proposed here con•
    grated mathematical framework for simultaneously   straints the relation of measurement coordinates in a soft way. The 
    registering scans and recovering the surface config• exact configuration of a scan is calculated while scans are registered 
    uration. To tackle the resulting high-dimensional to each other. 
    optimization problems, we introduce a hierarchi•
    cal method that first matches a coarse skeleton of sands of variables. To accommodate local deformations, our 
    scan points, then adapts local scan patches. The ap• approach transforms scans into Markov random fields, where 
    proach is implemented for a mobile robot capable  nearby measurements arc linked by a (nonlinear) potential 
    of acquiring 3D models of objects.                function. All links are soft. They can be bent, but bending 
                                                      them incurs a penalty. Figure 1 illustrates this transforma•
                                                      tion: rigid links between the measurement coordinates and the 
1 Introduction                                        robot sensor are replaced by soft links between adjacent mea•
                                                      surement points. The resulting problem of scan registration 
In recent years, there has been a flurry of work on acquir• under these soft constraints becomes a high-dimensional op•
ing 3D models from range data. The classical setting in• timization problem with orders of magnitude more variables 
volves a range sensor (e.g., a 3D range camera or a stereo involved than in regular ICP. We show how to solve this prob•
vision system) used to acquire range images of the target ob• lem via Taylor series expansion (linearization), and then pro•
ject from multiple vantage points. The problem of integrating pose a coarse-to-fine hierarchical optimization technique for 
multiple range scans into a 3D model is commonly known carrying out the optimization efficiently. 
as scan registration. Most state-of-the-art implementations 
                                                         Our new algorithm is applied to the problem of learning 
are based on the popular iterative closest point algorithm L2J. 
                                                      3D models of non-stationary objects with a mobile robot. We 
The topic has received significant attention in fields as di•
                                                      describe an implemented robot system that utilizes a model 
verse as computer vision [12; 9] and medical imaging [7], 
                                                      differencing technique similar to the one described in [1] to 
large-scale urban modeling [14], and mobile robotics [10; 8; 
                                                      segment scans. By acquiring views of the target objects from 
15]. 
                                                      multiple sides, our approach enables a robot to acquire a 3D 
  ICP aligns range scans by alternating a step in which clos• model of a non-stationary object. 
est points are identified, and a step by which the optimal trans•
lation and rotation of scans relative to each other is computed. 2 Scan Registration 
In doing so, most of them are making a rigid object assump•
tion: range scans, if aligned correctly, must be spatially con• This section describes a variant of the well-known iterative 
sistent with each other.                              closest point algorithm (ICP) [2] for rigid objects. The al•
  Many objects are deformable. For example, people change gorithm alternates two phases, one in which nearest points is 
shape, as do trees, pillows, and so on. A natural research identified, and one in which the distance between all pairs of 
goal is therefore to extend ICP to accommodate local object nearest points is minimized. 
transformations. Following recent work primarily found in 
the medical imaging literature [5; 16; 6; 3], we proposes an 2.1 Scans 
approach suited for scan registration and 3D modeling of non- The input to the ICP algorithm is a set of 3D scans denoted 
rigid objects that can efficiently deal with hundreds of thou-
                                                                        d = di,d2,... (1) 


PERCEPTION                                                                                            915       (a) mobile robot with scanner (b) scene acquired by scanner (c) result of model differencing 


Figure 2: (a) 3D range scan acquired by mobile robot shown in (b). (c) Scene from which the scan in (a) is extracted through background 
differencing. 

Each such scan consists of a collection of ID range mea• This likelihood distinguishes two cases. The first case models 
surements, arranged as a 3D "range image":            the noise in range perception by a Gaussian with a sensor-
                                                 (2)  specific covariance (usually a diagonal matrix). The mea•
Figure 2c shows a typical scan acquired by a robot. Further surement error under this Gaussian is given by the distance 
below, we will denote the horizontal angle of the range between the point under consideration, and the point 
measurement by and the vertical one by In our experi• in scan d/ that maximizes this Gaussian. As is easily to be 
mental setup, scans are obtained by a SICK laser range finder seen, this point minimizes the Mahalanobis distance to 
mounted on a tilt unit shown in Figure 2a.                Thus, is simply the point "nearest" to in the scan 
  The problem of scan registration can be formulated as the d/ under 
problem of recovering the vantage points from which the  However, finding the nearest point only makes sense if 
scans were taken. In our approach, scans are taken from a falls within the perceptual range of scan d/. If is oc•
mobile robot; hence each vantage point is described by three cluded, it might be perfectly well-explained by an object not 
variables: its location in Cartesian coordinates and its ori• detectable from the vantage point This is captured by the 
entation                                              second case in (5), which applies when lies outside the 
                                                 (3)  free space of scan The free space of scan is denoted 
Here denotes the vantage point from which scan was It is defined as the region between the robot and the detected 
acquired. The set of all vantage points will be denoted x. objects. If lies outside this region, the measurement prob•
Recovering the vantage points x is equivalent to registering ability is assumed to be uniform. The value of this uniform 
the scans if one vantage point is (arbitrarily) defined to be depends on the range of occluded space, but it plays no role 
                                                      in the optimization to come; hence we leave it unspecified. 
2.2 Measurement Model                                 2.3 Registration as Likelihood Maximization 
Scans are registered in world coordinates. To do so, measure• The goal of scan registration is to determine the vantage 
ments must be mapped into 3D world coordinates. This  points x that maximize the joint likelihood of the scans d and 
is achieved by a projective function which takes as an ar• x: 
gument a range measurement and a vantage point and returns                                             (6) 
as its output the corresponding coordinate in 3D world coor• The first term of this product is obtained by calculating the 
dinates:                                              product over all individual measurement likelihoods, assum•
                                                      ing noise independence in each measurement: 
                                                 (4) 
                                                                                                       (7) 
Here and are the orientation of the range measurement 
   relative to the sensor. The variable is the generic height The term p(x) in (6) is the prior on the individual vantage 
of the sensor which in our robot system is fixed, but is easily points (and nence on the registration). The prior of the point 
generalized to variable heights. For brevity, we will some• is expressed as a Gaussian with mean and covariance 
                                                      matrix 
times write instead of 
  We define the quality of a pairwise scan registration by the 
probability representing the likelihood of a range mea•
surement under a fixed (hypothetical) registration: 
                                                (5) 
                                                      In our robot system, this prior is obtained from the robot's 2D 
                                                      localization routines, supplied by a public domain software 
                                                      package [11]. 


916                                                                                          PERCEPTION Figure 3: Illustration in 2D: (a) initial configurations of two scans in red and blue, (b) result of optimal registration, (c-f) result of recovering 
the object configuration by our new adjustable shape technique. 

  The negative logarithm of the joint likelihood (6) is given Here j[n] is the Jacobian (gradient) of n at xj. , which is di•
by the following sum:                                  rectly obtained from the definition of n in (4): 


                                                       With this approximation, (the negative log-likelihood 
                                                       function G in the n-th iteration) becomes quadratic in and 
                                                       is of the form 
Scans are registered by minimizing the sum, which is equiva•
lent to maximizing the likelihood function. 
   Unfortunately, minimizing G is not possible in closed form                                         (14) 
for the following three reasons: (1) the exact terms in the sum 
depend on the occlusion constraint which are a function of Here A is a matrix, a vector, and x the vector of all 
the vantage points x; (2) the result of the minimization over vantage points (the unknowns). The various sums in (9) are 
involves a discrete search for a nearest neighbor, whose out• simply integrated into A and , and generalizes to 
come is again a function of x; (3) the projection functions the full space of all points x: 
  are nonlinear in the points x, and the resulting nonlinear 
optimization problem is hard. 
2,4 Optimization Procedure 
ICP-style algorithms minimize the negative log-likelihood by 
calculating a sequence of vantage points (registrations): Step 4. The values of the vantage points are 
                                                       now obtained through a closed-form solution of minimizing 
                                                (10) 
                                                           This solution is obtained by setting the first derivative of 
The first set of points are obtained from the prior (e.g., the with respect to x to zero (derivation omitted, see [131): 
robot odometry): The th vantage points 
are computed from the -th ones by the following five step 
algorithm: 
  Step 1. The set of occluded points is determined for the In the original ICP algorithm [2], this step is implemented by 
n-th points This step involves the calculation of a rela• calculating the the "center of mass" of each scan and shifting 
tive orientation of a point to scan It furthermore     the scans accordingly (which is computationally simpler); our 
involves a range comparison with the corresponding measure• approach also accommodates a prior on x. 
ment in scan d/, to determine if is occluded relative to Step 5. Because of the linearization, only Cartesian co•
  Step 2. The minimization in (9) is carried out by determin• ordinates are actually updated in Step 4; the orientation co•
ing the closest measurement in each scan relative to each ordinates remain unmodified. For this reason, the original 
point                                                  ICP literature introduced a separate step for calculating ori•
                                                       entations. This is achieved by a singular value decomposition 
                                                01) 
                                                       (SVD) step, in which the correlation between residual errors 
                                                       in the scan is determined, and each scan is rotated so as to 
For = const. • /, this calculation is equivalent to finding the 
                                                       minimize these error correlations. Details on this step can be 
closest points (hence the name of the algorithm). 
  Step 3. The projection function is linearized to obtain a found in the ICP literature [2]. 
quadratic objective function. This is achieved by the Taylor All steps are iterated until a convergence criterion is 
series expansion:                                      reached. Satisfactory registrations are usually obtained within 
                                                       the first three to four iterations. If the total number of scans is 
                                                (12)   small (e.g., less than 10), the computationally most expensive 


PERCEPTION                                                                                            917  step is the determination of the closest points in Step 2. This To model nonrigid surfaces, our approach allows for violation 
 step is usually implemented efficiently by representing scans of these link constraints. This is obtained by introducing the 
 through kd-trees [4].                                 following Gaussian potentials for each link 
   Figure 3a-b illustrate the result of scan registration in 2D. 
 The initial configuration in Figure 3a is transformed into the 
 one shown in Figure 3b, which is the one that minimizes the 
 squared distance (maximizes the likelihood). Clearly, both 
 scans are incompatible in shape. Pure registration techniques 
                                                       Here defines the strength of the link (the resulting structure 
 are unable to handle such shape deformations, but the tech•
                                                       is a Markov random field f 171). 
 nique presented in the next section is. 
                                                       3.2 Target Function 
 3 Recovering the Surface Configuration of             The negative logarithm of these potentials, summed over all 
    Nonrigid Objects                                   links, is given by the following function // (constant omitted): 
 The key idea for extending ICP to nonrigid objects was al•
 ready discussed in the introduction to this paper, and is high•
 lighted in Figure 1. Technically, it involves two modifica•
 tions: First, the static relationship between points and As in the scan registration problem, all these terms are non•
 the corresponding vantage points is replaced by nonrigid linear in the node coordinates and the orientations 
 links between adjacent points. These links can be bent (but at To obtain a closed-form solution for the resulting equation 
                                                       system, the link function is linearized via a Taylor series ex•
 a probabilistic penalty), to accommodate nonrigid surfaces. pansion: 
 Second, and as consequence of this, the optimization now in•
 volves the determination of the location of all points in 
 addition to the robot poses This optimization problem is 
 much higher dimensional, and we will discuss a hierarchical 
optimization technique for tackling it efficiently. A key char• where specify the coordinate system for the node 
 acteristic of the approach proposed here is that it fits neatly in the 7i-th iteration of the optimization. The matrix 
 into the ICP methodology above: Again, under appropriate is a Jacobian matrix of dimension six by six, which is obtained 
 linearization the target function is quadratic, and estimates are as the derivative of the functions (19). 
obtained just as in (16).                                By the same logic by which G can be approximated by a 
                                                       quadratic function in the scan registration problem, substitut•
3.1 Links                                              ing our approximation back into the definition of H gives us a 
The definition of links between pairs of adjacent points makes quadratic function in all variables and This function 
 it necessary to augment the notion of a measurement point. In can be written in the form 
particular, our approach associates an (imaginary) coordinate 
system with each node. The origin of each coordinate sys•
tem is the familiar coordinate and its orientation is speci•
fied by three Euler angles (an alternative formulation may use where is the vector of all coordinate system origins, r the 
quaternions):                                          vector of all Euler angles, and B is a matrix and f a vec•
                                                       tor. Calculating and f is involved but mathematically 
                                                       straightforward. 
 The orientation is initialized arbitrarily; e.g. = (0,0,0)T. 3.3 Optimization Procedure 
(The result of the optimization is invariant with respect to 
this initialization.) A link is now given by the affine coor• Our new version of ICP now minimizes the combined target 
dinate transformations among the coordinate systems of adja• function G + H, which is again quadratic in all parameters 
cent measurements. Each link possesses six parameters, three (x, and r). By doing so, it simultaneously recovers the 
for rotation (denoted and three for translation (de•   scan registration and the surface configuration of the object. 
noted They are calculated as follows:                  The solutions for x and are completely analogous to the one 
                                                       in (16): 


                                                       The global orientation is still optimized by a single global 
                                                       SVD as above. Our new augmented optimization leads to 
Here the R's are the rotation matrices around the three coor• relative adjustments between measurement points, in which 
dinate axes. Links enable us to recover a node's coordinates the links play the role of soft constraints. 
from any of its neighbors: 
                                                         This is illustrated in Figure 3c-f, for different values for 
                                                          As the various diagrams illustrate, scans are deformed to 
                                                       improve their match. The degree of the deformation depends 
                                                       on the value of which defines the rigidity of the surface. 
                                                       Figure 3c-f illustrates that our approach succeeds in locally 
                                                       rotating and even rescaling the model. 


918                                                                                          PERCEPTION Figure 4: Example of a thinned graph superimposed to the origi•
nal scan left) and before and after adjustment (right). Thinning is 
necessary to perform the optimization efficiently. 
                                                       technique adopted from [11], we first acquired a map of the 
3.4 Efficient Variable Resolution Optimization         environment (see Figure 5). Non-stationary objects were de•
                                                       tected through differencing of scans, using the robot's local•
The main problem with the approach so far is its enormous ization routines to get a rough estimate of this pose. Figure 2b 
complexity. The number of variables involved in the opti• illustrates the segmentation process. Red scans are retained 
mization is orders of magnitude larger than in scan registra• while the black scans are assumed to correspond to the back•
tion. This is because the target function H is a function of all ground and are henceforth discarded. 
measurement points n and orientations r, whereas G has only Figure 6 illustrates one iteration of the algorithm in all es•
the vantage points x as its arguments. The matrix B in (23) sential steps, using data acquired by the robot. Results for 
is, thus, a (sparse) matrix with many thousand dimensions. matching three scans with different postures are shown in Fig•
  To tackle such problems efficiently the optimization is re• ure 7(a-b). While the standard registration procedure leads to 
duced to a sequence of nested optimization problems. In a a model with six arms, our approach correctly deforms the 
first step, scans arc analyzed for connected components (re• scan to arrive at an improved model, with two arms. A sim•
gions without large disparities); links exist only between con• ilar result is shown in Figure 7(c-g), which shows three raw 
nected components in each scan; hence H factors naturally scans on the left, followed by the result of (rigid) scan reg•
into different subproblems for different connected compo• istration and the result of our approach. Another example is 
nents. Next, the resulting scan patches are thinned. Thin• the chair in Figure 8(a-d) scanned in different heights. The 
ning proceeds by identifying a small number of representa• standard registration will lead to multiple feet, our approach 
tive landmark measurements that are approximately equally correctly aligns them. Table 1 shows the cumulative distance 
spaced. This computation is performed by stipulating a grid between points in the nearest neighbor calculation. The value 
over the scan (in workspace coordinates), and selecting mea• marked as "start" is the result of an initial registration phase, 
surements closest to the center points of each grid cell. An all reflecting the remaining distances under the rigid body as•
point shortest path search then associates remaining measure• sumption. All other columns correspond to further iterations 
ments with landmark measurements. The optimization is first of our algorithm as it adjusts the shape of the scans. This re•
performed for the thinned scan; after the landmark scans are sult illustrates numerically the integrity of the result is indeed 
localized (and the corresponding coordinate transformation improved by iterate the process. 
are computed), the remaining measurements are optimized 
locally, in groups corresponding to individual landmark mea• 5 Discussion 
surements. Smoothness is attained by using multiple land•
mark measurements as boundary conditions in this optimiza• This paper proposed a technique for simultaneous scan reg•
tion. Figure 4 shows an examples of a thinned graph, for istration and scan deformation for modeling nonrigid objects. 
which the optimization can be carried out in seconds. The deformation was made possible through the definition of 
                                                      (soft) links between neighboring scan points, whose config•
4 Setup and Experimental Results                      uration was calculated during registration. To tackle the re•
                                                      sulting optimization problem efficiently, we described a hi•
Our approach was implemented using a mobile robot, in an erarchical optimization techniques that operated on thinned 
attempt to acquire 3D models of non-stationary objects. In a graphs. Experimental results obtained using a mobile robot 
                                                      illustrated the viability of this approach. 
                                                        There are many problems in object modeling that this pa•
                   start loop # 1 loop #2 loop #3 
        moving arms                                   per does not address, but whose inclusion shall be the subject 
        scan 1     2.3266 0.8993 0 7986  -            of future research. For example, the present segmentation ap•
        scan 2     2.5320 0.8704 0.8001 
        stretched body                                proach is somewhat simplistic: It will fail if more than one 
        scan 1     1.9369 1.2915 1.2008 1.1975        non-stationary object appears in the scene. The approach re•
        scan 2    2.5087 1.2964 1.2220 1.2120         quires deformations to be small, and the target object may 
                                                      not move very far during acquisition. Objects are not sub-
Tabie 1: Average distance to the closest points to the matched model segmented. This will cause difficulties when components of 
after scan registration. The decrease of this distance measures the objects are adjacent to different other components, or missing 
improvement of the model through local surface deformations. entirely, which can happen if components are combined and 


PERCEPTION                                                                                            919 