People Tracking with Anonymous and ID-Sensors Using Rao-Blackwellised Particle 
                                                 Filters 
                            Dirk Schulz, Dieter Fox, and Jeffrey Hightower 

                                Dcpt. of Computer Science & Engineering 
                                        University of Washington 
                                               Seattle, WA 

                     Abstract                          with relatively coarse location information [Want et al, 1992; 
                                                       Priyantha et al., 2000]. Various techniques have been pro•
    Estimating the location of people using a network 
                                                       posed for tracking with multiple anonymous sensors or multi•
    of sensors placed throughout an environment is a 
                                                       ple id-sensors, but the problem of integrating anonymous and 
    fundamental challenge in smart environments and 
                                                       id sensor information has not been addressed so far. In this 
    ubiquitous computing. Id-sensors such as infrared 
                                                       paper we present an approach that combines the accuracy ben•
    badges provide explicit object identity information 
                                                       efits of anonymous sensors with the identification certainty of 
    but coarse location information while anonymous 
                                                       id-sensors. 
    sensors such as laser range-finders provide accurate 
                                                         Our approach uses Rao-Blackwellised particle filters to ef•
    location information only. Tracking using both sen•
                                                       ficiently estimate the locations and identities of multiple ob•
    sor types simultaneously is an open research chal•
                                                       jects. Each particle represents a history of associations be•
    lenge. We present a novel approach to tracking mul•
                                                       tween object tracks and observations. For each particle, the 
    tiple objects that combines the accuracy benefits of 
                                                       individual objects are tracked using Kalman filters. Since 
    anonymous sensors and the identification certainty 
                                                       the initial id uncertainty makes a sample-based representation 
    of id-sensors. Rao-Blackwellised particle filters are 
                                                       of id assignments extremely inefficient, our approach starts 
    used to estimate object locations. Each particle rep•
                                                       by tracking objects using only anonymous sensors and ef•
    resents the association history between Kalman fil•
                                                       ficiently representing estimates over object id's by keeping 
    tered object tracks and observations. After using 
                                                       track of sufficient statistics. Once the id estimates are cer•
    only anonymous sensors until id estimates are cer•
                                                       tain enough, the approach switches to sampling id assignments 
    tain enough, id assignments are sampled as well re•
                                                       as well resulting in a fully Rao-Blackwellised particle filter 
    sulting in a fully Rao-Blackwellised particle filter 
                                                       over both object tracks and id assignments. When applied to 
    over both object tracks and id assignments. Our ap•
                                                       anonymous sensors only, our method results in a new Rao-
    proach was implemented and tested successfully us•
                                                       Blackwellised approach to multi-hypothesis tracking, which 
    ing data collected in an indoor environment. 
                                                       has gained substantial attention in the target tracking commu•
                                                       nity [Bar-Shalom and Li, 1995]. 
1 Introduction                                           This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 clarifies the 
                                                       problem. Section 3 then presents our Rao-Blackwellised par•
Accurate and reliable tracking of people using sensors placed 
                                                       ticle filter approach to tracking multiple objects using only 
throughout an environment is a fundamental problem relevant 
                                                       anonymous sensor information and Section 4 extends the ap•
to several research communities. Knowing the locations of 
                                                       proach to incorporate id-sensors. Our implementation and ex•
people is of critical importance for research investigating high-
                                                       perimental results are presented in Section 5, followed by a 
level state estimation, plan recognition, and learning of human 
                                                       discussion. 
activity patterns for applications such as work flow enhance•
ment and health monitoring. 
  Over the years, many location estimation approaches have 2 Problem Description 
been introduced using sensors such as cameras, laser range- Figure 1 illustrates the problem of tracking multiple people 
finders, infrared and ultrasound sensors, and wireless net• with anonymous and id-sensors. The solid and dotted lines 
working infrastructure [Hightower and Bordello, 2001]. A are the trajectories of person A and B, respectively. In the 
crucial aspect of these sensors is whether they provide ex• beginning, the identity of the two people is not known. As 
plicit information about the identity of a person. Anony• they walk, the anonymous sensor observes their locations fre•
mous sensors such as radar, reflective ultrasound transducers, quently. Since the people are far enough apart, their positions 
and scanning laser range-finders provide accurate location and can be tracked reliably using the anonymous sensor. How•
appearance information, but do not provide explicit identity ever, until they reach id-sensor areas 3 and 4, both trajectories 
information. Id-sensors like infrared and ultrasound badge have the same probability of belonging to either person A or B. 
systems do provide explicit object identity information, but Hence there are two different hypotheses for the id's of the two 


PERCEPTION                                                                                           921 Figure 1: Example scenario: The shaded circles indicate areas cov•
ered by id-sensors such as infrared receivers. When a person wearing 
a badge enters such an area, the corresponding sensor issues a read•
ing indicating the id of the person. Since these sensors provide no Figure 2: Graphical model for multi-object tracking with anony•
information about the person's location within the area, two people mous and id-sensors. is the state vector describing the locations 
in the same area can not be distinguished. Not shown is an additional of the individual objects at time Objects generate anonymous ob•
anonymous sensor such as a laser range-finder. This sensor provides servations and id observations . The assignments of individual 
accurate information at a high rate about the locations of people, but observations to objects are given by the hidden nodes and Rao-
no information about their id's.                               Blackwellised particle filters sample assignments and and solve 
                                                               the state updates analytically, using Kalman filters conditioned on the 
trajectories. After passing through the coverage of id-sensors samples. 
3 and 4, the ambiguity is resolved and both trajectories' id's 
are determined. Then, after the paths cross there is confusion    and the complete sequence of observations up to time is 
about the continuation of the two tracks. When the people      given by (we use hat and tilde to distinguish anonymous 
leave the light gray area the anonymous sensor can not deter•  from id observations). The associations between object tracks 
mine which observations to associate with which trajectory.       and observations are given by assignment matrices and 
This problem is known as the data association problem in the       For instance, is one if assigns anonymous ob•
multitarget tracking community [Bar-Shalom and Li, 1995]. 
                                                               servation to object and zero otherwise. The observa•
Were there no id-sensors, it would be impossible to resolve 
                                                               tions only depend on the current object positions and assign•
this ambiguity. In our scenario, the ambiguity can be resolved 
                                                               ments. 
as soon as the people reach the areas covered by id-sensors 5 
                                                                 The goal of tracking is to estimate the posterior over the 
and 6. To do so, however, it is necessary to maintain the hy•
                                                               state based on all sensor information available up to time 
potheses for both possible track continuations, A going down 
and B going up, or B going down and A going up.                  A factored representation of this tracking problem allows us 
                                                               to use Rao-Blackwellised particle filters (RBPF) which sample 
  The use of a combination of anonymous and id-sensors re•     assignments and track the objects using a bank of m Kalman 
quires us to solve two types of data association problems.     filters for each sample [Doucet et ai, 2000]. However, due 
The first problem is the classic multitarget tracking problem  to the large number of anonymous assignments and the "fiat" 
of assigning anonymous observations to object tracks. This     distributions over id assignments, a straightforward implemen•
data association problem has to be solved at each point in     tation of RBPFs would require a prohibitive number of sam•
time, resulting in possible associations for tracks of length  ples. In the next section we describe how to efficiently sample 
  involving people. Fortunately, the probability distribu•     anonymous assignments over time. The resulting algorithm, 
tions over these anonymous assignments are typically highly    MHT-RBPF (multi-hypothesis tracking RBPF), can track mul•
peaked, thereby allowing an efficient, sample-based represen•  tiple objects using anonymous sensor information. Then, in 
tation of assignments. The second problem is the one of es•    section Section 4, we will describe how to extend MHT-RBPF 
timating the id of individual objects/tracks. As with anony•   to incorporate id-sensors. 
mous assignments there are possible assignments of id's to 
tracks. Fortunately, the number of id assignments does not in• 3 MHT-RBPF: Rao-Blackwellised Particle 
crease over time since the identity of objects does not change. 
However, due to the low spatial resolution of id-sensors, the      Filters for Multi-hypothesis Tracking 
posterior over id assignments is almost uniform during early   Since the assignments between observations and ob•
stages of the estimation process (see Figure 1). For such "flat" jects/tracks are not given, we need to estimate the posterior 
distributions, a sample-based representation requires in the or•
                                                              over both object states and assignments This joint 
der of samples, which is certainly not feasible for online 
                                                              posterior can be factorized by conditioning the state k on the 
tracking.                                                                                                        X
                                                               assignments 
  Figure 2 shows the graphical model for this tracking prob•
lem. Here, time is indexed by subscripts and the current time                                                         (1) 
is denoted by are the current po•
sitions of the people being tracked. Following standard no•      The key idea of Rao-Blackwellised particle filters is to com•
tation in the tracking community, observations are denoted by pute (1) by sampling assignments from p and then 


922                                                                                                      PERCEPTION computing the state xk conditioned on each sample. More to and not the desired 
specifically, each sample represents a history of data associ• the rightmost term of the target distribution (3) [Morales-
ations and is annotated with a bank ofKalman fil•     Menendez et al, 2002]. The second source of inefficiency 
ters, one for each tracked person. The Kalman filters arc is that sampling from the predictive distribution in the sec•
conditioned on the data associations provided by the sample ond sampling step can be very inefficient if the observation 
and thus can be updated efficiently using standard Kalman likelihood is highly peaked compared to the 
filter update rules for known data association [Bar-Shalom predictive distribution [Pitt and Shephard, 1999]. 
and Li, 1995]. The Kalman filter estimates, or tracks, The second problem is extremely severe in our context since 
              are represented by the mean and covariance the predictive distribution for assignments is virtually uniform 
of the persons' locations.                            while the posterior is typically concentrated on a small set of 
  RBPF generate assignments incrementally by maintaining assignments [Bar-Shalom and Li, 1995]. 
sample sets containing assignment histories distributed ac•
cording to the posterior given by the rightmost term in (1). MCMC Sampling from the optimal distribution 
                                                      Let us first discuss how to address the second problem, i.e. 
More specifically, at time a sample set 
                                                      the problem of drawing samples from the posterior distribu•
           contains TV weighted samples, where each sam•
                                                      tion (3), given the previous sample set. Conditioned on a spe•
ple consists of a history of assignments and 
                                                      cific assignmentthe optimal sampling distribution fol•
the current position estimates for the objects. The generic 
                                                      lows from (3) as 
RBPF algorithm generates a set from the previous sample 
set, and an observation by first generating new assign•
ments distributed according to the posterior 
Each such assignment specifies which observations in be• It is possible to efficiently generate samples from this dis•
long to which object track. The final step consists of updating tribution using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) tech•
the Kalman filter tracks of each sample using the observations niques [Gilks et al, 1996]. We apply a version of the 
assigned to them by the sample [Doucet et al, 2000].  Metropolis-Hastings algorithm that has been adapted specif•
                                                      ically to the data association problem [Dellaert et al, 2003]. 
3.1 Importance Sampling with Lookahead                Here, the idea of Metropolis-Hastings is to sample states from 
                                                      an ergodic Markov chain with the posterior as stationary distri•
The efficiency of RBPFs strongly depends on the number of bution. Such a Markov chain is constructed by first choosing a 
samples needed to represent the posterior In candidate for the next state s' given the current state s accord•
this section we will devise an efficient algorithm for generat• ing to a proposal distribution This state transition is 
ing such assignments/samples. Due to the sequential nature accepted with probability 
of the estimation process, samples must be generated from the 
assignments of the previous time step. The posterior at time k                                         (5) 
is given by 
                                                      where (s) is the intended stationary distribution. In our 
                                                      case the states are the possible assignments and (.s) is 
                                                      the optimal sampling distribution (4). The efficiency of the 
                                                      Metropolis-Hastings method strongly depends on the choice 
                                                      of the proposal distribution We use an efficient approach 
                                                      called smart chain flipping. Smart chain flipping permutes 
                                                      the assignments of a subset of the objects on each transi•
                                                      tion, where the actual choice already takes the individual as•
Here, (2) follows from Bayes rule, and (3) follows from (2) signment likelihoods into account. This approach has been 
since the position tracks of the objects are sufficient shown to result in improved mixing rates on assignment prob•
statistics for the previous observations and assignments lems [Dellaert et al, 2003]. 
                                                      Assignment lookahead 
  Unfortunately, in most cases it is impossible to sample di• As mentioned above, another source of inefficiency is the 
rectly from (3). The approach most commonly used in particle fact that the previous sample set does not consider the most 
filters is to evaluate (3) from right to left in a three stage pro• recent observation. This problem can be greatly reduced 
cess [Doucet et al, 2001]: First, draw samples from the by using the most recent observation to re-weight the sam•
previous sample set using the importance weights, then draw ples of the previous sample set [Pitt and Shephard, 1999; 
for each such sample a new sample from the predictive dis• Morales-Menendez et al, 2002]. The weight for a sample 
tribution and finally weight these samples pro•            is given by dividing the target distribution 
portional to the observation likelihood The by the sampling distribution which 
last step, importance sampling, adjusts tor the tact that sam• can be shown to result in 
ples are not drawn from the actual target distribution. This 
approach has two main sources of inefficiency. First, the 
samples of the previous sample set are distributed according 


PERCEPTION                                                                                          923                                        Table 1: MHT-RBPF algorithm. 
                                                      4 Tracking with Anonymous and ID-Sensors 
That is, the importance weight of a sample is given by the abil•
                                                      In principle, MHT-RBPFs can be readily extended to include 
ity of the tracks associated with the sample to predict the next 
                                                      id-sensors. Instead of only sampling anonymous assignments, 
observation. Accurate computation of the right term in (6) it is possible to sample both anonymous and id assignments. 
requires summation over all possible next assignments as Such a straightforward extension, however, results in an infea-
done by [Morales-Menendez et al., 2002]. Since in our case sible increase in the number of samples needed during early 
the number of assignments can be prohibitively large, we esti• stages of the estimation process. This has two reasons. First, 
mate (6) using the samples generated in the MCMC step. Un• each hypothesis (sample) of MHT-RBPF has possible as•
fortunately, computing is equivalent to comput•       signments of id's to object tracks. Second, due to the low spa•
ing the normalization factor of a Markov chain, which is not tial resolution of id-sensors, the posterior over id assignments 
possible in general [Gilks et al., 1996]. In our case, however, is initially very uncertain and sample-based representations of 
we do not need the absolute value of the normalization con• such flat distributions are inherently inefficient. To overcome 
stant for each chain, but only the value relative to the normal• these difficulties we instead use a two-stage estimation pro•
izes of the other Markov chains. Since the distributions (4) cess. During the initial stage, only anonymous sensors are 
have similar shapes for all chains (they are highly peaked), we used for object tracking while the id-sensors are simply used to 
                                                      estimate the identity of the different objects. Once these esti•
can estimate the relative normalization constants by the aver•
                                                      mates are certain enough, the process moves into the full Rao-
age probabilities of the samples in the different Markov chains. 
                                                      Blackwellisation phase, during which both anonymous and id 
  More specifically, let M samples be drawn from each assignments are sampled. The two phases are discussed below. 
Markov chain. Let denote the th sample drawn from 
the Markov chain associated with sample Then the up•  Identity estimation phase 
dated weight of this sample is given by               During this phase only anonymous sensors are used to track 
                                                      the objects. The id-sensors are used to estimate the identity 
                                                      of the different objects. More specifically, for each hypothesis 
                                                (7)   of the MHT-RBPF, there are possible assignments of 
                                                      identities to tracks. In order to avoid estimating distributions 
where proportionality is such that all weights sum up to one. over this potentially too large number of assignments, we only 
                                                      keep track of sufficient statistics that allow us to recover distri•
MHT-RBPF Algorithm                                    butions over assignments. Such sufficient statistics are given 
The algorithm is summarized in Table 1. In step 4, new sam• by the individual assignments of id's to tracks 
ples are generated from the previous sample set. The aver• The probabilities of these individual assignments can be 
age probability of these samples is used to estimate the looka- updated recursively using the most recent id observation: 
head/predictive weights of each sample of the previous set 
(step 6). This step also involves a normalization so that the                                           (8) 
weights sum up to one. In step 8, a sample is drawn from the 
previous sample set Then, for each sample drawn from  Here, is an id observation corresponding to person To 
     we draw an assignment from the posterior re-using determine the assignment probabilities, we have to normalize 
the samples generated in the Markov chains in step 4. Step 10 these values by considering all possible assignments: 
updates the actual position estimates for the individual objects, 
                                                                                                       (9) 
using the corresponding assignment Again, is one ifassigns id to object track 
and zero otherwise. The computational complex computa•
tion of (9) can be avoided by sampling id assignments using 
Metropolis-Hastings, based on the individual values 
This approach works identical to the method used to sample 
anonymous assignments in the MHT-RBPF algorithm. 
  To summarize, in the identity estimation phase, each sam•
ple consists of Kalman filters and an matrix 
representing the sufficient statistics ) of the id assign•
ments. Whenever needed, the posterior over id assignments 
can be computed using MCMC sampling. The id estimation 
stage is ended as soon as the posterior over id assignments 
is sufficiently peaked to allow an accurate representation with 
a reasonable number of samples. Currently, we estimate this 
condition by determining the average number of hypotheses in Figure 3: Outline of the Intel Research Lab Seattle. The environ•
the Markov chains run for id assignments.             ment is equipped with ceiling mounted ultrasound and infrared re•
                                                      ceivers. Cubical partitions are half-height (about 1.3 meters high). 
Full Rao-Blackwcllisation phase                       The two laser range-finders scan at chest height just above the parti•
Once the id's are estimated accurately enough, we begin es• tions. Also shown are the paths of the six people as estimated by our 
timating the joint posterior of both anonymous and id assign• system. 
ments. This posterior is given by: 
                                                      sample set contained at least one hypothesis with correct loca•
                                                      tions and identities. Each method was tested on 10 trial runs 
Note that id assignments are sampled only once during the using the real data set. Without identity estimation phase, the 
complete estimation process, since after an id assignment is algorithm was never able to successfully complete the data 
sampled, the identities of the attached object tracks arc fixed. set. Next, we tested the approach when not switching to the 
From then on, id observations serve two purposes: First they full Rao-Black well isation phase, i.e. the algorithm remained in 
provide information of object positions, and, second, they the identity estimation phase. Without lookahead, the update 
provide information for weighting anonymous hypotheses, times of the approach were prohibitively large (more than 10 
thereby improving the object estimates considerably.  times real time). The lookahead resulted in significant speedup 
                                                      and the results are shown in the first row of the table below. 
5 Experiments                                         Finally, we tested our two-phase approach with and without 
                                                      lookahead. The algorithms were able to successfully track the 
To validate our approach we captured trace logs of six peo• complete data in most cases, as can be seen in the first col•
ple simultaneously walking around the cubical areas of the umn. The other three columns give average time, standard de•
office environment outlined in Figure 3. Each person was viation, and maximum time per update in seconds. The results 
wearing a small id-sensor track-pack consisting of two in• demonstrate that both the lookahead and the two-stage process 
frared badges and an ultrasound badge. Infrared and ultra• improve the performance of the tracking algorithm. 
sound receivers were installed throughout the ceiling. The 
entire scene was continually observed by two wall-mounted Method               Succ.   Avg.   Std.  Max. 
laser range-finders scanning at chest height just above the cu• Id estimation w. look. 10 0.062 0.125 2.9 
bical partitions. The duration of the log was 10 minutes, dur• Two-phase RBPF    10   0.154  0.170    1.5 
ing which the individual people moved between 230 meter and Two-phase RBPF w. look. 9 0.036  0.060    1.2 
410 meter. In this challenging data log, the paths of people fre•
quently crossed each other and there were situations in which In another set of experiments, we compared our MCMC 
up to 4 people were occluded by others. To validate our track• based assignment generation to a deterministic sampling 
ing algorithm quantitatively, we carried out a series of exper• scheme, as used in traditional MHT algorithms. Here, as•
iments based on this data log and on additional simulation signments are enumerated in decreasing order wrt. their like•
runs (see www.cs.washington.edu/robotics/people-      lihood [Cox and Hingorani, 1996]. Note that generating as•
tracking/ for visualizations).                        signments by decreasing likelihood results in estimates that 
Tracking ability                                      are strongly biased towards more likely assignments. We per•
                                                      formed extensive tests using real data and data simulating 20 
The path of the six people as estimated by our system is shown people and found that our approach is slightly more efficient 
in Figure 3. This result was obtained with an MHT-RBPF us• while achieving the same robustness. Since such results de•
ing 1000 samples and Markov chains of length 100. With this pend on implementational details, we did not consider them 
setting, the algorithm was able to reliably track the six people significant enough. However, the fact that smart chain flipping 
if no lookahead was used. After determining these parame• works at least as good as ranked assignments in practice is 
ters, we carried out trial runs for different variants of our al• very encouraging, since the MCMC approach results in much 
gorithm. A run was considered successful if at the end the less biased estimates. 


PERCEPTION                                                                                          925 