                Resource Temporal Networks: Definition and Complexity 

                                            Philippe Laborie 
                                                  ILOG 
                             9, rue de Verdun, 94253 Gentilly Cedex, France 
                                             plaborie@ilog.fr 

                     Abstract                          2 Resource Temporal Networks 
                                                       2.1 Definition 
    This paper introduces the concept of Resource      Definition 1 (Resource) A resource is a numerical fluent 
    Temporal Network (RTN), a constraint network       whose value can vary over time. The value of this fluent at 
    that subsumes both classical attributes used in A.I. date t is called the resource level at date t and is denoted 
    Planning and capacity resources traditionally han•
    dled in Scheduling. After giving a formal defini•    In this paper, we focus on time and resource levels belong•
    tion of RTNs, we analyze their expressive power    ing to a dense set (rational numbers): Al•
    and study complexities of several fragments of the though the framework can be extended to handle continuous 
    RTN framework. We show that solving an RTN is      changes, we only consider discrete changes. 
    in general NP-Complete - which is not surprising 
    given the expressivity of the framework - whereas  Definition 2 (Resource Statements) We define the follow•
    computing a Necessary Truth Criterion is polyno•   ing statements on a resource where t, and denote vari•
    mial. This last result opens the door for promising able time-points and q some constant in 
    algorithms to solve RTNs.                            • An absolute change is a statement denoted A(q, t) stat•
                                                           ing that because of this change at date t, the level of the 
                                                           resource changes from a current level I to q. 
                                                         • A relative change is a statement denoted R stat•
1 Introduction                                             ing that because of this change at date t, the level of 
                                                           the resource changes from current level I to I This 
                                                           corresponds to a production of units if or 
Historically, Artificial Intelligence Planning focuses on ab• consumption of units if 
solute changes (for instance change of the truth value of a • A lower-than condition is statement denoted 
predicate), conditions on the state of the world and symbol• L stating that the level of the resource 
ical precedences between operations whereas Scheduling fo• must remain lower than or equal to q over time interval 
cuses on relative changes of the world (resource consump•
tion or production) and numerical time. Recent advances in 
both fields have enlarged their relative ambition: time and • A greater-than condition is statement denoted 
resources are increasingly being studied by the AI Planning G(q,t8,te) stating that the level of the resource must 
community whereas conditions and absolute changes are nec• remain greater than or equal to q over time interval 
essary to express complex scheduling problems involving for 
example alternative recipes or complex conditions and ef•        respectively denote the sets of absolute, rela•
fects on the level of resources. This paper introduces and tive changes, lower-than and greater-than conditions. If 
analyzes the computational complexity of a formalism that    is a resource change, we denote the time-point of 
mixes on the same fluent the ingredients of Al Planning (ab• and q(x) the resource quantity involved in If 
solute changes, conditions) and the ones of Scheduling (rela• is a condition, we denote the start time-point of 
tive changes, numerical time). There has been some recent its end time-point and the resource quantity involved in 
work on the decidability of planning with numerical state Note that the above resource statements also allow for 
variables [Helmert, 2002] but to the best of our knowledge, expressing equal conditions of the form E stating 
no computational complexity study has been published that that the level of the resource remains equal to q over the time 
analyzes a complex but realistic and useful fragment of the interval as the conjunction of a lower-than condition 
overall framework of planning with time and numerical state L and a greater-than condition G . The set 
variables. This paper is a step in this direction.     of equal conditions is denoted £. Resource statements are 


948                                                                                             PLANNING the basic ingredients for defining Resource Temporal Net•
works (RTNs). Informally, an RTN represents a set of pos•
sible evolutions of a given numerical variable (the level of the 
resource) over time. 
 Definition 3 (Resource Temporal Network) A resource 
temporal network (R TN) is a tuple where: 
   is set of time-point variables, and respectively 
denote set of absolute, relative changes, lower-than and 
greater-than conditions referring to time-points in is 
a Temporal Network using the formalism defined in 
[Gerevini and Cristani, 1997]1 on the time-points of 
  In this paper, for simplicity reasons, we focus on decision 
problems and reasoning involving a unique resource. Our 
framework can naturally be extended toward (1) parametrized 
resources of the form Res where is a variable parameter 
describing which resource a given resource statement applies 
and (2) handling variable quantities q in resource statements. 
Those extensions are out of the scope of the paper. 
Definition 4 (Instantiation of an RTN) An instantiation of 
an RTN is function a :                                              Figure 2: Solution of an RTN 
  It is to be noted that in this paper, we assume that all the re•
source statements are known and the only decision variables 
of an RTN are the time-points in We do not handle, at 
this point, the complete Al Planning problem of generating 
an RTN given a partial RTN and a set of operators described 
as RTNs. 
Definition 5 (Time-consistent instantiation) An instantia•
tion a is said to be time-consistent iff is consistent with 
the STN 
  Computing a time-consistent instantiation of an RTN can 
be done in [Gerevini and Cristani, 1997]. We now de•
fine the notion of resource-consistent instantiation. In the def•
inition below, conditions [1] and [2] ensure that in a resource-
consistent instantiation, two absolute changes assigning dif• Definition 7 (Solution of a RTN) A solution to an RTN is an 
ferent levels cannot be simultaneous and an absolute change instantiation that is both time- and resource-consistent. 
cannot be simultaneous with a relative change. The ratio•
nale for this semantics is that, as in [Fox and Long, 2002], 
we allow simultaneity only for pair of changes that are 
commutative, that is such that applying just after leads to 
the same level as applying just after . Given a date point 
[3] defines the last date beforeat which an absolute 
change occurred and the resource level assigned by such 
an absolute change. Note that can be defined without 
ambiguity because two absolute changes assigning different 
levels cannot be simultaneous. Equation [4] defines the pro•
file of the resource level over time. Conditions [5] and [6] 
state that this profile must satisfy the lower-than and greater- 3 Expressive Power 
than conditions. 
                                                       In this section, we show that most of the classical attributes 
Definition 6 (Resource-consistent instantiation) An in• used in AI Planning as well as most of the resources used in 
stantiation a is said to be resource-consistent iff the following Scheduling can be represented in the RTN framework. 
conditions are satisfied: 
                                                      3.1 Planning Attributes 
                                                      STRIPS operators 
                                                      Let p be a STRIPS predicate. It can be represented by a 
   'This formalism allows for both the representation of metric con• resource for which level 0 means that p is false and level 1 
straints and unequations                              means that p is true. Let be an operator at time-point /. If p 


PLANNING                                                                                              949 is in the precondition of operator o, this can be captured by a state among a known set of possible states Ac•
greater-than condition with the constraint             tivities requiring different states of the state resource cannot 
It is in the precondition of operator o, this can be cap• overlap. We can build a mapping that maps the possible 
tured by a lower-than condition If p is in the delete  states of the state resource to Q. Then, the requirement of 
list of operator o, this can be captured by an absolute change a given state s of a state resource by an activity executing on 
       stating that after will be false. is in the add the time interval can be modeled as an absolute change 
list of operator o, this can be captured by an absolute change     and an equal condition 
       stating that after t, p will be true. 
                                                       Additional Expressivity 
IXTET attributes                                       The RTN framework allows for modeling complex resources 
Let att be an IxTnT attribute [Ghallab and Laruelle, 1994]. and activities in scheduling. In manufacturing for instance, 
We can build a mapping p,att that maps the possible values maintenance activities need to be executed as soon as the level 
of attribute att to Q. Then, a hold predicate          of some numerical variable (measuring the "need for mainte•
can be modeled by an equal condition E(uaU An nance") has reached a certain level. The level of this variable 
event event by the conjunction of an equal con•        is increased (relative change) by production activities and is 
dition an absolute changeand                           reset to 0 (absolute change) by maintenance activities. An•
a temporal constraint t'                               other example is scheduling while ensuring some condition 
                                                       on a numerical variable during the execution of an activity 
PDDL 2.1                                               (e.g. maintaining the temperature of a furnace within a suit•
Let's consider a durative action of PDDL 2.1 [Fox and Long, able interval). Such kind of conditions are very important 
2002]. This action can be represented by two time points ts in process industry and chemistry. The conjunction of ab•
(start) and (end) in our formalism. A condition at start on solute changes, relative changes and conditions holding over 
a non-numerical proposition can be captured by a greater- variable time intervals offers a powerful formalism for rep•
than condition with the precedencean ef•               resenting complex scheduling problems. Additional features 
fect at start by an absolute change A(l, ta) (similar modeling such as dependence between variable resource quantities 
for conditions and effects at end) and an invariant condition and time-points t that do not directly fit into the RTN model 
by a greater-than condition Conditions and in•         can be handled by additional constraints in a constraint prop•
variants of the form and = on numeric variables can be agation framework. 
captured by RTN conditions L, G and E. Numeric effects 
assign correspond to absolute changes, whereas increase 4 Complexity 
and decrease correspond to relative changes. 
                                                       In this section, we analyze the algorithmic complexity of 
3.2 Scheduling Resources                               solving and providing necessary truth criteria for general 
                                                       RTNs and particular fragments of the RTN formalism. By 
Discrete resources 
                                                       NP-Complete we mean NP-Complete in the strong sense. 
A discrete resource of maximal capacity Q [Laborie, 2003] 
can be captured by an RTN with a greater-than condition 4.1 Notations 
                a lower-than condition 
                                                       Let us consider the following notations about temporal con•
and an initial production An activity requiring 
                                                       straints: PA denotes the point algebra of [Vilain and Kautz, 
units of resource over the time interval is represented 
                                                       1986] which is a restriction of that only consists of 
by a pair of relative changes If the 
                                                       the set of qualitative relations be•
discrete resource is given a varying maximal capacity pro•
                                                       tween timepoints. denotes a general . We 
file, this can be modeled as a set of lower-than conditions 
                                                       write to express the fact that the corre•
                                                       sponding relation is subsumed by the temporal network. We 
Reservoir                                              use the following notations about resource statements: 
A reservoir of maximal capacity and initial level L [La• denote any set of relative changes x such that 0 
borie, 2003] can be captured by an RTN with a greater- (producers). denote any set of pairs of resource state•
than condition a lower-than condition                  ments where denotes 
               and an absolute change A the lower-than condition denotes any 
production activity corresponds to a relative change R(q, t) set of pairs where and 
where whereas a consumption activity corresponds to    with A fragment of the complete RTN framework 
a relative change R(q, t) where                        is denoted (X|y) where X is the set of changes and con•
                                                       ditions allowed in this fragment and Y the type of tempo•
State Resources                                        ral constraints, denotes the number of resource statements 
In ILOG Scheduler [ILOG, 2002], state resources are defined in the RTN, the number of temporal constraints between 
as objects that at each timepoint can take only one possible time-points and maxflow the complexity of comput•
                                                       ing a maximum flow on a graph with n nodes and arcs4. 
        denotes the constraint 
   3 We assume that denotes a time-point before any other time- 4State-of-the-art maximum flow algorithms do it in O 
point and denotes a time-point after any other time-point. in worst case [Hochbaum, 1998]. 


950                                                                                             PLANNING  4.2 Finding a solution 
 Complexity 1 The problem of finding a solution to an RTN 
 is in NR 
 Proof: The time-consistency of an instantiation a can be 
 checked in polynomial time and, given its definition, the func•
 tion can be build and the resource-consistency checked in 
 polynomial time. A simple algorithm to check that an instan•
 tiation is a solution runs in 0\ 
   The proof of the three poly normality results below is omit•
 ted because trivial. 


PLANNING                                                                                               951                                                          The following lemma is a generalization of Lemma 2 when 
                                                       all changes are allowed including consumers 


of the resource is equal to the weight of the maximum inde•
pendent set of G. Furthermore G is a comparability graph Proof: The theorem gives a necessary condition for 
as the edges involving at least one relative change can nat• NTC(U) to be true because if the condition is not met, a 
urally be oriented with the direction of a path containing an time-consistent instantiation can be built that is not resource-
absolute change between them and the remaining of the edges consistent. Reciprocally, if NTC(U) is false, it means 
(between pairs of absolute changes) forms a clique. Comput• that there exists a time-consistent instantiation that is not 
ing the maximum weight independent set of a comparability resource-consistent. This time-consistent instantiation vio•
graph is polynomial and can be solved as a min-flow problem lates at least one condition statement 
[Golumbic, 1980]. Thus, the NTC only needs to compare the The following complexity results use Theorem 1 to extend 
weight of the maximum weight independent set of G with the Lemmas 1 and 3 to the more general case of any set of condi•
maximal resource level Q.                              tion statements. For each of these results, one can show that 