                               Variable Resolution Particle Filter 

                          Vandi Verma, Sebastian Thrun and Reid Simmons 
                                       Carnegie Mellon University 
                                  5000 Forbes Ave. Pittsbugh PA 15217 
                                    {vandi, thrun, reids}@cs.cmu.edu 


                     Abstract                          Bayesian posterior in the limit as the number of samples go to 
                                                       infinity. For real-time state estimation it is impractical to have 
  Particle filters are used extensively for tracking the state an infinitely large number of particles. With a small number 
  of non-linear dynamic systems. This paper presents a of particles, the variance of the particle based estimate can be 
  new particle filter that maintains samples in the state high, particularly when there are a large number of possible 
  space at dynamically varying resolution for computa• state transitions. 
  tional efficiency. Resolution within siatespace varies by 
                                                         This paper presents a new particle filter, the variable res•
  region, depending on the belief that the true state lies 
                                                       olution particle filter (VRPF), for tracking large state spaces 
  within each region. Where belief is strong, resolution is 
                                                       efficiently with low computation. The basic idea is to rep•
  fine. Where belief is low, resolution is coarse, abstract•
                                                       resent a set of states  rather than a single state with a single 
  ing multiple similar states together. The resolution of the           1
                                                       particle and thus increase the number of states (or hypothe•
  statespace is dynamically updated as the belief changes. 
                                                       ses) that may be tracked with the same number of particles. 
  The proposed algorithm makes an explicit bias-variance 
                                                       This makes it possible to track a larger number of states for 
  tradeoff to select between maintaining samples in a bi•
                                                       the same computation, but results in a loss of information that 
  ased generalization of a region of state space versus in 
                                                       differentiates between the states that are lumped together and 
  a high variance specialization at fine resolution. Sam•
                                                       tracked in abstraction. We formalize this tradeoff in terms of 
  ples are maintained at a coarser resolution when the bias bias and variance. Tracking in abstraction at a coarser res•
  introduced by the generalization to a coarse resolution is olution introduces a bias over tracking at a finer resolution, 
  outweighed by the gain in terms of reduction in variance, but it reduces the variance of the estimator given a limited 
  and at a finer resolution when it is not. Maintaining sam• number of samples. By dynamically varying the resolution in 
  ples in abstraction prevents potential hypotheses from different parts of the state space to minimize the bias-variance 
  being eliminated prematurely for lack of a sufficient error, a finite set of samples are used in a highly efficient man•
  number of particles. Empirical results show that our vari• ner. Initial experimental results support our analysis and show 
  able resolution particle filter requires significantly lower that the bias is more than compensated for by the reduction 
  computation for performance comparable to a classical in variance from not eliminating potential hypotheses prema•
  particle filter.                                     turely for lack of a sufficient number of particles. 
1 Introduction 
                                                       2 Bayesian Filtering 
A number of problems in Al and robotics require estima•
tion of the state of a system as it changes over time from a We denote the multivariate state at time t as Xt and measure•
sequence of measurements of the system that provide noisy ments or observations as Ot. As is commonly the case, we 
(partial) information about the state. Particle filters have been concentrate on the discrete time, first order Markov formu•
extensively used for Bayesian state estimation in nonlinear lation of the dynamic state estimation problem. Hence, the 
systems with noisy measurements [Isard and Blake, 1998; state at time t is a sufficient statistic of the history of mea•
Fox et al., 1999; Doucet et al, 2001 ]. The Bayesian approach surements, i.e. p(Xt\Xo:t-i) = p(Xt\Xt-\) and the obser•
to dynamic state estimation computes a posterior probability vations depend only on the current state, i.e. p(Ot\Xo.t) = 
distribution over the states based on the sequence of measure• p(Ot\Xt). In the Bayesian framework, the posterior distribu•
ments. Probabilistic models of the change in state over time tion at time t% p{X^t\0\:t), includes all the available infor•
(state transition model) and relationship between the mea• mation upto time t and provides the optimal solution to the 
surements and the state capture the noise inherent in these state estimation problem. In this paper we are interested in 
domains. Computing the full posterior in real time is often estimating recursively in time a marginal of this distribution, 
intractable. Particle filters approximate the posterior distri• the filtering distribution, p(Xt\Oi:t), as the measurements be-
bution over the states with a set of particles drawn from the 
posterior. The particle approximation converges to the true 'or regions of a continuous state space 


976                                                                             PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE come available. Based on the Markovian assumption, the re•
cursive filter is derived as follows: 


                                                       3 Variable Resolution Particle Filter 

                                                       A well known problem with particle filters is that a large num•
                                                       ber of particles are often needed to obtain a reasonable ap•
                                                       proximation of the posterior distribution. For real-time state 
                                                       estimation maintaining such a large number of particles is 
  This process is known as Bayesian filtering, optimal filter• typically not practical. However, the variance of the particle 
ing or stochastic filtering and may be characterized by three based estimate can be high with a limited number of samples, 
distributions: (1) a transition model (2) an ob•       particularly when the process is not very stochastic and parts 
servation model and, (3) an initial prior distribu•    of the state space transition to other parts with very low, or 
tion, In a number of applications, the state space is  zero, probability. Consider the problem of diagnosing loco•
too large to compute the posterior in a reasonable time. Par• motion faults on a robot. The probability of a stalled motor 
ticle filters are a popular method for computing tractable ap• is low and wheels on the same side generate similar observa•
proximations to this posterior.                        tions. Motors on any of the wheels may stall at any time. A 
                                                       particle filter that produces an estimate with a high variance 
2.1 Classical Particle Filter 
                                                       is likely to result in identifying some arbitrary wheel fault on 
A Particle filter (PF) [Metropolis and Ulam, 1949; Gordon the same side, rather than identifying the correct fault. 
et al.% 1993; Kanazawa ex a/., 1995] is a Monte Carlo ap•
proximation of the posterior in a Bayes filter. PFs are non- The variable resolution particle filter introduces the notion 
parametric and can represent arbitrary distributions. PFs ap• of an abstract particle, in which particles may represent in•
proximate the posterior with a set of N fully instantiated state dividual states or sets of states. With this method a single 
                                                       abstract particle simultaneously tracks multiple states. A lim•
samples or particles, as follows:                      ited number of samples are therefore sufficient for represent•
                                                       ing large state spaces. A bias-variance tradeoff is made to 
                                                 (2)   dynamically refine and abstract states to change the resolu•
                                                       tion, thereby abstracting a set of states and generalizing the 
                                                       samples or specializing the samples in the state into the indi•
where denotes the Dirac delta function. It can be shown vidual states that it represents. As a result reasonable poste•
that as the approximation in (2) approaches the true   rior estimates can be obtained with a relatively small number 
posterior density [Doucet and Crisan, 2002]. In general it of samples. In the example above, with the VRPF the wheel 
is difficult to draw samples from, instead, sam•       faults on the same side of the rover would be aggregated to•
ples are drawn from a more tractable distribution, called gether into an abstract fault. Given a fault, the abstract state 
the proposal or importance distribution. Each particle is as• representing the side on which the fault occurs would have 
signed a weight, to account for the fact that the sam• high likelihood. The samples in this state would be assigned a 
ples were drawn from a different distribution [Rubin, 1988; high importance weight. This would result in multiple copies 
Rubinstein, 1981]. There are a large number of possible of these samples on resampling proportional to weight. Once 
choices for the proposal distribution, the only condition be• there are sufficient particles to populate all the refined states 
ing that its support must include that of the posterior. The represented by the abstract state, the resolution of the state 
common practice is to sample from the transition probability, would be changed to the states representing the individual 
            in which case the importance weight is equal to wheel faults. At this stage, the correct hypothesis is likely to 
the likelihood, The experiments in this paper were     be included in this particle based approximation at the level 
performed using this proposal distribution. The PF algorithm of the individual states and hence the correct fault is likely to 
is:                                                    be detected. 
                                                         For the variable resolution particle filter we need: (1) A 
                                                       variable resolution state space model that defines the relation•
                                                       ship between states at different resolutions, (2) an algorithm 
                                                       for state estimation given a fixed resolution of the state space, 
                                                       (3) a basis for evaluating resolutions of the state space model, 
                                                       and (4) and algorithm for dynamically altering the resolution 
                                                       of the state space. 


PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE                                                                                977 3.1 Variable resolution state space model              3.3 Bias-variance tradeoff 
                                                       The loss /, from a particle based approximationof 
We could use a directed acyclic graph (DAG) to represent the the true distribution 
variable resolution state space model, which would consider 
every possible combination of the (abstract)states to aggre•
gate or split. But this would make our state space exponen•
tially large. We must therefore constrain the possible com•
binations of states that we consider. There are a number of 
ways to do this. For the experiments in this paper we use                                               (6) 
a multi-layered hierarchy where each physical (non-abstract) where, is the bias andis the variance. 
state only exists along a single branch. Sets of states with The posterior belief state estimate from tracking states at 
similar state transition and observation models are aggregated the resolution of physical states introduces no bias. But the 
together at each level in the hierarchy. In addition to the phys• variance of this estimate can be high, specially with small 
ical state set the variable resolution model, M consists sample sizes. An approximation of the sample variance at the 
of a set of abstract states that represent sets of states and resolution of the physical states may be computed as follows: 
or other abstract states. 
                                                                                                        (7) 
                                                 (3) 
                                                       The loss of an abstract state is computed as the weighted 
                                                       sum of the loss of the physical states , as follows : 
Figure 1 (a) shows an arbitrary Markov model and figure 1 (b)                                         2
shows an arbitrary variable resolution model for 1(a). Figure                                           (8) 
1(c) shows the model in 1(b) at a different resolution. 
  We denote the measurement at time as and the se•     The generalization to abstract states biases the distribution 
quence of measurement as From the dynamics,            over the physical states to the stationary distribution. In other 
          and measurement probabilities we com•        words, the abstract state has no information about the relative 
pute the stationary distribution (Markov chain invariant distri• posterior likelihood, given the data, of the states that it repre•
bution) of the physical states [Behrends, 20001.       sents in abstraction. Instead it uses the stationary distribution 
                                                       to project its posterior into the physical layer. The projection 
3.2 Belief state estimation at a fixed resolution      of the posterior distribution of abstract state to 
                                                       the resolution of the physical layer is computed as 
This section describes the algorithm for estimating a distri• follows: 
bution over the state space, given a fixed resolution for each 
state, where different states may be at different fixed resolu•                                        (9) 
tions. For each particle in a physical state, a sample is drawn 
from the predictive model for that state It is then    where, 
assigned a weight proportional to the likelihood of the mea• As a consequence of the algorithm for computing the pos•
surement given the prediction, For each particle in    terior distribution over abstract states described in section 3.2, 
an abstract state, one of the physical states, that it an unbiased posterior over physical states is available at no 
represents in abstraction is selected proportional to the prob• extra computation, as shown in equation (4). The bias 
ability of the physical state under the stationary distribution, introduced by representing the set of physical states 
      The predictive and measurement models for this phys• in abstraction as is approximated as follows: 
ical state are then used to obtain a weighted posterior sample. 
The particles are then resampled proportional to their weight.                                        (10) 
Based on the number of resulting particles in each physical 
state a Bayes estimate with a Dirichlet(l) prior is obtained as It is the weighed sum of the squared difference between the 
follows:                                               unbiased posterior , computed at the resolution of the 
                                                       physical states and the biased posterior computed at 
                                                (4)    the resolution of abstract state 
                                                         An approximation of the variance of abstract state Sj is 
                                                       computed as a weighted sum of the projection to the physical 
where, represents the number of samples in the physi•  states as follows: 
cal state and represents the total number of particles 
in the particle filter. The distribution over an abstract state 
at time is estimated as: 
                                                                                                      (11) 
                                                (5)       The relative importance/cost of the physical states may also be 
                                                       included in the weight 


978                                                                             PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE                   (a) Example           (b) Variable resolution       (c) S2 at a finer resolution 
                                        model 

Figure 1: (a)Arbitrary Markov model (b) Arbitrary variable resolution model corresponding to the Markov model in (a). Circles that enclose 
other circles represent abstract states. S2 and S3 and S6 are abstract states. States S2, S4 and S5 form one abstraction hierarchy, and states 
S3, S6, S7, S8 and S9 form another abstraction hierarchy. The states at the highest level of abstraction are Sl, S2 and S3, (c) The model in 
(b) with states S4 and 55 at a finer resolution. 

The loss from tracking a set of states at the resolu• 4 Experimental results 
tion of the physical states is thus: 
                                                      The problem domain for our experiments involves diagnos•
                                               (12)   ing locomotion faults in a physics based simulation of a six 
                                                      wheel rover. Figure 2(a) shows a snapshot of the rover in the 
                                                      Darwin2K [Leger, 2000] simulator. 
The loss from tracking the same set of states in abstraction as The experiment is formulated in terms of estimating dis•
   is:                                                crete fault and operational modes of the robot from contin•
                                                      uous control inputs and noisy sensor readings. The discrete 
                                               (13) 
                                                      state, represents the particular fault or operational mode. 
There is a gain in terms of reduction in variance from gener• The continuous variables, provide noisy measurements of 
alizing and tracking in abstraction, but it results in an increase the change in rover position and orientation. The particle set 
in bias. Here, a tradeoff between bias and variance refers to 
                                                      Pt therefore consists of TV particles, where each particle 
the process of accepting a certain increase in one term for a is a hypothesis about the current state of the system. In other 
larger reduction in the other and hence in the total error. words, there are a number of discrete fault and operational 
                                                      states that a particle may transition to based on the transition 
3.4 Dynamically varying resolution 
                                                      model. Each discrete fault state has a different observation 
The variable resolution particle filter uses a bias-variance and predictive model for the continuous dynamics. The prob•
tradeoff to make a decision to vary the resolution of the state ability of a state is determined by the density of samples in 
space. A decision to abstract to the coarser resolution of ab• that state. 
stract state is made if the state space is currently at the The Markov model representing the discrete state transi•
resolution of states and the combination of bias and vari• tions consists of 7 states. As shown in figure 2(c) the normal 
ance in abstract state is less than the combination of bias driving (ND) state may transition back to the normal driv•
an variance of all its children 5,, as shown below:   ing state or to any one of six fault states: right front (RF), 
                                                      right middle (RM), right rear (RR), left front (LF), left mid•
                                                      dle (LM) and left rear (LR) wheel stuck. Each of these faults 
                                                      cause a change in the rover dynamics, but the faults on each 
On the other hand if the state space is currently at the reso• side (right and left), have similar dynamics. 
lution of abstract state and the reverse of equation (14) is Given that the three wheels on each side of the rover have 
true, then a decision to refine to the finer resolution of states similar dynamics, we constructed a hierarchy that clusters the 
  is made. The resolution of a state is left unaltered if its fault states on each side together. Figure 2(d) shows this hier•
bias-variance combination is less than its parent and its chil• archical model, where the abstract states right side fault (RS), 
dren. To avoid hysteresis, all abstraction decisions are con• and left side fault (LS) represent sets of states 
sidered before any refinement decisions.              and respectively. The highest level of abstrac•
  Each time a new measurement is obtained the distribution tion therefore consists of nodes Figure 2(e) 
of particles over the state space is updated. Since this alters shows how the state space in figure 2(d) would be refined if 
the bias and variance tradeoff, the states explicitly represented the bias in the abstract state RS given the number of parti•
at the current resolution of the state space are each evaluated cles outweighs the reduction in variance over the specialized 
for gain from abstraction or refinement. Any change in the states RF, RM and RR at a finer resolution. 
current resolution of the state space is recursively evaluated When particle filtering is performed with the variable reso•
for further change in the same direction.             lution particle filter, the particles are initialized at the highest 


PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE                                                                               979 Figure 2: (a) Snapshot from the dynamic simulation of the six wheel rocker bogie rover in the simulator, (b) An example showing the normal 
trajectory (ND) and the change in the same trajectory with a fault at each wheel, (c) Original discrete state transition model. The discrete 
states are: Normal driving (ND), right and left, front, middle and rear wheel faulty (RF, RM, RR, LF, LM, LR) (d) Abstract discrete slate 
transition model. The states, RF, RM and RR have been aggregated into the Right Side wheel faulty states and similarly LF, LM and LR into 
Left Side wheel faulty states (RS and LS). (e) State space model where RS has been refined. All states have self transitions that have been 
excluded for clarity. 

level in the abstraction hierarchy,i.e. in the abstract states ND, perior to that of the classical filter for small sample sizes. In 
RS and LS. Say a RF fault occurs, this is likely to result in a addition figure 3(b) shows the Kl-divergence along the Y axis 
high likelihood of samples in RS. These samples will mul• and wall clock time along the X axis. Both filters were coded 
tiply which may then result in the bias in RS exceeding the in matlab and share as many functions as possible. 
reduction in variance in RS over RF, RM and RR thus favor•
ing tracking at the finer resolution. Additional observations 5 Discussion and Future Work 
should then assign a high likelihood to RF. 
                                                       This paper presents a novel approach for state abstraction in 
  The model is based on the real-world and is not very 
                                                       particle filters that allows efficient tracking of large discrete, 
stochastic. It does not allow transitions from most fault states 
                                                       continuous or hybrid state spaces. The advantage of this ap•
to other fault states. For example, the RF fault does not tran•
                                                       proach is that it makes efficient use of the available computa•
sition to the RM fault. This does not exclude transitions to 
                                                       tion by selecting the resolution of the state space based on an 
multiple fault states and if the model included multiple faults, 
                                                       explicit bias-variance tradeoff. It performs no worse than a 
it could still transition to a "RF and RM" fault, which is dif•
                                                       classical particle filter with an infinite number of particles . 
ferent from a RM fault. Hence, if there are no samples in                                                4
                                                       But with limited particles we show that its performance is 
the actual fault state, samples that end up in fault states with 
                                                       considerably superior. The VRPF does not prematurely elim•
dynamics that are similar to the actual fault state may end up 
                                                       inate potential hypotheses for lack of a sufficient number of 
being identified as the fault state. The hierarchical approach 
                                                       particles. It maintains particles in abstraction until there are a 
tracks the state at an abstract level and does not commit to 
                                                       sufficient number of particles to provide a low variance esti•
identifying any particular specialized fault state until there is 
                                                       mate at a lower resolution. 
sufficient evidence. Hence it is more likely to identify the 
correct fault state.                                     The VRPF generalizes from current samples to unsampled 
                                                       regions of the state space. Regions of the state space that had 
  Figure 3(a) shows a comparison of the error from moni• no samples at time t may acquire samples at time 1 on 
toring the state using a classical particle filter that tracks the abstraction. This provides additional robustness to noise that 
full state space, and the VRPF that varies the resolution of may have resulted in eliminating a likely hypothesis. [Koller 
the state space. The X axis shows the number of particles and Fratkina, 1998] addresses this by using the time sam•
used, the Y axis shows the KL divergence from an approxi• ples as input to a density estimation algorithm that learns a 
mation of the true posterior computed using a large number of distribution over the states at time t. Samples at time are 
samples. 1000 samples were used to compute an approxima•
                                                       then generated using this generalized distribution. [Ng et al, 
tion to the true distribution. The KL divergence is computed 
                                                       2002] uses a factored representation to allow a similar mix•
over the entire length of the data sequence and is averaged 
                                                       ing of particles. The VRPF uses a bias-variance tradeoff to 
over multiple runs over the same data set . The data set in•
                                    3                  generalize more selectively and efficiently. 
cluded normal operation and each of the six faults. Figure 
                                                         We have presented the variable resolution particle filter for 
3(a) demonstrates that the performance of the VRPF is su-
                                                       a discrete state space. We plan to extend it to a continuous 

   3The results are an average over 50 to 5 runs with repetitions 4There is a minor overhead in terms of evaluating the resolution 
decreasing as the sample size was increased.           of the state space 


980                                                                             PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE 