  Unsupervised      Learning    of Semantic     Relations    between    Concepts    of  a Molecular
                                        Biology    Ontology    ∗

   Massimiliano  Ciaramita†     Aldo  Gangemi†      Esther Ratsch‡    Jasmin   Sariˇ c´§ Isabel Rojas§
  † Institute for Cognitive Science and Technology (CNR),  Roma,   Italy, ﬁrstname.lastname@istc.cnr.it
      ‡ University of Wurzb¨ urg, Wurzb¨ urg, Germany, esther.ratsch@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de
                  § EML-Research   gGmbH,    Heidelberg, Germany,  lastname@eml-r.de

                    Abstract                          and selectional restriction learning. We apply our system
                                                      to a corpus of molecular biology literature, the GENIA cor-
    In this paper we present an unsupervised model    pus [Ohta et al., 2002], and generate a list of labeled binary
    for learning arbitrary relations between concepts of relations between pairs of GENIA ontology concepts. An in-
    a molecular biology ontology for the purpose of   depth analysis of the learned templates shows that the model,
    supporting text mining and manual ontology build- characterized by a very simple architecture, has good poten-
    ing. Relations between named-entities are learned tials for text mining and ontology building applications.
    from the GENIA corpus by means of several stan-     In the next section we describe the problem of learning re-
    dard natural language processing techniques. An   lations from text and related work. In Section 3 we describe
    in-depth analysis of the output of the system shows our system and the data used in our study in detail. In Sec-
    that the model is accurate and has good potentials tion 4 we discuss the evaluation of the system’s output.
    for text mining and ontology building applications.
                                                      2   Problem   statement  and related work
1  Introduction                                       The GENIA  ontology contains concepts related to gene ex-
Bioinformatics is one of the most active ﬁelds for text mining pression and its regulation, including cell signaling reactions,
applications because of the fast rate of growth of digital doc- proteins, DNA, and RNA. Much work in bioinformatics has
uments collections such as Medline and SwissProt. The ulti- focused on named-entity recognition (NER), or information
mate goal of text mining in bioinformatics is knowledge dis- extraction (IE), where the task is the identiﬁcation of se-
covery by means of natural language processing (NLP) and quences of words that are instances of a set of concepts. As
machine learning. To achieve this objective it is necessary to an example one would like to recognize that “NS-Meg cells”,
access the information contained “inside” the documents, i.e. “mRNA” and “EPO receptor” are, respectively, instances of
their content. One possible strategy to get to the content is the GENIA classes “Cell line”, “RNA family or group” and
through information extraction. One starts with a conceptu- “Protein molecule” in the following text (Example 1):
alization of the domain; i.e., a domain ontology, which spec- (1) “Untreated [Cell line NS-Meg cells] ex-
iﬁes relevant concepts as well as semantic relations, such as pressed [RNA family or group mRNA]  for the
is-a, part-of, and more complex relations encoding important [Protein molecule EPO receptor]”
interactions between concepts. Then it is necessary to apply A natural extension of NER is the extraction of relations
extraction techniques to recognize where, in the documents, between entities. NER and relation extraction could provide
concepts are instantiated by speciﬁc entities, and where im- a better support for mining systems; e.g., patterns of enti-
portant interactions are expressed by linguistic structures. ties and relations could be compared across document collec-
  Several ontologies which deﬁne concepts and structural se- tions to discover new informative pieces of information (as
mantic relations, e.g., is-a, are available. Instead there is a in [Swanson and Smalheiser, 1997] for example). Currently
need for ontologies that specify relevant arbitrary semantic most of the work on relation extraction applies hand-built
relations between concepts; for example, that “Cell express- rule-based extraction patterns; e.g., Friedman et al. [2001]
the-receptor-for Protein” or that “Virus replicate-in Cell”. In
                                                      on identifying molecular pathways and Sariˇ c´ et al. [2004b]
this paper we investigate the problem of enriching an existing
                                                      on ﬁnding information on protein interactions which use a
ontology with arbitrary semantic relations which are strongly
                                                      manually-built ontology similar to that described in [Ratsch
associated with ordered pairs of concepts. We design an unsu-
                                                      et al., 2003]. One problem with rule-based IE is that sys-
pervised system that combines an array of off-the-shelf NLP
                                                      tems tend to have good precision but low recall. Machine
techniques such as syntactic parsing, collocation extraction
                                                      learning oriented work has focused on extracting manually-
  ∗We would like to thank our colleagues in the Laboratory for compiled lists of target relations; e.g., Rosario and Hearst
Applied Ontology (LOA-CNR), and the Klaus Tschira Foundation [2004] address the relation extraction problem as an exten-
for their ﬁnancial support.                           sion of NER and use sequence learning methods to recognize                                                      concepts with underspeciﬁed taxonomic relations, see Fig-
                Nucleic_acid                          ure 1. The ontology was used to semantically annotate bio-
                                                      logical entities in the GENIA corpus. We used the G3.02 ver-
                                                      sion consisting of 2,000 articles, 18,546 sentences, roughly
                   DNA                                half a million word tokens, and 36 types of labels. This cor-
                                                      pus has complex annotations for disjunctive/conjunctive en-
  DNA_N/A                     DNA_family_or_group     tities, for cases such as “erythroid, myeloid and lymphoid
                                                      cell types”. We excluded sentences that contained only in-
               DNA_molecule                           stances of complex embedded conjunctions/disjunctions and
  DNA_domain_or_region        DNA_substructure        also excessively long sentences (more than 100 words). The
                                                      ﬁnal number of sentences was 18,333 (484,005 word to-
                                                      kens, 91,387 tags). Many tags have nested structures; e.g.
Figure 1: A small fraction of the GENIA ontology. Contin- “[Other name [DNA IL-2 gene] expression]”. Here we only
uous lines represent unspeciﬁed taxonomic relations, dashed considered the innermost labels, although the external labels
lines represent other regions.                        contain useful information and should eventually be used.
                                                        One potential drawback of the GENIA ontology is the rel-
                                                      atively small number of biological concepts and their coarse
instances of a set of 6 predeﬁned relations about “Diseases”
                                                      granularity which causes groups of similar but distinct en-
and “Treatments”. These systems yield good precision and
                                                      tities to be assigned to the same class. Some relations ﬁt
recall but still need that sets of relations between classes be
                                                      very well to subsets of the entities of the related concepts,
deﬁned ﬁrst. Yet another problem which deals with seman-
                                                      whereas they don’t ﬁt well for other entities of the same con-
tic relations is that addressed by Craven and Kumlien [1999]
                                                      cept. For example, the concept “DNA domain or region”
who present a model for ﬁnding extraction patterns for 5 bi-
                                                      contains sequences with given start and end positions, as well
nary relations involving proteins. A similar work is that of
                                                      as promoters, genes, enhancers, and the like. Even if promot-
Pustejovsky et al. [Pustejovsky et al., 2002] on automatically
                                                      ers, genes, and enhancers are pieces of sequences too (with
extracting “inhibit” relations. Semantic relations have been
                                                      start and end positions), they also are functional descriptions
used as templates, or guiding principles, for the generation
                                                      of sequences. Therefore, different statements can be made
of database schemata [Rojas et al., 2002]. Another applica-
                                                      about such kinds of DNA domains or regions and (pure) se-
tion of ontological relations is that of consistency checking
                                                      quences. The relation “DNA domain or region encodes Pro-
of data in molecular biology databases to individuate errors
                                                      tein molecule” makes sense for genes, but not for enhancers,
in the knowledge base (e.g., by checking the consistency of
                                                      and may make sense or not for (pure) sequences, depending
the arguments) or to align different databases.
                                                      on their (unknown) function. On the other hand any NLP ori-
  Biological text mining systems that involve relations re-
                                                      ented resource cannot have many ﬁne-grained concepts de-
quire predeﬁned sets of relations that have to be manually
                                                      ﬁned, otherwise IE wouldn’t be accurate. In this respect the
encoded, a job which is complex, expensive and tedious, and
                                                      GENIA  corpus is unique in that it provides extensive named-
that as such can only guarantee narrow coverage – typically
                                                      entity annotations which can be used to train appropriate NER
a handful of relations and one pair of classes. Our aim is to
                                                      systems (cf. [Kazama et al., 2002].
automatically generate all relevant relations found in a corpus
between all ontological concepts deﬁned in an ontology. This 3.2 Relations as dependency paths
work is also valuable to ontologists since ontology building
and evaluation are becoming more and more automatized ac- The 18,333 sentences were parsed with a statistical
tivities and most of the corpus-based work has focused only parser [Charniak, 2000].1 Since we are interested in rela-
on structural relations such as is-a and part-of [Pantel and tions that connect entities as chunks we want to avoid that the
Ravichandran, 2004; Berland and Charniak, 1999].      parser analyzes an entity that is split among different phrases.
                                                      This can happen because entity names can be fairly long,
3  Learning   relations from  text                    complex and contain words that are unknown to the parser.
                                                      To avoid this problem we substituted the entity tags for the ac-
Our model takes as input a corpus of texts in which named- tual named-entities; the result can be seen in Figure 2 which
entities, corresponding to ontology concepts, have been iden- shows the substitution and the relative parse tree for the sen-
tiﬁed. Here we use the GENIA corpus, for which the tagging tence of Example 1. Trees obtained in this way are simpler
has been carried out manually, but the corpus data can be also and don’t split entities across phrases. For each tree we gener-
generated automatically using an appropriate NER system. ated a dependency graph: each word2 is associated with one
The model outputs a set of templates that involve pairs of GE- governor, deﬁned as the syntactic head3 of the phrase closest
NIA ontology classes and a semantic relation. For example,
a template might be “Virus infect Cell”.                 1Which takes roughly three hours on a Pentium 4 machine.
                                                         2
3.1  Data                                                Morphologically simpliﬁed with the “morph” function from the
                                                      WordNet library, plus morphological simpliﬁcations from UMLS.
The GENIA  ontology was built to model cell-signaling re- 3The word whose syntactic category determines the syntactic
actions in humans with the goal of supporting information category of the phrase; e.g., a verb for a verb phrase (VP), a noun
extraction systems. It consists of a taxonomy of 46 nominal for a noun phrase (NP), etc.                                  S:express
               NP:Cell_line                       VP:express
              JJ       NNP       VBD      NP:RNA_family_or_group        PP:for
           Untreated  Cell_line expressed           NN             IN   NP:Protein_molecule
                                            RNA_family_or_group    for    DT        NNP
                                                                          the  Protein_molecule


Figure 2: Parse tree for the sentence of Example 1. Entities are substituted with their tags. Phrases are labeled with their
syntactic heads. The dependency graph is depicted with dashed directed edges pointing to the governed element.

to the word that differs from the word itself. For example, “SUBJ←express→for→IND OBJ”, between “Cell line”
in Figure 2 “Cell line” is governed by “express”, while “Pro- and “Protein molecule”. Overall we found 7,189 instances
tein molecule” is governed by the preposition “for”.  of such relations distributed as follows:
  In this way it is possible to formalize the notion of semantic Type               Counts   RelFreq
relation between two entities. A related application of depen-
                                                           SUBJ-DIR  OBJ              1,746    0.243
dency relations concerns the recognition of paraphrase sen-
                                                           SUBJ-IND  OBJ              1,572    0.219
tences [Lin and Pantel, 2001]. A relation r between two en-
                                                           SUBJ-DIR  OBJ  MOD  PP     1,156    0.161
tities c and c in a tree is the shortest path between c and
     i     j                                  i            SUBJ-DIR  OBJ  MOD          943     0.131
c following the dependency relations. For example, in Fig-
 j                                                         SUBJ-IND  OBJ  MOD  PP      911     0.127
ure 2 the path between “Cell line” and “Protein molecule” is
                                                           SUBJ-IND  OBJ  MOD          861     0.120
“←express→for→”.  There is a path for every pair of enti-
ties in the tree. Paths can be considered from both directions The data contained 485 types of entity pairs, 3,573 types of
since the reverse of a path from A to B is a path from B to A. patterns and 5,606 entity pair-pattern types.
A large number of different patterns can be extracted, overall
we found 172,446 paths in the data. For the sake of inter- 3.3 Learning relations (Stage 1)
pretability, by inspection, of the outcome of the model in this
paper we focused on a subset of these patterns. We selected Let us take A to be an ordered pair of GENIA classes; e.g. A =
                                                      (Protein domain,DNA domain or region), and B to be a pat-
paths from ci to cj where j > i and the pivotal element, the
word with no incoming arrows, is a verb v. In addition we im- tern; e.g., B = SUBJ←bind→DIR OBJ. Our goal is to ﬁnd re-
                                                      lations strongly associated with ordered pairs of classes, i.e.,
posed the following constraints: ci is governed by v under an
S phrase (i.e., is v’s surface subject, SUBJ), e.g., “Cell line” bi-grams AB. This problem is similar to ﬁnding collocations;
in Figure 2; and one of the following six constraints holds: e.g., multi-word expressions such as ”real estate”, which form
                                                      idiomatic phrases. Accordingly the simplest method would
 1. c is governed by v under a VP (i.e., is v’s direct object,
     j                                                be to select the most frequent bi-grams. However many bi-
    DIR OBJ), e.g., “RNA family or group” in Figure 2;
                                                      grams are frequent because either A or B, or both, are fre-
 2. cj is governed by v under a PP (i.e., is v’s indirect object, quent; e.g., SUBJ←induce→DIR OBJ is among the most
    IND OBJ), e.g. “Protein molecule” in Figure 2;    frequent pattern for 37 different pairs. Since high frequency
 3. cj is governed by v’s direct object noun (i.e., is a mod- can be accidental and, additionally, the method doesn’t pro-
    iﬁer of the direct object, DIR OBJ MOD), e.g. “Virus” vide a natural way for distinguishing relevant from irrelevant
    in “... inﬂuenced Virus replication”;             bi-grams, we use instead a simple statistical method.
                                                        As with collocations a better approach is to estimate if
 4. cj is governed by v’s indirect object noun (i.e., is the
    indirect object’s modiﬁer, IND OBJ MOD), e.g., “Pro- A and B occur together more often than at chance. One
    tein molecule” in “..was induced by Protein molecule formulates a null hypothesis H0 that A and B do not oc-
    stimulation”;                                     cur together more frequently than expected at chance. Us-
                                                      ing corpus statistics the probability of P (AB), under H ,
 5. c is governed by a PP which modiﬁes the direct object                                              0
     j                                                is computed and H  is rejected if P (AB) is beneath the
    (DIR OBJ MOD   PP); e.g., “Protein molecule” in “.. in-            0
                                                      signiﬁcance level. We use a chi-square test for this pur-
    duce overproduction of Protein molecule”;
                                                      pose. For each observed bi-gram we create a contingency
 6. cj is governed by a PP which modiﬁes the indirect ob- table of the frequencies AB, ¬AB, A¬B, and ¬A¬B; e.g.,
    ject (IND OBJ MOD PP); e.g., “Lipid” in “..transcribed for A = Protein molecule-DNA domain or region and B =
    upon activation with Lipid”.                      SUBJ←bind→DIR    OBJ the table computed from the corpus
For  the  sentence in  Figure  2  we   identify two   would contain respectively the values 6, 161, 24 and 6,998.
good   patterns:    “SUBJ←express→DIR   OBJ”    be-   The chi-square test compares the observed frequencies vs. the
tween  “Cell line” and  “RNA  family or group”, and   frequencies expected under H0. Together with the test we use  Protein_molecule DNA_domain_or_region Other_name    for learning such restrictions. We use here the method pro-
                                                      posed in [Clark and Weir, 2002] which is accurate and sim-
                  Enhance_the_expression_of           ple. We use the taxonomy deﬁned in the GENIA ontology,
                                                                                                        5
         Produce_level_of                             see Figure 1, to generalize arguments of the learned patterns.
                           Is_agent_of                  Clark and Weir deﬁne an algorithm, top(c, r, s), which (ad-
  Induce_transcription_of
                               Transactivate          justing the terminology to our case) takes as input a relation
                      Virus                           r, a class c and a syntactic slot s, and returns a class c0 which
       Replicate_in Encode                            is c itself or one of its ancestors, whichever provides the best
                           Infect          DNA
                                                      generalization for p(r|c, s). The method uses the chi-squared
   Cell_type   Protein     Natural_source             test to check if the probability p(r|c, s) is signiﬁcantly differ-
                                                      ent from p(r|c0, s), where c0 is the parent of c. If this is false
                                                               0
Figure 3: The “Virus” concept with the selected and general- then p(r|c , s) is supposed to provide a good approximation
ized relations, and related concepts, in the enriched ontology. for p(r|c, s), which is interpreted as evidence that (r, s) holds
                                                      for c0 as well. The procedure is iteratively applied until a sig-
                                                      niﬁcant difference is found. The last class considered is the
the log-likelihood chi-squared statistic: 4           output of the procedure, the concept that best summarizes the
                              o                       class that r “selects” in syntactic slot s. We computed the
(2)           G2 = 2    o log  ij
                    X    ij   e                       frequencies of patterns involving superordinate classes sum-
                     i,j       ij                     ming over the frequencies, from the GENIA corpus, of all
where i and j range over the rows and columns of the contin- descendants of that class for that pattern.
gency table, and the expected frequencies are computed off For each relation r, slot s and class c, learned in stage 1,
                                                      we used Clark and Weir’s method to map c to top(c, r, s). We
the marginal frequencies in the table. In the previous exam-        2
ple G2 is equal to 16.43, which is above the critical value 7.88 again used the G statistic and the same α value of 0.005. Us-
                                                      ing these maps we generalized, when possible, the original
for α = 0.005, hence B is accepted as a relevant pattern for
A. The following table shows the three highest ranked class 287 patterns learned. The outcome of this process is a set
pairs for pattern B. There is strong evidence that entities of of 240 templates 153 of which have generalized arguments.
the protein type tend to bind DNA locations, which is a rea- As an example, the templates above “Protein domain binds
sonable conclusion:                                   DNA  domain or region” and “Protein family or group binds
                                                      DNA  domain or region” are mapped to the generalized tem-
             B = SUBJ←bind→DIR    OBJ                 plate “Protein binds DNA”. Figure 3 depicts the set of labeled
  A                                     G2    Sig     relations the concept Virus is involved in, and the respective
  Protein domain-DNA domain or region 16.43  YES      paired concepts, after stage 1 and 2.
  Protein family or group-DNA d. or r. 13.67 YES
  Virus-Protein molecule               7.84   NO      4   Evaluation
In this study we used α = 0.005. In general, α is an ad- We discuss now an evaluation of the model carried out by a
justable parameter which might be set on held-out data in biologist and an ontologist, both familiar with GENIA. The
order to maximize an objective function. We also ignored biological evaluation focuses mainly on the precision of the
bi-grams occurring less than 2 times and pairs A, patterns B, system; namely, the percentage of all relations selected by the
occurring less than 4 times. Overall there are 487 suitable AB model that, according to the biologist, express correct biolog-
                               2
pairs, 287 (58.6%) have a value for G higher than α.  ical interactions between the arguments of the relation. From
                                                      the ontological perspective we analyze semantic aspects of
3.4  Generalization of relations (Stage 2)            the relations, mainly the consistency with the GENIA classes.
Relations can share similar arguments as in “bind” above
where, in both signiﬁcant cases, the direct object is “DNA 4.1 Biological evaluation
domain or region” while the subject is some kind of pro- The output of stage 1 is a set of 287 patterns, composed of
tein. This can be evidence that, in fact, we are facing a an ordered pair of classes and a semantic relation. 91 of
more general template holding between superordinates of the these patterns, involving in one or both arguments the class
arguments found in the ﬁrst stage. It is desirable, when “Other name”, were impossible to evaluate and excluded al-
possible, to learn more general relations such as “Protein together. This GENIA class is a placeholder, for very dif-
SUBJ←bind→DIR    OBJ DNA”,  because the learned ontol- ferent sorts of things, which needs partitioning and structur-
ogy is more compact and has greater generalization power, ing. Relations involving “Other name” (e.g., “treat”) might
i.e., relations apply to more entities. Finding such general- prove correct for a subset of the entities tagged with this
izations is similar to learning selectional restrictions of pred-
icates, that is, the preferences that predicates place on the se- 5Four of the 36 GENIA corpus class labels, namely,
mantic category of their arguments; e.g., that “eat” prefers ob- “DNA substructure”, “DNA N/A”, “RNA substructure” and
jects that are “foods”. Several methods have been proposed “RNA N/A”, have no entries in the GENIA ontology, we used
                                                      them as subordinates of ” DNA” and “RNA”, consistently with
  4Dunning [1993] argues that G2 is more appropriate than Pear- “Protein N/A” and “Protein substructure” which in the ontology are
son’s X2 with sparse data; here they produce similar rankings. subordinates of “Protein”.label (e.g., “inﬂammation”) but false for a different subset is not a kind of “Amino acid”. Generalizations such as se-
(e.g., “gene expression”). Of the remaining 196 patterns lectional restrictions instead seem to hold mainly between
76.5% (150) are correct, i.e., express valid biological facts classes that share a relation of inclusion. In order to support
such as “Protein molecule induce-phosphorylation-of Pro- this kind of inference the structural relations between GENIA
tein molecule”, while 23.5% (43) are incorrect, e.g. “Protein classes would need to be clariﬁed.
inhibit-expression-of Lipid”. Evaluation involved the exhaus-
tive inspection of the original sentences to verify the intended 4.2 Ontological assessment
meaning of the pattern and spot recurring types of errors. The 150 patterns validated by the expert are potential new
Half of the mistakes (22) depend on how we handle coor- components of the ontology. We compiled GENIA, includ-
dination, which causes part of the coordinated structure to be ing the newly learned relations, in OWL (Ontology Web
included in the relation. For example, the ﬁrst two DNA enti- Language [McGuinness and van Harmelen, 2004]) to as-
ties in the noun phrase “DNA, DNA, and DNA” are governed sess its properties with ontology engineering tools. Ignoring
by the head DNA rather than by, say, the main verb. Thus “Other name”, the GENIA taxonomy branches from two root
wrong relations such as “Protein bind-DNA DNA” are gener- classes: “Source” and “Substance”. GENIA classes, by de-
ated in addition to good ones such as “Protein bind DNA”. sign, tend to be mutually exclusive, meaning that they should
Fixing this problem involves simply the speciﬁcation of a be logically disjoint. Our main objective is to verify the de-
better dependency structure for coordinations. Finally, 5 er- gree to which the new relations adhere to this principle.
rors involved the class “Other name” embedded somewhere To analyze the relations we align, i.e., map, “Source” and
within the relation, suggesting again generalizations that can- “Substance” to equivalent classes of another more general
not be judged with enough conﬁdence. The remaining er- ontology. Ideally, the alignment should involve an ontology
rors are probably due to sparse data problems. In this re- of the same domain such as TAMBIS [Stevens et al., 2000].
spect we plan to implement an NER system to produce more Unfortunately TAMBIS scatters the subordinates of “Source”
data and consequently more reliable distributional informa- (organisms, cells, etc.) across different branches, while “Sub-
tion. Finally, we notice that, although the GENIA ontology stance” in TAMBIS does not cover protein and nucleic acid-
was intended to be a model of cell signaling reactions, it lacks related subordinates of “Substance” in GENIA.7 In GENIA
important concepts such as signaling pathway. This leads to substances are classiﬁed according to their chemical features
some errors as in the following case: ”An intact TCR sig- rather than biological role, while sources are biological lo-
naling pathway is required for p95vav to function.”. In this cations where substances are found and their reactions take
case we derive the relation: “Protein molecule is-required- place. This distinction assumes a stacking of ontology lay-
for Protein molecule” since only “TCR” is annotated as “Pro- ers within the physical domain where the biological is su-
tein molecule” neglecting signaling pathway.          perimposed to the chemical level. This feature of GENIA
  To the best of our knowledge we can compare these re- makes it suitable for alignment with DOLCE-Lite-Plus (DLP,
sults with one other study. Reinberger et al. [2004] evaluate http://dolce.semanticweb.org), a simpliﬁed translation of the
(also by means of experts) 165 subject-verb-object relations, DOLCE foundational ontology [Gangemi et al., 2003]. DLP
                             6
extracted from data similar to ours but with a different ap- specify a suitable distinction between “chemical” and “bio-
proach. They report an accuracy of 42% correct relations. logical” objects. It features about 200 classes, 150 relations
Their method differs from ours in three respects: relations and 500 axioms and has been used in various domains includ-
are extracted between nouns rather than entities (i.e., NER ing biomedicine [Saric et al., 2004a].
is not considered), a shallow parser is used instead of a full We aligned “Source” and “Substance” to the biological and
parser, and relations are selected by frequency rather than by chemical classes in DLP. There are 78 types of relations out
hypothesis testing. A direct comparison of the methods is not of 150, 58% of them (45) occur only with one pair of classes,
feasible. However, if the difference in accuracy reﬂects the i.e., are monosemous, while 33 have multiple domains or
better quality of our method this is likely to depend on any, or ranges, i.e., are polysemous. Since the root classes of GE-
on a combination, of those three factors.             NIA are disjoint we checked if there are polysemous relations
  As far as stage 2 is concerned we ﬁrst removed all  whose domain or range mix up subclasses of “Source” with
relations involving “Other name” (40 out of 153), which subclasses of “Substance”. Such relations might not imply
does not have superordinates nor subordinates, and eval- logical inconsistency but raise doubts because they suggest
uated if the remaining 113 generalized patterns were cor- the possibility that a class of entities emerged from the data,
rect.  Of  these, 60 (53.1%) provided valid general-  which is the union of two classes that by deﬁnition should
izations; e.g., “Protein molecule induce-phosphorylation- be disjoint. Interestingly, there are only 4 such relations out
of Amino acid monomer” is mapped to “Protein induce-  of 78 (5.1%); e.g., “encode”, whose subject can be either
phosphorylation-of Amino acid monomer”. Excluding mis- “Virus” or “DNA”. In biology, DNA encodes a protein, but
takes caused by the fact that the original relation is incorrect, biologists sometimes use the verb ”metonymically”. By say-
over-generalization is mainly due to the fact that the taxon- ing that a virus encodes a protein, they actually mean that
omy of the GENIA  ontology is not a is-a hierarchy; e.g., a virus’ genome contains DNA that encodes a protein. The
“DNA  substructure” is not a kind of “DNA”, and “Protein” small number of such cases suggests that relations emerging

  6The SwissProt corpus, 13 million words of Medline abstracts 7Notice that we are not questioning the quality of TAMBIS, but
related to genes and proteins.                        only its ﬁtness for aligning GENIA.