                Categorizing classes of signals by means of fuzzy gradual rules 

                                  Sylvie Galichet, Didier Dubois, Henri Prade 
                           Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse (IRIT) 
                            118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 4, France 
                                          {galichet, dubois, prade }@irit.fr 


                        Abstract                               What is supposed to be known, in a precise or in an imprecise 
                                                               way, is the behaviour of the function at some reference 
      This paper presents an approach to the approxi•
                                                               points, the problem being to interpolate between these points. 
      mate description of univariate real-valued func•
                                                               Figure 1 illustrates our purpose of building an imprecise mod•
      tions in terms of precise or imprecise reference 
                                                               el in a case where the points on which interpolation is based 
      points and interpolation between these points. It 
                                                               are imprecise and modelled by rectangular areas. 
      is achieved by means of gradual rules which ex•
      press that the closer the variable to the abscissa of 
      a reference point, the closer the value of the func•
      tion to the ordinate of this reference point. Grad•
      ual rules enable us to specify sophisticated 
      gauges, under the form of connected areas, inside 
      of which the function belonging to the class under 
      consideration should remain. This provides a 
      simple and efficient tool for categorizing signals. 
      This tool can be further improved by making the 
      gauge flexible by means of fuzzy gradual rules. 
      This is illustrated on a benchmark example. 

 1 Introduction                                                              figure 1: Imprecise interpolation 
Signal functions, such as time series, medical ECG's, arc usu•
                                                               So, we are no longer looking for a function, but for a relation 
ally viewed as analytical mappings. Then, a precise represen•
                                                               linking the variable to the possible value of the function. 
tation is often used. Even when uncertainty is dealt with, it is 
                                                               Then, this relation is represented by its graphT defined on the 
supposed to pervade parameters of the analytical models, 
                                                               Cartesian product X X Z (where X is the input domain, and Z 
leading to probabilistic or interval-based processing. The 
                                                               the function range). A similar approach used in automated 
main objective of this paper is to propose an alternative to this 
                                                               control, recently proposed in [Sala and Albertos, 2001], also 
classical type of approaches by investigating the interest of a 
                                                               considers the building of uncertain fuzzy models in the set•
special kind of fuzzy « if., then » rules, named gradual rules 
                                                               ting of the approximation of multi-valued functions called 
[Dubois and Prade, 1992; 1994], for developing imprecise 
                                                               "ambiguous functions". 
representations. Actually, the proposed strategy relies on in-
terpolative reasoning. By specifying the interpolate repre•    The paper, after some brief background on gradual rules, dis•
sentation with gradual rules, there is no need to choose an    cusses the design of the imprecise interpolate representa•
analytic form for the interpolator and an imprecise model is   tion in terms of gradual rules, constrained by precise or 
directly obtained from the constraints expressed by the rules. imprecise reference points. The proposed approach is then 
The proposed rule-based approach is an alternative to works    applied to the classification of time series. Moreover, a more 
based on fuzzy polynomials [Lowen, 1990] or fuzzy spline       powerful representation framework, based on fuzzy sets of 
interpolation, e.g. [Kawaguchi and Miyakoshi, 1998], which     gradual rules (called fuzzy gradual rules for short) is pro•
rely on fuzzy-valued functions and still depend on the analyt• posed. It enables us to describe areas through which it is not 
ical form of the interpolant.                                  completely possible that the function may go. 


QUALITATIVE REASONING                                                                                               1039  2 Interpolation and gradual rules                             Similar relationships can be obtained when considering de•
                                                               creasing reference points. These constraints can be related to 
The idea of imprecise interpolation suggested above is based 
                                                               consistency requirements between gradual rules [Dubois ct 
on constraints to be satisfied. Namely the results of the inter•
                                                               al., 1997], ensuring the non emptiness of the image of each in•
polation should agree with the reference points. These con•
                                                               put point via the relation 
straints define the graph of a relation on 
                                                               Figure 2 pictures the interpolation graph which is obtained 
 We first consider the case of precise interpolation points 
                                                               with three interpolation points, and thus three gradual rules 
with coordinates Then the relationT should 
                                                               whose Afs and Bi's also appear in figure 2. The partitioning 
satisfy: 
                                                               of X is obtained by cutting the intervals into three 

                                                               ed by the parameters which define the fuzzy sets The ex•
for Without any further constraint on the nature of            treme values and are also predefined. Lastly, the other 
the interpolation, we only have:                               parameters can be obtained by solving the system of equa•
                                                               tions derived from (3) and (4). 
Thus each interpolation point induces the constraint "If 
then represented by the rulewhere 
   is material implication. The relation is thus obtained as 
the conjunction: 
                                                        (1) 
This relation is extremely imprecise since there is no con•
straint at all outside the reference points. Instead of using a 
precise type of interpolation function, one may use fuzzy 
rules in order to express constraints in the vicinity of the in•
terpolation points. The idea is to use rules of the form "the 
closer* is to , the closer:: is to " The extension of equation 
(1) to gradual rules provides the following expression for the 
graph 
                                                        (2) 
where represents Reschcr-Gaincs implication 1 

if andcIosc t0 is the degree 
of truth of the proposition is close to "\                            figure 2: Piecewise quadrangle-shaped graph 

We have just to define what is meant by "close to". Let de•    This approach straightforwardly extends to imprecise refer•
note the fuzzy set of values close to It is natural to set     ence points provided that trapezoidal membership functions 
                  and to assume that the membership degree     are used in place of triangular ones (see figure 3). 
to decreases on each side of with the distance to How•
ever will not be necessarily symmetrical. The simplest so•
lution consists in choosing triangular fuzzy sets with a 
support denoted by In a similar way, the closeness 
to will be modelled by a triangular fuzzy set B, with modal 
value Zi and support Then the interpolation relation 
only depends on 4n parameters for interpola•
tion points. In order to simplify their tuning, we further as•
sume that at most two rules are simultaneously fired at each 
point of the input domain, 
         For increasing reference points and 
                      it has been established in [Galichet et 
al., 2002] that the interpolation graph is made of connected 4-
sided areas (as pictured in figure 2) when the following con•
straints hold between the parameters: 
                                                        (3) 
                                                                           figure 3: Imprecise reference points 
                                                       (4) 


1040                                                                                          QUALITATIVE REASONING  3 Classification of time series 

 Our purpose is now to illustrate how the imprecise intcrpola-
tive representation framework can be used to classify time se•
                                                                                                                                 Imprecise 
ries, see, e.g. [Kadous, 2002]. Supervised classification is                                                                     reference 
assumed, contrary to clustering techniques whose recent de•                                                                        points 
 velopments are often based on hidden Markov models [Bis•
 was et al., 1998; Li, 2000]. The proposed experiment deals 
with the database, freely available from the 
 UCI Data Archive [UCI KDD Archive]. It is a 6-class prob•
 lem, with 100 examples of each class, a prototype of each 
class being presented in figure 4. A categorization of process 
trends, based on types of variation, is also adopted in qualita•
tive reasoning and model-based diagnosis [Colomcr et al., 
2002]. 

                                             Normal (class 0) 

                                             Cyclic (class 1) 
                                                                                       figure 5: Imprecise model of class 5 
                                             Increasing trend 
                                                  (class 2) 
                                                                         The model so built can be further improved by truncating the 
                                             Decreasing trend            upper and lower parts of the quadrangle-shaped graph. An 
                                                  (class 3) 
                                                                         easy strategy to implement the graph cutting consists in add•
                                             Upward shift                ing a new rule that directly translates the interval-based con•
                                                  (class 4) 
                                                                         straint where and b2 
                                             Downward shift              arc defined in figure 5. Such an approach results in the final 
                                                  (class 5) 
                                                                         graph given in figure 6. 
                                         60 

              figure 4: One example of each class 

Given an unlabeled time series, the aim of the classification 
is to decide to which class it belongs. The idea behind the pro•
posed methodology consists in developing an imprecise mod•
el of each class. Then, the time scries to classify will be 
assigned to the class whose model presents the maximal ade•
quacy with the temporal data under consideration. The impre•
cise models are specified using gradual rules as advocated in 
the previous section. 
                                                                                  figure 6: Model of class 5 (truncated graph) 
In figure 5, ten examples of class 5 are plotted simultaneous•
ly. It clearly shows that the reference points arc no longer pre•        Figure 7 and 8 present the implemented models for two others 
cise. In this context, triangular membership functions are               classes. The first one associated with class 3 is based on ref•
replaced by trapezoidal membership functions whose cores                 erence points whose imprecision is only relative to the output. 
delimit the rectangular areas associated with the imprecise              Using strong partitions with triangular input membership 
reference points. According to this slight modification, the             functions and trapezoidal output ones, imprecise linear inter•
graph plotted in figure 5 is obtained from two gradual rules,            polation is obtained by means of the two rules and 
i.e. It can be shown that the constraints 
on the graph shape expressed by equations (3) and (4) are still 
valid. 


QUALITATIVE REASONING                                                                                                                  1041                                                                tegy to classify the 600 available examples, perfect classifica•
                                                               tion is obtained, i.e. the error rate is null for the training 
                                                               examples but also for the test time scries. This result is better 
                                                               than the one obtained with other approaches of the same pro•
                                                               blem [Kcogh and Kasetty, 2002; Nanopoulos et al., 2001]. It 
                                                               is however important to be cautious about this good perfor•
                                                               mance. Indeed, the discrimation between some classes is not 
                                                               robust. This point is illustrated by figure 9 in the case of clas•
                                                               ses 3 and 5 which are difficult to differentiate. The adequacy 
                                                               between the 100 time series of class 3 and models of classes 
                                                               3 and 5 is plotted. It can be stated that, for many time series, 
                                                               the difference between both obtained scores is small, which 
                                                               means that a slight modification of the models would proba•
                                                               bly result in different final decisions. Actually, an important 
                                                               intersection between both models induces a loss of the discri•
                                                               mination power of the adequacy index. In this framework, 
        figure 7: Model for class 3 (decreasing trend)         one may think of improving the robustness of the classifica•
 Concerning cyclic time scries (figure 8), the non-monotonic   tion by refining the imprecise models. One possible strategy 
 underlying behavior induces some difficulties in the model•   is then to introduce some membership degrees in the four si•
 ling process. Actually, closeness on the right and on the left ded areas while keeping their support unchanged. This can be 
 of the reference points must be handled in different ways. It made by using fuzzy sets of gradual rules as shown now. 
 means that two distinct fuzzy subsets are required for correct•    Number of points that belong to the models 
 ly dealing with each reference point. In this framework, the 
 imprecise models of figure 8 is composed of 9 gradual rules. 


                                                                       0 Time series number 100 

                                                                   figure 9: Adequacy of class 3 examples with models 
                                                                                   of classes 3 and 5 

                                                               4 Interpolate fuzzy graph 
                         (c) Cyclic 
             figure 8: Model for class l (cyclic)              According to the previous sections, it is clear that given a set 
                                                               of rules, i.e. a set of reference points, a collection of crisp 
Imprecise models are built for the six classes so that the     graphs can be obtained by varying the support parameters of 
graphs include all the points that compose the training time   the and/or theMoreover, inclusion properties be•
series (10 for each class). The classification of a time-series, tween the built graphs can be exhibited for controlled varia•
given as a collection of points is then                        tions of the supports as expressed by the following 
carried out according to its adequacy with the class models.   statements. 
The latter is determined from the number of points of the time 
series under consideration that belong to the graph of each 
model, that is: 

where denotes the model graph of the class. The final 
decision is then to assign the time series, supposed unlabeled, 
to the class that maximizes ..., 6. Applying this stra•


1042                                                                                         QUALITATIVE REASONING                                                                                 when and are built according to (6) 
                                                               and (7). 
                                                               An interpretation consists in viewing as a fuzzy set of crisp 
                                                               graphs, that is as a level 2 fuzzy set, i.e. a fuzzy set of fuzzy 
                                                               sets. In this case, F is represented as: 

                                                                                                                      (9) 
                                                               according to Zadch's notation where the integral sign stands 
                                                               for the union of the fuzzy singletons A single fuzzy 
                                                               gradual rule is pictured in figure 11. 


 a construction of nested graphs simply expresses that impli•
 cative graphs increase in the sense of inclusion when under•
 lying constraints become more permissive. More permissive 
 rules are obtained cither by restricting input conditions fur•
 ther, or by enlarging output fuzzy sets. 
 Using a convex linear combination enables the automatic 
 construction of such a collection of nested fuzzy subsets rang•
 ing from the lower bound of the family to the upper one. Ap•
plying such a technique results in the following proposal: 

                                                        (6) 
 where and. such that are the lower and upper 
bounds of the family and denotes the extended sum of           Figure 12 plots the fuzzy graph obtained when the lower 
 fuzzy numbers. In the same way, nested output fuzzy subsets   graph r1 is precise and piecewise linear and the upper graph 
 can be built according to:                                    f° has the quadrangle-based shape of figure 2. 

                                                        (7) 
 where and such that are the upper and low•
er bounds of the family. It should be noted that the inclusion 
ordering of the using is the converse of the one of the 
     due to opposite behaviors with respect to graph inclusion. 
 Using the so-built fuzzy subset families (see figure 10) results 
 in the following graph inclusions: 

                                                        (8) 

                                                                               0.75 0 0.5 
                                                                    figure 12: A graph based on 3 fuzzy gradual rules 

                                                               Using fuzzy gradual rules for dealing with the example of 
           figure 10: Nested fuzzy subsets                     section 3 still results in perfect classification. Moreover, the 
                                                               robustness of the classification is improved as illustrated by 
One interesting point is that the 4-sided shape introduced in 
                                                               figure 13, where histograms of the difference N3 - N5 are 
section 2 is shared by all nested graphs provided that the low• plotted for class 3 time series (see figure 9). It is clear that the 
er and upper graphs are themselves 4-sided areas. In other     number of examples for which the final decision is brittle, i.e. 
words, equalities (3) and (4) hold for any when they hold 
                                                               for the small values of N3 - N5 which are accounted for in the 
              as expressed by property P4.                     two first bars, decreases when fuzzy gradual rules are used. 
                                                               These results have been obtained by using the same form of 
                                                               indices Nj given by equation (5) for crisp and fuzzy graphs 


QUALITATIVE REASONING                                                                                               1043 