                Distributive and Collective Readings in Group Protocols

                        Silvia Rossi                   Sanjeev Kumar     and  Philip R. Cohen
               ITC-irst – Povo, Trento, Italy           Oregon Health and Science University
        Istituto di Cibernetica, CNR Napoli – Italy             Beaverton, OR – USA
                  silvia.rossi@dit.unitn.it                {skumar, pcohen}@cse.ogi.edu


                    Abstract                          collecting results), it should be possible for each computer
                                                      to send messages and results to groups of other components
    Collaborative applications require protocols that without knowing in advance who are the recipients and who
    specify how distributed entities interact with one actually need such results. In this sense, an agent commu-
    another in order to achieve a speciﬁed behavior.  nication language should support communication addressed
    Many different kinds of relationships can be estab- to individuals as well as to groups, where a group may have
    lished between these entities as a result of such in- a stable, known membership (i.e. it can be addressed by a
    teractions. Distributive and Collective readings are referring name) or its membership may be unknown. For
    two important ways to characterize group interac- example, in a publish/subscribe system, senders label each
    tion. Starting from an attempt-based semantics of message with the name of a topic (”publish”), rather than ad-
    group communicative acts, we distinguish between  dressing it to speciﬁc recipients and the messaging system
    these two concepts and evaluate group protocols   then sends the message to all eligible systems that have asked
    with respect to formation of different types of teams to receive messages on that topic (”subscribe”).
    during the interaction.
                                                        But complex systems like grids not only require that col-
                                                      lections of components be treated as a single conceptual unit
1  Motivations                                        when viewed from a different level of abstraction, they also
Group communication is common in collaborative applica- involve the changing of relationships between their various
tions of all kinds such as clustering, grid computing, transac- components. Group communicative acts by themselves are
tions and database replication, distance learning, application not sufﬁcient to model such situations. The group commu-
sharing, distributed interactive simulations, on-line games nication semantics of speech acts is sufﬁcient to model one-
and ﬁnancial markets. In all these applications the empha- shot one-to-many communicative interactions - the intended
sis shifts to distributed global collaboration rather then a cen- recipients can be multiple agents and/or groups of agents.
tralized view of the problem. A protocol deﬁnition speciﬁes However, we need group protocols in order to enable com-
how distributed elements interact with one another in order to putational mechanisms for ﬂexibly forming, maintaining, and
achieve a speciﬁed behavior and therefore, protocols are crit- disbanding organizations or teams. This is not just a matter
ical for the interoperability of the various components. Most of allowing new groups to appear and then disband, but also
of the protocols presented in multi-agent systems propose bi- allowing different kinds of groups that have different types
lateral interaction among agents, with few cases of protocols of commitments among the group members themselves. The
that try to capture cases involving groups of agents. These use of communicative acts in different contexts and in differ-
representations of bilateral interactions are very useful in de- ent orders leads to the creation of different types of commit-
scribing isolated conversation between two agents, but fail ment among the agents. Different commitments imply differ-
when the structure of the conversation becomes complex or ent methods to form and disband teams of agents.
the number of agents involved within the conversation grows. In this paper, starting from an attempt-based semantics of
  One of the most challenging examples in distributed inter- communicative acts [Cohen and Levesque, 1990] and the se-
actions and group communication is represented by the third mantics of group communication [Kumar et al., 2000], we an-
generation of grid computing systems [De Roure et al., 2003]. alyze the concept of distributive reading vs. collective read-
Grid computing enables geographically distributed systems ing [Clark and Carlson, 1982] in group protocols. These types
to form dynamic virtual organizations [Foster et al., 2001] of group communication will be evaluated with respect to the
whose members use shared and private resources to collabo- formation of different types of teams during interaction. In
rate in order to ﬁnd a solution to a common problem. Given the case of a collective reading, we claim that joint commit-
this situation, according to Jennings [Jennings, 2001], agent- ments and mutual beliefs have to be established among all the
oriented approaches are well-suited to engineering complex, members of the group. We will see that by means of group
distributed software systems. In the case of distributed grid communication, one can obtain a joint commitment among
computing (i.e., when there is no single big computer for the members of a group that has different properties from theone achieved by means of single utterances.           represent groups (γ, for example) to indicate the distribu-
                                                      tive readings of that group. An entity without an underline
2  Formalism                                          can be either an individual or a group and indicates a col-
                                                      lective reading. If ψ is a formula with term γ, and x does
Addressing an utterance to more than one recipient is more not appear in ψ, and γ(x) is the property predicate that cor-
than a convenient way to refer to many people simultane- responds to γ, and ψ(x) is a formula formed by replacing γ
ously. For example, it may be that we want to make other with x in ψ, then ψ(γ) = ∀x γ(x) ⊃ ψ(x). For example:
people aware of what is going on say, by using the Carbon (BEL γ p) = ∀x γ(x) ⊃ (BEL x p). In other words, ev-
Copy ﬁeld in e-mails. Even if everybody in the ”TO” and eryone in group γ believes p. In case of ambiguity in the
in the ”CC” ﬁelds receives the e-mail, it is clear that the in- determination of the scope, we will mark the group term
tended recipients of our utterance are just the people in the that it applies to and the starting bracket with the free vari-
”TO” ﬁeld, but, we also want the people in the ”CC” ﬁeld to able in the superscript. (yBEL γy (BEL x (zBEL γz p))) =
be aware of it. So, the reader of an e-mail has to be able to ∀y γ(y) ⊃ (BEL y (BEL x (∀z γ(z) ⊃ (BEL z p)))).
make certain inferences about the mental state of others who This paper will concentrate on group protocols in which
the e-mail is addressed to or who will be reading the e-mail. the intended recipient of a message is a group of (possibly un-
Moreover, consider the utterance: ”Can both of you help me known) agents. The difference between a distributive reading
in lifting this table?”. The main effect of this utterance is and collective reading will be shown to depend upon whether
not only that both the recipients are aware of the request, but the intended actors are separate individuals or groups. Here,
also that both of them know that the request was made to all we summarize the results from literature that this paper builds
the recipients as a group and the requested action should be upon and redeﬁne semantics for the communicative acts that
a joint action. An agent communication language should be we need for our example. The terms α, β, and γ in the fol-
able to properly convey these nuances of a requester’s inten- lowing deﬁnitions can represent either groups or individuals.
tions about the performers of an action.              Here, α is the entity performing the communicative act, β is
  In a previous paper [Kumar et al., 2000], we introduced the recipient (including the ”Over-hearers”) of the message,
a framework for semantics of group communicative acts and and γ is the intended recipient (or intended actor). The se-
provided a semantics of the REQUEST communicative act mantics of the communicative acts as described below has the
within this framework. It was demonstrated that this group implicit requirement that the intended recipients of an utter-
communicative act can be performed even when the requester ance are a subset of all the recipients. Moreover, the sender
does not know about the intended actor and when the re- of the utterance is always a single agent that may be an in-
quester does not know everyone who will get the message. dividual that acts on behalf of the group. The analysis of
Even though that paper emphasized the importance of distin- authorized representative of groups is left for future work.
guishing between a group doing an action as an entity (collec- A persistent weak achievement goal or PWAG represents
tive reading) and everybody in a list of individuals performing the one-way commitment of one agent directed towards an-
the action (distributive reading), it provided a clear semantics other and it is used to deﬁne the semantics of various com-
only for the latter. Furthermore, plurals and utterances ad- municative acts. A PWAG made public via performance of
dressed to groups can introduce semantic ambiguities. For a communicative act represents a social commitment using
example, there can be a potential ambiguity as to whether mentalist notions. The deﬁnition of (P W AG α γ p q) states
the aggregated entities are to act individually (distributive) or that an entity α has a PWAG towards another entity γ to
they are to act together as one (collective). This paper makes achieve p with respect to q when the following holds: if α
a clear distinction in the semantics of communicative acts to believes that p is not currently true then it will have a persis-
enable understanding whether an utterance requires a collec- tent goal to achieve p, and if it believes p to be either true, or
tive or a distributive reading. In particular, we want the agents to be impossible, or if it believes the relativizing condition q
that receive a communicative act to interpret its correct read- to be false, then it will have a persistent goal to bring about
ing (distributive or collective) so that they can act accordingly. the corresponding mutual belief with γ. In the philosophy of
Moreover, group communicative acts have to be inserted and language, it is argued that the illocutionary effect of a speech
analyzed in the wider context of protocols, where distributive act consists of the hearers recognition of the speakers com-
and collective reading of an utterance is important in order to municative intention. A communicative act succeeds when
generate the next communicative act of the protocol. How- the hearer successfully recognizes the speakers intention and
ever, in this paper we will not be concerned with how the it is satisﬁed when the hearer successfully acts on the speak-
action is done and how the agents coordinate in order to per- ers intention. Communicative acts must be characterized as
form the action.                                      attempts because there is a possibility that the act may not
  We regard a group as being deﬁned by a characteristic succeed. Accordingly, attempt is deﬁned as having a goal and
function such as the membership property. This can be cap- an intention. An ATTEMPT to achieve p via q represented
tured by a predicate consisting of a free variable that ranges as (AT T EMP T γ e p q t) is a complex action expression in
over individuals. With Greek letters we will represent groups’ which the entity γ is the actor of the event e and just prior
names, and we use the same symbol in a functional nota- to e, the actor chooses that p should eventually became true,
tion to denote the associated membership predicate. For ex- and intends that e should produce at least q relative to that
ample, γ is a group having the membership predicate γ(x) choice. Mutual belief for groups is deﬁned in terms of unilat-
where x is a free variable. We will underline the entities that eral mutual belief, or BMB [Cohen and Levesque, 1990], thatis treated as a semantic primitive [Kumar et al., 2000]. Proof Sketch. γ is a subset of β, so the intention part of
Deﬁnition 2.1 Mutual Belief                           the deﬁnition of the REQUEST speech act is also valid by
         (MB γ p) ≡ ∀x γ(x) ⊃ (BMB x γ p)             substituting β with γ. After making these substitutions, the
                                                      proof is the same as the one provided in [Kumar et al., 2002].
  MB between two groups (MB β γ)  is deﬁned similarly. Deﬁnition 2.3 Inform
In this article, we assume that mutual belief is established (INF ORMα β γ e p t) ≡ (AT T EMP T α e φ ψ t)
by default. Establishing mutual belief by default means that where φ = [BMB γ α p]
agents make certain defeasible assumptions if they have no and ψ = [BMB β α [GOAL α (BEL γ [BEL α p])]]
information to the contrary. If at a later time, the agent hav-
                                                        The goal of an INFORM is that the intended recipients γ
ing a defeasible belief discovers that its belief was incorrect
                                                      come to believe that there is mutual belief between γ and the
than it needs to revise that belief1. But until that happens, an
                                                      senders α that the proposition p is true. The intention of the
agent can assume the defeasible belief and make inferences
                                                      INFORM   is that the recipients (including the over-hearers)
based on that belief. The symbol ` represents the deduc-
                               d                      come to believe that there is mutual belief between the recip-
tion relation and ` (ϕ ⇒ ψ) denotes that ψ can always be
                d                                     ients and the senders that the senders had the goal that the
derived from ϕ using defeasible rules. In particular, we as-
                                                      intended recipients will believe that the senders belief p.
sume that the sender and the receivers of a communicative
act use the same defeasible rules, like, for example, that i) Theorem 2.2 Successful performance of the INFORM com-
the speaker does not change its mental state about the propo- municative act establishes a mutual belief by default be-
sitional content of the communicative act immediately after tween the sender α and the intended recipient γ, that
                                                      the sender believes the informed proposition. Formally,
performing it; ii) the sender of a communicative act is sincere ` (DONE(INF ORMα β γ e p t)) ⇒ (MB α γ (BEL α p))
toward the recipients about its (i.e. sender’s) mental attitude; d
iii) if a communicative act has been done successfully then Proof Sketch. Again, by substituting β with γ the proof of
the sender and the hearer mutually believe that it has been the theorem is the same as in [Kumar et al., 2002].
done [Kumar et al., 2002]. This enables us to deﬁne the other Starting from the deﬁnition of INFORM and REQUEST,
communicative acts that we require for our example.   we can deﬁne some other communicative acts, modifying the
                                                      deﬁnitions in [Kumar et al., 2002]. One has to replace the
Deﬁnition 2.2 Request                                 sender x and the recipients y appropriately by the sender α,
(REQUEST α β γ e a q t) ≡ (AT T EMP T α e φ ψ t)
where φ = (zDONE γz a)∧                               the recipients β, and the intended actors γ.
 [P W AG γz α (DONE γz a)(P W AG α γ (wDONE γw a) q)] Deﬁnition 2.4 Agree
and ψ = [BMB β α [GOAL α (BEL γ [P W AG α γ φ q])]]   (AGREE α β γ e a q t) ≡ (INF ORM α β γ e φ t)
                                                      where φ = (P W AG α γ (DONE α a)
  The goal of the REQUEST is that the intended actor even-                       (P W AG γ α (DONE α a) q)
tually does the action a and also has a PWAG with respect to
the requester to do a. The intention of the REQUEST is that The agreeing entities α inform the intended recipients γ
all the recipient β believe there is a mutual belief between that they have a PWAG with respect to γ to perform action a
the recipient and the requester that the requester α had a goal with respect to γ’s PWAG that α do a relative to q.
that he (the requester) will have a PWAG with respect to the Deﬁnition 2.5 Refuse
intended actor γ about the goal φ of the REQUEST2. It was (REF USE α β γ e a q t) ≡ (INF ORM α β γ e φ t)
shown in [Kumar et al., 2000] that the recipient β and the in- where φ = (¬¤(P W AG α γ (DONE α a)
tended actor γ never quantify into the beliefs of the requester                 (P W AG γ α (DONE α a) q))
α - meaning thereby that the requester a does not need to The refusing entities α inform the intended recipients γ
know who β and γ are. It was also shown how to construct that they will never have the PWAG to perform action a with
a model in which a request can be performed even when the respect to γ’s PWAG that α do a relative to q. As in the
requester does not know the recipients as well as the intended individual case, the effect of a REFUSE is opposite to that of
actors of the request. Therefore, unlike the previous deﬁni- the AGREE.
tions in agent communication languages literature, this deﬁ- In the next section, we discuss how these group commu-
nition of REQUEST allows for the broadcasting of a request. nicative acts ﬁt together in a group protocol that is described
                                                                                 [               ]
Theorem 2.1 Successful performance of the REQUEST     using the Joint Intention Theory Kumar et al., 2002 . In par-
communicative act establishes a mutual belief by default be- ticular, we will see how to obtain the collective and distribu-
tween the requester α and the intended recipient γ, about the tive reading cases just by addressing the utterances to groups
requester’s PWAG toward the intended recipient γ for doing instead of single agents.
the requested action. Formally,
  `d (DONE(REQUEST α β γ e a q t)) ⇒                  3   An Example: The Request for Action
              (xMB γx α (yP W AG α γy φ q))               Protocol
  where, φ = (DONE γ a)∧
    [P W AG γ α (DONE γ a)(P W AG α γ (DONE γ a) q)]  For simplicity of exposition, let us consider the Request for
                                                      Action protocol that establishes joint commitment(s) between
  1We do not discuss belief revision in this paper.   the requester(s) and the requestee(s) to get an action done.
  2In accordance with the ﬁrst defeasible rule, we have simpliﬁed One of the objectives of this protocol is to create a joint com-
the temporal aspects of communicative act deﬁnitions. mitment (JPG) among the requester α and the group γ for   a      Distributive Request  Distributive Reading    In the third case (c), the requester sends a collective RE-
          + Distributive Agree                        QUEST to a group which then replies collectively to that re-
   b   Distributive Group Request Distributive Reading quest. It is essentially communication from one entity (indi-
          + Distributive Agree                        vidual or group) to a group treated and addressed as an entity
   c    Collective Group Request Collective Reading   (such as an organization). An interesting aspect of this com-
          + Collective Agree                          munication is to what extent the members of the requested
   d    Collective Group Request Collective Reading   organization are jointly committed towards the requester for
      + Distributive Agree to Group                   doing the requested task. We speculate that this has to do
                                                      with how that group was created in the ﬁrst place. For ex-
Figure 1: Distributive and Collective behaviors in the Request ample, if the bylaws in the articles of incorporation of that
for Action protocol.                                  group require that the group makes its decisions by a majority
                                                      vote but once a decision has been made then all group mem-
                                                      bers are committed to that decision then it may very well be
doing a speciﬁc action a. The discussion that follows applies the case that each member of that organization is individually
equally well to other protocols (such as Contract-Net) that committed to seeing the success of the joint commitment.
use communicative acts to create and discharge joint com- In this case, we have collective commitment among the
mitments. The simplest (and the most well-studied) case in- members of the group. This kind of commitment is the same
volves an individual REQUEST from one agent to another that we can achieve in the last case (d), where a requester
who then responds with either an AGREE or a REFUSE.   sends a REQUEST to a number of agents treated as a group
It has been established in multi-agent literature that this se- and they reply individually with an AGREE addressed to the
quence of communicative actions is sufﬁcient to establish a group. The main difference between the cases c and d is that
joint commitment between the two agents for doing the re- while in the ﬁrst case the message is addressed to an existing
quested action. The resulting joint commitment constrains group (i.e., it has rules for team creation decision even if we
the mental state and future behavior of both agents such are not aware of and we do not now who are the members of
that they work cooperatively as a team that is robust to a the group), in the last case the collective REQUEST followed
wide range of failures. However, this simple one-to-one re- by individual replies addressed to the group has the effect that
quest/accept protocol is insufﬁcient for many real life scenar- the members of the group are bound together by their com-
ios that involve joint commitment not only between two in- mitment and so a team is formed (we have a collaboration).
dividuals but between and among individuals and groups that In the next sections, we will analyze two of the above cases.
may possibly be unknown at the start of the protocol. Further- In particular, we will discuss the case b for distributive com-
more, there may be over-hearers in any group communication mitment (Sec. 3.1) and the case d for collaborative commit-
that may affect the team creation process.            ment (Sec. 3.2). Notice that protocols may also require that
  Even ignoring the effects of over-hearers, there are at least teams be disbanded (i.e., they have to discharge their commit-
four different cases of team formation when the request for ment) after the achievement of the goal. The complete study
action protocol is generalized to account for group commu- of the protocol is left for future work.
nication as listed in the above table (see Fig. 1). In the ﬁrst
case (a), individual requests are sent to multiple entities (that 3.1 Distributive Reading of Request Protocol
may be groups or individuals) for doing the same task. The The ﬁrst step of the Request protocol consists of a REQUEST
requester has to know all the agents to whom it wants to re- sent from α to the group γ that establishes a MB about
quest. Some of the recipients of that request may agree to the α’s PWAG towards each member of γ in a distributive way:
request, some may reject the request, and others may not re- (REQUEST α β γ e a q t). In this case the sender α may
spond at all. As a result of this communication, the requester not be aware of who are the members of γ, as in the case of
forms pair-wise joint commitment with every entity that re- posting a message on a advice board or, in the case of Grids,
sponded with an AGREE. The second case (b) is similar in the agents may not be aware of who are the other agents con-
that it also results in pair-wise joint commitments between the nected to the grid. Notice that in this case, the intended ac-
requester and each entity that agreed. However, it achieves tor of this communicative act is a single (possibly unknown)
the same effect by using a single group REQUEST that does agent x.
not require a requester to be aware of the intended recipients A subset of the participants that we represent by the group
of the request. This is very common in broadcast communica- γagree may agree to do the requested action and another
tions, for example, consider a request for helping with a pro- subset of the participants represented by the group γrefuse
gramming task that has been posted on a notice board. Both may refuse to the requested action. ∀x γagree(x) ⊃
the above two cases can be used to create competing teams, (DONE(AGREE x β α e a ψ q t)), and ∀x γrefuse(x) ⊃
and this is not restricted to the request protocol. For exam- (DONE(REF USE x β α e a ψ q t)). In this case the
ple, consider a call for proposal from a funding agency for a communication is overheard by all the members of β. If
competitive project where multiple contracts are awarded to we want private agreements, then we have: ∀x γagree(x) ⊃
different universities - each university has a pair-wise joint (DONE(AGREE x α α e a ψ q t)). For example, if we want
commitment with the funding agency for doing the research to design an auction protocol, the ﬁrst method (with public
but at the same time they compete with each other to produce communication) describes in a better way what happens dur-
the best results for ongoing funding.                 ing the protocol. Note that with the semantics of the FIPAspeech acts, it is not possible to model the same effects. In
fact during an auction, all members of the group have to over-
hear all other bids in order to bid again.
  The group property for the group γagree speciﬁes the
agents who chose to agree from a rational choice between
agreeing and refusal. The group γagree is speciﬁed by not-
ing that it consists of those agents who performed an AGREE
within the speciﬁed timeout period after the original request
was performed. In either case, the group predicate is evalu-
                                                      Figure 2: a. Case of Distributive Commitment; b. Case of
ated retrospectively i.e. by looking backwards from a future
                                                      Collective Commitment.
point in time to determine which agents ’agreed’. We will
specify γagree using the predicate γagree(x) which is true
                  0
if there exist events e and e1 such that the event sequence We will see in the next section that when we are dealing with
   0
e; e ; e1 was done earlier where e is the original REQUEST collective reading, the effects of group communication are
event and e1 is an AGREE event performed by x.        different from the one obtained with the above utterances.
              0                         0
  γagree(x) ≡ ∃ e , e1 (EARLIER (DONE e; e ;
                            (AGREE x β α e1 a q t1))) 3.2  Collective Reading of Request Protocol
  Similarly, the group property for γrefuse speciﬁes the In the case of collective reading, we need JPG and MB to be
agents who refused within the speciﬁed timeout period after established among all the members of the group. It may be
the original REQUEST was performed.                   possible to achieve this with the exchange of pair-wise com-
  According to these deﬁnitions of group predicates, an agent municative acts resulting in O(n2) messages. On the other
executing this protocol may not know all the agents who hand, with messages addressed to groups via broadcast com-
agree and all the agents who refuse until the deadline is munication we would have just O(n) messages. Using the
reached, that is, when this protocol ends. In fact, the groups deﬁnition of group speech acts, it can be shown that the MB
γagree and γrefuse are dynamic groups because evaluating among the group is achieved. Notice that a collective request
the respective group predicates at any time before the dead- is more than sending individual requests to all the members
line gives only those agents that have agreed or refused up of the group, i.e. a collective request implies mutual belief in
to that time. Until the deadline is reached, the member- the group that the intended actor of the request is the whole
ship of these groups increases whenever an agent performs group, and so the action should be a joint action for the group.
an AGREE or a REFUSE communicative act.               We claim that one cannot obtain a similar affect by just send-
  The goal associated with the protocol is to form teams for ing individual requests to the members.
doing an action a relative to some condition q. In other words, In the case of collective reading, the team that is formed
the goal is to establish pair-wise joint commitments between using group communication has different properties from the
the initiator α and whoever agreed (i.e. every agent x who one discussed earlier. These different properties result from
belongs to the group γagree) that x does the action a relative how the team is created. Note that one can also talk about
to the initiator’s original PWAG. The existence of a JPG be- groups in the case of distributive reading but in that case
tween two agents is a sufﬁcient condition for the formation the requester and the agents who agree have pair-wise joint
of a team with respect to that JPG [Levesque et al., 1990]. commitment (see Fig. 2 case a). However, in the case of
Mutual beliefs in each other’s PWAG toward the other to a collective reading of the Request protocol, the following
achieve a goal p is sufﬁcient to establish a joint commitment property holds in order to establish (JP G γ (DONE γ a))
to achieve p provided that there is a mutual belief that p has for the group γ: ∀x γ(x) ⊃ (MB γ (P W AG x γ p)) ∧
not already been achieved, and the PWAGs are interlocking (MB γ (P W AG γ x p)) where there is explicitly stated that
(i.e., one PWAG is relative to the other) [Kumar et al., 2002]. the member of the team γ has beliefs about the others agents
Theorem 3.1 `d (DONE  (REQUEST α β γ  e a q t);       or about the team as an entity. This demonstrates that in the
                                                0
                          (AGREE γagree β α e a q t )) case of a collective reading, the effects of multiple single ut-
                                                      terances are different from group utterances.
         ⇒  (JP G α γagree (DONE γagree a))
                                                        So in the case of collective REQUEST, the REQUEST
  Proof Sketch. Using the deﬁnitions of the group com-
                                                      is addressed to a group  and not to  a single agent:
municative acts REQUEST and AGREE (deﬁnitions 2.2
                                                      (REQUEST    α β  γ e a q t).  Then, each member of
and 2.4) and applying Theorems 2.2 and 2.1 under the
                                                      the group will send an AGREE   (or a REFUSE) to  α
assumptions of mutual belief between about each other’s
                                                      plus the group itself (i.e., γ   ):  ∀x γ    (x) ⊃
sincerity and the reliability of the communication chan-                         agree+α       agree
                                                      (AGREE x β γ         e a ψ q t). Also, in this case each
nel, we establish that there is a mutual belief in each             agree+α
                                                      member of the group γ   may be not aware of who are the
other’s PWAG: (xMB γx α (yP W AG α γy (DONE γ a)))∧                      agree
                                                      other members.
∀z γagree(z) ⊃ (MB z α (P W AG z α (DONE z a))).
  In distributive reading, the effect of multiple single utter- Theorem 3.2 Successful performance of a REQUEST ad-
ances is the same as that of making group utterances. Notice dressed to the group for collective reading, followed by
that here we are just considering the effects of group com- AGREEs addressed to the requester and the group establishes
munication on the intended actors and not on the overhearers. a JPG by default among the members of the agree group and