                       The Altricial-Precocial Spectrum for Robots              ∗

                      Aaron Sloman                                Jackie Chappell
                 http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/˜axs/    http://www.biosciences.bham.ac.uk/staff/staff.htm?ID=90
               School of Computer Science                       School of Biosciences
              University of Birmingham. UK                 University of Birmingham, UK


                    Abstract                          learning and experience. Even learning mechanisms can have
                                                      constraints tailored by natural selection to the probability
    Several high level methodological debates among   of certain events co-occurring in their environment. For
    AI  researchers, linguists, psychologists and     example, Domjan and Wilson [1972] showed that rats readily
    philosophers, appear to be endless, e.g. about    learned to associate the taste of water with sickness, and
    the need  for and  nature of representations,     ringing bells with electric shock, but could not learn to
    about the role of symbolic processes, about       associate noise with sickness or taste with shock.
    embodiment, about situatedness, about whether
                                                        Our ability to design artiﬁcial systems could beneﬁt from
    symbol-grounding is needed, and about whether
                                                      a better understanding of the very varied spectrum of cases
    a robot needs any knowledge at birth or can start
                                                      found in nature. At one extreme are biological species,
    simply with a powerful learning mechanism.
                                                      often labelled ‘precocial’, whose young are born or hatched
    Consideration of the variety of capabilities and
                                                      relatively well developed and able to cope with tasks that are
    development patterns on the precocial-altricial
                                                      far beyond what our current robots can do: newly hatched
    spectrum in biological organisms will help us to
                                                      chickens look for food which they peck, and new-born deer
    see these debates in a new light.
                                                      can, within hours, ﬁnd a nipple to feed from, and run with
                                                      the herd. At another extreme (often labelled ‘altricial’),
1  Introduction                                       animals are born or hatched helpless and underdeveloped,
                                                      yet sometimes grow into adults with far more impressive
Attempts to design intelligent systems often encounter two cognitive skills than their precocial cousins, e.g. humans,
objections: (a) for non-trivial systems the task is impossibly hunting mammals and nest-building birds. How?
difﬁcult, and (b) a system that has been designed is not
                                                        Precocial skills that appear in a relatively constant form
intelligent since everything it does is a result of the designer’s
                                                      in different environments can be ﬁne-tuned by the individual
decisions, not its own. These and similar arguments lead
                                                      experience of the animal. In contrast, altricial capabilities
some people to the conclusion that intelligent systems must
                                                      can vary widely within a species, as languages do between
start off without any knowledge, and acquire what knowledge
                                                      cultures, and as many kinds of competence do from one
and skills they need by interacting with the environment,
                                                      generation to another within a culture. Many children now
possibly guided by a teacher, using only general learning
                                                      have knowledge and skills beyond the wildest dreams of
capabilities.
                                                      their parents at the same age. It is implausible that a
  This view assumes that something like human adult intel-
                                                      combination of environmental differences and some simple
ligence could be a product of neonates born with very little
                                                      general learning mechanism, or any known learning algo-
innate knowledge, but possessing a powerful general-purpose
                                                      rithms, could produce such variation. Evolution seems to
learning mechanism, e.g. reinforcement learning using pos-
                                                      have found something more powerful, which supports and
itive and negative reinforcement based on drives, needs, and
                                                      enhances cultural evolution.
aversions. Then all knowledge would gradually be built up
by continual shaping of internal and external responses to We propose that in addition to knowledge-free reinforce-
various combinations of internal and external stimuli. There ment learning mechanisms and the unlearned kinds of knowl-
have been several AI robotics projects and synthetic agent edge acquisition (like maturation, and peri-natally generated
projects based on this line of thought (e.g. [Grand, 2004; precocial skills), there are capabilities produced by powerful
McCauley, 2002; Weng, 2004], among others.)           mechanisms characteristic of the altricial end of the spectrum,
  This view ignores some powerful genetic inﬂuences in that explain how adult members of the same species can have
biological organisms. Most species show a mosaic of skills hugely varying knowledge and skills. These mechanisms
and abilities some of which develop mainly under genetic (a) aquire many discrete chunks of knowledge through play
inﬂuence, while others grow (usually gradually) as a result of and exploratory behaviour which is not directly reinforced,
                                                      and (b) combine such chunks in novel ways both in solving
  ∗Many thanks to colleagues on the EC CoSy project.  problems and in further play and exploration. This processdepends on a collection of very abstract ‘internal’ skills and Factors promoting altricial skills and knowledge
knowledge with a strong innate component – though the In conditions opposite to those outlined above (abundant op-
collection can develop over time, especially in humans. portunity for learning, low risk outcome, no time constraints),
  So evolution provides much information that animals do altricial skills will tend to be favoured. In addition, the
not have to learn: some used in overt behaviour in precocial following factors are also important:
skills and some in more abstract internal behaviour (e.g. • Unpredictability: If the environment is very variable or unpre-
skill-bootstrapping behaviour) towards the altricial end. We dictable, there will be no consistent pattern for natural selection
present a number of conjectures about how this happens and to act on. The fact that ﬂeeing prey are relatively unpredictable,
discuss implications for robot designers.               while grass tends to be highly predictable might explain why
                                                        predatory mammals and birds tend to have altricial developmen-
1.1  Precocial vs. altricial developmental mode         tal patterns, while grazers have many precocial skills.
                                                      • New niches: This is related to unpredictability. If an animal
Conjecture 1: There is no sharp altricial/precocial dis- encounters conditions which have never been encountered before
tinction between species, nor a continuum of cases, but a in the evolutionary history of its species, individual learning
spectrum of capabilities, with many discontinuities. Each will be the only possible response. Some niche variation can
species exhibits a unique collection of skills from different be accommodated by individual adaptation and calibration. But
parts of the spectrum. A similar variety of designs may be not when quite new concepts and new behavioural structures are
useful in robots.                                       required, e.g. if opponents often invent new weapons, or new
  A number of factors determine the extent to which a   defences against old weapons and strategies.
behaviour or skill is modiﬁed by the animal’s own experience. If altricial skills provide so much ﬂexibility and diversity
The outcomes of these factors map very approximately on of responses, why don’t more animals show altricial skills?
to the precocial and altricial developmental modes, though A partial answer is cost: neural tissue is expensive to build
altricial species may have some precocial skills and vice and maintain (in humans, the brain consumes about 20% of
versa. Analysis of these issues will prove valuable in deciding the basal metabolic rate). Learning can be time-consuming
which sorts of robots will need ‘precocial’ capabilities, which and risky. Young animals need to be protected from the harsh
‘altricial’ capabilities, and what sorts of mechanisms are realities of life while acquiring altricial skills, so the intensity
needed.                                               and duration of parental care can also be signiﬁcant. The
                                                      extended commitment of resources by parents to guarding,
Factors promoting precocial skills and knowledge      feeding, and in some cases helping their offspring to gain
The following will tend to favour evolution of precocial skills hunting skills, can both endanger the adults (make them more
over altricial ones (if both are possible).           vulnerable to predation, deprive them of food given to the
• Opportunity: If it would be very difﬁcult for the animal to offspring), and reduce their breeding frequency.
  learn a skill given the constraints of its environment the skill
  has to be precocial. e.g. young blackcaps migrating for the 1.2 The altricial-precocial spectrum for robots
  ﬁrst time on their own [Helbig, 1996], and the species-speciﬁc Analysis of the altricial/precocial trade-offs already explored
  ‘password’ vocalisation in a brood parasite, the brown-headed by evolution can provide a basis for a new understanding
        [              ]
  cowbird Hauber et al., 2001 , which is raised by other species. of the varied requirements and tradeoffs in robot design.
• Risk: Learning depends on exposure to certain stimuli at the right Applications where tasks and environments are fairly static
  time. If failing to perform a vital skill correctly would result in and machines need to be functional quickly, and where
  animals dying before reproduction, the skill is more likely to be mistakes during learning could be disastrous (e.g. ﬂight
  precocial. e.g. predator recognition in Atlantic salmon, [Hawkins control) require precocial skills (with some adaptation and
          ]
  et al., 2004 , ﬂight in cliff-nesting altricial birds. self-calibration), whereas others require altricial capabilities,
• Time constraints: If learning would take too long to meet a need, e.g. where tasks vary widely and change in complex ways
  a skill is more likely to be precocial. e.g. running in wildebeest over time, and where machines need to learn to cope without
  calves, who must keep up with the herd soon after birth. being sent for re-programming (e.g. robots caring for the
  The young of species with many precocial skills start elderly). Architectures, mechanisms, forms of representation,
highly competent, requiring little or no parental care other and types of learning may differ sharply between the two
than a degree of protection from predators.1 They appear to extremes. And the end results of altricial learning by the same
have a great deal of information about structures in the world, initial architecture may differ widely, as happens in humans.
how to perceive them, and how to behave in relation to them,
even if they can be changed later in subtle ways as a result of 1.3 Combining precocial and altricial skills
adaptive processes, reinforcement learning or the like. Precocial skills can provide sophisticated abilities at
  Since evolution can, and often does, provide huge amounts birth. Altricial capabilities add the potential to adapt to
of information in the form of knowledge and skills. should changing needs and opportunities. So it is not surprising
not a large amount of precocial information be the norm, if that many species have both. However evolution seems
all those millions of years of evolution are not to be wasted? to have discovered something deeper than just a mixture
                                                      of some innate modules and some learning capabilities.
  1Note, however, that species with precocial young may have to Humans, and presumably some other animals, seem to have
invest more resources in their young pre-natally.     a hybrid architecture where the mechanisms for learning arethemselves a mixture of precocial and altricial mechanisms. such processes is learning new ontologies (discussed further
                                                      below.)
Conjecture 2: Evolution ‘discovered’ and deployed the
power of an architecture towards the more sophisticated, al- 2.2 Combinatorics: the origins of syntax
tricial, end of the spectrum, based not on speciﬁc knowledge For these kinds of learning, mechanisms that gradually
about the environment, but on mechanisms using abstract change weights or probabilities do not sufﬁce: instead some
knowledge about ways in which physically possible environ- chunks once learnt are explicitly referenced and available
ments can differ. So powerful altricial learning arises from to be combined with other chunks, so as immediately to
sophisticated genetically determined (i.e. precocial) learning produce external and internal states and processes that are
mechanisms, which may be expanded during development. qualitatively (e.g. structurally) novel for the individual.4
  Instead of starting off able to recognise and react to speciﬁc Conjecture 4: Some altricial species can not only store, label
stimuli, an altricial learner might have mechanisms that use and categorise input and output ‘chunks’ that can be re-used
knowledge about how to generate varied exploratory actions later, but can also combine them to form larger chunks that
and how to seek recognisable patterns.2 Such ‘playful’ are explored, and if found ‘interesting’ also stored, labelled,
actions reveal which among possible patterns are instantiated categorised, etc. so that they become available as new, larger
in the environment, and which ways of combining various units for future actions. A simple example would be picking
kinds of pre-programmed or learnt action capabilities have something up and transferring something to one’s mouth,
effects that are ‘interesting’ not merely in terms of useful being combined to form a new unit to pick up an object
or harmful effects, but also according to criteria such as and bring it to one’s mouth. Another example is combining
symmetry, elegance and power (e.g. producing big effects moving right and moving left in a repeated sequence which
with little effort, or making something work that previously can produce changes of visual input that provide useful
failed), thereby bootstrapping a wide variety of competences information about 3-D structure [Philipona et al., 2003].
through interactions with the environment.3             A simple demonstration of how this can enormously reduce
                                                      search spaces, originally suggested by Oliver Selfridge over
2  What are the mechanisms?                           20 years ago can be found in a tutorial program ﬁle provided
                                                      with the Poplog system.5 In that example the ‘agent’ is
This may sound like standard reinforcement learning, ex- given tasks which it attempts to solve using its primitive
cept for some innate biases to learn about certain classes actions, previously learnt useful actions, and combinations
of things only a subset of which are actually learnt under of primitive and previously learnt actions formed by simple
the inﬂuence of any particular environment [Cummins and syntactic operations, including use of a ‘repeat construct’. If
Cummins, 2005]. But such mechanisms produce only gradual it is given a complex task initially it searches for a solution
changes in behaviour, and it seems that at least some species, and gives up after a certain length of search. But as it
including humans, apes, and some corvids are — in addition gradually builds up useful re-usable chunks the space of
—  capable of kinds of discontinuous learning where hard actions in which it searches in a given number of steps gets
problems are solved creatively by recombining previously more and more complex. If suitably trained by giving it the
acquired concepts, knowledge chunks and action chunks. right problems to ‘play’ with it can suddenly become able to
                                                      solve a class of quite difﬁcult ‘counting’ problems.
2.1  Gradual change  vs learning chunks.                This is a very simple example, but it illustrates a general
Conjecture 3: Altricial learning is not always driven by point: that an altricial learning agent may need to be able
biological needs and desires (e.g. for food, shelter, escape, to learn many things that are not intrinsically rewarding, but
mating, etc.) using rewards and punishments to drive gradual which are stored as a result of innately driven exploratory
change through positive and negative feedback; instead the drives and then provide a basis for newer more complex ex-
key feature is constant (often unmotivated) experimentation plorations and learning – which could be specially well suited
with external and internal actions during which re-usable to the environment in which the simpler chunks (including
chunks of information are learnt about what can be done and perceptual and action chunks) have been learnt.
what can occur, and the preconditions and effects. Chunks We have here a kind of syntactic competence which gener-
are discovered both in passively perceived inputs (e.g. using ates structures with compositional semantics.
self-organising classiﬁers to chunk sensory inputs) and also Conjecture 5: Not only external, but also internal actions
in behaviour patterns and their consequences.         – e.g. actions of goal formation, problem-solving, concept
  Re-use, in new combinations, of previously stored chunks, formation – may be composed, forming layers of complexity.
might explain the creative problem-solving of New Caledo- If the methods of syntactic composition are themselves
nian crows [Chappell and Kacelnik, 2004; Weir et al., 2002]) subject to the same process then the result may be production
and chimpanzees [Kohler, 1927], the ability of social animals of ontological layers in many parts of the system including
to absorb a culture; and, in humans, the ability to learn and perceptual layering, action layering and various kinds of
use a rich and highly structured language. A key feature of internal layering of control and description. Different kinds
                                                      of competence may produce different kinds of layering.
  2Manuela Viezzer’s PhD research on discovery of affordances
illustrates this. See http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/˜mxv      4[Boden, 1990] distinguishes historical and personal creativity.
  3For more on interestingness see [Colton et al., 2000] 5http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/research/poplog/teach/ﬁnger2.3  Possible beneﬁts of the hybrid design              Having two hands with ﬁve ﬁngers each with several (more
There may be several different biological advantages gained or less independently controllable) joints can produce huge
by the hybrid architecture over the more obvious ‘precocial’ combinatorial possibilities. Having grippers that can move
and ‘altricial’ architectures, which can be framed in terms of independently of the eyes (i.e. hands vs beaks) can make a
ways of overcoming resource limitations.              huge difference to perceivable patterns. Different designs for
                                                      mouths (or beaks) and tongues or vocal mechanisms may also
Advantage over precocial strategies                   produce different combinatorial spaces to be explored.
• The capabilities required in adults of some species may be too A ﬁxed learning mechanism may be able to acquire dif-
  rich to be encoded in the genome if there is a ‘space’ limitation). ferent sorts of reusable chunks and perhaps even different
  (Genetic information capacity as a scarce resource) ways of combining chunks, when it is combined with dif-
                                                      ferent physical bodies, or different physical environments.
• The evolutionary history of some species may not have provided
  any contexts in which certain currently useful capabilities could Compare the different behavioural and conceptual results
  have been selected for, or may constrain the direction in which of exploratory play in children surrounded by rocks, sand,
  evolution can proceed (i.e. phylogenetic constraints) (Evolution- sticks, stones, mud and water, on the one hand and children
  ary history is a biological resource, and may have limitations like surrounded by stackable blocks and cups, dolls, toy animals,
  any other biological resource.)                     meccano sets, lego sets, computers with mice and keyboards,
                                                      on the other.6
Advantage over altricial strategies
                                                        Such learners start with both a control system that performs
• Although rapid, one-trial reinforcement learning is possible, systematically varied internal and external operations driving
  reinforcement generally requires multiple exposures to a pairing these mechanisms, as well as mechanisms for learning, stor-
  of stimulus and reinforcer, and such slower forms of learning ing, labelling and re-using various kinds of chunks. (Compare
  (involving gradual, adaptive, shaping, processes) may not be able
  to cope with the very varied environments and challenges facing macro-formation mechanisms in planners, e.g. HACKER
  adults of some species. (Time to learn as a limited resource) [Sussman, 1975] and SOAR’s chunking.)
                                                        So the variety of sensory and motor chunks learnt will de-
• For some new problems an individual may have to produce pend on (a) the physical design of the organism or robot, e.g.
  a discontinuous change from previous behaviours, i.e. novel, having independently movable limbs, digits, jaws, tongue,
  creative behaviour, as opposed to interpolating or extrapolating
  in a space that is already well explored. That is because prior neck, head, eyeballs, ears, with motion changed in various
  learning does not always take the individual ‘close’ to problems ways, such as accelerating, decelerating, changing direction
  that can occur. (Individual learning opportunities as a limited etc. (b) the richness of the organism’s environment, partic-
  resource)                                           ularly during development (e.g. learning in rats improves
                                                      with environmental enrichment [Iuvone et al., 1996]). (c)
• The beneﬁts of precocial strategies may be outweighed by the
  risks of over-commitment in a particular direction. If there the genetically determined collection of internal operations
  are constraints on types of learning that make certain sorts of on data-structures, especially (d) the ‘syntactic’ mechanisms
                                                                                                      7
  developmentally ﬁxed competence incompatible with kinds of available for combining old chunks into new structures in
  learning e.g. because the prior commitment provides the wrong perception (e.g. parsing), or in action (e.g. synthesising
  building-blocks for the required new competence and because plans), and (e) whether those syntactic mechanisms can be
  it is difﬁcult to re-wire or otherwise re-implement the required applied not only to representations of external actions, but
  building blocks. In that case, the advantages of being precocial also to representations of internal actions such as operators
  may be best abandoned in favour of the advantages of ﬂexibility: used in problem formation, plan construction and debugging
  provided that parents are available to care for helpless young. (as in Sussman’s HACKER).
  (Flexibility as a limited resource.)                  So different altricial species will differ in many ways
  All this points to the need for learning, decision-making, related to these differences. In particular some may have
and acting capabilities that support discontinuous develop- much richer combinatorial competence than others.
ment either in the evolution of the species, or in learning by Some of the processes are clearly amenable to cultural
the individual, without adversely affecting ﬁtness.   inﬂuences: e.g. what sorts of toys and games are found in the
                                                      environment during early development will make a difference
2.4  Effect of body and physical environment          to which ontologies can be acquired. The processes could
Although innate altricial bootstrapping mechanisms encode lead to different kinds of understanding and representation
a great deal of abstract know-how enabling speciﬁc kinds of of space, time, motion and causality in different species, and
development, the space of possible learnt concepts and action perhaps in different cultures within a species.
schemas permitted by such mechanisms (the ‘epigenetic land- After mechanisms for chunking and composing evolved
scape’) may be very large, leaving the environment scope to in forms that we share with some other mammals, further
determine which subset of that space is actually learnt in both
                                                         6An example of such exploration can be seen in this video of a
early and late development. Even within one environment, child aged 11 months exploring affordances in a world with yogurt:
different kinds of bodies and different kinds of initial brain http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/˜axs/ﬁg/josh23 0040.mpg
mechanisms will produce variation: (a) in the kinds of chunks 7Arp [2005] has recently made a similar point, but citing only
that can be learnt, (b) in the number of different chunks that the special case of visualisation. [Cummins and Cummins, 2005]
can be learnt (c) in the variety of forms of combination of propose only innate learning biases not these innate meta-level
previously learnt chunks.                             modules.typical evolutionary processes of duplication plus differen-
tiation could have produced variants that were particularly
suited to human language, which, if used internally, would
have enormously ampliﬁed all the effects discussed above.
But our discussion implies that a powerful form of internal
language developed earlier, to support processes of altricial
bootstrapping that we appear to share with some non-verbal
altricial species [Sloman, 1979].

3  Symbol ‘attachment’, not ‘grounding’
The existence of precocial species demonstrates that sophis- There are many intermediate cases between pure symbol grounding
ticated visual and other apparatus need not be learned, imply- and extreme symbol-attachment. Arrows on the left indicate ab-
ing that the semantic content of the information structures is straction of concepts from instances or sub-classes. On the right
somehow determined by pre-existing structures and how they arrows indicate a mixture of constraints that help to determine
are used. This eliminates, at least for such precocial species, possible interpretations (models) of the whole system and/or make
one of the supposed explanations of where meaning comes predictions that enable the system to be used or tested.
from (“There is really only one viable route from sense to
symbols: from the ground up” [Harnad, 1990]).
                                                      ‘symbol attachment’. We suggest that in altricial species:
  How then can innate abstract structures determine mean- (a) symbol attachment, in which structures produced by a
ing, as we claim happens for precocial species? Our answer, combination of evolution, and exploratory ‘play’ and problem
          [                 ]
presented in Sloman, 1985; 1987 , is inspired by ideas about solving, acquire most of their meaning from their formal
models in meta-mathematics and proposals in philosophy of structure, with perceptual/action bridging rules to reduce their
science about scientiﬁc terms that could not possibly get ambiguity, is far more important than what is normally called
their meaning by abstraction from perceptual processes, (e.g. ‘symbol grounding’, and
‘electron’, ‘quark’, ‘neutrino’, ‘gene’, ‘economic inﬂation’, (b) learning of chunks and combinatory procedures tailored
‘grammar’).                                           to the current environment but constrained by powerful innate
  A (consistent) formal system determines a non-empty class boot-strapping mechanisms that evolved to cope with general
of possible (Tarskian) models, which may be either abstract features of the environment (e.g. concerning space, time,
mathematical objects or collections of objects, properties, re- motion, causation, etc.) is far more powerful than most forms
lations, events, processes etc. in the world. For a given formal of learning now being studied.
system not every such collection can be a model, though
it may have many different models. As (non-redundant)
axioms are added the set of possible models decreases. So 4 Conclusion
the meaning becomes increasingly speciﬁc. A formal system The rapid, automatic, non-need-driven collection/creation of
can determine precise meanings for its theoretical terms, by a store of labelled, reusable, perceptual and action chunks,
ruling out the vast majority of possible things in the universe along with ‘syntactic’ mechanisms for combinatorial exten-
as referents.                                         sions of those ‘basic’ chunks, provides a rich and extendable
  There is typically residual ambiguity, but, as Carnap [1947] store of rapidly deployable cognitive resources, using mecha-
and other philosophers have shown, this residual indetermi- nisms that will already sound familiar to many AI researchers
nacy of meaning may be eliminated, or substantially reduced, who have worked on planning, problem solving, reasoning, 3-
by the use of bridging rules or ‘meaning postulates’. As D vision, and language understanding, though we have said
Strawson [1959] noted, further ambiguity in reference to very little about how they might work.
individuals can in some cases be eliminated or reduced by It may be that if some of this happens while the brain
causal relations between the event of use of symbols and the is still growing the result can be ‘compiled’ into hardware
things referred to.                                   structures that support further development in powerful ways,
  We can call this process ‘symbol attachment’, because it is explaining why the process needs to start while the infant is
a process in which a complex symbolic structure with rich still physically under-developed. (This is very vague.)
structurally-determined meaning can be pinned down to a We are not saying that precocial species cannot learn
particular part of the world. This is very different from the and adapt but that the amount of variation of which they
theory of symbol grounding which requires all meaning to are capable is more restricted and the processes are much
be derived bottom up by abstraction from sensory experience slower (e.g. adjusting weights in a neural net trained by
of instances, which is actually a very old philosophical reinforcement learning, as contrasted with constructing new
theory (concept empiricism) put forward hundreds of years re-usable components for combinatorially diverse perceptual
ago by empiricist philosophers and refuted by Kant. Our and action mechanisms).
impression is that many of the AI researchers who now   So we suggest that in addition to the experiments where we
use the phrase ‘symbol grounding’ have ignored its original pre-design working systems with combinations of different
meaning (arising out of concept empiricism) and actually use sorts of competence in order to understand ways in which
it, unwittingly, to refer to something like what we have called such competences might work and cooperate, we should also