                   Phase Transitions of the Asymmetric Traveling Salesman* 

                                                   Weixiong Zhang 
                                Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
                                         Washington University in St. Louis 
                                             St. Louis, MO 63130, USA 
                                            Email: zhang@cse.wustl.edu 


                        Abstract                                 In contrast to numerous phase-transition studies on decision 
                                                               problems, the research on the phase transitions and backbones 
     We empirically study phase transitions of the asym•       of optimization problems is limited. An early work on the 
     metric Traveling Salesman. Using random instances         symmetric Traveling Salesman Problem, which is an optimiza•
     of up to 1,500 cities, we show that many properties       tion problem, introduced the concept of backbones and left an 
     of the problem, including the backbone and optimal        open question of whether there exists a phase transition of the 
     tour cost, experience sharp transitions as the preci•     TSP [17]. However, this question has not be addressed since 
     sion of intercity distances increases across a critical   1985. One of the most rigorous phase-transition results was 
     value. We also show that the average computational        obtained on number partitioning [4], an optimization problem. 
     cost of the well-known branch-and-bound subtour           However, the phase transition analyzed was the existence of a 
     elimination algorithm for the problem also exhibits       perfect partition of a set of integers, which is in essence a de•
     a threshold behavior, transitioning from easy to diffi•   cision problem. In our early work, we studied the relationship 
     cult as the distance precision increases. These results   between the phase transitions of satisfiability, a decision prob•
     provide strong positive evidences to a decade-long        lem, and maximum satisfiability, an optimization problem [24]. 
     open question regarding the existence of phase tran•      In addition, the relationship between backbones and average-
     sitions of the Traveling Salesman.                        case algorithmic complexity has also been considered [23]. 
                                                                 In this paper, we study the phase transitions of the asym•
1 Introduction                                                 metric Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), which has many 
                                                               real-world applications such as scheduling and routing. The 
Phase transition refers to such a phenomenon of a system in    TSP [13; 18] is an architypical combinatorial optimization 
which some global properties change rapidly and dramatically   problem, and also very often a touchstone for combinatorial 
when a control parameter crosses a critical value. A sim•      algorithms. In this paper, we consider the asymmetric TSP 
ple example of phase transition is water changing from the     (ATSP), where the distance from one city to another may not 
liquid phase to the solid phase when the temperature drops     be necessarily the same as the distance in the reverse direc•
below the freezing point. Phase transitions of combinato•      tion. The ATSP is more general and difficult than the symmet•
rial problems and threshold behavior of combinatorial algo•    ric TSP (STSP). Our results provide strong positive evidences 
rithms have drawn much attention in recent years [12]. It      to the long-standing open question of [ 17] using the more gen•
has been shown that many combinatorial decision problems       eral form of the problem. Another reason that we choose the 
have phase transitions, such as Boolean satisfiability [7; 21; ATSP rather than the symmetric TSP is that many properties of 
22], graph coloring [7] and number partitioning [4].           the assignment problem [19], a problem closely related to the 
  Another useful concept for characterizing combinatorial      ATSP, are known (Section 3.2) and useful to our analysis. 
problems is that of backbones [17; 22]. A backbone variable 
                                                                 Specifically, using random problem instances of up to 1,500 
refers to such a variable that has a fixed value in all solutions 
                                                               cities, we empirically reveal that the average optimal tour 
of a problem. All such backbone variables are collectively re•
                                                               length, the accuracy of the best cost function (the assignment 
ferred to as the backbone of the problem. The fraction of back•
                                                               problem), and the backbone of the ATSP undergo sharp phase 
bone, the percentage of variables in the backbone, reflects the 
                                                               transitions. The control parameter is the precision of inter•
constrainedness of the problem and directly affects an algo•
                                                               city distances which is typically represented by the number 
rithm searching for a solution. The larger the backbone, the 
                                                               of digits for the distances. Note that these results are algo•
more tightly constrained the problem becomes. 
                                                               rithm independent and properties of the problem. Further•
   *This research was supported in part by NSF grants IIS-0196057 more, we show that the average computational cost of the well-
and ITR/EIA-0113618, and in part by DARPA Cooperative Agree•   known branch-and-bound subtour elimination algorithm [1; 
ments F30602-00-2-0531 and F33615-01-C-1897. Thanks to Sharlee 3] for the ATSP exhibits a threshold behavior, in which the 
Climer for the joint work on an algorithm for finding backbones and 
                                                               computational cost grows abruptly and dramatically as the dis•
Alan Frieze for a question on a bin-ball problem. Thanks also to 
                                                               tance precision increases. 
Sharlee Climer, David Johnson, Scott Kirkpatrick and the anonymous 
reviewers for very helpful comments and suggestions to early versions Two related results are worth mentioning. The research in 
of the paper.                                                  [26] revealed that the average complexity of the subtour elim-
 1202                                                                                                   SATISFIABILITY ination algorithm for the ATSP is controlled by the number of  the cost of its parent. An optimal goal is a node of minimum 
distinct intercity distances. We will further extend this result in cost at depth The overall goal is to find an optimal goal node. 
Section 5. However, these results are algorithm specific, which  Let be the probability of a node having the same cost 
may not necessarily reflect intrinsic features of the underly• as its parent. The expected number of child nodes of a node 
ing problem. The research in [11] studied the decision version that have the same cost as their parent is mpo- The following 
of the symmetric TSP. Specifically, it analyzed the probabil•  results have been proven [15; 20; 25]. Let be the expected 
ity that a tour of length less than a specific value exists for a optimal goal cost of T(m,d) with m 1. Let NBFS AND 
random symmetric euclidean TSP, showing that the probabil•     NDFS Be the expected numbers of nodes expanded by best-
ity has a one-to-zero phase transition as the length of the tar• first search and DFBnB, respectively. 
geting tour increases. Note that the phase-transition result in Q1 and NBFS = NDFS — almost surely when mpo < 
[ll] does not address the open question of [ 17] which is on the 1, where a1 and a2 are constants; (2) 
optimization version of the problem.                           and =and NDFS =almost surely when 
                                                                    = 1; (3) C* remains bounded by a constant and = 
2 The Problem and Algorithms                                        and NDFS = almost surely when  
                                                                 The above results mean that the cost of an optimal goal node 
Given n cities and a matrix D = (dlJ) that defines the dis•    almost surely undergoes a phase transition from a linear func•
tances or costs of pairs of cities, the Traveling Salesman Prob• tion of depth d to a constant when increases beyond one. 
lem (TSP) is to find a minimum-cost complete tour visiting     Meanwhile, the expected complexity of best-first search and 
each city once. When the cost matrix is asymmetric, i.e., dij  DFBnB changes dramatically from exponential to polynomial 
is not necessarily equal to d j,i, the problem is the asymmetric in d as mpo is reduced below one. 
TSP (ATSP), which is more'difficult than the STSP, for both 
optimization and approximation [14].                           3.2 Relationship between AP and ATSP 
  The branch-and-bound (BnB) subtour elimination algo•         The assignment problem (AP) cost function and its relationship 
rithm [1; 3] solves the ATSP using the assignment problem      with the ATSP have been a research interest for a long time [8; 
(AP) as a lower-bound cost function. The AP, which can be      9; 10; 16]. The relationship between the AP cost, AP(D), 
solved in 0(n3), is to assign to each city i another city j with and the ATSP cost, ATSP(D), has remarkably different char•
cost equal to distance d i,j, so that the total cost of all such as• acteristics under different distance distributions of a random 
signments is minimized [19]. If the AP solution happens to be  matrix D. The AP(D) and ATSP{D) can be the same with 
a complete tour, it is also an ATSP solution.                  a high probability, or they can differ from each other, with a 
  The BnB search takes the ATSP as the root of the state space high probability, by a function of n. If the expected number 
and solves the AP to the root node. If the AP solution is not  of zeros in a row of D approaches infinity when 
a complete tour, decompose it into subproblems by selecting    AP(D) = ATSP{D) with a probability tending to one [9]. 
a subtour from the AP solution and generate subproblems by     However, if the distances are uniform over 
excluding some edges in the subtour to eliminate the subtour.  AP(D) = ATSP(D) with a probability going to zero, where 
We used the Carpaneto-Toth subtour-elimination heuristic [6]      grows to infinity with n [9]. Indeed, when the entities of 
in our implementation, which generates no duplicate subprob-   D are uniform over [0,1], E(ATSP(D) - AP(D)) 
lem, so that the search space is a tree. Next, select as the current where Co is a positive constant [10]. 
problem a new subproblem that has been generated but not yet 
expanded. This process continues until there is no unexpanded  4 Phase Transitions of the ATSP 
problem, or all unexpanded problems have costs greater than 
or equal to the cost of the best complete tour found so far.   The results in the previous section indicate that the quality of 
  Our algorithm is, in principle, the same as that of [5], which the AP function varies significantly, depending on the under•
is probably the best known complete algorithm for the ATSP.    lying distance distribution. Precisely, the difference between 
The main difference between the two is that we use depth-first the AP cost, AP(D), and the ATSP cost, ATSP(D) has two 
branch-and-bound (DFBnB), due to its low space requirement,    phases, controlled by the number of zero distances in the dis•
while [5] used best-first search. We further extended our DF•  tance matrix D. In one phase, the difference is zero with high 
BnB algorithm to finding all optimal solutions and backbones.  probability, while in the other phase, the expectation of the dif•
                                                               ference is a function of the problem size n. 
3 Previous, Related Results                                      How does the difference between ATSP(D) and AP(D) 
                                                               change phases? Does it have a sharp phase transition, or does 
Two previous lines of work influenced this research and helped it follow a slow process? Do other properties of the ATSP, such 
reveal the properties of the ATSP.                             as the backbone, also have phase transitions? 
                                                                 The two-phase result on the accuracy of the AP cost func•
3.1 Phase transitions in tree search                           tion discussed in Section 3.2 is in principle consistent with 
To capture the tree search of the DFBnB algorithm for the      the phase-transition result of incremental random trees in Sec•
ATSP, we first introduce an abstract tree model. An incremen•  tion 3.1. The root of the search tree has a cost equal to the 

tal tree [15; 20; 25], T(m, d), is a tree with depth dy and inde• AP cost AP(D) to the problem and an optimal goal node has 
pendent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random branching  the ATSP tour cost ATSP{D). If we subtract the AP cost 
factors with mean m. Edges are assigned costs that are finite  to the root from every node in the ATSP search tree, the root 
and nonnegative i.i.d. variables. The cost of a node is the sum node has cost zero and an optimal goal node has cost equal to 
of the edge costs along the path from the root to that node. An ATSP(D) - AP(D). When there are a large number of zero 
edge cost is nothing but the difference between a node cost and distances in D, the AP cost of a child node in a search tree is 
 SATISFIABILITY                                                                                                    1203 more likely to be the same as the AP cost of its parent, since 
AP will tend to use the zero distances. Therefore, it is expected 
that more nodes in the search tree will have more than one child 
node having the same cost as their parents. In fact, the concept 
of zero distances can be extended to minimal-cost distances. 
If the cost of the minimal distance is known, we can simply 
subtract it from every distance without affecting the accuracy 
of the AP function. 

4.1 The control parameter 
Furthermore, the concept and role of zero and minimal dis•
tances can be extended to that of equal distances. The AP to a 
child node is obtained by excluding one arc, and possibly in•
cluding some arcs, of a subtour of the AP solution to the parent 
node. With this new restriction, the child AP is then computed 
by constructing a new augmenting path from the starting point 
to the end point of the excluded arc [19]. The child and parent 
AP solutions usually differ by only a relatively small number 
of arcs. In other words, the child AP solution is derived by 
replacing some arcs in the parent AP solution. If the numbers 
of distances of equal values are large, it is more likely that the 
child AP cost is equal to the parent AP cost. Conversely, when 
the number of distinct distances is large, it is unlikely the costs 
of two APs will be the same. When the distances are uniform 
over [0,1, • • •, R — 1], the probability that the child AP cost is 
equal to the parent AP cost will depend on the range JR. If R 
is small, relative to the problem size n, this probability will be 
high. In short, for a given problem size, the accuracy of the AP 
cost function is controlled by the number of distinct distances 
in matrix D. More precisely, the accuracy of the AP is deter•
mined by the fraction, denoted as of distinct distances. 
  In practice, however, we do not directly control the number 
or the fraction of distinct distances. In addition to the actual 
structures of the "layouts" of the cities, the precision of the 
distances also affects the number of distinct distances. The 
precision of a number is usually represented by the maximal 
number of digits allowed for the number. As a result, the num•
ber of digits for distances is naturally a good choice for the 
control parameter. 
  The effect of a given number of digits on the fraction of 
distinct distances is relative to the problem size n. Consider a 
matrix D with distances uniformly over 
where the range R is determined by the number of digits b. For 

a fixed b9 the fraction of distinct distances of a larger matrix D 
is obviously smaller than that of a smaller D. Thus, the control 
parameter for the fraction of distinct distances must be 
in the form of where f(n) is a rescaling function on             Controlled by the effective number of digits 
the effect of the number of digits.                            the fraction of distinct distances has a phase transition of 
  To find the scaling function consider the number of          its own, also shown in Figure 1(a). The larger the problem, 
distinct distances of matrix D for a given integer range R. The the sharper the transition, and there exists a crossover point 
problem of finding the number of distinct distances is equiva• among the transitions of problems with different sizes. We 
lent to the bin-ball problem as follows. We are given M balls  can examine the phase transitions more closely using finite-
and R bins, and asked to place the balls into the bins. Each   size scaling. Finite-size scaling [2] is a method that has been 
ball is independently put into one of the bins with an equal   successfully applied to phase transitions in similar systems of 
probability. We are interested in the fraction of bins that are different sizes. Based on finite-size scaling, around a criti•
not empty after all the placements. Here, for asymmetric TSP   cal parameter (temperature), problems of different sizes tend 

M = n2 - n balls correspond to the total number of nondi-      to be indistinguishable except for a change of scale given 
agonal distances of matrix D, and R bins represent the possi•  by a power law in a characteristic length. Thus, finite-size 
ble integers to be selected from. Since each ball (distance) is scaling can help to characterize a phase transition precisely 
thrown independently and uniformly into one of R bins (inte•   around a critical point of the control parameter as the prob•
gers), the probability that one bin is not empty after throwing lem scales to infinity. For the problem at hand, the effective 
 1204                                                                                                   SATISFIABILITY number of distinct distances and the problem 
size n play the roles of the temperature and the characteris•
tic length, respectively. This means that as n goes to infinity, 
the control parameter becomes where is the 

critical point and nl 1/vspecifies the change of scale. Using 
                                       and numerical meth•
ods, we obtained the critical value = 
and rescaling component where the error 
bounds represent the 95% confidence intervals. The rescaled 
phase transitions are shown in Figure 1(b). 
   Note that the number of digits used for intercity distances Figure 4: (a) Average accuracy of AP lower-bound function, 
is nothing but a measurement of the precision of the distances. measured by the error of AP cost relative to ATSP cost, (b) 
The larger the number of digits, the higher the precision be•  Normalized average accuracy. 
comes. This agrees with the common practice of using more 
effective digits to gain precision. Therefore, the phase transi•
tion of the control parameter is in turn determined by the pre• the range of intercity costs. Equivalently, an intercity distance 
cision of intercity distances.                                 was virtually converted to a real value in [0,1]. By doing this, 
                                                               we can verify the existing analytical result on the AP and ATSP 
4.2 Phase transitions                                          costs. This will be discussed in detail in the next subsection. 
With the control parameter, the effective number of digits       As shown, the ATSP tour cost increases abruptly and dra•
        for intercity distances, identified, we are now in a po• matically as the effective number of digits increases, exhibiting 
sition to investigate possible phase transitions in (1) the ATSP phase transitions. The transitions become sharper as the prob•
cost, (2) the probability that an AP cost is equal to the corre• lem becomes larger, and there exist crossover points among 
sponding ATSP cost, (3) the relative error or accuracy of the  curves from different problem sizes. By finite-size scaling, we 
AP lower-bound function, and finally (4) the backbone of the   further determine the critical value of the control parameter at 
ATSP. The answers to the first three problems provides a de•   which the phase transitions occur. The scaled result is shown 
tailed picture on the accuracy of the AP cost function, and the in Figure 2(b). It is worthwhile to mention that the AP cost 
answer to the last problem reveals the intrinsic constrainedness (not shown) follows almost the same phase-transition pattern. 
among the cities as the precision of distances changes. We ex•   Our numerical results show that when the number of dig•
amine these four problems in turn.                             its for intercity distances is very small, for example, less than 
   We generated uniformly random problem instances of 100-,    1.9 digits or R 80 for n = 1,500, the AP and ATSP 
200-, 300- to 1,000-cities and 1,500-cities. Intercity distances costs are equal to zero, meaning that these two costs are the 
are independently and uniformly chosen from {0,1,2, • • •, R-  same as well. Given a random distance matrix D, how likely 
1} for a given range R, which is controlled by the number of   is it that an AP cost will differ from the ATSP tour cost as 
digits 6. We varied 6, with an increment of 0.1, from 1.0 to 6.0 the effective number of digits increases? We address this 
for instances with up to 1,000-cities and from 1.0 to 6.5 for in• question by examining the probability that an AP cost AP(D) 
stances with 1,500-cities. For each combination of and we      is equal to the corresponding ATSP cost ATSP(D) as B in•
generated 10,000 instances for problems (l)-(3) listed above,  creases. Figure 3(a) shows the results, averaged over the same 
and 1,000 instances for problem (4) due to its high computa•   set of instances for Figure 2. As shown, the probability that 
tional cost. To make the result figures readable, we only use  AP(D) = ATSP(D) also experiences phase transitions. Fig•
the curves from 100-, 500-, 1,000- and 1,500-city problems.    ure 3(b) shows the phase transitions after finite-size scaling. 
  There is a phase transition in the ATSP tour cost,             The results in Figure 3 also imply that the quality of the AP 
ATSP(D), shown in Figure 2(a). The reported tour costs are     function degrades as the effective number of digits increases. 
obtained by dividing the integer tour costs from the DFBnB al• The degradation also follows a phase-transition process. This 
gorithm by n x (R - 1), where n is the number of cities and R  is verified by Figure 4, using the data from the same set of 
  SATISFIABILITY                                                                                                    1205                                                                ficiently large so that all distances are distinct, regardless of 
                                                               problem size, and the quantities to be examined do not change 
                                                               substantially after finite-size scaling. = 2 is also relatively 
                                                               small so that we can experiment on large problems. In our im•
                                                               plementation of the DFBnB algorithm, distances are integers 
                                                               of 4 bytes. Thus the number of digits must be less than 9.4 
                                                               without causing an overflow in the worst case. Using = 2, 
                                                               we can go up to roughly 2,500-city ATSPs in the worst case. 
                                                                  Table 1 shows the results, with up to 2,900 cities. The AP 
                                                               cost approaches to 1.6439 and the ATSP cost to 1.6444. The 
                                                               accuracy of AP function indeed improves as the problem size 
                                                               increases, with relative error reduced to about for 
                                                               2,900-city problems. 

   n     digits | AP cost       ATSP cost   relative AP error (%) 5 Threshold Behavior of Subtour Elimination 
  2100  8 6810 1 p.6435±0;0(K)8" 1.6444 ±0.0008 0 0402 ± 0.(M)09 
  2300  8.7555  1.6439 ±0.0007 1 6445 ± 0.0008 0.0368 ± 0 0008 The phase-transition results indicate that the ATSP becomes 
  2500  8 8235  1.6441 ±0.0007 1.6442 ±0 0007 0.0336 ± 0.0008  more constrained and difficult as the distance precision be•
  2700  8.8861  1.6438 ±0 0007 1.6444 ± 0.0007 0.0309 ± 0.0007 comes higher. We now study how the DFBnB subtour elimina•
  2900  8.9440  1.6439 ± 0.0007 1.6444 ±0 0007 0 0286 ± 0.0007 
                                                               tion algorithm behaves. We separate this issue from the phase 
                                                               transitions studied before because we now consider the behav•
 Table 1: Results on AP cost, the ATSP cost and AP error rel•
                                                               ior of a particular algorithm, which may not be necessarily a 
 ative to the ATSP cost, on random ATSP. Each datum is aver•
                                                               feature of the underlying problem. Nevertheless, this is still an 
 aged of 10,000 instances. All error bounds represent 95 percent 
                                                               issue of its own interest because this algorithm is among the 
 confidence intervals. 
                                                               best known methods for the ATSP, and we hope that a better 
                                                               understanding of this algorithm can shed light on the typical 
 problem instances for the previous two figures.               case complexity of the problem. 
   We now turn to the backbone of the ATSP, which is the frac•   Figure 6(a) shows the average complexity of the DFBnB 
 tion of directed arcs that appear in all optimal solutions. The algorithm, measured by the number of calls to the AP func•
 backbones also exhibit phase transitions as the effective num• tion. The result is averaged over the same problem instances 
 ber of digits for distances increases. The result is included in for each data point as used for the phase transitions in the pre•
 Figure 5. Interestingly, the phase-transition pattern of the back• vious section. Note that the number of AP calls increases sig•
bone is almost identical to that of the fraction of distinct entities nificantly from small problems to large ones using the same 
 in the distance matrix, shown in Figure 1, and that of the ATSP effective number of digits for distances. Thus, we normalize 
tour cost, shown in Figure 2.                                  the result in such a way that for a given problem size, the min•
   The fraction of backbone captures, in essence, the tightness imal and maximal AP calls among all problem instances of the 
of the constraints among the cities. As more intercity dis•    same size are mapped to zero and one, respectively, and the 
tances become distinct, the number of tours of unique lengths  other AP calls are proportionally adjusted to a ratio between 
 increases. Consequently, the number of optimal solutions de•  0 and 1. This allows us to compare the results from different 
creases and the fraction of backbone grows inversely. When     problem sizes on one figure. The curves in Figure 6(a) follow 
more arcs are part of the backbone, optimal solutions become   a pattern similar to that of the phase transitions in the previous 
more restricted and the number of optimal solutions decreases, section. The complexity of the subtour elimination algorithm 
making it more difficult to find an optimal solution.          increases with the effective number of digits, and exhibits a 
                                                               threshold behavior similar to phase transitions. Indeed, we can 
4.3 Asymptotic AP precision                                    use finite-size scaling to capture the behavior as the problem 
                                                               size grows, as illustrated in Figure 6(b). The results in Fig•
As a by-product of the phase-transition results, we now pro•
                                                               ure 6 and the results in the previous section indicate that the 
vide asymptotic values of the ATSP cost, the AP cost and its 
                                                               complexity of the subtour elimination algorithm goes hand-in-
accuracy. We attempt to extend the previous theoretical results 
                                                               hand with the constrainedness of the problem. 
on the AP cost, which is known to be within (1.51,1.94) [8], 
                                                                 Similar results have been reported in [26]. The results of this 
and the observation that the accuracy of the AP lower bounds 
                                                               subsection extend that in [26] to different sizes of problems and 
increases as the problem size increases [1]. 
                                                               by applying finite-size scaling to capture the threshold behav•
   We need to be cautious in selecting the number of digits for 
                                                               ior as problem size increases. 
intercity distances. As discussed earlier, the same number of 
digits for distances gives rise to different effective numbers of 
digits on problems of different sizes. Therefore, the number of 6 Conclusions and Discussions 
digits must be scaled properly to have the same effect on prob• Our main contributions are twofold. First, we provided strong 
lems of different sizes when we exam an asymptotic feature.    positive evidences to the long-standing question of whether the 
   Therefore, in our experiments, we fixed the scaled effec•   Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) has phase transitions [17]. 
tive number of digits to a constant. Based on the phase-       We studied this issue on the more general asymmetric TSP 
transition of the control parameter in Figure 1, we took =     (ATSP). We empirically showed that many properties, includ•
                             a constant of 2. = 2 is suf-      ing the ATSP tour cost and the fraction of backbone, have 
  1206                                                                                                  SATISFIABILITY 