                               Distributed Patient Scheduling in Hospitals 

       T. O. Paulussen* N. R. Jennings K. S. Decker A. Heinzl* 
        Inf. Sys. Dept. Elect. & Comp. Sci. Dept. Comp. & Inf. Sci. Dept. Inf. Sys. Dept. 
     Univ. of Mannheim Univ. of Southampton Univ. of Delaware University of Mannheim 
     Mannheim, Germany Southampton, UK Newark, Delaware, USA Mannheim, Germany 
paulussen@uni-mannheim.de nrj@ecs.soton.ac.uk decker@cis.udel.edu heinzl@uni-mannheim.de 


                          Abstract                              ule disturbances1 [Schliichtermann, 1990]. Due to this, pa•
                                                                tient scheduling in hospitals requires an approach which is 
        Patient scheduling in hospitals is a highly complex     distributed, in order to leave the authority at the responsible 
        task. Hospitals have a distributed organisational       hospital units, and flexible, to be able to react to plan changes 
        structure; being divided into several autonomous        in an efficient manner. 
        wards and ancillary units. Moreover, the treat•           We have chosen to adopt a multi-agent based approach to 
        ment process is dynamic (information about the          this problem, because such systems allow the representation 
       patients' diseases often varies during treatments,       of every single coordination object, i.e. the responsible enti•
       causing changes in the treatment process). Current       ties, as single autonomous agents with their own goals [Wein-
       approaches are insufficient because they either fo•      hardt and Gomber, 1996]. This, in turn, reflects the existing 
       cus only on the single ancillary units, and therefore    decentralised structures in hospitals [Decker and Li, 2000]. 
       do not consider the entire treatment process of the      Through social abilities, the agents can interact with each 
       patients, or they do not account for the distribution    other to reach their own goals. Moreover they can react with 
       and dynamics of the patient scheduling problem.          the needed flexibility to changes (as new information about 
       Therefore, we propose an agent based approach in         the health status of a patient becomes available) and distur•
       which the patients and hospital resources are mod•       bances (e.g. emergencies and complications) through proac-
       elled as autonomous agents with their own goals,         tiveness and responsiveness [Jennings, 2001]. 
       reflecting the decentralised structures in hospitals. 
                                                                  This paper advances the state of the art in two main ways. 
       In this multi-agent system, the patient agents com•
                                                                First is the design of a novel procedure, i.e. a patient cen•
       pete over the scarce hospital resources. Moreover 
                                                                tred multi-agent based coordination mechanism, where the 
       to improve the overall solution, the agents then ne•
                                                                patients are represented as autonomous agents, trying to im•
       gotiate with one another. To this end, a market 
                                                                prove their current scheduling state by negotiation with other 
       mechanism is described, in which each self inter•
                                                                agents. Second is the derivation of health state dependent op•
       ested agent tries to improve its own situation. In 
                                                                portunity cost functions, based upon which the agents eval•
       particular we focus on how the agents can calculate 
                                                                uate their current schedule and compute the gains and losses 
       demand and supply prices based upon their current 
                                                                through plan modifications. 
       schedule. Further, an evaluation of first results of 
                                                                  The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Sec•
       the proposed method is given. 
                                                                tion 2 describes the domain of patient-scheduling in hospitals. 
                                                                Section 3 details the conceptual framework of our multi-agent 
   1 Introduction                                               system, the relevant coordination objects and the coordination 
                                                                mechanism. The results of the proposed mechanism are also 
   Patient scheduling in hospitals is concerned with the optimal evaluated. The paper ends with conclusions and an outlook 
   assignment of patients to hospital resources. Hospitals are  to further work in section 4. 
   divided into several autonomous wards and ancillary units, 
   which are visited by the patients for treatments and exami•  2 The Patient Scheduling Problem 
   nations during hospitalisation in accordance with their illness 
   [Schliichtermann, 1990]. However, the pathways (the needed   In addition to the complexity arising from the distributed 
   treatments and examinations) and the medical priorities (the structure of hospitals, patient scheduling has to be performed 
   health condition of the patients) are likely to change due to in the face of a high degree of uncertainty about the treatment 
   new findings about the diseases of the patients during exami• pathways of patients within the hospital. Thus patients arrive 
   nation. Further, complications and arrivals of emergency pa•
   tients, which are in urgent need for treatment, result in sched- This problem can be ameliorated by the provision of addi•
                                                               tional (exclusive) emergency resources (e.g. separate x-ray facili•
     * We would like to thank the DFG, Deutsche Forschungsgemein- ties). However, for economic reasons, hospitals try to minimise 
   schaft for funding this work as part of SPP 1083.           these extra resources. 


   1224                                                                                                    SCHEDULING continuously at the hospital and the necessary medical treat•  contrast to the resource agents, who only see the patients as 
ments are often not able to be completely determined at the    entities to be treated, the patient agents only see the medi•
beginning of the treatment process. Moreover the results of    cal actions as tasks that need to be performed. Due to these 
a diagnostic examination might change the (medical) priority   opposing forces, the patient agents ensure that the resource 
of the patients, invoke additional activities and/or make other agents also consider the treatments of the patients outside 
medical actions obsolete.                                      their unit (without any explicit knowledge of them) and vice 
   Due to this complexity, the application of traditional (op• versa. 
erations research) methods from industrial scheduling to the     To this end, the relevant coordination objects in the hospi•
patient scheduling problem is problematic [SchlCichtermann,    tal (i.e. the entities to be coordinated), which will be repre•
 1990]. To be able to handle the process dynamics in a dis•    sented as agents, can be identified as patients and resources 
tributed environment, hospitals commonly use a very flexible   (i.e. rooms, machines and personnel). To reduce complexity, 
approach for patient scheduling. Typically, the wards send     all resources needed for a specific medical action are repre•
treatment and examination requests to the ancillary units.     sented by the hospital unit responsible for this action, which 
 Based upon these requests, the ancillary units order the pa•  will be implemented as the resource agents. 
tients from the wards. This allows the units to react very flex•  If more than one patient agent now wants to use the iden•
ibly to changes with very low communication needs. If, for     tical resource at the same time interval, a resource conflict 
example, an emergency patient needs to be inserted, the next   occurs. To solve these conflicts, a coordination mechanism 
patient will simply be called from the ward later, leaving this is needed. For this inter-agent coordination, we decided to 
patient available to other ancillary units.                    use a market mechanism. The rationale for this is that a 
   However, because there is no inter-unit coordination, this  market mechanism is a distributed coordination mechanism 
procedure cannot resolve resource conflicts, which occur if    which facilitates efficient solutions with low communication 
the same patient is requested by more than one ancillary unit  needs. In particular, only prices for specific goods are com•
at the same time [Decker and Li, 2000]. Because the ancil•     municated, keeping all other information private to the mar•
lary units only have a local view, i.e. they do not - and cannot ket participants [Wellman et al., 2001]. Additionally, a mar•
- take the whole pathway of the treated patients into their    ket facilitates a dynamic environment, where the market par•
scheduling consideration, no inter-unit process optimisation   ticipants take actions according to their current (dynamically 
can be undertaken (i.e. the medical tasks for the patients can• changing) situation based upon private information and pref•
not be scheduled and coordinated in an efficient manner).      erences. In this market, the coordination objects are modelled 
This causes undesired idle times as well as overtime hours     as autonomous, self-interested market participants, trying to 
for the hospital resources and extended patient stay times.    improve their local schedule. In markets, the price mecha•
                                                               nism leads to an efficient resource allocation because the re•
3 Agent-Based Patient Scheduling                               sources are assigned to the agents that are willing to pay the 
                                                               highest price (assuming that the agents bid rationally, these 
In this section the conceptual framework of our multi-agent 
                                                               are the agents who gain the highest utility from this resource). 
system is described. Then, the relevant coordination ob•
                                                               A pareto optimal solution will be achieved, because no agent 
jects, i.e. the patients and hospital resources, are modelled as 
                                                               will accept a deal, which worsens its current state. Therefore, 
agents. After this, a coordination mechanism is introduced. 
                                                               the agents will trade resources until no agent can improve its 
Finally, examples are given and the first results of the imple•
                                                               schedule without harming another agent [Weigelt, 1994]. 
mentation are presented. 
3.1 Conceptual Framework                                       3.2 Coordination Objects 
                                                               To implement a coordination mechanism, the above men•
Using a multi-agent system, [Decker and Li, 2000] addressed 
                                                               tioned coordination objects have to be modelled. In this 
the problem of resource conflicts in the patient scheduling 
                                                               work the main goal for the patients is to minimise their stay 
domain. Specifically, by adding a coordination mechanism 
                                                               time and for the resources to minimise idle times. This kind 
to handle mutually exclusive resources (i.e. the patients) to 
                                                               of scheduling problems represents a worth-oriented environ•
the Generalized Partial Global Planning (GPGP) approach   , 
                                                         2     ment [Rosenschein and Zlotkin, 1994], where the degree 
they achieved significant scheduling improvements compared 
                                                               of goal achievement can be evaluated by a utility function 
to current patient scheduling without coordination. In their 
                                                               (rather than a state or task oriented environment, where a sin•
work, they took a function-oriented approach, where only the 
                                                               gle goal cannot be achieved partially). The usage of contin•
units are represented as autonomous agents. The treatment 
                                                               uous worth functions instead of single worth values assigned 
pathway of the patients is captured by the nursing units. How•
                                                               to specific goals enables the agents to relax their goals, i.e. 
ever, the dynamics of the patient scheduling problem and the 
                                                               to compromise in order to achieve a better solution [Rosen•
medical priorities of the patients were not considered. 
                                                               schein and Zlotkin, 1994]. For example, if two agents want 
   For this reason, we use a patient-centred approach, in 
                                                               the same time slots at the same resource, the agents can agree 
which the patients are modelled as agents, too. This allows 
                                                               upon a solution which does not fully satisfy their own goals, 
the representation - and therefore consideration - of the hos•
                                                               but reaches a better overall solution. This situation is illus•
pital processes as a whole [Adam and Gorschliiter, 1999]. In 
                                                               trated in the figures 2(a) and 2(b). 

   2GPGP is a domain independent, task environment centred,      Because we adopt a patient-centred approach, the main fo•
scheduling approach to coordination [Decker and Li, 2000].     cus will be on the patient agents, which will be modelled in 


SCHEDULING                                                                                                           1225  the first subsection. Within this part, we introduce the health Through this, the health state of a patient can be described in 
 state dependent cost-functions, which are needed for price ar• time units. 
 ticulation in the market mechanism. In the second subsection,   The primary goal of patients in hospitals is to increase their 
 the resource agents are described.                            current health state through treatment, where a disease could 
                                                               be viewed as disutility (decrease in quality of life) for the pa•
 Patient Agents                                                tient. This loss of utility adds up as long as this disease is 
 Each patient is represented by an agent. The patient agents   not cured. Based on this assumption, the (opportunity) cost 
 can only see their own schedule, containing their pathway           for not curing the patient right away equals the differ•
 through the hospital. The pathway of a patient agent com•     ence between the achievable health state (through treatment) 
 prises the needed treatments and examinations as well as the  z and the patient's health state over the time H(t). Formally, 
 order constraints between those tasks. The patient agents are this can be expressed by 
 also equipped with a private worth function to be able to ne•
 gotiate in a goal driven manner. This worth function is re•
 alised as a cost function, which they try to minimise. These 
 cost functions increase over time, setting incentives for the 
                                                                 In addition, it has to be considered that the health state and 
 patient agents to schedule their treatments and examinations 
                                                               the achievable health state can change over time. Therefore, 
 as early as possible in order to reduce costs. 
                                                               the patient's opportunity costs are influenced by his current 
   In contrast to commercial domains, the utility or cost func•
                                                               health state a, the development of his health state over time 
 tions cannot be based upon monetary values in hospitals. 
                                                               H(t), and the maximal reachable health state through treat•
 While in e-commerce scenarios the human principals reveal 
                                                               ment z. If the health state does not change over time, i.e. 
their preferences through their willingness to pay (e.g. by 
                                                               H(t) = a, the opportunity costs are 
specifying maximum buy and minimum sell prices), patients 
do not - and should not - reveal thei; preferences through 
their willingness to pay for a specific treatment time slot. The 
preferences rather have to be based upon medical priorities,   If the health state of a patient worsens over time, assump•
i.e. their health state. This absence of normalised monetary   tions about the course of the health state have to be made by 
units additionally causes the problem of inter-agent utility   a physician. If we assume - for clarity - a linear reduction by 
comparison. To solve this problem, we operationalised the      b of the health state, i.e. H(t) = a — bt, we get 
progress of the patients' health state. In current hospital prac•
tice, numerous health states or patient priority measures and 
indices are in use (e.g. APACHE IT (Acute Physiology And 
Chronic Health Evaluation) [Knaus et al., 1985] in intensive     However, this approach works with any health decrease 
care units). The choice of the measurement to use is up to     rate, as the health state of a patient normally does not decrease 
the hospital. However, we propose, that it should support a    linearly. Nevertheless, a linear approximation of the decrease 
cardinal measurement of the health state progress over time.   in health can be justified by practical reasons. Instead of try•
   The cardinal measurement is necessary for inter-agent util• ing to estimate the exact shape of the curve, a physician could 
ity comparison and transfer (as we have to calculate with      rather specify two or more specific points in time and in be•
these units). Because these health state (utility) units cannot tween a linear reduction could be estimated. Figure 1 shows 
be transferred between the actual patients in the hospital, the an exemplary course of an illness with linear reduction of the 
multi-agent system has to be separated from the actual patient health state, resulting in a quadratic opportunity cost curve. 
world, where only the agents transfer utility units in order to 
reach a better overall solution (minimisation of health state 
adjusted patient stay time). 
  The health state progress is important, because the priority 
of the patients should not be based upon their current state, 
but on their health state development. For example, a patient 
with a currently reasonable but rapidly deteriorating health 
condition should have a higher priority than a patient with 
a (slightly) lower current, but continuously constant, health 
state. 
  For the necessary cardinal measurement of health, we rely 
on the concept of years of well being [Torrance, 1987] be•
cause it handles the health state progress over time (a good 
overview can be found in [Pedroni and Zweifel, 1990]). In 
this method, the question is what time period xT of total               Figure 1: Linear reduction of health state. 
health (1) equals one specific time period IT of a certain 
health state H, i.e.                                             Finally, if the maximal reachable health state decreases, the 
                                                               patient must be treated immediately to prevent lifelong dam•
                                                               age to his health. 


1226                                                                                                       SCHEDULING    With these cost functions in place, the agents can now eval• previous section, i.e. 
uate their current state, i.e. the degree of goal achievement. 
Further, based on these functions, the agents are able to com•
pute supply and demand prices for time slots which corre•
                                                                  Because in this approach the (opportunity) costs of an ap•
spond to the losses or benefits caused by plan changes, which 
                                                               pointment increase over time for the patient agents, they must 
is essential for a market mechanism. How these prices are 
                                                               try to schedule their treatments and examinations as early as 
computed will be explained later in the context of the descrip•
                                                               possible. If a demanded time slot is already occupied by an•
tion of the coordination mechanism (section 3.3). 
                                                               other patient agent, the initial demander must try to buy the 
Resource Agents                                                time slot from the current owner. With respect to the proper•
In contrast to the patients, the hospital resources are directly ties of a market mechanism, the agents act in a rational, self-
comparable with the resources in industrial scheduling do•     interested manner. Therefore, the owners of the time slots 
mains. Their main goal can be described as maximising their    will only release them, if the price offered equals the losses 
utilisation or, equivalently, minimising idle time.            invoked through rescheduling. Since they only charge for the 
   To reach this goal, cost-functions can also be articulated  costs invoked through rescheduling they can be viewed as act•
for the resource agents. These cost functions represent the    ing in a partially cooperative manner. 
reserve prices (i.e. the price that will be charged for an empty The detailed negotiation process goes as follows: 
slot) for the possible appointments [Wellman et al, 2001].       1. A patient agent initiates a negotiation for rescheduling, 
Through this, priorities between different resources can be         if the pathway (additional or obsolete medical actions) 
established that allow penalisation of undesired appointment        or the health state of its patient has changed. 
times (e.g. evening shift or overtime hours). Here, the basis 
                                                                 2. The initiating agent selects the task with the highest pos•
for the resource agents' cost functions comes from cost ac•
                                                                    sible improvement (difference between the costs of the 
counting. 
                                                                    current owned and the best reachable time slot) and con•
   However, for inter-agent utility comparison (i.e. between        tacts the resource agent that is responsible for the execu•
patient and resource agents) these measurements have to be          tion of this task. 
equalised, which can be a very difficult task, because the 
health state of a patient has to be compared with monetary       3. The resource agent reserves that time slot, and contacts 
values from cost accounting. A good way out of this problem         all affected patient agents, i.e. the agents that currently 
are trade-off considerations, e.g. what amount of idle time of      own this interval, and informs them about the proposal 
a specific resource equals one hour waiting time for a patient      of the initiator. 
with a specific health state.                                    4. The affected patient agents (sellers) try to reschedule to 
                                                                    the first nonreserved time slots (see step 3) and notify 
3.3 The Coordination Mechanism                                      the initiator about their costs due to rescheduling. To 
The main goal of the coordination mechanism is to minimise          prevent cycles, reserved intervals cannot be demanded 
the health state adjusted stay time of the patients, which is       by other agents. 
equivalent to an overall minimisation of suffering for the pa•   5. If the alternative time slots for the sellers are already 
tients. The basic idea of our coordination mechanism is that        occupied, they again become demanders for those time 
the patient agents try to buy into resource time slots for the      slots and accumulate the invoked costs. Here, order con•
needed treatments and examinations. However, the usage of           straints can invoke additional rescheduling in other re•
(central) auction mechanisms is obstructed by the dynamics          sources. 
of the patient scheduling problem described in section 2. 
   To ensure feasible (i.e. conflict free) initial task appoint• 6. After all prices are computed and submitted to the ini•
ments for the patients, all new treatments and examinations         tiator, the initiator compares its expected gains from 
are scheduled on a first-come first-served (fefs) basis. To do      rescheduling to the total price asked for this interval. If 
this, the patient agents who want to add a task to their path•      the gains exceed the costs it accepts or rejects otherwise, 
way contact the responsible unit for the execution of this task     and the negotiation for this time slot terminates. 
in order to obtain the earliest time slot which is available at  The former initiator continues its rescheduling activities by 
the unit as well as in their own schedule. To illustrate this, opening new negotiations for the next task with the (now) 
figure 2(a) shows a possible initial resource allocation. These highest possible improvement until it cannot improve any task 
initial appointments determine the budget (or better the initial any further. Previously rejected time slots will not be consid•
opportunity costs) of the agents. This is important because a  ered unless these time slots are released by their owners. For 
hypothetical price system is used (as per section 3.2).        concurrency issues only one (randomly chosen) agent can ini•
   Based upon this initial schedule, the agents try to improve tiate a negotiation at a time. 
their schedule in order to reduce their opportunity costs. The   In this coordination mechanism only the patient agents are 
price p they are willing to pay for a specific time slot (ex•  active components. However, as described earlier, cost func•
pected gain) or they charge for a time slot (expected loss) is tions can be implemented into the resource agents, allowing 
the difference between the cost-value of the current alloca•   prioritisation between the resources. The resource price for a 

tion told and the cost-value for the wanted appointment tnew,  time slot is charged when a patient agent buys a time slot, and 
according to their individual cost function described in the   reimbursed when the patient agent releases this time slot. 


SCHEDULING                                                                                                           1227    As described earlier, the pathway of the patients through   agent A would only ask for its slot (agent A moves to 
 the hospital is likely to change during the treatment process, slot 1 and gains $3.15, and agent B moves to slot 3 and looses 
 that is, additional treatments and/or examinations may be•
 come necessary while other tasks may become obsolete. In         We have applied the described coordination mechanism to 
 bur coordination mechanism, additional tasks (as well as ad•  the first Taillard 5 5 open shop problem [Taillard, 1993] 
 ditional patients) can be added at any time using the fcfs rule to analyse the behaviour for tasks with different durations. 
 explained above. If a treatment becomes obsolete, the respon• Figure 3 shows the resulting Gantt chart with a solution of 
 sible patient agent notifies the affected resource agent that, 349. The optimal solution is 300. To analyse the convergence 
 again, informs the other patient agents in its schedule.      of the mechanism, we logged the changes of the latest task for 
                                                               each agent. Figure 4 shows the corresponding convergence 
 3.4 Example Scenarios                                         behaviour, which indicate a fast convergence in the first third 
 Figure 2(a) and 2(b) illustrate the functioning of our coordi• of the graph. 
 nation mechanism. Figure 2(a) shows an initial schedule with 
 three patients (A,B,C). For illustration purposes, we start with 
 identical cost-functions with an assumed initial health state a 
 of 0.7, an achievable health state z of 1.0, a decrease rate b of 
 0.001 and equal possible starting times for all patients. The 
 used cost function resolves as 0.3t + 0.0005* . Further, in 
 this example, all task durations are set to lOt. We will use the 
 $-sign to indicate utility units. 


                                                               Figure 3: Gantt of the results of the Taillard 5x5 open shop 
                                                               problem. 

   Based upon this initial schedule, agent C negotiates with 
agent B in unit 2 in order to improve its current situa•
tion. Agent C's current opportunity costs in unit 2 are 
(0.3 x 40 + 0.0005 x 4(r). Its opportunity costs for the first 
time slot would be (i.e. a difference of For the 
calculation of the offer price, agent B has to determine its 
additional rescheduling costs. Therefore agent B has to ne•
gotiate with agent A in unit 2 for the next best time slot and 
in unit I, because the patients are exclusive resources which 
can only perform one task at a time. Agent A looses 
in unit 2 and another in unit 1. Agent B looses  
in unit 2 but gains $3.15 in unit 1. Agent B is charged with 
the losses of Agent A and adds this to its supply price 
for agent Because the total                                     Figure 4: Converge of the Taillard 5x5 open shop problem. 
supply price is less than agent C 's gains agent 
C accepts the deal (because it can compensate the losses of      The number of negotiation rounds counts each improve•
the other agents) and the plan is changed. No more deals are   ment attempt (successful or not) of the agents. The same pro•
possible and figure 2(b) shows the result of this negotiation. cedure was executed for the open shop problems with 
   In this example, patient agent A accepted a schedule of     equal task durations. For these problems the optimal solution 
lower quality in favour of patient agent C. However, only pa•  will be always achieved. The resulting Gantt chart is shown 
tient agent A - not the real patient - has received a compen•  in figure 5. Figure 6 shows the corresponding convergence, 
sation from patient agent C. This illustrates the necessary dis• illustrating the simplicity of this problem type in contrast to 
junction between the real patients and the multi-agent system  the used Taillard benchmark. 
in the hospital domain as described earlier (section 3.2).       However, a better agent-based solution to this problem can 
   In the next step, we relax the assumption, that all agents  be achieved through the usage of (central) appointment auc•
have the same cost functions. If agent C would have had a      tions. Implementing an auction based approach using the 
lower health state (e.g. = 0.35) it could have even improved   same cost functions resulted in a solution at 308. How•
its appointment in unit 1 because it would have gained $3.75   ever, these auctions cannot handle the dynamics of the patient 
from moving to the second slot (agent A in figure 2(b)) while  scheduling problem, because the auction process would have 


1228                                                                                                       SCHEDULING 