                                          Reasoning about distances 
                                  Frank Wolter and Michael Zakharyaschev 
                           Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, 
                                              Liverpool L69 7ZF, U.K.; 
                                Department of Computer Science, King's College, 
                                          Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K. 
                                 (emails: frank@csc.liv.ac.uk, mz@dcs.kcl.ac.uk) 

                        Abstract                               ators and restricted quantifiers like, (Tor all objects 
                                                               within a circle of radius and ('for some object within 
     The paper presents a novel expressive logic-based 
                                                               a circle of radius r'). Thus, denotes the set of all ob•
     formalism intended for reasoning about numerical 
                                                               jects each of which is located at distance from at least one 
     distances. We investigate its computational prop•
                                                               object with property P. To illustrate the expressive power of 
     erties (in particular, show that it is EXPTIME-
                                                               the language and to convince the reader that it can be useful, 
     complete) and devise a tableau-based satisfiability-
                                                               we give three concrete examples. 
     checking algorithm. To be able to express knowl•
     edge about implicit or unknown distances, we then         Example 1. Consider a space of proteins (i.e., sequences of 
     extend the language with variables ranging over           amino acids); some of them are well studied, but properties 
     distances and prove that the resulting logic is de-       of the majority are not known. Using one of the available 
     cidable as well.                                          techniques, we can define a 'similarity measure' between pro•
                                                               teins which gives rise to a certain 'distance' (perhaps, metric) 
                                                               space. One of the typical problems is to recognise whether 
 1 Introduction                                                a given protein p has some property P, e.g., whether it con•
The numerical notion of distance or metric as a measure of     tains an EF-hand motif. The usual approach of comparing the 
closeness or similarity (in a great variety of senses) plays a structure of p with that of 'closely located' proteins whose 
 fundamental role in many branches of science—including,       properties are known can be supplemented with a knowledge 
 naturally, knowledge representation, artificial intelligence  base composed by an expert and containing information like 
 and informatics in general. Recent examples are such dif•
ferent fields as spatial KR&R and geographic information 
 systems [Cohn and Hazarika, 2001; Adam and Gangopad-
hyay, 1997], computational molecular biology [Setubal and 
Meidanis, 1997; Clote and Backofen, 2000], text processing 
 [Salton, 1989] and data mining [Dunham, 2003]. Unlike clas•   Note that, in view of incomplete information about proper•
sical physics and the corresponding mathematical models, the   ties of elements of the distance space, to answer the query 
 'distance spaces' arising in these applications may be quite  whether/) can have P, we have to run a satisfiability-checking 
different from the standard Euclidean spaces, e.g., they are   algorithm rather than a model-checking one. 
often finite and do not necessarily satisfy all of the metric 
axioms. Another important feature is that properties of only   Example 2. Suppose now that we are trying to organise a 
some objects in the space may be known, and the task is to     web site for selling books (or any other goods) on-line. One 
use the available information to determine properties of other way of classifying the existing books is to introduce a mea•
elements of interest. Traditional methods of dealing with met• sure of closeness of the contents of some of them. We then 
ric data are mostly numerical or 'sub-symbolic' (e.g., graph-  obtain a database containing items of the form = 
theoretic or probabilistic) and usually do not involve any kind a, if the distance between books b1 and b2 is a, and, say, 
of (automated) reasoning which is based upon symbolic, ex•                    for some number c, if the distance between 
plicit knowledge representation. The main aim of this paper    b1 and b2 is only known to be greater than c. Now we can 
is to present a new expressive logic-based formalism intended  built a sort of terminology by saying: 
for reasoning about distances and to provide it with a tableau 
decision algorithm. 
   The language we propose is—as far as its algorithmic prop•
erties and expressiveness are concerned—a compromise be•
tween full first-order and propositional languages: it contains 
object names and unary atomic predicates from which com•
plex predicates are constructed by means of the Boolean oper•


SPATIAL REASONING                                                                                                    1275  and deduce, for instance, that Al is not subsumed by Com•     that we have to integrate rather sophisticated reasoning about 
 puter Science.                                                quantitative data into a logic-based framework. 
 Example 3. Perhaps the most natural application of this kind    Logics of distance spaces were introduced in [Sturm et 
 of formalism is spatial representation and reasoning. We can  al, 2000; Kutz et al., 2003], where our main concern was 
 speak in terms of 'absolute' distances:                       to find out whether such logics can be decidable. Unfortu•
                                                               nately, the logics constructed in these papers were not sup•
   • (London, Leipzig) > 100,                                  ported by effective reasoning machinery. The aim of this 
   • house (shop restaurant) — 'the house is                   paper is more practical. To begin with, in Section 2, we 
     located within 1 mile distance from a shopping centre of  present an application oriented variant of a dis•
     radius 0.5/                                               tance logic (containing location constants, set variables and 
                                                               restricted quantifiers) and show that the satisfiability problem 
   • doughnut {centre} {centre}.                               for its formulas in metric (and some weaker distance) spaces 
We can also deal with distances given implicitly by saying,    is EXPTIME-complete. As distance spaces used in computer 
for example,                                                   science and AI are often finite (e.g., data with a similarity 
                                                               measure, a model of a railway system, etc.), we consider also 
   • (London, Leipzig) > 3 • (Liverpool, Manchester), 
                                                               the problem of satisfiability of knowledge bases 
   • my-house college, (Dov1 s-house, college) =               in finite spaces. We show that the language does not 'feel' the 
     ('I do not want to have a house that is located farther   difference between finite and infinite spaces: all the results 
     from my college than Dov's house')                        presented for satisfiability in arbitrary spaces hold for finite 
without referring to concrete distances between the cities and spaces as well. (Unfortunately, if we restrict attention to the 
perhaps having no idea where Dov's house is.                   two-dimensional Euclidean space or its subspaces, then the 
                                                               satisfiability problem becomes undecidable.) Then, in Sec•
   The approach to reasoning about distances we advocate       tion 3, we devise a tableau-based satisfiability checking al•
in this paper has grown up from four main sources. First,      gorithm for this logic. An interesting and quite unexpected 
extensive research has been done by the (spatial/constraint)   consequence of the proofs of these results is the following 
database community [Revesz, 2002] aiming to deal efficiently   observation. The full contains both operators  
with large sets of data which come equipped with some kind 
                                                               and 3    which together allow assertions like 
of distance (or similarity) measure; consult, e.g., the litera•      <u
ture on 'similarity search' and 'k-nearest neighbour queries' 
[Bozkaya and Ozsoyoglu, 1999; Hjaltason and Samet, 19991.           cated in precisely 1 mile distance from the house.' 
Although this paper does not contribute to this field,1 we     But in everyday life we often do not pay attention to the 
were driven by the idea that it may be useful to extend the    boundaries of spatial regions or treat them in a sort of vague 
 'evaluation-based' methods by automated reasoning services.   manner. What happens if we keep only one of the operators 
As was mentioned above, complete information about models                  in our language? Do the two resulting fragments 
based on distance spaces, and even distances themselves, are   behave differently, or to put it another way, does our language 
often not available, which means that the quality of solutions feel the difference between regions with and without bound•
provided by the database technology can be significantly im-   aries? To our surprise, the answer turns out to be 'NO' (for a 
proved by using explicit knowledge of the field (or even con•  precise formulation of the result see Theorem 7). 
jectures) supported by appropriate reasoning procedures.         To be able to express knowledge about implicit or unknown 
   Two approaches to extend the database technology by         distances, in Section 4 we extend with variables 
means of KR&R have been developed by the qualitative spa•      ranging over distances and prove that the satisfiability prob•
tial reasoning community. One is based upon the representa•    lem for the resulting language is decidable. 
tion of spatial data by means of constraint systems [Renz and    Because of lack of space we had to omit all (rather non-
Nebel, 1999], while the other uses first-order theories, e.g., trivial and lengthy) proofs. They are available at  
[Randell et al, 1992]. Constraint systems are usually very                                          Here we only say that 
efficient (at most NP-complete); however, their expressive     the complexity result as well as the proof of the correctness 
power is rather limited (for instance, they do not allow any   and completeness of the tableau algorithm are based on a rep•
kind of quantification). On the other hand, the unrestricted   resentation of metric spaces in the form of relational struc•
quantification of first-order representations is a serious obsta• tures Kripke frames. This representation allows us to use 
cle for their use in practical reasoning systems.              advanced techniques from modal and description logics. 
  In a sense, our approach is similar to that taken by the 
description logic community which represents conceptual        2 The logic  
knowledge by means of restricted quantification (a kind of 
modal necessity and possibility operators) and uses reason•    Let M be a non-empty subset of positive rational numbers 
ably effective tableau-based procedures even for expressive    (i.e., a subset of Denote by the language 
and complex (say, EXPTIME-complete) formalisms [Hor-           with the following alphabet and term and formula formation 
rocks, 1998]. The chief difference from description logics is  rules. The alphabet consists of 
                                                                 • an infinite list of set (or region) variables  
   1Note, however, that our logics can express some of the cluster•
ing conditions.                                                  • an infinite list of location constants  


1276                                                                                               SPATIAL REASONING                                                                Theorem 4. The satisfiability problem for 
                                                               knowledge bases in arbitrary metric spaces is 
                                                               complete (even if the parameters from M are coded in bi•
                                                               nary). 
                                                                 Actually the same result can be proved for satisfiability in 
                                                               weaker distance spaces, say, the class of spaces which do not 
                                                               necessarily satisfy the triangular inequality (2) or the symme•
                                                               try axiom (3). The proof of this and some other theorems in 
                                                               this paper are based on a rather sophisticated representation 
                                                               of distance spaces in the form of relational structures a la 
                                                               Kripke frames. The EXPTIME satisfiability-checking algo•
                                                               rithm is basically an elimination procedure which iteratively 
                                                               deletes from the set of all 1-types over a sufficiently small 
                                                               set of terms all those that contain distance quantifiers without 
                                                               witnesses. 
                                                                 According to the next result, the logic of metric spaces in•
                                                               troduced above has the finite model property, and so Theo•
                                                               rem 4 holds for the class of finite metric spaces as well (the 
                                                               third equivalence actually follows immediately from the fact 
                                                               that any finite metric space is isometric to a subspace of some 
                                                              [Matousek, 2002]). 
                                                               Theorem 5. The following conditions are equivalent for any 
                                                                         -knowledge base  
                                                                 • E is satisfiable in a metric space; 
                                                                 • E is satisfiable in a finite metric space; 
                                                                 • E is satisfiable in a finite subspace of some space  


SPATIAL REASONING                                                                                                   1277                                                                              2 Actually, at most /oc(E) • |trra(∑)|2 


1278                                                                                                               SPATIAL REASONING    It is to be noted that the rule is rather inefficient as it 
stands. Actually, there is no need to add those and  
but then some other rules, as well as the blocking strategy, 
have to be changed in a subtle way. We show here this 'ineffi­
cient variant' to make the tableaux as transparent as possible. 
The worst case complexity (even of the more efficient vari­
ant) of the tableau algorithm does not match the EXPTIME 
upper bound of Theorem 4, which is actually a feature of all 
implemented tableau procedures in description logic. 

4 Metric logic with numerical variables 
Let us consider now the language which is defined 
almost precisely as with the only difference be-


SPATIAL REASONING                                                                                                    1279 