                    Tractable Pareto Optimization of Temporal Preferences 

        Lina Khatib1.2 Paul Morris2 Robert Morr                          Kristen Brent Venable 
                       1. Kestrel Technology                        ;ment of Pure and Applied Mathematics 
              2. Computational Sciences Division                           University of Padova 
           NASA Ames Research Center, MS 269-2                                via G.Belzoni.7 
                     Moffett Field, CA 94035                               35131 Padova, Italy 


                        Abstract                               a Temporal CSP involving local temporal preferences was 
                                                               introduced in [Khatib et at, 2001], based on maximizing 
     This paper focuses on temporal constraint prob•
                                                               the minimally preferred local preference for a time value. 
     lems where the objective is to optimize a set of lo•
                                                               Because the locally minimally preferred assignment can be 
     cal preferences for when events occur. In previous 
                                                               viewed as a sort of "weakest link" with respect to the global 
     work, a subclass of these problems has been for•
                                                               solution, we dub this method "weakest link optimization" 
     malized as a generalization of Temporal CSPs, and 
                                                               (WLO), in the spirit of the television game show. WLO 
     a tractable strategy for optimization has been pro•
                                                               can be formalized using a generalization of Simple Tempo•
     posed, where global optimality is defined as maxi•
                                                               ral Problems (STPs), called STPs with Preferences (STPPs), 
     mizing the minimum of the component preference 
                                                               that preserves the capability to tractably solve for solutions 
     values. This criterion for optimality, which we call 
                                                               (with suitable preference functions associated with the tem•
     "Weakest Link Optimization" (WLO), is known to 
                                                               poral constraints). Unfortunately, as often occurs, this effi•
     have limited practical usefulness because solutions 
                                                               ciency has a price. Specifically, WLO offers an insufficiently 
     are compared only on the basis of their worst value; 
                                                               fine-grained method for comparing solutions, for it is based 
     thus, there is no requirement to improve the other 
                                                               on a single value, viz., the "weakest link." It is consequently 
     values. To address this limitation, we introduce a 
                                                               easy to conceive of examples where WLO would accept in•
     new algorithm that rc-applies WLO iteratively in 
                                                               tuitively inferior solutions because of this myopic focus. Al•
     a way that leads to improvement of all the values. 
                                                               though it is possible to consider more robust alternatives to a 
     We show the value of this strategy by proving that, 
                                                               WLO strategy for evaluating solutions, it is not clear whether 
     with suitable preference functions, the resulting so•
                                                               any of these methods would preserve the computational ben•
     lutions are Pareto Optimal. 
                                                               efits of WLO. This impasse is the starting point of the work 
                                                               described in this paper. 
1 Introduction                                                   We propose here to make WLO more robust by combin•
The notion of softness has been applied to either a constraint ing it with an iterative strategy for solving STPPs. The pro•
or planning goal, indicating that either can be satisfied to mat• cess involves repeatedly restricting temporal values for the 
ters of degree. It is not hard to find applicable real world   weakest links, resetting their preference values, and apply•
problems for such a notion. For example, in an earth orbit•    ing the WLO procedure to the reduced problem that results 
ing spacecraft, sensitive instruments like imagers have duty   from these changes. The intuition is a simple one, and we 
cycles, which impose restrictions on the amount of use of      motivate this technique with an example from a Mars Rover 
the instrument. A duty cycle is typically a complex function   planning domain. In Section 2, we summarize the soft con•
based on both the expected lifetime of the instrument, as well straint problem solver based on WLO introduced previously. 
as short term concerns such as the amount of heat it can be    We then illustrate in section 3 the deficiencies of WLO on 
exposed to while turned on. Duty cycles impose constraints     a simple example, which also reveals the intuition underly•
on the duration of the periods for which the instrument can    ing the proposed strategy for overcoming this deficiency. The 
be on, but it is natural to view this duration as flexible. For main contribution of this paper is discussed in sections 4 and 
example, this restriction might be waived to capture an im•    5, which formalize this strategy and prove that any solution 
portant event such as an active volcano. Thus, the flexibility generated by an application of this strategy is in the set of 
of the duty cycle "softens" the constraint that the instrument Pareto optimal solutions for the original problem. 
cannot be on beyond a certain duration. Reasoning about soft 
constraints for planning or scheduling is for the purpose of   2 Reasoning about preferences with soft 
finding a solution that satisfies the constraints to the highest   constraints 
degree possible. 
   For temporal reasoning problems, a simple method for        This section reviews the material first presented in [Khatib et 
evaluating the global temporal preference of a solution to     al., 2001]. There, a class of constrained optimization prob-


TEMPORAL REASONING                                                                                                  1289  lems, called Temporal Constraint Satisfaction Problems with 
 Preferences (TCSPPs), was first defined. A TCSPP is a gen•
 eralization of classical TCSPs which allows for a represen•
 tation of soft constraints. In classical TCSPs [Dechter et 
 al., 1991], a unary constraint over a variable X represent•
 ing an event restricts the domain of X, representing its pos•
 sible times of occurrence; the constraint is then shorthand for 
                                               Similarly, a 
 binary constraint over X and Y restricts the values of the dis•
 tance in which case the constraint can be expressed as 
                                                A uniform, 
binary representation of all the constraints results from intro•
ducing a variable for the beginning of time, and recasting 
unary constraints as binary constraints involving the distance 

   A soft temporal constraint is a pair where / is a set         As with classical (binary) CSPs, TCSPPs can be arranged 
of intervals of temporal values, and / is a func•              to form a network of nodes representing variables, and edges 

tion from (UI to a set A of values. Intuitively, / expresses   labeled with constraint information. Given a network of soft 
local preferences for temporal values based on the value it as• constraints, under certain restrictions on the properties of the 
signs from A. For example, the soft constraint represented     semiring, it can be shown that local consistency techniques 
by can be interpreted to mean that the                         can be applied in polynomial time to find an equivalent mini•
temporal assignments must be selected from either of the in•   mal network in which the constraints are as explicit as possi•
tervals in the set, and the function min assigns a greater pref• ble. The restrictions that suffice for this result apply to 
erence to smaller values. The cardinality of the set A, i.e., 
                                                                 1. the "shape" of the preference functions used in the soft 
the number of distinct preference values, reflects the ability 
                                                                    constraints; 
to discriminate among degrees of preference for temporal as•
signments. The class of TCSPPs in which each soft constraint     2. the multiplicative operator x (it should be idempotent); 
consists of a single interval is called Simple Temporal Prob•       and 
lems with Preferences (STPPs). 
                                                                 3. the ordering of the preference values (<s must be a total 
   Local preferences combine to form global preferences for 
                                                                    ordering). 
complete assignments. To formalize these operations, A can 
be structured in the form of a c-semiring [Bistarelli et al.,  The class of restricted preference functions that suffice to 
 1997]. A semiring is a tuple such that                        guarantee that local consistency can be meaningfully applied 
                                                               to soft constraint networks is called semi-convex. This class 
   • A is a set and 0,1 A: 
                                                               includes linear, convex, and also some step functions. All 
   • +, the additive operation, is commutative, associative    of these functions have the property that if one draws a hor•
     and 0 is its identity element (a+0= a);                   izontal line anywhere in the Cartesian plane of the graph of 
                                                               the function, the set of X such that f(X) is not below the 
   • x, the multiplicative operation, is associative, distributes 
                                                               line forms an interval. Semi-convexity is preserved under the 
     over +, 1 is its identity element and 0 is its absorbing 
                                                               operations performed by local consistency (intersection and 
     element (ax 0 = 0 ). 
                                                               composition). STPPs with semiring SWLO can easily be seen 
A c-semiring is a semiring in which + is idempotent (i.e.,     to satisfy these restrictions. 
a + a = a,a A), 1 is its absorbing element, and x is             The same restrictions that allow local consistency to be 
commutative. The semi-ring representation of operations on     applied are sufficient to prove that STPPs can be solved 
preference values is used as part of the proof of tractability tractably. Finding an optimal solution of the given STPP 
for restricted sub-classes of TCSPP, which occurs below.       with semi-convex preference functions reduces to a two-step 
  A solution to a TCSPP is a complete assignment to all        search process consisting of iteratively choosing a preference 
the variables that satisfies the temporal constraints. An arbi• value, "chopping" every preference function at that point, 
trary assignment of values to variables has a global preference then solving a STP defined by considering the interval of tem•
value, obtained by combining the local preference values us•   poral values whose preference values lies above the chop line 
ing the semiring operations. A c-semiring induces a partial    (semi-convexity ensures that there is a single interval above 
order relation over A to compare preference values of ar•      the chop point, hence that the problem is indeed an STP). 
bitrary assignments; a b can be read b is more preferred       Figure 1 illustrates the chopping process. It has been shown 
than a. Classical Temporal CSPs can be seen as a special case  that the "highest" chop point that results in a solvable STP in 
of TCSPP, with "soft" constraints that assign the "best" pref• fact produces an STP whose solutions are exactly the optimal 
erence value to each element in the domain, and the "worst"    solutions of the original STPP. Binary search can be used to 
value to everything else. The optimal solutions of a TCSPP     select candidate chop points, making the technique for solv•
are those solutions which have the best preference value in    ing the STPP tractable. The second step, solving the induced 
terms of the ordering                                          STP, can be performed by transforming the graph associated 


1290                                                                                            TEMPORAL REASONING                                                               tions that have the optimal value includes solutions in which 
                                                              the CPU duration for the second sensing event varies from 1 
                                                              to 3 time units. The fact that WLO is unable to discriminate 
                                                              between the global values of these solutions, despite the fact 
                                                              that the one with 1 time unit is obviously preferable to the 
                                                              others, is a clear limitation of WLO. 
                                                                 One way of formalizing this drawback of WLO is to ob•
                                                              serve that a WLO policy is not Pareto Optimal. To see this, 
                                                              we reformulate the set of preference functions of a STPP, 
                                                                          as criteria requiring simultaneous optimization, 
                                                              and let s = and s' = be two solutions 
                                                              to a given STPP. s' dominates s if for each j, 
                                                              and for some In a Pareto optimiza•
                                                              tion problem, the Pareto optimal set of solutions is the set 
                                                              of non-dominated solutions. Similarly, let the WLO-optimal 
                                                              set be the set of optimal solutions that result from applying 
                                                              the chopping technique for solving STPPs described above. 
                                                              Clearly, applying WLO to an STPP does not guarantee that 
                                                              the set of WLO-optimal solutions is a Pareto optimal set. In 
                                                              the rover planning problem, for example, suppose we con•
                                                              sider only solutions where the CPU duration for the first sens•
Figure 2: The STPP for the Rover Science Planning Problem     ing event is 3. Then the solution in which the CPU duration 
where T is any timepoint                                      for the second sensing event is 1 time unit dominates the so•
                                                              lution in which it is 2 time units, but both are WLO-optimal, 
                                                              since they have the same weakest link value.
with this STP into a distance graph, then solving two single-                                            1 
                                                                Assuming that Pareto-optimality is a desirable objective in 
source shortest path problems on the distance graph. (The 
                                                              optimization, a reasonable response to this deficiency is to 
solutions to these provide upper and lower time bounds for 
                                                              replace WLO with an alternative strategy for evaluating solu•
each event. If the problem has a solution, then for each event 
                                                              tion tuples. A natural, and more robust alternative evaluates 
it is possible to arbitrarily pick a time within its time bounds, solutions by summing the preference values, and ordering 
and find corresponding times for the other events such that the them based on preferences towards larger values. (This strat•
set of times for all the events satisfy the interval constraints.) egy would also ensure Pareto optimality, since every maxi•
For N nodes and E edges, the complexity of this phase is      mum sum solution is Pareto optimal.) This policy might be 
0{EN) (using the Bellman-Ford algorithm [Cormen et al,        dubbed "utilitarian." The main drawback to this alternative 
1990]).                                                       is that the ability to solve STPPs tractably is no longer ap•
                                                              parent. The reason is that the formalization of utilitarianism 
3 The problem with WLO                                        as a semiring forces the multiplicative operator (in this case, 
Formalized in this way, WLO offers what amounts to a coarse   sum), not to be idempotent (i.e., a + a # a), a condition 
method for comparing solutions, one based on the minimal      required in the proof that a local consistency approach is ap•
preference value over all the projections of the solutions to lo• plicable to the soft constraint reasoning problem. 
cal preference functions. Consequently, the advice given to a   Of course, it is still possible to apply a utilitarian frame-
temporal solver by WLO may be insufficient to find solutions  work for optimizing preferences, using either local search or 
that are intuitively more globally preferable. For example,   a complete search strategy such as branch and bound. Rather 
consider the following simple Mars rover planning problem,    than pursuing this direction of resolving the problems with 
illustrated in Figure 2. The rover has a sensing instrument and WLO, we select another approach, based on an algorithm that 
a CPU. There are two sensing events, of durations 3 time units interleaves flexible assignment with propagation using WLO. 
and 1 time unit (indicated in the figure by the pairs of nodes 
labeled ins", ins1e and ins28, ins2e respectively). There is a hard 4 An algorithm for Pareto Optimization 
temporal constraint that the CPU be on while the instrument 
                                                              The proposed solution is based on the intuition that if a con•
is on, as well as a soft constraint that the CPU should be on 
                                                              straint solver using WLO could iteratively "ignore" the weak•
as little as possible, to conserve power. This constraint is 
                                                              est link values (i.e. the values that contributed to the global 
expressed in the STPP as a function from temporal values in•
                                                              solution evaluation) then it could eventually recognize solu•
dicating the duration that the CPU is on, to preference values. 
                                                              tions that dominate others in the Pareto sense. For example, 
For simplicity, we assume that the preference function min 
                                                              in the Rover Planning problem illustrated earlier, if the weak•
on the CPU duration constraints is the negated identity func•
                                                              est link value of the global solution could be "ignored," the 
tion; i.e., min(t) = thus higher preference values, i.e. 
                                                              WLO solver could recognize that a solution with the CPU on 
shorter durations, are preferred. Because the CPU must be on 
at least as long as the sensing events, any globally preferred   'This phenomenon is often referred to in the literature as the 
solution using WLO has preference value -3. The set of solu•  "drowning effect.*' 


TEMPORAL REASONING                                                                                                 1291                                                                Figure 4: Relationships between Solution Spaces for STPPs 
                                                               that are WLO or Pareto Optimal 

                                                               optimally preferred, and fbest is the preference function such 
                                                               that for any input value v. Notice that the run 
 Figure 3: STPP solver WLO+ returns a solution in the Pareto   time of times the time it takes to execute 
 optimal set of solutions                                      Solve(V, Cp), which is a polynomial. 
                                                                 We now proceed to prove the main result, in two steps. In 
                                                               this section we assume the existence of weakest links at every 
 for 1 time unit during the second instrument event is to be 
                                                               iteration of the algorithm, and show that the subset of 
 preferred to one where the CPU is on for 2 or 3 time units. 
                                                               solutions of the input STPP returned by is contained 
   We formalize this intuition by a procedure wherein the 
                                                               in the intersection of WLO-optimal and Pareto-optimal so•
 original STPP is transformed by iteratively selecting what we 
                                                               lutions. In the next section we show that, given additional 
 shall refer to as a weakest link constraint, changing the con•
                                                               restrictions on the shape of the preference functions, such 
 straint in such a way that it can effectively be "ignored," and 
                                                               weakest links can be shown to always exist. 
 solving the transformed problem. A weakest link (soft) con•
                                                                 Given an STPP P, let be 
 straint for a WLO set of solutions is one in which the prefer•
                                                               the set of WLO-optimal (respectively, Pareto-Optimal) solu•
 ence value of its duration in all the WLO solutions is the same 
                                                               tions of P, and let be the set of solutions to P 
 as the chop level v of the optimal STP using WLO. For exam•
                                                               returned by Then the result can be stated as follows. 
ple, after applying WLO to the problem in Figure 2, the CPU 
duration constraint associated with the first sensing event will 
be a weakest link, since it now has a fixed preference value 
of -3. However, the CPU constraint for the second event will 
not be a weakest link since its preference value can still vary 
from -3 to -1.                                                 Proof: 
   We also define a weakest link constraint to be open if v is   First note that after an open weakest link is processed in 
not the "best" preference value (i.e., where 1 is the          steps (4) to (6), it will never again be an open weakest link 
designated "best" value among the values in the semi-ring).    (since its preference is reset to Since the theorem 
   Formalizing the process of "ignoring" weakest link values   assumes a weakest link constraint is found at each stage of 
is a two-step process of restricting the weakest links to their        the algorithm will terminate when the weakest link 
intervals of optimal temporal values, while eliminating their  constraint is not open, i.e., when all the soft constraints in Cp 
WLO restraining influence by resetting their preferences to a  have WLO preferences that equal the best (1) value. 
single, "best" value. Formally, the process consists of:         Now assume s Since the first iteration 
   • Squeezing the temporal domain to include all and only     reduces the set of solutions of (V, Cp) to and 
     those values which are optimally preferred; and           each subsequent iteration either leaves the set unchanged or 
                                                               reduces it further, it follows that .s Now sup•
   • Replacing the preference function by one that assigns 
                                                               pose s Then s must be dominated by a Pareto 
     the most preferred value (i.e. 1) to each element in the 
                                                               optimal solution .s'. Let c be a soft constraint in C for which 
     new domain. 
                                                                 is superior to s. Thus, the preference value of the dura•
The first step ensures that only the best temporal values are  tion assigned by s to c cannot be 1. It follows that at some 
part of any solution, and the second step allows WLO to be     point during the course of the algorithm, c must become an 
re-applied to eliminate Pareto-dominated solutions from the    open weakest link. Since s is in it survives 
remaining solution space.                                      until then, and so it must provide a value for c that is equal to 
   The algorithm WLO+ (Figure 3) returns a Simple Tem•         the chop level. However, since s' dominates s, s' must also 
poral Problem (STP) whose solutions are contained in the       survive until then. But this contradicts the assumption that c 
WLO-optimal, Parcto-optimal solutions to the original STPP,    is a weakest link constraint, since s' has a value greater than 
P. Where C is a set of soft constraints, the STPP              the WLO chop level. Hence, s is in and so in 
is solved (step 3) using the chopping approach described ear•
lier. In step 5, we denote the soft constraint that results from Next suppose the original STPP P has at least one solu•
the two-step process described above as                        tion. To see that is nonempty, observe that the 
where is the interval of temporal values that are              modifications in steps (4) to (6), while stripping out solutions 


1292                                                                                           TEMPORAL REASONING                                                                STP P is defined in terms of an assignment to each variable, it 
                                                               also determines a value for each edge e, given by = 
                                                                             where X and Y are the start and end variables 
                                                               of r, respectively. We will use this notation in what follows. 
                                                                 Now consider any consistent STP P. The minimal net-
            Figure 5: A unique WLO+ Solution.                  work [Dechter et al., 1991]corresponding to P is another STP 
                                                               P'. The constraints between any two points X and Y in P' are 
that are not WLO optimal with respect to do retain             formed by intersecting the constraints induced by all possible 
 all the WLO optimal solutions. Clearly, if there is any so•   paths between X and Y in P. 
 lution, there is a WLO optimal one. Thus, if the in In the following, a preference function / is said to be con-
 any iteration has a solution, the in the next iteration       vex if is a convex set. The claim of the 
 will also have a solution. Since we are assuming the first    existence of weakest links can be stated as follows: 
         (— (V, C)) has a solution, it follows by induction 
                                                               Theorem 2 Let P be an STPP with continuous domains and 
that is nonempty.  
                                                               convex preference functions. Then there will he at least one 
   The theorem shows that it is possible to maintain the 
                                                               weakest link constraint for the WLO optimal set of solutions. 
tractability of WLO-based optimization while overcoming 
some of the restrictions it imposes. In particular, it is pos• Proof: 
sible to improve the quality of the flexible solutions gener•    Consider the (minimal) STP that corresponds to the 
ated within an STPP framework from being WLO optimal to        optimal chopping level for P (as described in the WLO algo•
being Pareto optimal.                                          rithm). Suppose there is no weakest link constraint. Then for 
   Although the algorithm determines a nonempty set of so•     each edge constraint c there is a solution to such that 
 lutions that are both WLO optimal and Pareto optimal, the set                  where / is the preference function for the 

might not include all such solutions. Consider the example     edge.2 
in figure 5. Assume the preference function for all soft con•    Let s be the average of all the sc solutions, i.e. 
straints is given by /(t) = t, i.e., longer durations are pre•
ferred (signified by the max label on the edges). The 
algorithm will retain a single solution where BC and CD are 
both 5. However, the solution where BC = 2 and CD = 8, 
which is excluded, is also both Pareto optimal and WLO op•
timal. (Note that AB, with a fixed value of 1, is the weakest 
link.) 
   Many optimization schemes seek what is known as utili•
tarian optimality, where the objective is to maximize the sum 
of the local preferences. However, the WLO+ solutions are 
not necessarily utilitarian optimal with respect to all solutions 
or even the WLO solutions. For example, in figure 5, if the 
preference function is f(t) — a utilitarian optimal WLO 
solution would be given by BC — 1 and CD = 9, but 
will still return the solution where BC and CD are both 5. 
   We can summarize the position taken in this paper by say•
ing that utilitarian strategies, while attractive in many ways, 
are apparently intractable. The approach provides 
some of the same benefit at lower cost. For example, non-
competing constraints are fully optimized by For 
competing constraints, tends to divide the preferences 
as equally as possible. In some applications, this might be 
more desirable than a utilitarian allocation.                    The operations in the WLO+ algorithm preserve the con•
                                                               vexity property of the preference functions. Each stage of 
5 Existence of Weakest Links                                          repeats a WLO calculation. Thus, theorem 2 implies 
In this section we show that under suitable conditions, a      Corollary 2.1 Suppose P is an STPP with continuous do-
weakest link constraint always exists. This involves a         mains and convex preference functions. Then a weakest link 
stronger requirement than for WLO: the preference functions    is found at each iteration of  
must be convex, not merely semi-convex. This would include 
                                                               An example of why the existence result does not apply more 
linear functions, cycloids, and upward-pointing parabolas, for 
                                                               generally to semi-convex functions is found in figure 6. The 
example, but not Gaussian curves, or step functions. (Later 
on, we will see this requirement can be relaxed somewhat so 
                                                                  2To avoid excessive subscripting, we suppress the implied e sub•
that Gaussians can be permitted.)                              script on / here and in what follows. In all cases, the applicable 
   Before proceeding, we note that while a solution .s of an   preference function will be clear from the context. 


TEMPORAL REASONING                                                                                                  1293 