                Switching Hypothesized Measurements: A Dynamic Model 
                  with Applications to Occlusion Adaptive Joint Tracking 

            Yang Wang Tele Tan                                           Kia-Fock Loe 
     Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore          Dept. Computer Science, National Univ. Singapore 
          {ywang, telctan}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg                         loekf@comp.nus.edu.sg 

                     Abstract                          Fortmann, 1988] and multiple hypothesis tracking (MHT) 
                                                       [Cox and Hingorani, 1996] techniques, which represent 
    This paper proposes a dynamic model supporting 
                                                       multimodal distributions by constructing data association 
    multimodal state space probability distributions 
                                                       hypotheses, can be cast in the framework of SLDS as well. 
    and presents the application of the model in dealing 
                                                       Moreover, Monte Carlo methods such as the Condensation 
    with visual occlusions when tracking multiple 
                                                       algorithm [Isard and Blake, 1996] support multimodal 
    objects jointly. For a set of hypotheses, multiple 
                                                       probability densities with sample based representation. By 
    measurements are acquired at each time instant. 
                                                       retaining only the peaks of the probability density, relatively 
    The model switches among a set of hypothesized 
                                                       fewer samples are required in the work of Cham and Rehg 
    measurements during the propagation. Two 
                                                       [1999]. A switching model framework of the Condensation 
    computationally efficient filtering algorithms are 
                                                       algorithm is also proposed by Isard and Blake [1998]. 
    derived for online joint tracking. Both the 
                                                         On the other hand, the measurement process is another 
    occlusion relationship and state of the objects are 
                                                       essential issue to deal with the potential variability. 
    recursively estimated from the history of 
                                                       Measurements are not readily available from image 
    measurement data. The switching hypothesized 
                                                       sequences in visual tracking. Even an accurate tracking 
    measurements (SHM) model is generally 
                                                       model may have a poor performance if the measurements 
    applicable to describe various dynamic processes 
                                                       are too noisy. Parametric models can be used to characterize 
    with multiple alternative measurement methods. 
                                                       appearance changes of target regions [Hager and 
                                                       Belhumeur, 1998]. In the work of Galvin et al. [1999], two 
1 Introduction                                         virtual snakes, a background and a foreground snake for 
Visual tracking is important in such application areas as each object, are generated to resolve the occlusion when two 
human-computer interaction, surveillance, and visual   objects intersect. Rasmussen and Hager [2001] describe a 
reconstruction. Given a sequence of images containing the joint measurement process for tracking multiple objects 
objects that are represented with a parametric motion model, enumerating all possible occlusion relationships. The 
parameters of the motion model are required to be estimated measurement with respect to the most possible occlusion 
in successive frames. Tracking could be difficult due to the relationship is determined from the current frame. 
potential variability such as partial or full occlusions of Moreover, layered approach [Wang and Adelson, 1994; 
objects, appearance changes caused by the variation of Ayer and Sawhney, 1995; Jojic and Frey, 2001; Tao et al., 
object poses or illumination conditions, as well as    2002] is an efficient way to represent multiple moving 
distractions from background clutter.                  objects. A moving object is characterized by a coherent 
  One principle challenge for visual tracking is to develop motion model over its support region. 
an accurate and effective model representation. The      In this paper, the idea of switching hypothesized 
variability in visual environments usually results in a measurements (SHM), which results in a SHM model 
multimodal state space probability distribution. The Kalman supporting multimodal distributions, is proposed to handle 
filter [Brown, 1983; Rohr, 1994], a classical choice   the potential variability in visual tracking. The approach 
employed in tracking work, is restricted to representing acquires a set of hypothesized measurements for different 
unimodal probability distributions. Switching linear   occlusion hypotheses at each time instant. Comparing with 
dynamic systems (SLDS) [Pavlovic and Rehg, 2000] and   the above mentioned state space models, the SHM approach 
their equivalents [Shumway and Stoffer, 1991; Kim, 1994] switches among a set of hypothesized measurements rather 
have been used to describe dynamic processes. Intuitively, a than switches among a set of models. Two computationally 
complex dynamic system is represented with a set of linear efficient filtering algorithms are derived for jointly tracking 
models controlled by a switching variable. Joint       multiple objects. Both the occlusion relationship and state of 
probabilistic data association (JPDA) [Bar-Shalom and  the objects are estimated from the history of measurements. 


1326                                                                                               VISION 2 Model                                                                                                            (1) 
2.1 Hypothesized Measurement                                   with The hidden state is denoted as 
For a hidden state sequence the objective of 
online tracking is to recursively estimate from the set of                          with being the state 
all available measurements up to time For a                    for the mth object at time k. For a linear process with 
certain complex system, the estimation may be influenced       Gaussian noise, the hidden state transition model becomes 

by a mode or switching state sequence {sk} as well, with                                                           (2a) 
                          Specifically, the mode switching                                                         (2b) 
originates from the measurement process in our work. The       where is the state transition matrix, n is a 
notion of a measurement is extended to a set of L              zero-mean Gaussian noise with covariance matrix Q, and 
hypothesized measurements at each                                         is a Gaussian density with argument z, mean m, 
time instant. Each is called a hypothesized                    and covariance z. 
measurement since it is obtained by assuming that the 
switching state is at time  
   To illustrate the idea of hypothesized measurement, 
consider the measurement process for jointly tracking two 
objects, e.g. a rectangle and a circle, in an image sequence 
      To deal with occlusions between the two objects when 

measuring the kih frame gK, the switching state sk is 
introduced to describe the depth ordering at time 

2}, where sk equals 1 if the rectangle is in front of the circle, 
and 2 if the circle is in front of the rectangle. The 
hypothesized measurement is denoted as 
               where is the measurement for the 

rectangle, and is the measurement for the circle under 

theyth hypothesis.                                               Figure 1: Bayesian network representation of the SHM model 
   Under the hypothesis of =1, i.e. the circle is occluded 
by the rectangle at time the rectangle should be measured         Given the switching state at time the corresponding 

first to acquire Then the observed rectangle is masked         hypothesized measurement yksi could be considered as a 
in the image. The occluded area of the circle is ignored and   proper measurement centering on the hidden state, while 
only the visible region is matched normally to get             every other for is an improper measurement 
                                                               generated under a wrong assumption. The improper 
Similarly, under the hypothesis of = 2, i.e. the rectangle is 
                                                               measurement should be weakly influenced by the hidden 
occluded by the circle, the circle should be matched first to 
                                                               state and have a large variance. To simplify the 
get then the masked image is used to measure                   computation, we assume a normal distribution for a proper 
Thus, the occlusion will not affect the measurement result. It measurement and a uniform distribution for an improper 
is obvious that both hypothesized measurements support the     measurement. The measurement model is simplified as 
condition of nonocclusion since different depth orderings of 
nonoverlapping objects are visually equivalent. The                                                                (3a) 
probabilities of the hypotheses should be equal in the case 
of nonocclusion. 
                                                                                                                   (3b) 
   Unfortunately, the occlusion relationship is not given 
before hand. The objective of our SHM approach is to 
                                                               where is a zero-mean Gaussian noise with covariance 
estimate both the switching state and the hidden state from 
                                                               matrix and w is a uniformly distributed noise, whose 
the history of the hypothesized measurements. 
                                                               density is a small positive constant. For the measurement of 
2.2 Linear SHM Model for Joint Tracking                        M objects, is denoted as and  
For joint tracking of objects in the scene, the                is written as Given the current state, 
switching state s  represents the occlusion relationship at 
                 k                                             the conditional independence among the hypothesized 
time ..., and L - We assume the 
                                                               measurements is assumed to make the model 
switching state follows a first order Markov chain with the    computationally efficient. 
following transition probability, 


VISION                                                                                                              1327                                                     (4)                                                           (6) 
The SHM model can be represented by a dynamic Bayesian        In principle, the filtering process has three stages: 
network shown in figure 1.                                    prediction, update, and collapsing [Murphy, 1998]. From 
                                                              (1), (2), (4) and (6), the approximate inference algorithm 
3 Method                                                      can be derived in a similar way as that in a Gaussian sum 
3.1 Measurement                                               filter [Anderson and Moore, 1979]. 
Multiple, occluding objects are modeled using layer 
representation. Layers are indexed by with 
layer 1 being the layer that is closest to the camera and layer 
   being behind layer There is one object in 
each layer. The number of all occlusion relationship 
hypotheses (or depth ordering permutations) is Each 
permutation is tagged with a index  
   Under each permutation hypothesis, the object in the 

front layer 1 should be measured first from the image gk at 
time Then the object in layer 2 can be matched from the 
masked image, and so on. At last, the object in layer can 
be measured. Occluded points aie not matched when 
measuring the objects. Measurement results of 
nonoverlapping objects should be equivalent for different 

depth ordering permutations. Given the reference image gr 
        the measurement is based on minimizing the mean 
of squared intensity differences between the current image 
and the reference region. Under theyth hypothesis, is 

the hypothesized measurement of the Mth object, and is 
the corresponding squared difference mean at time k. The 
vector is written as The 
covariance matrix is obtained by assuming that the 
components of the measurement noise are uncorrelated to 
each other, and the variances is proportional to the 
corresponding squared difference mean. 

3.2 SHM Filter 
From a Bayesian perspective, the online tracking problem is 
to recursively calculate the posterior state space distribution. 
Given the measurement data up to time k, the probability 
density function (pdf) of the state is expressed as 


                                                    (5) 
where is denoted as with and From (7) it can be seen that the computation of the SHM 
                                                              filter is slightly more complex than that of multiple Kalman 
the conditional density is modeled as a                       filters or Gaussian sum filters. 
normal distribution under each switching 
state hypothesis. Thus the pdf is a mixture of L              3.3 Fast SHM Filter 
Gaussians.                                                    When occlusion is the main factor in the potential variability 
  At time the set of hypothesized measurements                of joint tracking, we can assume that the measurement noise 
becomes available, and it is used to update                   under the true occlusion hypothesis is small. When the noise 
                                  via Bayes' rule.            becomes zero, the measurement model can be simplified as 


1328                                                                                                             VISION                                                                                                                   (15a) 
                                                    (9) 
                                                                                                                  (15b) 
where is the Dirac delta function. Consider the 
minimized mean of squared differences as a part of the           The result can then be plugged into a Kalman 
hypothesized measurement, so that the definition of           filter to achieve improved performance. Such a SHM-
measurement can be generalized as                             Kalman filter keeps the multimodality of the SHM model 
                                                    (10)      and has attractive computation requirement. In addition, the 
Assume that is independent on and and the                     collapsing stage is not necessary in the fast SHM filter. 
posterior density of the squared difference mean is of 
 exponential distribution for each object (More accurate      4 Implementation 
expression could be derived using the distribution.) under    In practice, we use the second order (constant velocity) 
the true hypothesis, the pdf of is factorized as              model. The hidden state transition function is 
                                                    (11a) 
                                                                                                                  (16) 

                                                    (l1b)     where zk is the tracked entity (e.g. position and orientation). 
                                                              The hidden state and state transition matrix can be 
                                                              correspondingly defined. The switching state transition 
                                                              probability is set as 

                                                                                                                  (17) 

                                                              where is a small positive value (0.1 in this paper) so that 
                                                    (12)      two successive switching states are more likely to be of the 

                                                              same label. At the beginning, the reference image gr is set as 
                                                              the initial image go- When there is a high confidence in 
                                                              nonocclusion, the reference image can be adaptively 
                                                              updated. The objects are assumed to be separated from each 
                                                              other in The initial should be equal for 

                                                              different j because of nonocclusion.  

                                                              The initial mean is set as a zero vector. The initial 
                                                              covariance matrix is set as diagonal with small variances 
                                                              since the initialization is assumed to be accurate. When an 
                                                              object is totally occluded by the other objects, no points of 
                                                              the target region will be matched. The estimation is based 
                                                              on the result of time k using the state transition function 
                                                              when no visible region of the object is expected at time £+1. 


VISION                                                                                                             1329 5 Results and Discussion                                      should be totally 4! = 24 hypotheses if we directly apply the 
                                                               SHM filter in section 3.2. To reduce the computation, two 
Test results of two video sequences are shown in our 
                                                              reasonable assumptions are made to prune less plausible 
experiments. The state is the position and orientation, and 
                                                              hypotheses. Firstly, one's legs can not simultaneously 
the second order model is employed. Fach measurement is a 
                                                              occlude and be occluded by the other's legs. Secondly, the 
translation and rotation. 
                                                              occlusion relationship between the man and woman can be 
   Figure 2 shows the tracking of two hands of a person as 
                                                              determined from their bodies. Thus the whole tracking 
they cross several times in an image sequence. Figure 2a 
                                                              procedure is divided into three trackers. The first one tracks 
shows the three frames of the sequence. Appearance 
                                                              the two bodies of the walkers. According to the detected 
variation of the hands due to pose changes can be seen. 
                                                              occlusion relationship, the two shanks of the person in the 
Figure 2b and 2c demonstrate the tracking efficacy of the 
                                                              front are then tracked. At last, the shanks of the other person 
fast SHM filter versus the Kalman filter. The fast SHM filter 
                                                              are tracked in the masked image. Figure 3a shows the results 
successfully tracks both hands under different occlusion 
                                                              for the four frames of the sequence (circles are marked on 
relationships. In figure 2b, one hand is drawn in black 
                                                              the man's body and shanks, and rectangles are marked on 
contour when the detected depth order indicates that it is in 
                                                              the woman). Figure 3b shows the posterior distributions for 
front of the other hand. The Kalman filter has a similar 
                                                              the horizontal position of the occluded body in figure 3a. 1-
performance when occlusions are not severe, but poor under 
                                                              3a.3. When the two bodies are separated, the density is 
heavy occlusions. In figure 2c.3, the distraction from 
                                                              unimodal and of a small variance. The density variance 
background clutter causes the Kalman tracker to fail. The 
                                                              increases when occlusions occur. It becomes multimodal 
normalized posterior distributions for the vertical position of 
                                                              under heavy occlusions. Figure 3c shows the probabilities of 
the left hand in figure 2a.2 and 2a.3 are shown in figure 2d.l 
                                                              the woman's body being in the front. The probabilities for 
and 2d.2. When the occlusion is not severe, measurements 
                                                              the four frames in figure 3a are circled. 
under the two hypotheses are the same, and the distribution 
                                                                 Under realistic environments, it is understandable that 
is unimodal. Under heavy occlusions, the distribution 
                                                              comparing with the other hypothesized measurements, the 
becomes multimodal since the two hypothesized 
                                                              measurement under the true occlusion hypothesis usually 
measurements tend to be different. The measurement under 
                                                              shows more regularity and has smaller variances (or squared 
true hypothesis matches the hand correctly, while the 
                                                              difference means). Thus, the true information (the switching 
measurement under false hypothesis is distracted by 
                                                              state and the hidden state) could be enhanced through the 
background clutter. Figure 2e shows the probabilities of the 
                                                              propagation. In addition, the acquirement of multiple 
first occlusion hypothesis (the left hand being in the front) 
                                                              measurements helps decrease the information loss (e.g. 
over the first 300 frames. The probabilities for the three 
                                                              caused by background clutter) during the measurement 
frames in figure 2a are circled. The probabilities of the two 
                                                              process. 
hypotheses are equal in the nonoverlapping cases, while the 
probability of the true hypothesis becomes dominant under 
occlusions.                                                   6 Conclusion 
   Figure 3 shows the results of jointly tracking the four    This paper proposes a SHM model for state space 
shanks of a man and a woman as they cross. The man's right    representation of dynamic systems and derives two efficient 
shank has been totally occluded in the sequence. There        filtering algorithms. Our joint tracking approach explicitly 


1330                                                                                                             VISION 