        Active Probing Strategies for Problem Diagnosis in Distributed Systems 

                            Mark Brodie, Irina Rish, Sheng Ma, Natalia Odintsova 
                 IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 19 Skyline Drive, Hawthorne, NY 10532 
                        mbmdie, rish, shengma@us.ibm.com, nodintsova@hotmail.com 


                        Abstract 
                                                                            Active Probing System 
     We address the task of problem determination in 
     a distributed system using probes, or test transac•
     tions, which gather information about system com•
     ponents. Effective probing requires minimizing 
     the cost of probing while maximizing the diag•
     nostic accuracy of the probe set. We show that 
     pre-planning an optimal probe set is NP-hard and 
     present polynomial-time approximation algorithms 
     that perform well. We then implement an active 
     probing strategy which selects probes dynamically 
     and show that it yields a significant reduction in 
     probe set size in both simulation and a real system 
     environment.                                                           Figure 1: Active Probing System. 

 1 Introduction 
                                                               probe-selection and the idea of active probing were not con•
Accurate diagnosis in a complex, multi-component system        sidered there. 
by making inferences based on the results of various tests 
and measurements is a common practical problem. Devel•
oping cost-etfective techniques for diagnosis in such systems  2 Pre-Pianned Probing 
requires that high accuracy be achieved with a small number 
of tests. In this work we present a generic approach to this   In pre-planned probing, given an initial set of probes, we want 
problem and apply it specifically to the area of distributed   to compute the smallest subset of probes such that each sys•
systems management.                                            tem state will produce a different set of probe outcomes, al•
   The key component of our approach is an "active" mea•       lowing the state to be uniquely determined. 
surement approach, called probing. A probe is a test transac•
tion whose outcome depends on some of the system's com•        Proposition 1 Probe-set selection is NP-hard. 
ponents. Diagnosis is performed by appropriately selecting 
the probes and analyzing the results. For distributed systems, Proof: The proof is via a reduction from 3-Dimensional 
a probe is a program that executes on a particular machine     Matching (defined in [Garey and Johnson, 1979]). Details 
(called a probe station) by sending a command or transaction   can be found in [Brodie et al, 2003]. 
to a server or network element and measuring the response.       We implemented two approximation algorithms for pre-
The ping program is probably the most popular probing tool     planned probing - greedy (quadratic) search and subtractive 
that can be used to detect network availability. Other probing (linear) search. Greedy search starts with the empty set and 
tools, such as IBM's EPP technology, provide more sophisti•    adds at each step the "best" of the remaining probes - the 
cated, application-level probes. For example, probes can be    probe which maximizes the information gained about the sys•
sent in the form of test e-mail messages, web-access requests, tem state. Computational complexity is quadratic in the size 
and so on.                                                     of the initial probe set. Subtractive search starts with the com•
   Previous work studied the problem of probe-selection        plete set of available probes, considers each one in turn, and 
[Brodie et al, 2001], [Ozmutlu et al, 2002] and efficient di•  discards it if it is not needed. Computational complexity is 
agnosis from probe outcomes using approximate inference in     linear in the size of the initial probe set. Neither algorithm is 
Bayesian networks [Rish et al, 2002], but the NP-hardness of   optimal in general - empirical results are provided below. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                        1337      Figure 2: Algorithm for Diagnosis using Active Probing. 

 3 Active Probing 

 Active probing, allows the selection of later probes to depend 
 on the results of earlier probes. An active probing system is              (b) Large Networks (simulations) 
 outlined in Figure 1. Probe-stations issue probes which tra•
 verse different parts of the network. The results of the probes Figure 3: Active versus pre-planned probing results for ran•
 are analyzed to infer what problems might be occurring. If    domly generated networks. 
 additional information is needed in order to locate the prob•
 lem, the "most-informative" probe, which provides the largest 
 information gain about the true state of the system, is com•
 puted and sent. When additional probe results are received 
 further inferences are made, and the process repeats until the 
 fault is localized. The algorithm is described in Figure 2. 
   Active probing allows fewer probes to be used than if the 
 entire probe set has to be pre-planned, though more complex 
 inferential machinery is needed to support it. 

4 Results                                                      Figure 4: Active probing averages 7.5 probes in a real appli•
                                                               cation where pre-planned probing requires 24 probes. 
 Simulation results, using randomly generated networks, are 
shown in Figure 3a (small networks) and Figure 3b (large net•
works, where finding the true minimum is impractical). The     References 
approximation algorithms for finding the smallest probe set    [Brodie te al., 2001] M. Brodie, I. Rish, and S. Ma. Optimizing 
perform well and are close to the true minimum set found by      probe selection for fault localization. In Distributed Systems Op•
exhaustive search. It is also clear that active probing consid•  eration and Management, 2001. 
erably reduces the size of the probe set when compared with    [Brodie et al, 2003] M Brodie, I. Rish, Sheng. Ma, and 
pre-planned, or "passive", probing.                              N. Odintsova. Strategies for Problem Determination Using 
   In Figure 4, we report the results on a real network. This    Probing. Technical report, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 
                                                                 2003. 
network, supporting e-business applications, includes many 
servers and routers, and its performance and availability de•  [Garey and Johnson, 1979] M.R. Garey and D.S. Johnson. Com•
pend on a number of software components. A set of 29 probes      puters and Intractability; A Guide to the Theory of NP-
                                                                 completeness. W.H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco, 1979. 
was manually selected by an expert. Exhaustive search shows 
that the minimum number of probes is actually only 24          [Ozmutlu et al., 2002] H.C. Ozmutlu, N. Gautam, and R. Barton. 
probes, a saving of 17%. Greedy search returned 24 probes,       Zone recovery methodology for probe-subset selection in end-to-
while subtractive search found 25 probes. For active probing,    end network monitoring. In Network Operations and Manage•
                                                                 ment Symposium, pages 451-464, 2002. 
Figure 3c shows the number of probes needed for localiza•
tion for each of the different single faults. The number of    [Rish et al., 2002] I. Rish, M. Brodie, and S. Ma. Accuracy vs. Ef•
probes needed never exceeds 16 probes and averaged only          ficiency Trade-offs in Probabilistic Diagnosis. In Proceedings of 
7.5 probes, a large improvement over the 24 probes used by       the The Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
                                                                 (AAAI-2002), Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 2002. 
pre-planned probing. 


1338                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS 