                                       Coverage-Optimized Retrieval 

                                                   David McSherry 
                                School of Computing and Information Engineering 
                          University of Ulster, Coleraine BT52 ISA, Northern Ireland 
                                             dmg.mcsherry@ulster.ac.uk 


                        Abstract                               where for each is a numeric weight representing 
                                                               the importance of a and is a measure of the 
     We present a generalization of similarity-based 
                                                               similarity of the value of in to the 
     retrieval in recommender systems which ensures 
                                                               preferred value of a. Apart from its similarity to the target 
     that for any case that is acceptable to the user, the 
                                                               query, another factor likely to influence the acceptability of 
     retrieval set contains a case that is at least as good 
                                                               a given case is the compromises it involves, or preferences 
     in an objective sense and so also likely to be 
                                                               of the user that it fails to satisfy [Burkhard, 1998]. Often in 
     acceptable. Our approach recognizes that similarity 
                                                               e-commerce domains, one can identify attributes whose 
     to the target query is only one of several possible 
                                                               values most users would prefer to maximize or minimize 
     criteria according to which a given case might be 
                                                               [Wilke et al., 1998]. In CORE, we assume that the value 
     considered at least as good as another. 
                                                               specified by the user is a preferred minimum in the case of a 
1 Introduction                                                 more-is-better attribute or a preferred maximum in the case 
                                                               of a less-is-better attribute. 
An advantage of case-based reasoning (CBR) in product 
recommendation is that if none of the available products       Definition 1 For any query Q and case C we define: 
exactly matches the user's query, she can be shown the 
products that are most similar to her query [Wilke et al., 
 1998]. However, a known limitation of similarity-based 
retrieval is that the most similar case may not be the one that 
is most acceptable to the user [Burkhard, 1998; Smyth and 
McClave, 2001]. The strategy of retrieving the k most 
similar cases only partially compensates for this limitation, 
                                                                   So is the set of attributes with respect to which 
as the number of cases that can be presented to the user is 
                                                               C fails to satisfy the user's preferences. Below we define 
necessarily restricted in practice. So the existence of an 
                                                               four dominance criteria according to which a given case C\ 
acceptable case does not guarantee that it will be retrieved. 
                                                               might be considered at least as good as another case C : 
   We present a new approach to retrieval called coverage-                                                         2
optimized retrieval (CORE) which ensures that for any case 
that is acceptable to the user, the retrieval set contains a case 
that is at least as good in an objective sense and so also 
likely to be acceptable. Similarity to the target query is only 
one of several possible criteria according to which a given 
case might be considered at least as good as another in the       For example, if for all  

approach.                                                      we say that C\ dominates C2 with respect to D3. We say that 

                                                               a given case C2 is covered by a retrieval set RS if C2 RS or 

2 The CORE Retrieval Set                                       there exists C\ RS such that C\ dominates C2. The 
                                                               importance of coverage in this sense is that if an acceptable 
The similarity of a given case C to a target query over a 
                                                               case that is not retrieved is covered by a retrieved case, then 
subset of the case attributes A is typically defined as: 
                                                               the retrieved case is also likely be acceptable. Another basic 
                                                               premise in our approach is that the likelihood of the 
                                                               retrieved case also being acceptable increases with the 
                                                               strength of the dominance criterion with respect to which it 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                        1349  dominates the acceptable case. For example, dominance of      Travel case library (www.ai-cbr.org). As might be expected, 
 the acceptable case with respect to DO (the usual similarity  there is a trade-off between the strength of the dominance 
 criterion) may not be enough to ensure that the retrieved     criterion in terms of which coverage is defined and the size 
 case is also acceptable. However, if it dominates the         of the retrieval set required to provide full coverage of the 
 acceptable case with respect to D3, then there is no attribute case library. Though unable to compete with CORE-1 in 
 with respect to which it is less similar to the user's query. terms of coverage efficiency, CORE-2 has an average 
    In Ar-NN, all cases are dominated by the most similar      retrieval-set size of only 7.5 cases. 
 case with respect to DO; so even 1-NN provides full 
 coverage of the case library with respect to DO, the weakest 
 of our dominance criteria. The aim in CORE is to construct 
 a retrieval set that provides full coverage of the case library 
 with respect to any of the dominance criteria we have 
 identified. In Figure 1, Q is the target query and Candidates 
 is a list of candidate cases for addition to the retrieval set 
 RS. We assume that the candidate cases, initially all cases in 
 the case library, are sorted in order of non-increasing 

 similarity, and that if C\, C2 are equally similar cases such 

 that C\ dominates C2 but C2 does not dominate C1 then C\ 

 is listed before C2 in Candidates. 


                                                                 Figure 2. Size of the CORE retrieval set for full-length queries 
                                                                                 on the Travel case library. 

                                                               3 Conclusions 
                                                               Coverage-optimized retrieval (CORE) is a generalization of 
                                                               similarity-based retrieval which ensures that for any case 
                                                               that is acceptable to the user, the retrieval set contains a case 
                                                               that is at least as good according to a given dominance 
                                                               criterion. Our empirical results show that the size of the 
                                                               retrieval set required to provided full coverage of the case 
                                                               library in this sense increases with the strength of the 
                                                               dominance criterion in terms of which coverage is defined. 
                                                               However, CORE-2 offers a good compromise between 
                                                               strength of dominance and retrieval-set size, with an average 
   Figure 1. Generic algorithm for coverage-optimized retrieval. of only 7.5 cases required to provide full coverage for full-
                                                               length queries on a case library containing over 1,000 cases. 
    We refer to the versions of CORE based on Dl, D2 and 
 D3 as CORE-1, CORE-2 and CORE-3 respectively. It is           References 
 worth noting that with DO as the dominance criterion,         [Burkhard, 1998] H.-D. Burkhard. Extending some concepts 
 CORE is equivalent to 1-NN, and so CORE is in fact a             of CBR - foundations of case retrieval nets. In M. Lenz, 
 generalization of similarity-based retrieval.                    B. Bartsch-Sporl, H.-D. Burkhard and S. Wess (eds.), 
 Theorem 1 The CORE retrieval set provides full coverage          Case-Based Reasoning Technology, pages 17-50. Berlin-
 of the case library and no smaller retrieval set can provide     Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 1998. 
full coverage of the case library.                             [Smyth and McClave, 2001] B. Smyth and P. McClave. 
                                                                  Similarity vs. diversity. In Proceedings of the Fourth 
    While it can easily be shown that the maximum possible 
                                                                  International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning, 
 sizes of the CORE-1 and CORE-2 retrieval sets for a given 
                                                                  pages 347-361, Vancouver, Canada, 2001. Springer-
 query are and respectively, the maximum                          Verlag. 
 possible size of the CORE-3 retrieval set is not as easily 
                                                               [Wilke et al.t 1998] W. Wilke, M. Lenz and S. Wess. 
 determined. In practice, CORE-1 and CORE-2 retrieval sets 
                                                                  Intelligent sales support with CBR. In M. Lenz, B. 
 are usually much smaller than their maximum possible 
                                                                  Bartsch-SpSrl, H.-D. Burkhard and S. Wess (eds.), Case-
 sizes. Figure 2 shows the maximum, average, and minimum 
                                                                  Based Reasoning Technology, pages 91-113. Berlin-
 sizes of CORE retrieval sets for full-length queries on the 
                                                                  Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 1998. 


 1350                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS 