                                          Grid-based SensorDCSP* 


         R.Bejar1, C.Domshlak2, C.Fernandez1, C. Gomes2, B. Selman2 and M. Vails3 

        1 Dept. d'Informatica 2Dept. of Computer Science 3Dept. de Matematica 
          Universitat de Lleida Cornell University Universitat de Lleida 
          Jaume II, 69. Lleida, Spain Ithaca, NY 14853, USA Jaume II, 69. Lleida, Spain 


                        Abstract                               of SensorDCSP, as well as its empirical evaluation, consid•
                                                               ering the performance and scalability of alternative DisCSP 
     We introduce Grid-based SensorDCSP, a geometri•           algorithms on various scenarios in a truly networked environ•
     cally structured benchmark problem for the study          ment. 
     of distributed CSP algorithms. This domain pro•
                                                                 In this work we extend SensorDCSP by providing it with 
     vides realistic structure of the communication and 
                                                               an underlying spatial structure. In SensorDCSP, the con•
     tracking constraints. We formally define this prob•
                                                               straints of communication between sensors and visibility of 
     lem, and perform its worst-case complexity analy•
                                                               mobiles are independent of their physical location. In con•
     sis. Likewise, we provide an average case empirical 
                                                               trast to SensorDCSP, the spatial limitations for both com•
     analysis of the AWC algorithm, studying its behav•
                                                               munication between sensors and visibility of the mobiles are 
     ior on tractable and intractable sub-classes of our 
                                                               captured by a geometrical structure in our new benchmark, 
     problem. 
                                                               providing a more realistic framework. We refer to our ge•
                                                               ometrically enriched benchmark as Grid-based SensorDCSP 
1 Introduction                                                 or just GSensorDCSP. We provide both an analytical com•
                                                               plexity analysis of GSensorDCSP and an empirical study of a 
In recent years we have seen an increasing interest in Dis•    characteristic DisCSP algorithm on various instances of this 
tributed Constraint Satisfaction Problem (DisCSP) formula•     problem. 
tions to model combinatorial problems arising in multi-agent 
environments [Yokoo, 2001 J. Recently, an interesting bench•
mark for DisCSP algorithms, called SensorDCSP, has been        2 GSensorDCSP: Definition and Complexity 
introduced in [Fernandez et al, 20021. Inspired by distributed GSensorDCSP is a specific variant of the general SensorD•
applications arising in networked systems, SensorDCSP in•      CSP, enriched by a spatial structure: we have multiple sen•
volves a network of distributed sensors simultaneously track•  sors multiple objects (mobiles) T = 
ing multiple mobile objects. An instance of SensorDCSP is                   which are to be tracked by the sensors subject 
defined by a set of sensors, a set of mobiles which are to be  to visibility and compatibility constraints, and the goal is to 
tracked by the sensors, and two sets of visibility and compat•
                                                               decide whether there exists an allocation of three sensors to 
ibility constraints specifying which sensors can communicate 
                                                               each object, while keeping these triplets of sensors pair-wise 
one with another and which sensors can track which mobiles, 
                                                               disjoint. However, the visibility and compatibility constraints 
respectively. The goal is to allocate three sensors to track 
                                                               in GSensorDCSP relate to the physical limitations of the sen•
each mobile, such that all these triplets of sensors are pair-
                                                               sors and the terrain on which the sensors are located. 
wise disjoint, and the sensors in each such triplet are mutually 
                                                                 In GSensorDCSP, the sensors are located on the nodes of a 
compatible and can track the mobile they are assigned to. The 
analysis in [Fernandez et al., 2002] addresses the complexity 

   * Research supported by AFOSR, grant F49620-01-1-0076 (In•
telligent Information Systems Institute) and F49620-01-1-0361 
(MURI grant on Cooperative Control of Distributed Autonomous 
Vehicles in Adversarial Environments), CICYT, TIC2001-1577-
C03-03 and DARPA, F30602-00-2-0530 (Controlling Computa-
tional Cost: Structure, Phase Transitions and Randomization) and 
F30602-00-2-0558 (Configuring Wireless Transmission and Decen•
tralized Data Processing for Generic Sensor Networks). The views 
and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should 
                                                               Figure 1: Grid of 6 x 6 sensors; black sensors stand for 
not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or 
endorsements, either expressed or implied, of AFOSR, DARPA, or the (a) 2-compatibility window of the gray sensor, and (b) 
the U.S. Government.                                           2-visibility window of the square mobile. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1359  uniform grid, and the mobiles are located within the surface  probabilities are low, the instances generated are mostly un-
 enclosed by this grid; this way the grid specifies the gener• satisfiable, while for high probabilities most of the instances 

 ally trackable region. The physical limitations of the sen•   are satisfiable. Both for kc = 1 and kc — 2, the transition be•
 sors are modeled by the notions of -compatibility and         tween the satisfiable and unsatisfiable regions occurs within 

 visibility. The -compatibility window for a sensor Si, de•    a narrow range of the density parameters. Observe that, for 
 noted as corresponds to the set of all sensors that are       kc = 1 this range corresponds to significantly higher values 
 at most kc general (rectilinear and/or diagonal) hops from    of Pc and Pv, comparatively to these for kc = 2 and kc = 2. 
 For example, the black sensors in Figure 1 (a) correspond to  However, the form of the transition for various values of kc is 
 2-compatibility window for the gray sensor. Similarly, the kv- very similar. 
 visibility window for a mobile denoted as corre•
 sponds to the set of all sensors that are at most k general hops 
 around For example, the black sensors in Figure 1(b) cor•
respond to 2-visibility window for the square mobile. Finally, 
 if each sensor of a given GSensorDCSP problem instance 
can communicate only with some sensors within 
then the set of compatibility constraints of this instance is 
called -restricted. The notion of -restricted visibility is 
defined similarly. 
   Studying the worst-case complexity of GSensorDCSP we 
formally show that: 
  1. Any GSensorDCSP instance with 1-restricted visibility 
     is solvable in low polynomial time, and 
  2. GSensorDCSP with -restricted visibility is NP-
     complete for all  
The former is shown by a reduction to the problem of feasible 
integer flow in bipartite graphs, while the latter is shown by 
a non-trivial reduction from 3-SAT and is valid even for the 
problems with 1-restricted compatibility. 

3 Connecting Locality and Constrainedness 
While the physical limitations of the sensors in GSensorD•
CSP are modeled via the locality windows, the terrain limita•
tions are modeled via incomplete compatibility and visibility 
within the windows. Problem instances of any GSensorDCSP 
sub-class can be ordered according to the local con•
strainedness, i.e., the average number of sensors that a sensor 
can communicate with and the average number of sensors that 
can track a mobile. In our experiments, for each pair of lo•
cality parameters we define a random distribution of 
GSensorDCSP instances via two parameters 
that control the density of visibility and compatibility: The 
probability that two sensors and will be compatible is 
given by if otherwise, it is equal to 
0. Clearly, higher value for and correspond to better 
conditions for communication and tracking, respectively. 
   For our first experiments with the AWC [Yokoo, 1994] al•
gorithm, we consider different sets of instances with 25 sen•  Figure 2: Some experiments with AWC on instances of 
sors (grid 5 x 5), and 5 mobiles, with every set generated with 
                                                               GSensorDCSP: (a) ratio of satisfiable instances for kv = 2, 
different values for the parameters Pc and Pv. The parame•     and mean solution time for (b) = 2 and (c) = 1, as a 
ters Pc and Pv are ranging from 0.1 to 1 with an increment     function of the density parameters and  
of 0.1, giving a total number of 100 data sets, where every 
set contains 50 instances. Given our formal complexity re•       Consistently with the general SensorDCSP, we observe 
sults, we consider several hard subclasses of GSensorDCSP      that the phase transition of GSensorDCSP coincides with the 

corresponding to kv = 2. For instance, Figure 3(a) shows       region where the hardest instances occur. For instance, Fig•
the ratio of the satisfiable instances (Psat) as a function of Pc ure 3(b) shows the mean solution time with respect to the 
and Pv for kv = 2 with kc = 1 and kc = 2. As in the case       density parameters and for the problem instances with 
of general SensorDCSP [Fernandez et al, 2002], when both       25 sensors, 5 mobiles, = 3, and = 1. Somewhat 


1360                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS                                                               to track the mobiles in real time. More formally, a dynamic 
                                                              GSensorDCSP problem can be seen as an ordered sequence 
                                                              of static GSensorDCSP problems The static 
                                                              problems of the sequence only differ in the positions of the 
                                                              mobiles and hence the visibility between sensors and mobiles. 
                                                              Observe that, if no assumptions are made about the relation•
                                                              ship between the positions of the mobiles in and it 
                                                              is natural to solve these problems independently (naive ap•
                                                              proach). However, mobile dynamics are typically far from 
                                                              being chaotic. A first approximation is to consider linear tra•
                                                              jectories. In this case, changes between the subsequent prob•
                                                              lems are governed by a clear model. An approach that a priori 
                                                              seems to be promising for dealing with the dynamic prob•
                                                              lem is to initialize the search for by the solution already 
                                                              achieved for (solution repairing approach). 
                                                                 In order to compare the naive and the solution repairing 
                                                              approach, we have performed experiments where we solve 
                                                              dynamic GSensorDCSP problems with both approaches. Fig•
                                                              ure 3 depicts the cumulative probability distributions of solv•
                                                              ing Ui for two different problems. One of them is obtained 
                                                              from the 50 % Psat point of GSensorDCSP and the other 
                                                              from the 70 % P8at point. 
                                                                 Our results show that we can exploit the previous solution 
                                                              and that, assuming certain reasonable constraints on the mo•
                                                              bile movements, we can benefit from solution repairing over 
                                                              the naive approach. More interestingly, it also follows that 
                                                              the relative attractiveness of solution repairing is higher in 
                                                              the region of hardest instances. 

                                                              5 Conclusions and Future Work 
                                                              We believe that GSensorDCSP provides a realistic framework 
                                                              for the analysis of the DisCSP algorithms, and we hope it 
                                                              will contribute to the further research in this area. For the 
Figure 3: Solving dynamic GSensorDCSP problems with the 
                                                              dynamic version, a next step would be to consider the effect 
naive and the solution repairing approaches: (a) performance 
                                                              of several kinds of trajectories in the performance of the so•
for a problem generated from an instance in the 70 % P  (b) 
                                                    sat       lution repairing approach. Finally, a further step towards an 
performance for a problem generated from a hard instance in 
                                                              even more realistic DisCSP benchmark would be to consider 
the 50% P     point. 
           sat                                                its optimization version: maximizing the number of tracked 
                                                              mobiles. In this extended distributed benchmark, it would be 
less expected result is depicted in Figure 3(c) for the case 
                                                              interesting to study the existence of the easy-hard complex•
of k  = 1 (and k   = 1), which we showed to be polyno•
    v            c                                            ity patterns that have been observed in classical optimization 
mial by a reduction to the problem of feasible integral flow 
                                                              problems [Slaney and Walsh, 2002]. 
in bipartite graphs. Despite the fact that AWC is a general 
purpose algorithm, Figure 3(c) shows that these tractable in•
stances are relatively easy for AWC. able to "detect and ex•  References 
ploit" the tractable without being aware of its existence.    [Fernandez et a/., 2002] C. Fernandez, R. Bejar, B. Krishna-
  Extending the evaluation, we consider different sets of        machari, and C. P. Gomes. Communication and computa•
instances for several orders of the problem (grids of 25-        tion in distributed CSP algorithms. In Proc. of CP-2002, 
100 sensors), and several levels of decomposition (Kc, kv        pages 664-679,2002. 
{2,3,4,5}). The analysis of these sets of instances clearly   [Slaney and Walsh, 2002] J. Slaney and T. Walsh. Phase 
shows both exponential dependence of the mean solution time      transition behavior: from decision to optimization. In Pro•
on the size of the grid, and, somewhat more interestingly,       ceedings of the SAT-2002 Conference, 2002. 
growth of the slope of this dependence with  
                                                              [Yokoo, 1994] M. Yokoo. Weak-commitment search for 
4 Dynamic GSensorDCSP                                            solving constraint satisfaction problems. In Proc. ofAAAl-
                                                                 94y pages 313-318,1994. 
As an additional extension of the GSensorDCSP domain, we 
                                                              [Yokoo, 2001] M. Yokoo. Distributed Constraint Satisfac•
consider the dynamics of the mobiles, in order to determine 
                                                                 tion: Foundations of Cooperation in Multi-Agent Systems. 
under which conditions (number of sensors and mobiles, ve•
                                                                 Springer-Verlag, 2001. 
locities, trajectories, etc.) generic DisCSP algorithms are able 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                      1361 