                     Dynamic Vehicle Routing with Stochastic Requests 

                               Russell Bent and Pascal Van Hentenryck 
                                            Brown University 
                                       {rbent,pvh} @cs.brown.edu 


                     Abstract                          2002]. MSA combines a variety of Al and OR techniques to 
                                                       address dynamic vehicle routing in the presence of stochastic 
    This paper considers vehicle routing problems      information. 
    (VRP) where customer locations and service times 
    are random variables that are realized dynamically 
    during plan execution. It proposes a multiple sce• 2 Problem Formulation 
    nario approach (MSA) that continuously generates   In the dynamic VRP, a number of customer requests are avail•
    plans consistent with past decisions and anticipat• able initially, while others become available during the plan 
    ing future requests. The approach, which combines  execution. In the applications considered in this paper, a re•
    Al and OR techniques in novel ways, is compared    quest consists of the location of a customer and a service time, 
    with the best available heuristics that model long- both of which are random variables. We assume that the dis•
    distance courier mail services [Larsen et al, 2002]. tribution of the requests, or some approximation thereof, is 
    Experimental results shows that MSA may signif•    available, which is typically the case in practical applications. 
    icantly decrease travel times and is robust wrt rea• For each incoming request, a dynamic algorithm must decide 
    sonably noisy distributions.                       whether to accept or reject it. Once a request is accepted, it 
                                                       must be serviced. Problems are generally characterized by 
                                                       their degree of dynamism (DOD), i.e., the ratio of unknown 
1 Introduction                                         customers!total customers [Larsen et al, 2002]. A more in 
The vehicle routing problem (VRP) is a difficult combinato• depth formalization of the VRP model can be found in [Bent 
rial optimization problem with many important applications and Van Hentenryck, 2002]. 
in distribution and transportation systems. It has received 
considerable attention from the operations research (OR) and 3 The Approaches 
Al communities for many years and sophisticated local search 
methods are quite effective at finding good quality solutions The Multiple Plan Approach The Multiple Plan Approach 
in reasonable amounts of time. In more recent years, tech• (MPA) is a fundamental generalization of many modern ap•
nology has advanced so that it is now possible and practical proaches. MPA generalizes the approach of [Gendreau et al, 
to address dynamic and/or stochastic versions of the prob• 1999] by making it independent of the search procedure. In 
lem. These new versions are motivated by the inherent un• short, MPA continuously generates plans that are compatible 
certainties that arise in many everyday VRPs and advances with the current state of information and removes those that 
in onboard computers and communications systems that al• are not. In addition, since decisions must be made with re•
low modification of routing plans even after vehicles are de• spect to a specific plan to guarantee service, a distinguished 
ployed.                                                plan is maintained via a ranking function. 
  Most of the existing work has focused solely on stochastic More precisely, MPA handles four types of events (1) cus•
or dynamic versions of the problem exclusively. In stochas• tomer requests, (2) vehicle departures, (3) plan generations, 
tic optimization, the expected cost of a solution is optimized (4) timeouts. A more complete description of the events and 
with respect to a recourse function which restores feasibil• MPA can be found in [Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2002]. 
ity during plan execution. In dynamic optimization, various The Multiple Scenario Approach The Multiple Scenario 
data items, such as customer requests, are unknown and are Approach (MSA) generalizes MPA by considering both ex•
only revealed after some decisions are taken. A more de• isting and potential future requests during plan generation. 
tailed overview of the methods used in both approaches can Future requests are obtained by sampling their distributions. 
be found in [Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2002]. How to com• Once a routing plan a is discovered, MSA stores the routing 
bine the two approaches is a research topic that is often men• plan a_ obtained by removing future requests from a. As a 
tioned (e.g., [Gendreau et al, 1999], among others).   result, plan a- leaves room to accommodate future requests, 
  This paper considers the multiple scenario approach  should they actually materialize. This ability to anticipate the 
(MSA) recently proposed in [Bent and Van Hentenryck,   future is the strength of MSA. 


1362                                                                                      POSTER PAPERS  Ranking Functions Both MPA and MSA are parametrized 

 by a ranking function ft, which selects the distinguished plan 
 at each time t. We will evaluate two ranking functions for 
 nominating a* in this paper. The obvious first choice for 
 ft would be to select the plan with the smallest travel cost 

 (MPAd). In [Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2002], it was shown 
 that it is possible to do substantially better in practice on 
 highly-constrained problems by using a consensus function 
 which selects the plan in that most resembles all the stored 
 plans. 
 Optimization Both MPA and MSA use large neighborhood 
 search (LNS) for optimization, which has been shown to be 
 very effective for vehicle routing [Shaw, 1998; Bent and Van 
 Hentenryck, 2001]. LNS combines the advantages of branch 
 and bound, constraint propagation, and local search.                                   Figure 1: Travel Distance Results 

 4 Experimental Results                                                  Multiple Vehicle Results First, the NN heuristic was gener•
                                                                         alized to provide guarantees on servicing customers. When•
 The Models The starting point of this research was the ex•
                                                                         ever a request arrives, the NN algorithm is simulated to deter•
 perimental model in [Larsen et aL, 2002], where customers 
                                                                         mine if it can accommodate the new request. Surprisingly, the 
 are uniformly distributed in a lOkm x10km region and must 
                                                                         MPA approaches perform very poorly, especially for higher 
 be served by a single vehicle with uniform speed of 40 km/h. 
                                                                         DODs. The "optimized" plans of MPA always use as few 
 Customers inter-arrival times are governed by an exponen•
                                                                         vehicles as possible since this generally improves travel dis•
 tial distribution. Problem sets are derived with expected 
                                                                         tance and feasibility is not a issue until late in the search. 
 DOD of {0,5,..., 100}. More details about the model are 
                                                                         This is in sharp contrast with problems with time-windows 
 found in [Larsen et aL, 2002]. We generated 15 instances for 
                                                                         where feasibility is a major issue and MPA does not experi•
 each DOD configuration, which gives 315 problems for each 
                                                                         ence such problems [Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2002]. The 
 model described. 
                                                                         MSA approaches perform roughly the same as NN as far as 
   Several models are used to evaluate the various approaches. 
                                                                         missed customers are concerned, but the true benefit of MSA 
The first two models, M1 and M2, use a single vehicle. Model 
                                                                         is with respect to travel costs as shown in Figure 1. (The fig•
Ml is the basic model with 40 customers. Model M2 is sim•
                                                                         ure only shows the results for similar number of unserviced 
 ilar to Ml, except that the region is now 40kmx40km. The 
                                                                         requests). Here, MSA decreases travel distances significantly, 
objective function minimizes the travel distance. The next 
                                                                         especially for high DODs. These models clearly show the 
model is a multiple-vehicle model. Model M3 uses 4 vehi•
                                                                         benefits of MSA and the value of stochastic information over 
 cles, 160 customers, and a 20km x 20km space. Each vehicle 
                                                                         traditional heuristics and MPA. These results are even more 
can serve at most 50 customers and the vehicle must return 
                                                                         dramatic when non-uniform distributions are used. Signifi•
to the depot by the time horizon. For the multiple-vehicle 
                                                                         cant gains are observed for DODs as low as 25%. In addi•
model, the objective function consists in minimizing the num•
                                                                         tion to these results, the algorithm is robust under reasonable 
ber of missed customers and minimizing the travel distance. 
                                                                         amounts of noise, for example when MSA is given incorrect 
 It is possible that some customers be left unserviced, since 
                                                                         customer arrival rates. 
M3 has capacity constraints, as well as a hard deadline. 
Single Vehicle Results Reference [Larsen et aL, 2002] tested             References 
 various heuristics on Model M1. Their best heuristic is near•
                                                                         [Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2001] R. Bent and P. Van Hentenryck. 
est neighbor (NN), where a pool of unserviced customers is 
                                                                            A Two-Stage Hybrid Local Search for the Vehicle Routing Prob•
maintained and the vehicle is sent to the nearest customer 
                                                                            lem with Time Windows. To appear in Transportation Science 
in the pool once it served its current request. Interestingly, 
in Model Ml, the vehicle is able to service customers faster             [Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2002] R. Bent and P. Van Hentenryck. 
                                                                            Scenario-Based Planning for Partially Dynamic Vehicle Routing 
than they arrive. As a consequence, all "reasonable" heuris•
                                                                            with Stochastic Customers. To appear in Operations Research 
tics converge towards a first come, first serve (FCFS) strategy 
                                                                            (pending minor revisions). 
as the DOD converges to 100%. This same behavior is also 
exhibited by our approaches. In Model M2, the vehicle is                 [Gendreau et al., 1999] M. Gendreau, F. Guertin, J. Y. Potvin, and 
                                                                            E. Taillard. Parallel Tabu Search for Real-Time Vehicle Routing 
not able to service customers as quickly and the heuristics do 
                                                                            and Dispatching. Transportation Science, 33 (4):381 390,1999. 
not converge to FCFS. Figure 1 shows that MPAd produces a 
4.6% improvement on average and the benefits can be as high              [Larsen et al, 2002] A. Larsen, O. Madsen, and M. Solomon. Par•
                                                                            tially Dynamic Vehicle Routing-Models and Algorithms. Journal 
as 11.1%. Stochastic information (MSA            ) improves these 
                                                d                           of Operational Research Society, 53:637-646, 2002. 
results slightly. Moreover, MSAd is never worse than NN. 
These results essentially indicate that the LNS-based MPA                [Shaw, 1998] P. Shaw. Using Constraint Programming and Local 
approach provides clear benefits over traditional heuristics.               Search Methods to Solve Vehicle Routing Problems. In Princi•
                                                                           ples and Practice of Constraint Programming, 417-431, 1998. 
Stochastic information helps, but only marginally. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                                         1363 