                         Solving Finite Domain Constraint Hierarchies by 
                                   Local Consistency and Tree Search* 


                        Stefano Bistarellit                                Philippe Codognet 
                     Dipartimento di Scienze                Univ. of Paris 6, LIP6, Paris Cedex 05, France 
           Universita "D'Annunzio" di Pescara, Italy                   Philippe.Codognet@lip6.fr 
                        bista@sci.unich.it 
          Istituto di Informatica e Telematica, C.N.R.                 Dept of Comp. Sci. & Eng. 
                             Pisa, Italy                    The Chinese Univ. of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
                    stefano.bistarelli@iit.cnr.it                    {kchuijlee}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk 


                        Abstract                               2 A Reformulation of Constraint Hierarchies 

     We provide a reformulation of the constraint hierar•
     chies (CHs) framework based on the notion of er-
     ror indicators. Adapting the generalized view of 
     local consistency in semiring-based constraint sat•
     isfaction problems (SCSPs), we define constraint 
     hierarchy k-consistency (CH-k-C) and give a CH-
     2-C enforcement algorithm. We demonstrate how 
     the CH-2-C algorithm can be seamlessly integrated 
     into the ordinary branch-and-bound algorithm to 
     make it a finite domain CH solver. Experimenta•
     tion confirms the efficiency and robustness of our 
     proposed solver prototype. Unlike other finite do•
     main CH solvers, our proposed method works for 
     both local and global comparators. In addition, our 
     solver can support arbitrary error functions. 

1 Introduction 

The Constraint Hierarchy (CH) framework [Borning et al.,  
1992] is a general framework for the specification and so•
lutions of over-constrained problems. Originating from 
research in interactive user-interface applications, the CH 
framework attracts much effort in the design of efficient 
solvers in the real number domain [Badros et al., 2001; 
Hosobe et al.,1996]. To extend the benefit of the CH frame-
work to also discrete domain applications, such as timetabling 
and resource allocation, the paper takes a step towards a gen•
eral and efficient finite domain CH solver, based on consis•
tency techniques and tree search. 

   *A more complete and detailed version of this paper can be ob•
tained from the authors. 
   *Part of this research has been carried out while the author was 
visiting the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, China 


1364                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS    Similarly, we can define and its instances w-              3 Summary of the Results 
                                              respectively. 
                                                              The notion of constraint hierarchy k-consistency (CH-fc-C), 
Given any two valuations and and the corresponding er•        is defined using error indicators which are structures isomor•
ror indicators and                                            phic to the structure of a given CH used for storing the error 
                                                              information of the CH problem (similar notion was defined 
                                                              by Bistarelli et al. [1999]). In particular, we give an algo•
                                                              rithm for enforcing CH-2-C of a CH problem. While classical 
                                                              consistency algorithms [Mackworth, 1977] aim to reduce the 
                                                              size of constraint problems, our CH-2-C algorithm works by 
Notice that by definition, all local/global comparators ignore explicating error information that is originally implicit in CH 
constraints in hierarchy levels greater than or equal to /.   problems. The space complexity of the CH-2-C algorithm is 
   We are now ready to define the solution set of a           simply of 0{nvndnc) in the worst case where nc is the num•
with variables V by:                                          ber of labeled constraints, nv is the number of variables, and 
                                                              rid is the size of the largest variable domain. 
                                                                 Incorporating a CH-2-C enforcement algorithm in a 
                                                              branch-and-bound algorithm, we obtain a general finite do•
The following lemma gives the monotonicity of the intro•      main CH solver, which works for arbitrary comparators. 
duced comparators, which are collectively denoted by          Search space is pruned by utilizing the error information gen•
and in the rest of the paper.                                 erated by the CH-2-C algorithm. Unlike other finite domain 
                                                              CH solvers, our proposed solver is applicable to arbitrary 
                                                              comparators. 
                                                                 We compare the performance of our proposed solver with 
                                                              generate-and-test, basic branch-and-bound, and the reified 
   Notice that the above lemma let us compare valuation for 
                                                              constraint approach by Lua [2000].Experiments confirm the 
both local and global comparators (because the order 
                                                              efficiency and robustness of our research prototype, which 
implies all the orders induced from any specific comparator) 
                                                              brings us one step towards practical finite domain CH solv•
and for arbitrary error functions. 
                                                              ing. 
   We also introduce the notion of a hierarchy problem which 
is a CH augmented with an Error Indicator Store.              References 
                                                              [Badros et al, 2001] G.J. Badros, A. Borning, and P.J. 
                                                                 Stuckey. The cassowary linear arithmetic constraint solv•
                                                                 ing algorithm. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
                                                                 Interaction, 8(4):267-306,2001. 
                                                              [Bistarelli et al., 1999] S. Bistarelli, Y. Georget, and J.H.M. 
                                                                 Lee. Capturing (fuzzy) constraint hierarchies in semiring-
                                                                 based constraint satisfaction. Unpublished Manuscript, 
                                                                 1999. 
                                                              [Borning et al., 1992] A. Borning, B. Freeman-Benson, and 
In other words, solutions of are solutions of H 
                                                                 M. Wilson. Constraint hierarchies. Lisp and Symbolic 
which have a "worse" error than the estimates provided in In • 
                                                                 Computation, 5(3):223~210, 1992. 
By the definition, the solutions of H always contain those of 
         Equality holds when the error estimates provided in  [Henz et al, 2000] Martin Henz, Yun Fong Lim, Seet Chong 
/// fails to "filter" out any solutions of //.                   Lua, Xiao Ping Shi, J. Paul Walser, and Roland H. C. Yap. 
                                                                 Solving hierarchical constraints over finite domains. In 
                                                                 Sixth International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence 
                                                                 and Mathematics, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 2000. 
                                                              [Hosobe et al., 1996] H. Hosobe, S. Matsuoka, and 
                                                                 A. Yonezawa. Generalized local propagation: A 
                                                                 framework for solving constraint hierarchies. In Proceed-
In particular, a hierarchy problem must share the                ings of the Second International Conference on Principles 
same solution as H if all contain only the er•                   and Practice of Constraint Programming, pages 237-251, 
ror value 0 (i.e. no error information). This fact is useful in  1996. 
ensuring the correctness of our local consistency algorithm   [Mackworth, 1977] A.K. Mackworth. Consistency in net•
and the completeness of our branch-and-bound solver later.       works of relations. Al Journal, 8(1):99-118,1977. 

   'Note the similarity of in notation to which denotes the 
error indicator of a valuation Here, is a store containing an 
estimate of the error associated with valuations containing  


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                      1365 