     Channeling Constraints and Value Ordering in the QuasiGroup Completion 
                                                       Problem 

                             Ivan Dotii and Alvaro del Val and Manuel Cebrian 
                                      Departamento de Ingenieria Informatica 
                                         Universidad Autonoma de Madrid 


 1 Introduction                                                  • Primal Model: This model has a variable xi,j for each 
                                                                    cell of the latin square, with i and j its coordinates. Their 
The Quasigroup Completion Problem (QCP) is a very chal­
                                                                    possible values are the colors of the cell. 
lenging benchmark among combinatorial problems, and a fo­
                                                                 • Row Dual Model: This is the first dual model, it repre­
cus of much recent interest in the area of constraint program­
                                                                    sents the colors in each row; the dual variable r  is the 
ming. It has numerous practical applications [Gomes et al,                                                       i,k
                                                                    k-th color in the i-th row, and the values it can take are 
2002]; it has been put forward as a benchmark which can 
                                                                    the columns where it can be placed. 
bridge the gap between purely random instances and highly 
                                                                 • Column Dual Model: This one models the colors in each 
structured problems [Gomes et al, 2002]; and its structure as 
                                                                    column; the dual variable c  represents the k-th color 
a multiple permutation problem [Walsh, 2001] is common to                                      j,k
                                                                    in the j-th column, with rows as its possible values. 
many other important problems in constraint satisfaction. 
   I Gomes et al, 2002] reports that QCPs of order 40 could    The primal and dual not-equal constraints specify that the col­
not be solved by pure constraint programming approaches,       ors in a row or column must all be different. While these are 
but could sometimes be solved by hybrid approaches com­        sufficient to capture the problem (and in fact redundantly so), 
bining constraint programming with mixed integer program­      it is known that these models can be improved by connecting 
ming techniques from operations research. In this paper, we    them through channeling constraints: 
show that the pure constraint satisfaction approach can solve    • Row Channeling Constraints: Constraints for the n row 
many problems of order 45 in the transition phase, which cor­       permutation constraints, linking the primal model with 
responds to the peak of difficulty. Our solution combines           the row dual model:  
a number of known ideas -the use of redundant modeling           • Column Channeling Constraints: Corresponding to the 
[Cheng et al, 1996] with primal and dual models of the prob­        n column permutation constraints, they link the primal 
lem connected by channeling constraints [Walsh, 2001 ]- with        and dual column models:  
some novel aspects, as well as a new and very effective value    • Triangular Channeling Constraints: These (novel) con­
ordering heuristic.                                                 straints link both dual models, closing a "triangle" 
                                                                    among the three models:  
2 Models for QCPs                                              It's easy to show that the first two kinds of channeling con­
                                                               straint fully capture a QCP (see also [Walsh, 2001]), making 
A quasigroup is an ordered pair (Q, ), where Q is a set and 
                                                               the primal and dual constraints redundant. 
•is a binary operation on Q such that the equations a • x = b 
and y ■ a = b are uniquely solvable for every pair of elements 3 Value Ordering 
a, b in Q [Gomes et al, 2002]. The order n of the quasigroup 
is the cardinality of the set Q. A quasigroup can be seen as   Key to our results is a new value ordering heuristic, which we 
an n x n multiplication table defining a Latin Square, which   might call the min-domain value selection heuristic. Once 
must be filled with "colors" so that the colors of each row are a primal or dual variable is selected, we need to choose a 
all distinct, and similarly for columns. A QCP is the problem  value for it. Since any such value corresponds to one spe­
of coloring a partially filled Latin square, which is known to cific variable from each of the two other models, we select 
be NP-Complete [Colbourn, 1984].                               the value whose corresponding two variables have a minimal 
   Each row and column of a Latin Square defines a permu­      "combined" domain. Specifically, say we have chosen X{j. 
tation problem, i.e. a constraint satisfaction problem with the Then we choose a color k from its currently active domain 
same number of variables as values, where a solution is a      for which the sum of the current domain sizes of ri,k and CJ,K 
permutation of the values [Walsh, 2001]. The QCP is a mul­     is minimal among the currently available colors for xi,j. 
tiple permutation problem with 2n intersecting permutation 
constraints (n row permutation constraints and n column per­   4 Results 
mutation constraints). In order to represent those permutation We focused our experiments on solvable instances. To make 
problems we have implemented three models:                     our results comparable with those reported in [Gomes et al, 


1372                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS                                                                ordering for quasigroups of order 30,35 and 40, and 60% pre-
                                                               assignment, close to the phase transition [Gomes et al, 2002]. 
                                                                 Encouraged by this performance, we generated some in•
                                                               stances of order 45 and 60% preassignment. Again the value 
                                                               ordering heuristic turns out to be so efficient that we were able 
                                                               to solve a great number of instances in a reasonable amount 
                                                               of time. The next table shows median and mean time in sec•
                                                               onds (the latter taken only over solved instances) and percent 
                                                               of solved instances, using value ordering for problems in the 
                                                               transition phase. 
                                                                 [ order   mean     median   % solved   timeout 
                                                                   30     148.84    174.11     68%       1000 
                                                                   35     533.43    163.48     84%       3600 
                                                                   40     690.85    842.11     68%       5000 
                                                                   45     1090.10  2971.40     56%       6000 | 
                                                                 Finally, we are currently exploring the effect of adding "tri•
Figure 1: Mean solution time on QCPs of order 30, 35 and 40 
                                                               angular" channeling constraints; our preliminary results sug•
with (vol) and without value ordering (voO). 
                                                              gest that they can improve performance by an additional 30-
                                                               35%, using in this case only forward checking (e.g. from 902 

2002], we used the same generator1, and considered only       to 666 seconds in one order 45/60% preassigned instance). 
"balanced" instances, which are known to be the hardest.      The idea is that they provably allow forward checking to per•
We used an (AC3-based) Generalized Arc Consistency            form as much pruning as arc-consistency, while saving many 
algorithm based on van Beek's CPLAN implementation             useless checks; in fact, as many as 60% fewer checks, even 
(http:ai.uwaterloo.ca/~vanbeek/software/software.html),       though the savings in time are not as great due to effects we 
with a few improvements. We considered various (complete)     are currently exploring. 
combinations of all the above mentioned constraints, and 
found that adding the primal and dual "not-equal" constraints 5 Conclusions and Future Work 
never helped performance in the presence of row and column    We have shown that a pure CSP approach can handle quasi-
channeling constraints, and yielded even worse results in     group completion problems significantly larger than was 
their absence. Most of the results discussed below therefore  thought possible, using appropriate models and value order•
use a model with only row and column channeling con•           ing heuristics, and even in the absence of global alldiff con•
straints; they also use "MAC" (mantaining arc consistency     straints. Yet our results are preliminary, and no doubt it would 
[Bessiere, Regin, 19961). Since our preliminary tests showed  be interesting to consider other value ordering heuristics and 
that CBJ and nogood learning seem to never help in these      ways to make the triangular channeling constraints most ef•
problems, and are often a source of significant overhead, we  fective. 
discarded them. We also considered various variable selec•
tion heuristics. We found the min-domain heuristic, which     References 
selects a variable with smallest domain to be uniformly the 
best among the alternatives we tried, which included more      [Gomes et al, 2002] C. Gomes and D. B. Shmoys. The 
sophisticated heuristics such as dom+degree, dom/degree,         promise of LP to Boost CSP Techniques for Combinato•
and variants of the above which took into account the (primal    rial Problems. In Proc. of CPAIOR'02, Le Croisic, March 
or dual) model to which variables belong, e.g. selecting only    2002. 
among primal variables, etc.                                  [Gomes et al, 2002] C. Gomes and D. B. Shmoys. Com•
   With only row and column channeling constraints, our im•      pleting Quasigroups or Latin Squares: A Structured Graph 
plementation outperforms classical approaches, in that we        Coloring Problem In Proc. Computational Symposium on 
can solve a considerable amount of instances of order 40 in a    Graph Coloring and Generalizations, 2002. 
reasonable time. As mentioned above, this was very recently    [Walsh, 2001] T. Walsh. Permutation Problems and Chan•
considered as out of reach for pure constraint programming       neling Constraints. TR 26, APES Group, 2001. 
approaches [Gomes et al, 2002], which ours is (in fact, we 
                                                              [Colbourn, 1984] C. Colbourn. The complexity of complet•
don't even use global or non-binary constraints). The results 
                                                                 ing partial latin squares. In Discrete applied Mathematics, 
when this model was used with the min-domain value order•
                                                                 (8):25-30, 1984. 
ing heuristic were quite surprising, as it outperformed previ•
ous tests in three orders of magnitude in some cases. For ex• [Cheng et al, 1996] B.M.W. Cheng, J.H.M. Lee, and J.C.K 
ample, for the instance bqwh-35-405-5.pls (balanced instance     Wu. Speeding up constraint propagation by redundant 
of order 35 and 60% preassigned) it took 2905 sees without       modeling. In 2nd Int. Conf. on Principles and Practice 
value ordering and only 0.40 sees with it. In Figure 1 we        of Constraint Programming, pp. 91-103, 1996. 
present a comparison of our results with and without value    [Bessiere, Regin, 1996] C.Bessiere and J.C.Regin Mac and 
                                                                 combined heuristics: two reason to forsake FC (and CBJ?) 
   'Generator Isencode, kindly provided by Carta Gomes.          on hard problemss. In CP'96, pp. 61-75, Cambridge MA. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                      1373 