                Sampling Combinatorial Spaces Using Biased Random Walks 

                                       Jordan Erenrich and Bart Selman* 
                                             Dept. of Computer Science 
                                                  Cornell University 
                                         {erenrich, selman} @cs.cornell.edu 


                        Abstract                               a random problem instance is more complex. We also con•
                                                               sidered the question of how to improve the uniformity of our 
     For probabilistic reasoning, one often needs to sam•      sampling approach. Our results show, again somewhat sur•
     ple from a combinatorial space. For example, one          prisingly, that coverage does not become more uniform with 
     may need to sample uniformly from the space of all        more noise injected in the random walk. (Of course, the ef•
     satisfying assignments. Can state-of-the-art search       fectiveness of finding solutions degrades, but apparently, this 
     procedures for SAT be used to sample effectively          degradation is proportional for all solutions.) 
     from the space of all solutions? And, if so, how            Because of space limitations, we present only some of our 
     uniformly do they sample? Our initial results find        key data. We hope this work will lead to a better understand•
     that on the positive side, one can find all solutions     ing of random walk style procedures for sampling solutions, 
     to a given instance. Nevertheless, sampling can           including possible ways for getting more uniform sampling. 
     be highly biased. This research provides a starting         Our work should be contrasted with the more standard 
     point for the development of more balanced proce•         Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approaches, such as 
     dures.                                                    simulated annealing (SA). For MCMC methods, one can 
                                                               show that the underlying Markov Chain eventually reaches 
                                                               an equilibrium distribution (although this can take exponen•
 1 Introduction                                                tial time). Unfortunately, formal guarantees are of little prac•
                                                               tical value. For example, even for finding a single satisfiable 
There has been much recent progress in the area of algorithms 
                                                               assignment, SA has been shown to be orders of magnitude 
 for solving Boolean satisfiability problems. Current methods 
                                                               slower than WalkSAT [Selman et al., 1994] (even ignoring 
can handle problem instances with up to a million variables. 
                                                               the issue of whether SA reaches the stationary distribution). 
The emphasis in this work has been on the decision version of 
                                                               The new class of local search methods for SAT are based on 
the satisfiability problem. A problem instance is either shown 
satisfiable by producing a satisfiable assignment or by prov•  ideas from biased random walks. These methods are designed 
 ing that no such solution exists. A natural extension of this to reach some solution as quickly as possible. Such strategies 
problem, for the satisfiable case, is to consider whether one  have proven to be quite effective, but they inherently exploit 
can sample from the set of all satisfying assignments. An ef•  the fact that they operate far away from equilibrium. Never•
fective sampling procedure would be of use in a large range of theless, as our results show, they can reach all solutions on 
probabilistic reasoning tasks. In the worst-case, the sampling non-trivial problem instances. Moreover, our work may sug•
problem is even harder than the satisfiability problem [Roth,  gest ways of making the sampling more uniform, possibly 
 1996]. However, this leaves open the question how of hard     leading to a new more powerful class of sampling methods. 
it is to sample solutions from practical problem instances. In 
particular, can state-of-the-art random walk style procedures  2 Sampling Experiments 
for SAT, such as WalkSAT [Selman et al., 1994], be used to 
sample from the space of satisfying assignments?               We consider a hard random 3-SAT instance and a more struc•
                                                               tured problem from a planning application. In order to gen•
   We investigated this question, and our key findings are as 
                                                               erate a random 3-SAT instance, we first created 100 uniform 
follows. On reasonable size problem instances, the WalkSAT 
                                                               random 3-SAT instances, with 70 variables and 301 clauses. 
procedure does reach all satisfying assignments. However, 
                                                               We chose an instance with 2531 solutions for our detailed 
the sampling can be highly non-uniform (several orders of 
magnitude in the probability of reaching solutions). Quite 
unexpectedly, we found that sampling on our structured prob•    Table 1: Summary Statistics from Coverage Experiments 
lem instance is much more uniform than on our hard random 
problem instance. This shows that, in a sense, the search on 

   * Research supported in part by AFOSR, Darpa, and NSF 


1376                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS                                                               on the y-axis. For the random instance we see a range over 4 
                                                              orders of magnitude. For the logistic problem, we see that the 
                                                              solution sampling is also biased, albeit much less than on the 
                                                              3-SAT problem. The figure also indicates that on the 3-SAT 
                                                              problem, rare solutions are typically found with fewer flips 
                                                              than common solutions. No such relation is evident for the 
                                                              logistic problem in Figure 2B. 

                                                              3 Solution Space Structure 
                                                              In this section, we attempt to gain insight into the structure 
                                                              of the solution space by analyzing hamming distances be•
                                                              tween solutions. For both the logistics and 3-SAT problems, 
                                                              we computed the hamming distance between all solutions. 
                                                              Thus, we generated 0(n2) distances per problem, where n is 
                                                              the number of problem solutions. 
                                                                 Figures 3A and B show histograms of these distances for 
Figure 1: Frequency of finding a specific soln. vs. the median the 3-SAT and logistics problem, respectively. The 3-SAT 
number of flips to find this solution for a 3-SAT problem.    hamming distance distribution is trimodal, while the logistics 
                                                              problem gives a unimodal distribution. These distributions 
                                                              suggest that the 3-SAT instance's solution space has multi•
                                                              ple clusters of solutions, while the logistic problem's solution 
                                                              space has only a single cluster of solutions. 
                                                                 Of course, it is inherently difficult to analyze structure 
                                                              within these 70+ dimension solution spaces, and many other 
                                                              underlying structures could explain the results seen in Fig•
                                                              ure 3. Nevertheless, we believe that these figures are highly 
                                                              suggestive. 

                                                              4 Obtaining More Uniform Coverage 
                                                              In the previous experiment with the 3-SAT instance, we ob•
                                                              served that rare solutions are generally found with fewer flips 
                                                              than common solutions. Intuitively, one needs to start rela•
                                                              tively close to such a rare solution to find it. Following up 
                                                              on this observation, we decreased the cutoff value (number 
                                                              of flips until restart) for Walksat. As shown in Figure 4A, 
                                                              our experiments indicate that a lower cutoff indeed makes 
Figure 2: Frequency of finding a specific soln. vs. the median the sampling more uniform on the 3-SAT instance. Unfor•
number of flips to find this solution for a logistic problem. tunately, as a side effect, the median number of flips to reach 
                                                              a solution goes up. Thus, there appears to be a tradeoff be•
                                                              tween speed and uniformity on the 3-SAT instance. Note that 
experiments. (Relsat [Bayardo and Pehoushek 2000] was         theoretically, a cutoff of 0 (no flips) gives us purely uniform 
used to systematically generate all solutions.) For the logis• sampling. However, such a strategy is clearly infeasible for 
tics planning formula, we started with logistics.d. cnf avail• any instance of practical interest. (A cutoff below 40 makes 
able from Satlib with over lOelO solutions. To facilatate so• it practically infeasible to find all solutions for our random 
lution set sampling experiments, we added 52 unit clauses,    problem instance.) Varying the cutoff used for the logistic 
constraining the instance to 1600 solutions.                  problem did not have an observable effect on uniformity of 
   For the 3-SAT and logistic instances, we performed 50e6    sampling, as expected. 
and lc6 runs of WalkSAT, respectively. All of these runs suc•    Intuitively, increasing WalkSATs noise level would lead 
cessfully found a solution, and WalkSAT ultimately found ev•  to a less greedy and more "erratic" search. It would therefore 
ery solution for both instances. Summary statistics for these be reasonable to expect more uniform sampling of solutions. 
experiments are available in Table 1.                         Quite surprisingly however, as shown in Figure 4B, the fre•
   Figures 1 and 2 display the relationship between "solu•    quency of the most common and the rarest solution is hardly 
tion frequency" (how often a particular solution is reached)  affected by the noise level. This unexpected finding requires 
and "speed" (the median number of flips to reach that solu•   further study. It also means that we need to develop other 
tion). Each point represents a unique solution. The figure    ways to improve WalkSATs sampling. We obtained similar 
further confirms the results from Table 1: WalkSATs solu•     results for the logistic problem, which are not shown due to 
tion sampling can be highly non-uniform. Notice the scale     space constraints. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                      1377                   Figure 3: Hamming distances between all solutions for a (A) 3-SAT and (B) logistics problem 


    Figure 4: Uniformity of Sampling for a 3-SAT problem: (A) Soln. Frequency vs. Cutoff (B) Soln. Frequency vs. Noise 

5 Summary                                                                  [McAllesteret al., 1997] D. McAllester, B. Selman, and H. Kautz. 
                                                                         Evidence for invariants in local search. In Proc. ofAAAI-97, pp 321-
   1. WalkSAT is able to find all solutions for the 3-SAT and 
                                                                         326, 1997. 
      constrained logistic problem, within a reasonable num•
                                                                           [Roth, 1996] D. Roth, On the Hardness of Approximate Reason•
      ber of trials.                                                     ing, In Artificial Intelligence Journal, Vol. 82, 1-2, pp 273-302, 
  2. Solution sampling can be highly non-uniform, particu•               1996. 
      larly for the 3-SAT problem.                                         [Selman et al., 1994] B. Selman, H. Kautz, and B. Cohen. Noise 
                                                                         Strategies for Local Search. In Proc. AAA1-94, pp 337-343, 1994. 
  3. The 3-SAT instances appear to have a more complicated 
      solution space than the logistic problem. 
  4. Increasing WalkSATs noise does not appear to in•
      crease the solution sampling uniformity, while it de•
      grades WalkSATs speed. 
  5. Challenge: Devise ways to obtain more uniform sam•
      pling. 
References 
[Bayardo and Pehoushek, 2000] R.J. Bayardo and J.D. Pehoushek. 
Counting models using connected components. In Proc. AAAI-00. 


1378                                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS 