                                                               BDIOCTI 
                          Obligations and the Specification of Agent Behavior 

               Jan Broersen                                Mehdi Dastani                          Leendert van der Torre 
         ICS, Utrecht University                      ICS, Utrecht University                          CWI Amsterdam 
              The Netherlands                              The Netherlands                             The Netherlands 
            broersen@cs.uu.nl                              mehdi@cs.uu.nl                                 torre@cwi.nl 

1 Introduction                                                             A speciality of CTL is that some formulae - called path 
                                                                        formulae- are not interpreted relative to a particular situation. 
Recently several agent architectures have been proposed that 
                                                                        What is relevant here are full paths. The reference to M is 
incorporate obligations. However, agent specification or ver•
                                                                        omitted whenever it is understood. 
ification languages that take obligations into account have re•
ceived less attention. Our research question is how properties 
involving obligations can be specified or verified in an exten•
sion of Rao and Georgeff's BDICTL- In Section 2 we extend 
BDICTL with so-called Standard Deontic Logic, and in Sec•
tion 3 and 4 we introduce various single agent and multiagent 
properties. 

2 BDIOCTl 
We use an equivalent reformulation of Rao and Georgeff's 
formalism 11991] presented by Schild [2000], which we ex•
tend with Standard Deontic Logic (SDL, Von Wright 11951 ]). 
We only consider the semantics. 

Definition 1 (Syntax BDIOCTL) Assume n agents. The ad-
mis sable formulae of are categorized into two classes, 
state formulae and path formulae. 
 S1 Each primitive proposition is a state formula. 
 S2 If and are state formulae, then so are and  
 S3 If is a path formula, and are state formulae. 
 S4If is a state formula and 1 i n, then 
                                     are state formulae as well. 
  P If and are state formulae, then and are 
     path formulae. 

  The semantics of BDICTL involves two dimensions. The 
truth of a formula depends on both the world w and the tem•
poral state s. A pair (w,s) is called a situation in which 
BDICTL formulae are evaluated. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                                         1389  3 Single agent properties                                     4 Multi-agent Obligations 
 The following properties characterize the relation between    In a multi-agent setting agents interact with each other, 
 mental attitudes of a single agent.                           thereby creating obligations. For example, in an electronic 
                                                               market where agents interact to buy and sell goods, sending a 
 3.1 Regimentation 
                                                               confirmation to buy an item creates the obligation of payment 
 A main question when developing a normative system is         by the buyer and the obligation of shipment of the item by the 
 whether the norms can be violated or not, i.e. whether the    seller. Social systems may be designed in which obligations 
norms are soft or hard constraints. In the latter case, the    are related to the mental attitudes of other agents. For exam•
norms are said to be regimented. Regimented norms corre•       ple, there may be communities in which agent i may adopt all 
spond to preventative control systems in computer security.    the obligations of agent j. 
For example, in the metro in Paris it is not possible to travel 
without a ticket, because there is a preventative control sys•
tem, whereas it is possible to travel without a ticket on the 
                                                               The following property characterizes that agent i adopts the 
French trains, because there is a detective control system. 
                                                               desires of agent j as its obligations. For example, if agent j 
Norm regimentation for agent i is characterized by: 
                                                               desires to eat then agent i is obliged to see to it that he gets 
                                                               something to eat. 
Strong and weak epistemic norm regimentation are: 

And intentional norm regimentation is:                         In a master slave relationship, the intentions of the master 
                                                               become the obligations of the slave. 

A variant of the latter regimentation is conditional to a con•
flict between agent i's internal and external motivations. For 
                                                               Agent i is a dictator if for every other agent j it holds that: 
example, if an agent is obliged to work but desires to go to 
the beach, then it intends to go to work. Or at least it does 
not intend to go to the beach. An agent is called strongly or 
weakly respectful if:                                          Finally, a particular kind of dictator i is one whose desires 
                                                               immediately turn into obligations of another agent j. 

Moreover, a respectful agent can internalize its obligations in 
the sense that they turn into desires, or at least it cannot decide 
to violate the obligation. For example, if an agent is obliged 5 Summary 
to work then it also desires to work, or at least it cannot desire 
                                                               In this paper we have introduced the BDIOCTL logic; a com•
not to work. 
                                                               bination of Rao and Georgeff's BDICTL formalism and stan•
                                                               dard deontic logic SDL. We have defined several specification 
Instead of respectful, agents may also be egocentric, which    and verification properties in this logic. The formalization of 
can be characterized by similar properties:                    other properties is the subject of further research. The option 
                                                               most discussed in deontic logic is whether violations of norms 
                                                               can trigger new obligations, i.e. whether there is contrary-to-
3.2 Persistence                                                duty reasoning. For example, it is often assumed that the legal 
Obligations typically persist until a deadline, e.g. deliver the code does not contain contrary-to-duty norms. Properties re•
goods before noon, or they persist forever, e.g. don't kill.   lated to contrary-to-do reasoning are therefore of particular 
We denote a deadline obligation by Oi(p, d), where achieve•    interest. 
ment of the proposition d is the deadline for the obligation to 
achieve p. A deadline obligation Oi(p,d) persists until it is  References 
fulfilled or becomes obsolete because the deadline is reached: [Rao and Georgeff, 1991] A.S. Rao and M.R Georgeff. 
                                                                 Modeling rational agents within a BDI-architecture. In 
                                                                 J. Allen, R. Fikes, and E. Sandewall, editors, Proceed•
  A deadline obligation 0{(p,p), for which the only dead•        ings of the 2nd International Conference on Principles of 
line is the achievement of the obligation itself, is called an   Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR'91), pages 
'achievement obligation'. We may characterize that Oip is an     473-484. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1991. 
achievement obligation by: 
                                                               [Schild, 2000] K. Schild. On the relationship between BD1-
                                                                 logics and standard logics of concurrency. Autonomous 
                                                                 agents and multi-agent systems, 3:259-283, 2000. 
  Alternatively, we may characterize that Oip persists for•
                                                               [Wright, 1951] G.H. von Wright. Deontic logic. Mind, 60:1-
ever, i.e. that it is a 'maintenance obligation', by: 
                                                                  15, 1951. 


1390                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS 