                                        Coherence of Laws* 
              Rex Kwok and Norman Y. Foo                          Abhaya C. Nayak 
                 Knowledge Systems Group                      Knowledge Systems Group 
            Department of Artificial Intelligence                  School of MPCE 
        School of Computer Science and Engineering               Macquarie University 
        University of New South Wales, NSW 2052                       NSW 2109 
                          Australia                                    Australia 

                     Abstract                          more coherent than T2 if in accounting for the observations 
                                                       the formulas in Tl "work together better" than those in T2, 
    The core of scientific theories are laws. These    or are "more useful" than in T2. A persuasive advocate for 
    laws often make use of theoretical terms, linguis• such properties is Bonjour iBonjour 85]. In a previous paper 
    tic entities which do not directly refer to observ- [Kwok, et.al. 98] we proposed a definition that amounted to 
    ables. There is therefore no direct way of deter•  a quantitative measure of coherence of theories. In this paper 
    mining which theoretical assertions are true. This we elaborate on the definition, repairing its deficiencies and 
    suggests that multiple theories may exist which are extending its range of application. 
    incompatible with each other but compatible with 
    all possible observations. Since such theories make 2 Coherence 
    the same empirical claims, empirical tests cannot 
    be used to differentiate or rank such theories. One Definition 1 (Supports for Observations) Given an input 
    property that has been suggested for evaluating ri• set I and and output set O, a subset TofT is a I-relative 
    val theories is coherence. This was only understood support for a set O of observations if 
    qualitatively until we [Kwok, et.al. 98] introduced 
    a coherence measure based on the average use of 
    formulas in support sets for observations. The idea 
    was to identify highly coherent theories with those Let S(T, I, O) denote the set of all I-relative supports for O. 
    whose formulas that are tightly coupled to account   This definition differs from that in [Kwok, et.al. 98] in the 
    for observations, while low coherence theories con• relativisation of notion of support to the input set 7, which 
    tain many disjointed and isolated statements. Our  better models scientific practice. 
    current approach generalizes that insight to accom•
    modate fundamental ideas from the philosophy of    Assumption 1 (Clausal Basis Assumption) All bases of 
    science and better mirrors scientific practice. More• theories are clauses. 
    over, this new approach is neutral with respect to 
    the philosophy and practice of science, and is able 
    to explain notions like modularization using coher•
    ence. 

1 Introduction 
This extended summary highlights the main points of the pa•
per, a full version [Kwok, et.al. 03] of which can be obtained 
electronically. This section motivates the problem and subse•
quent sections outline the definitions which formalize the in•
tuitions behind coherence, describe some properties that flow 
from these definitions, and provide examples of their use. 
  Scientific theories evidently comprise laws that use vocab•
ularies that contain terms which on the one hand refer to ob•
servations, and on the other refer to postulated or theoretical 
entities that are not directly observable. It is in fact quite 
common for two theories T1 and T2 that agree on the sta•
tus of their observational terms to differ in their theoretical 
terms. One way to compare Tl and T2 is to say that Tl is 
                                                         Informally, this is the relative frequency of occurence of a 
  *Supported in part by the Australian Research Council. in the support sets for O. 


1400                                                                                      POSTER PAPERS Definition 3 (Coherence of a Theory) Let T be a finite the-      Each such support sentence has utility 1 for a particular 
                  I a finite sequence of (input) observations swan swi, and 0 for other swans. 
               and O a finite sequence of (output) observa-      Hence the coherence of Tn for such k observations is 
                     The I-relative coherence of T with re-          which is asymptotically 0 with large n. This is an 
                                                              argument against the fix. The "good" fix is what happens in 
                                                              inductive learning when a predicate is invented to summarize 
                                                              the discovery that black swans live in Australia, viz., the new 
                                                              theory X" wit 2 sentences 

   Informally, coherence is the average utility of the elements                                                       (4) 
of T in supporting some observations with the help of others.                                                         (5) 
The inputs do not figure directly in the counting because it is The input set I now comprises pairs of the swan atoms and 
the internal laws (or rules) of T that we are assessing for how the new observable Australian literals. The output O are 
the outputs are supported.                                    the two color terms white and black. Now for any one swan 
                                                              (call it c) observation, its color is supported either by the 
3 A Typical Application                                       formulas 4 and or by the formulas 5 and 
In the full paper there are applications of the above defini• Australian(c). Therefore, irrespective of the color the sup•
tions to (i) demolish Craig's Trick [Craig 53], alleged by some port set for each observation has cardinality 2. Suppose there 
to show that theoretical terms are unnecessary, by demon•     are k\ white and k2 black swans in an observation sequence. 
strating that it yields highly incohrent theories; (ii) argue that It is then easy to see that the utilities of formula 4 is 1 for k1 
Mendel's assumption of two independent theoretical charac•    observations but 0 for the k2 observations; formula 5 is the 
teristics to account for the observations of his pea plant ex• dual of the preceding. The coherence of this theory for any 
periments yields a highly coherent theory; and (iii) indicate         swans is therefore  
that programs that realize the Kolmogorov complexity of se•   3.2 Modularization and Coherence 
quences are maximally coherent. Here we focus on a typical 
                                                              In the above example, suppose we partition the output obser•
application and its implication for coherence of modular the•
                                                              vational terms into black (swans) and white (swans), denot•
ories. 
                                                              ing the disjoint sets by 0b and Ow respectively. Likewise, 
3.1 The Black Swan Fix                                        we partition the input set into two, Ib and Iw denoting the 
                                                              pairs of hypothesized Australian literal and swan atom. Then 
Prior to western ornithologists exploration of Australia all the 
                                                              it is not hard to see that the formula 4 is in all support sets of 
swans they had hitherto encountered were white in color. For 
                                                                             but is not in any support set of 
this focussed domain, there is only one type of object, namely 
                                                              Dually, the formula 5 is in all support sets of but 
swans, that are of interest. The observational predicates are 
                                                              in none of those of The utility of each formula 
swan and white, and we regard the former as the input and 
                                                              is 1 in their respective support sets, and 0 in the other. This is 
the latter as the output. A succinct way to capture induction 
                                                              about as strong as we can get in modularizing a theory. 
is the rule 1 in the theory T below: 
                                                                 This idea has the following obvious generalization. Sup•
                                                              pose an observation set to be accounted for can be partitioned 
                                                       (1)    into and the theory T has invented theoretical 
  Notice that T does not have any theoretical terms as we     terms , such that for each is in every set of 
have specified that both the predicates are observational. In             Then the modularize the theory T with respect 
Australia they saw black swans. Here is an ad hoc way to      to the observation partitions. 
revise T minimally if we can enumerate these black swans as 
additions to the original input set, i.e. these new swans are References 
sw\, sw2,..., swn. Call this fix Tn. The revised rules that   [Bonjour 85] L. Bonjour. The Structure of Empirical Knowl•
replace rule 1 are:                                              edge. Harvard University Press, 1985. 
(1 sentence) 
                                                              [Craig 53] W. Craig. On axiomatizability within a system. 
                                                       (2)       In The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 18, pages 30-32, 1953. 
                                                              [Kwok, et.al. 98] R.B.H. Kwok, A.C. Nayak, N. Foo. Coher•
                                                                 ence Measure Based on Average Use of Formulas. Pro•
and {2n sentences)                                               ceedings of the Fifth Pacific Rim Conference on Artifi•
                                                                 cial Intelligence, 553-564, LNCS v. 1531, Springer Verlag, 
                                                       (3)       1998. 
                                                              [Kwok,et.al.03] R.B.H. Kwok, N. Foo and 
Suppose the new observation terms are about swan color, i.e.,    A.C. Nayak, Coherence of Theories (full ver•
black or white.                                                  sion). Available as Postscipt file via FTP 

  Tn has sentences. For any finite set of k black swans,         ftp://ftp.cse.unsw.edu.au/pub/users/ksg/Confercnce/ijcai03-
there are exactly 2k sentences in Tn that support their color.   Coherence.ps.gz. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1401 