                                         Collaborative Web Search* 

                   Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, Jill Freyne 
                            Smart Media Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland 
                                            {firstname.lastname} @ucd.ie 


                        Abstract                               PDAs). Their restricted input capabilities and limited screen 
                                                               real-estate mean that mobile users are even less likely to pro•
     Web search engines struggle to satisfy the needs of       vide well formulated queries or tolerate long result lists. 
     Web users. Users are notoriously poor at represent•         For the most part, recent search engine advances have fo•
     ing their needs in the form of a query, and search        cused on better ways to handle vague queries by improving 
     engines are poor at responding to vague queries.          existing page analysis, indexing and ranking methods. How•
     However progress has been made by introducing             ever a critical shortcoming still remains: a query might in•
     context into the search process. In this paper we         clude terms that identify the primary information target, but 
     describe and evaluate a novel approach to using           rarely includes terms that usefully describe the search con-
     context in Web search that adapts a generic search        text. For example, a simple query for "jaguar" docs not 
     engine for the needs of a specialist community of         indicate whether the user is interested in cars or cats, and 
     users. This collaborative search method enjoys sig•       queries for "Michael Jordan" do not distinguish between the 
     nificant performance benefits and avoids the pri•         basketball star and the Berkeley professor. Consequently, 
     vacy and security concerns that are commonly as•          researchers have recently focused on ways to exploit con•
     sociated with related personalization research.           text during search, either by explicitly establishing context 
                                                               up-front or by implicitly inferring it. For example, the In-
1 Introduction                                                 quires 2 meta-search engine [Glover et al., 2001] supple•
                                                               ments keyword-based queries with a context category; users 
It is a tragic irony of the information age that users are find• explicitly select from a set of categories such as "research pa•
ing it increasingly difficult to benefit from access to unprece• per", "homepage" etc. Alternatively, implicit context can be 
dented amounts of information. Even with the help of modern    automatically inferred. For example, systems such as Watson 
search engines we regularly fail to locate relevant information [Budzik and Hammond, 2000] take advantage of user activ•
in a timely manner. Many factors contribute to this informa-   ity prior to search to judge context; Watson monitors a user's 
tion overload problem. Certainly, the sheer quantity of in•    word processing activity and uses document text as the basis 
formation, and its growth rate, tax even the most advanced     for query terms. In contrast, relevance feedback techniques 
search engines. For example, various estimates indicate that   attempt to use actual search results to inform context. For 
even the largest search engines often cover only a fraction of example, [Mitra et al., 1998] extract correlated terms from 
the available information space [Lawrence and Giles, 1999].    top-ranking search results to focus context on the most rele•
   However, search engine coverage is just the tip of the ice• vant search results as opposed to the entire set. 
berg, and can be greatly enhanced by using meta-search meth•     In this paper we describe a novel technique for exploiting 
ods [Dreilinger and Howe, 1997; Selberg and Etzioni, 1997].    context during search: collaborative search acts as a front-
A more pressing problem is the limited degree to which those   end for existing search engines and re-ranks results based 
pages that are covered can be accurately ranked with re•       on the learned preferences of a community of users. We 
spect to a given query. Part of this problem lies with the     describe and evaluate its implementation in the I-SPY sys•
users. Search engines work very well for properly formu•       tem and highlight how I-SPY achieves personalization in an 
lated queries, but they come up short when presented with      anonymous fashion, without storing individual user profiles. 
an average Web user's query, which typically contains about 
2 query terms [Lawrence and Giles, 1998]. The inevitable       2 Collaborative Search 
outcome is long lists of apparently relevant results, with gen•
                                                               Collaborative search is motivated by two key ideas. First, spe•
uinely useful results (for the target user) few and far between. 
                                                               cialised search engines attract communities of like-minded 
Moreover, these problems are exacerbated by the new gen•
                                                               users and naturally limited context variations. For example, 
eration of mobile computing devices (eg. WAP phones and 
                                                               a motoring search engine is likely to attract queries with a 
   The support of the Informatics Research Initiative of Enterprise motoring theme; here "jaguar" queries are more likely to re•
Ireland is gratefully acknowledged.                            late to cars than cats. Second, by capturing the selections of 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1417                                                                engine can be used to service many different search services 
                                                               across a range of portals, for example, each one adapted for 
                                                               the needs of a particular user group through its associated hit 
                                                               matrix. Alternatively, different hit matrices could be associ•
                                                               ated with different regions of the same site to bias search with 
                                                               respect to different topics. For instance, the work of [Havel i-
                                                               wala, 2002] biases PageRank with respect to different topic 
                                                               groups in an Internet directory by generating category-biased 
                                                               PageRank vectors from the URLs contained in top-level di•
                                                               rectory categories. A similar strategy can be supported by 1-
                                                               SPY. Placing a search box on the Programming Languages 
                                                               directory page will naturally capture queries from this do•
                                                               main. And the behaviour of the users providing these queries, 
                                                               will gradually adjust I-SPY's relevancy metric and ranking 
                                                               function in favour of Programming Languages pages. 

                                                               3 Evaluation 
                                                               For our evaluation we focus on a specific user community 
                                                               and search domain: computer science students and program•
                                                               ming languages. A set of 60 queries is produced from the 
                                                               programming languages listed in Yahoo. I-SPY is configured 
                                                              to query two underlying search engines, Yahoo (which uses 
                                                              Google) and Splat!, and each of the 60 queries is submitted 
                                                              to obtain up to 30 results based on a standard meta-search 
                                                               ranking function. A group of 20 computer science students 
                                                              are asked to identify relevant results, based on the summary 
         Figure 1: The I-SPY meta-search engine.              result descriptions returned by 1-SPY. 
                                                                 A leave-one-out evaluation methodology is employed so 
                                                              that each user is designated to be a test user with the re•
a community of users it is possible to estimate query-page    maining 19 serving as training users. The relevancy results 
relevance as the probability that a page pj will be selected  of the training users are used to populate I-SPY's hit matrix 
for query qt. Collaborative search combines both ideas in a   and the results for each query are re-ranked using I-SPY's 
meta-search engine called I-SPY (Figure 1).                   relevancy metric. Next, we count the number of these results 
  The unique feature of collaborative search is its ability to listed as relevant by the test user for various result-list sizes 
personalize search results for a community of users, but with• (k = 5..30). Finally, we make the equivalent relevancy mea•
out relying on traditional context-analysis (eg. [Lawrence and surements by analysing the results produced by the untrained 
Giles, 1998J) or personalization (eg. [Bradley et al, 2000])  version of I-SPY (Standard), which serves as a benchmark. 
techniques. I-SPY achieves this by storing the usage patterns 
                                                                 Figure 2 presents the results for I-SPY and the benchmark 
of users as a hit matrix, H. Each element, H   equals the 
                                             i,j,             search engine as a graph of precision versus recall for each 
number of times that page p  was selected for query q . This 
                           j                        t         result-list size; these are really bounded versions of the stan•
matrix is a powerful source of relevancy information; after all 
                                                              dard precision and recall metrics and the measures for each 
its data reflect query-page relevancy judgments by users. The 
                                                              engine converge once a complete result-list is returned. The 
relevancy of p  to query q  is estimated by the probability that 
             3          z                                     results indicate a significant and consistent benefit for I-SPY 
P  will be selected for query q ; sec Equation 1. 
 j                           i                                over the standard meta-search benchmark. For example, for 
                                                              result-lists of 5 items, I-SPY achieves a precision of just over 
                                                       (1)    96% compared to the standard meta-search precision of only 
                                                              63%. Similarly, at the same result-list size, we find an av•
This relevancy metric is tuned to the preferences of a commu• erage recall for 1-SPY of 64% compared to just under 40% 
nity of users, and the queries and pages that they tend to pre• for the standard method. Indeed we see that I-SPY achieves 
fer. Deploy I-SPY on a motoring web site and its hit matrix    100% recall at just over 20 items whilst it takes the bench•
will become populated with queries and pages that are rele•   mark 30 items to achieve the same level of recall. The fact 
vant to car fans. For example, over time queries for "jaguar'" that larger relative benefits are available at smaller result-list 
will tend to result in the promotion of car sites because users sizes is important. Users rarely sift through large result-lists 
submitting this query term will tend to select Jaguar car sites, and so, the more relevant items that can be presented earlier 
ignoring the wild cat pages. The wild cat pages may still be  on, the better. This means that I-SPY is likely to be espe•
returned but will be relegated to the bottom of the result list. cially valuable in situations where large result lists must be 
  In fact I-SPY can deploy multiple I-SPY search agents,      truncated for other reasons, such as the small screen sizes o f 
each with its own separate hit table. Thus the central I-SPY  mobile devices. 


1418                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS                                                               5 Conclusions 
                                                              Improving the accuracy of Web search engines by introducing 
                                                              context into the search process is an important and challeng•
                                                              ing research problem. We have described a generic search 
                                                              engine that can be adapted or personalized to fit the context 
                                                              and needs of a community of users by using the collaborative 
                                                              search technique. The benefits include superior precision and 
                                                              recall characteristics when compared to a benchmark search 
                                                              engine. In addition, this level of personalization is achieved 
                                                              without the need to store individual user profiles, leading to 
                                                              superior security and privacy benefits when compared to al•
                                                              ternative approaches. 
           Figure 2: Precision vs. Recall Results.              In closing it is worth highlighting that collaborative search 
                                                              makes no strong assumptions about the form of the underly•
                                                              ing search engines and is generally applicable across a range 
4 Discussion                                                  of content types including Web pages, graphics and photos, 
                                                              audio and video. Finally, its proposed ranking metric is com•
There are number of problems with collaborative search that   putationally efficient (O(k) in the number of search results) 
need to be addressed to guarantee its applicability across a  and requires no additional parsing of result pages. 
broad range of search tasks. Perhaps the most important prob•
lem is the so-called cold-start problem. This refers to the fact References 
that newly indexed Web pages find it difficult to attract user 
attention since they will have a low relevancy score using 1- [Bradley et al, 2000] K. Bradley, R. Rafter, and B. Smyth. 
SPY's metric and thus appear far down in result-lists, limiting  Case-based User Profiling for Content Personalization. In 
their ability to attract the hits they deserve for a given query. O. Stock P. Brusilovsky and C. Strapparava, editors, Pro•
Essentially there is an in-built bias towards older pages.       ceedings of the International Conference on Adaptive Hy•
  There are a number of ways that this problem might be          permedia and Adaptive Web-based Systems, pages 62-72. 
dealt with. One is to look at ways to normalize the relevancy    Springer-Verlag, 2000. 
of pages with respect to their age. For example, we might     [Budzik and Hammond, 2000] J. Budzik and K. Hammond. 
measure the age of a page by the time (or number of queries)     User Interactions with Everyday Applications as Con•
since its first hit and amplify the relevancy of young pages     text for Just-In-Time Information Access. In Proceedings 
relative to older pages.                                         International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces., 
  Indeed there is another side to this problem. Just as new      pages 44-51. ACM Press, 2000. 
pages find it difficult to attract hits, so too older pages may [Dreilinger and Howe, 1997] D. Dreilinger and A. Howe. 
find it easy to attract hits. In the worst case scenario this could Experiences with Selecting Search Engines Using Meta 
even bias I-SPY's result-lists towards pages that are likely to  Search. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 
be out of date and thus less relevant to current users than they 15(3): 195-222, 1997. 
were to past users. Once again, biasing relevance towards 
new pages should help to cope with this problem.              [Glover et al, 2001] E. Glover, S. Lawrence, M. D. Gordon, 
  Of course in general there are many factors that can, and      W. P. Birmingham, and C. Lee Giles. Web Search - Your 
probably should, be taken into account when ranking search       Way. Communications of the ACM, 44(12): 97-102, 2001. 
results. We have focused primarily on I-SPY's relevancy fac•  [Haveliwala, 2002] T. H. Haveliwala. Topic-Sensitive 
tor, but other factors such as the age of a page and its meta-   PageRank. In Proceedings of the World-Wide Web Con•
search ranking are also appropriate. As part of our future      ference. ACM Press, 2002. 
work we will explore how best to combine these factors to 
                                                              [Lawrence and Giles, 1998] S. Lawrence and C. Lee Giles. 
produce optimal result rankings. This may or may not involve 
                                                                 Context and Page Analysis for Improved Web Search. 
a direct combination of the rankings. For example, one op•
                                                                 IEEE Internet Computing, July-August:38-^6, 1998. 
tion is to present search results not as a single list of results, 
as is normally the case, but perhaps as two or more lists of  [Lawrence and Giles, 1999] S. Lawrence and C. Lee Giles. 
results in order to emphasise the different qualities of the re• Accessibility of Information on the Web. Nature, 
turned pages. For instance, in general only a subset of search   400(6740): 107-109, 1999. 
results are likely to have non-zero I-SPY relevance scores;   [Mitralal, 1998] M. Mitra, A. Singhal, and C. Buckley. 
that is, a subset of results will have been selected in the past Improving Automatic Query Expansion. In Proceedings 
for the current query. Therefore, it is practical to present the of ACMSIGIR, pages 206-214. ACM Press, 1998. 
I-SPY results with relevancy scores as special recommenda•
                                                              [Selberg and Etzioni, 1997] E. Selberg and O. Etzioni. The 
tions (ranked by their relevancy). The remaining results can 
                                                                 Meta-Crawler Architecture for Resource Aggregation on 
be presented separately, ranked by their meta-score. In turn a 
                                                                 the Web. IEEE Expert, Jan-Feb:l 1-14, 1997. 
third list of new pages, ranked by meta-search score or rele•
vancy, can also be separately presented. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                      1419 