   Network Meta-Reasoning for Information Assurance in Mobile Agent Systems 

                        Donovan Artz Max Peysakhov William Regli 
                                         Department of Computer Science 
                                                  Drexel University 
                                           Philadelphia, PA 19104-2875 

1 Introduction 

This paper develops a practical means of measuring informa•
tion assurance for mobile agent systems operating on wire•
less, ad hoc networks based on meta-reasoning [Dix et ai, 
2000; Xuan et al, 2001] to improve the security of com•
munication. Figure 1 shows an agent system and its two 
distinct layers of communication: host-to-host and agent-to-
agent. Given the plethora of new techniques for identifying 
network intruders, we study the compromised host problem: 
determining the appropriate response to an identified intruder. 
In the context of a mobile, multi-agent system operating on an 
ad hoc network [Forman & Zahorjan, 1994], it is not merely 
                                                              Figure 1: Nodes are either physical hosts or agents; edges 
a simple matter of removing the compromised hosts and its 
                                                              are network host or agent-to-agent connections. The shaded 
agents. While keeping the compromised host can result in 
                                                              node is a compromised host. The bold arrow is a safe network 
information disclosure, removal of the host can degrade or 
                                                              route; the dashed arrow is a compromised network route. 
even sever the network. Wc develop a state description for an 
agent system and introduce a measure of* information assur•
ance for the system in terms of the integrity of the messages 
delivered to the agents in a given network state. Agents have 
three responses to a compromised host: ignore the compro•
mised host; reroute around the compromised host using net•
work route redundancies; or remove the compromised host, 
by having the agents instruct their hosts to eliminate it from 2.1 Evaluation of an Agent System Network 
the network. These responses are shown in Figure 2. 
                                                              We model the information assurance level in an agent net•
                                                              work by analyzing how agents communicate. Observe that 
2 Technical Formulation                                       agents must send messages to other agents in order to collab•
                                                              orate in any decision procedure. In a decision procedure, typ•
A state description for a mobile agent network is defined in 
                                                              ically certain agents are authorities that collate voting mes•
terms of sets of hosts (H) and agents (.4). Given H and A, 
                                                              sages from all other agents involved in the decision. In the 
we can define: 
                                                              context of TH, any host housing an agent involved in at least 
                                                              one decision procedure authority is a sink in the network 
                                                              topology graph into which messages flow. For a simple deci•
                                                              sion, there may be only one sink; in the most complex case, 
                                                              all hosts are sinks. This paper will assume the most complex 
                                                              case, in which all hosts are housing decision authority agents. 
                                                                For any decision procedure, messages sent to the decision 
                                                              authority can be classified into successful messages and failed 
                                                              messages. A successful message is delivered without using 
                                                              the compromised host. A failed message either: (1) origi•
                                                              nates or ends at the compromised host; (2) is routed through 
                                                              the compromised host; or (3) cannot be routed because no 
                                                              network route exists. 
                                                                For a given TV, a change in 7// can could cause a change 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                     1455                        Figure 2: Responses to compromised hosts: (a) ignore, (b) reroute; (c) remove. 

in routing. If a route changes, the time taken to transmit a 
                                                              routes used by host h  as: ti = Note, as t
message over that route may also change. A change in mes•                          %                                    t 
sage delivery time can negatively impact a decision proce•    increases, the routing efficiency to host hi decreases. When 
dure. Moreover, a compromised host contains agents that       the routing efficiency is minimized (i.e., no connections ex•
may violate their expected behavior in a decision procedure.  ist) for a host = 1.0. As the routing efficiency increases 
Both factors must be considered when evaluating a state TV.   (i.e., shorter routes are used) for host hi, ti approaches 0.0. 
Wc define two values that can be used to evaluate TV with     Hence, the mean time rating for the entire mobile agent net-
respect to each factor: 
  1. A message integrity rating, which relates successful 
     messages received to failed messages. 
                                                              Assurance for Whole Mobile Agent Network. A linear 
  2. A time rating, which is an estimate of optimality for the 
                                                              combination of message integrity rating and time rating de•
     current network routes. 
                                                              fines a utility function assessing a mobile agent network in 
                                                              state TV in terms of both assurance and routing efficiency: 
Measuring Message Assurance. If each agent is in com•
munication with all of the other agents,                                                                              (1) 
                    is the total number of messages that the 
agents on host hi expect to receive from agents on other hosts a is a coefficient between 0 and 1 that determines the balance 
per unit of time given state TV. Based on the current routes  between assurance and network performance. If — 1.0, 
one can calculate the number of successful messages received  only message integrity is considered; if — 0.0, only time 
on host The message integrity rating for host h2              efficiency is considered. Note that V : TV [0.0,1.0], where 
is computed as: Note, as mi increases, the                    V(TV) = 1.0 is the best possible result. 
integrity of messages sent to host hi also increases. When 
                                                              2.2 Operators on an Agent System Network 
all messages sent to are successful, mi= 1.0. When all 
messages sent to fail, = 0.0. The mean message in•            Using Equation 1, agents can decide how to operate on their 
tegrity rating over the entire mobile agent network in state TV network. Naturally, the ignore operator does nothing. The 
                                                              reroute operator generates a new set of network routes, us•
is:                                                           ing only safe routes wherever possible. If VR'is the set of 
                                                              safest possible routes, the resulting mobile agent network 
                                                                  = is generated using the reroute oper•
Measuring Network Routing Efficiency. The trade off is        ator on TV (Figure 2(b)). Given the routing algorithm p and 
between message integrity and the timeliness of message de•   route weight function w, the following algorithm can be used 
livery. Network routing algorithms find sets of routes that   to compute TV'; 
minimize some value for all routes in a network. In general, 
routing algorithms use a weight function on each route and    Algorithm 1 reroute(N,hc) 
find the shortest, single source, paths to all vertices in TH. 
In this context, the function p represents the network rout•
ing algorithm which returns a set of shortest path routes for 
the set of hosts, given their current physical network topol•
                                                                 The remove operator results in the complete removal of 
ogy: where w is the edge weight fiinc-
                                                              the compromised host from participation in the agent sys•
tion. There are several schemes that can be used to weight 
                                                              tem's underlying network. The new mobile agent network, 
routes in wireless, ad hoc networks [Royer & Toh, 1999], all 
                                                                                      is the result of applying the removal 
of which can be approximated or bounded using a w that re•
                                                              operator on TV and is generated by the following algorithm: 
turns a value proportional to the time required to transmit a 
message through the network. The units of time returned by 
w are used for relative comparison of network routes, which 
we normalize w to simplify computations: w :TZ [1, \H|], 
where = |H| signifies that the route from host ht to 
h3 is non-existent and weight of the longest possible route is 
\H\ — 1. Now we can define a time rating, Ti for the network 


1456                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS                                                                   operator    m        t    V(N)    C1/n     U1/n 
                                                                     ignore  0.286  0.250   0.509     0.5     0.0 
                                                                    reroute  0.714  0.321    0.598   0.25     0.25 
                                                                    remove   0.833  0.524   0.577     0.0   0.42857 
  In order to select the operator resulting in the highest val•
ued agent system, consider the values V{N), V(N'), and        Table 1: The terms and result of V(N) using = 0.5, the 
V(N"). The highest of these values represents the best ac•    probability of compromised messages , and the probability 
tion for the agent system.                                    of unreceived messages for the result of each operator. 

3 Application: A Compromised Auction                          compromised host, but not by the required message delivery 
The disclosure of bids to a compromised host can affect the   time:  
intended, timely, outcome of an auction. A Vickrey auction      The disclosure of bids to a compromised host during this 
is a sealed bid auction where the second highest bid is paid  decision procedure is illustrated in Figure 3. Assume for tim•
by the highest bidder [Vickrey, 1961]. All bidders maximize   ing that r — 3. In this example, the probability is 
their payoff if they employ a truthful bidding strategy. Agents representative of the effect of compromised messages, and 
often use Vickrey auctions to acquire resources. Each agent   the probability is representative of the effect of time. 
submits its bid to an auctioneer host hi (the sink)—but unless As either probability increases, the value of the underlying 
the physical host of a bidding agent is directly connected to mobile agent system should decrease. 
h1, the message containing the bid must pass through other      Table 1 demonstrates how V(N) can be used to minimize 
hosts in the agent system. All agents operating under normal  the effect of a compromised host in a Vickrey auction. As the 
conditions have neither the intent nor the capability of reading probability of compromised messages increases, the message 
bids that are routed through their physical hosts.            integrity rating decreases. As the probability of unreceived 
                                                              messages increases, the time rating also increases. The oper•
                                                              ator yielding the highest value in this example is reroute. 

                                                              4 Conclusions 
                                                              This paper developed a utility-based model for agents to bal•
                                                              ance information assurance and network routing efficiency. 
                                                              We have discovered that there exists a natural tradeoff be•
                                                              tween information assurance and network routing efficiency 
                                                              for ad hoc mobile agent networks. Further, by empowering 
                                                              agents to decide for themselves how they communicate at the 
                                                              network level, one can increase the overall level of message 
                                                              integrity in an agent system. Our approach involves a novel 
                                                              exploitation of properties of ad hoc networks, enabling mo•
Figure 3: Bid propagation to host h\ in a Vickrey auction: (a) 
                                                              bile agents to automatically adapt to changes that affect the 
h  and h  bid (b) h  and h  bid (c) h  and h.  bid (d) h  bids 
 4      7         2      6         3      5         8         security of their communication and migration. The capabil•
                                                              ity to dynamically reason about the state of their network will 
  First, a compromised host, hc can read all bids that are    provides new possibilities for secure computing. 
sent directly to or routed by means of hc and potentially cor•
rupt the auction. In this case, instead of maximizing absolute References 
payoff, the bidding agents on hc maximize their payoff rel•
ative to other bidding agents. In this type of "antisocial bid• [Brandt & Weiss, 2001] F. Brandt & G. Weiss. Antisocial 
ding" [Brandt & Weiss, 2001], assuming there are n bidding       agents and Vickrey auctions. Wkshp on ATAL, V 2333, pp 
agents in the agent system, hc most successful if it knows all  335-347,2001. 
bids 6i, b2,..., bn placed by all of the other bidding agents. [Dix et al., 2000] J. Dix, V. S. Subrahmanian, & G. Pick. 
The worst case is when all physical hosts use routes that con•  Meta-Agent Programs. 1 Logic Prog., 46( 1): 1-60, 2000. 
tain hc. In general this is not the case. Hence, if there are [Forman & Zahorjan, 1994] G. H. Forman & J. Zahorjan. 
n' hosts that use routes containing hc, the probability that the The challenges of mobile computing. IEEE Comp., 
highest (or any) bid is disclosed to hc is equal to             27(4):38-47, Apr 1994. 
  Secondly, time is an issue: auctioneers are not willing to  [Royer & Toh, 1999] E. M. Royer & C. K. Toh. A review of 
wait indefinitely for all bidders to respond. In any given de•  current routing protocols for ad hoc mobile wireless net•
cision problem there is some threshold, T, such that, if a bid• works. IEEEPers. Comm., 6(2):46-55, Apr 1999. 
der is more than hops from the auctioneer, its bid will not   [Vickrey, 1961] W. Vickrey. Counter speculation, auctions, 
reach the auctioneer in time. Let be the set of all hosts       and competitive sealed tenders. J. Fin., 16(1 ):8—37, 1961. 
that communicate with host hi via a route longer than r hops: [Xuan et al., 2001] P. Xuan, V Lesser, & S. Zilberstein. 
                                        may contain hosts       Communication decisions in multi-agent cooperation: 
that use a route containing the compromised host. To adjust     model and experiments. AAAS, pp 616-623, 2001. 
for this overlap, compute the set Ct of hosts affected by the 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                      1457 