                     A Formalization of Equilibria for Multiagent Planning 

                            Michael Bowling, Rune Jensen, and Manuela Veloso 
                                           Computer Science Department 
                                             Carnegie Mellon University 
                                             Pittsburgh PA, 15213-3891 


1 Introduction                                                 2.2 The Formalization 
Traditionally, planning involves a single agent for which a    We first begin by formalizing some planning related concepts. 
planner needs to find a sequence of actions that can transform The definitions parallel closely with Cimatti and colleagues' 
some initial state into some state where a given goal state•   single-agent formalization [2000]. We extend their defini•
ment is satisfied. But in general, "planning" can be viewed    tions of planning domains, problems, and solutions to encom•
as being concerned with a general action selection problem.    pass multiple agents. We then follow this formal framework 
The planning framework has been extended from the classi•      with a definition of multiagent planning equilibrium. Notice 
cal deterministic plan generation problem along many other     that the definitions and concepts presented are not bound to 
dimensions, in particular nondeterministic actions. With the   any particular planning algorithm or language. 
introduction of nondeterministic actions, the presence of an     We start by defining a multiagent planning domain. 
environment and other agents can become a consideration. In    Definition 1 (Multiagent Planning Domain) 
fact, actions may have nondeterministic effects not only be•   A multiagent planning domain D is a tuple 
cause of the uncertainty of their own execution, but also due                       where, 
to the uncertainty of the actions of other agents. The pos•
sible presence of other agents as executors is the challenge 
of "multiagent planning." The interest in this area has been 
steadily increasing and many issues remain open. 
   Despite the existence of planning languages with explicit 
models of uncontrallable agents [Jensen and Veloso, 2000], 
we believe that there has not been a formal discussion of the 
space of multiagent plans or solutions. In this work, we do 
not focus on the problem of plan generation for multiagent 
planning. Instead, we focus on the interesting question of 
analyzing and comparing solutions for multiagent planning. 
Our motivation comes from making an analogy with game 
theory and the notion of equilibria [Owen, 1995].                  I.e., each agent's set of actions that can be executed from 
  Inspired by game theory and extending previous formal            a state are independent. 

definitions of single-agent planning [Cimatti et al, 2000], in   In addition, let ACTi(s) Ai be the set of applicable or 
this paper, we introduce a formal definition of equilibria for executable actions in state s. Formally, 
multiagent planning. 

2 Planning Equilibria                                          The additional condition in the planning domain definition 
In this section, we formalize the concept of a multiagent plan• on R requires that each agent be capable of selecting actions 
ning equilibrium. In order to help make these concepts clear   independently. Formally this amounts to the following. For 
we will first describe an example, which is small enough to    all states s and executable actions for the agents 
easily enumerate all of the states.                            there exists some transition that is in 7v. 
                                                                 In the doorway domain, V contains two propositions, A-
2.1 A Simple Example — The Narrow Doorway                      in-room and B-in-room. The set of states S corresponds to all 
Consider a two agent robot domain where both agents are in     four possible subsets of P, since all combinations of proposi•
a hallway and want to move into the same room through a        tions are valid in this domain, n is two and is the set of 
single doorway. The agents have an operator to go through      actions {G, W}. The transition relation is defined by the 
the door (G) that only succeeds if the other agent is not also rules described above. The complete enumeration of states 
trying to go through the door. They also have the choice of    and transitions is shown in Figure 1. The figure also num•
waiting (W). Each agent's goal is simply to be in the room.    bers the states so they can be referred to in an abbreviated 


1460                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS                                                                             Intuitively, Q is the set of states that the system could reach 
                                                                         during execution of the plan and T is the set of transitions 
                                                                         that the system could cross during execution. For our door•
                                                                         way domain the execution structure induced by our example 
                                                                         joint state-action table is, 

 Figure 1: Doorway domain. andrepresent As and 
 B\s goal states, and , respectively. 
                                                                         We can now formalize an execution path. 
 form. Note that this domain satisfies the independent action            Definition 5 (Execution Path) 
 condition on R.                                                         Let K = (Q, T) be the execution structure induced by a state-
                                                                         action table from X. An execution path of K from so T is 

                                                                         a possibly infinite sequence SQ,SI , .s2,... of states in Q such 

                                                                         that, for all states si in the sequence: 

                                                                            • either si is the last state of the sequence, in which case 

                                                                               Si is a terminal state of K, or 
    In the doorway example, the goal states for agent A are 
 {1,3} and for agent B are {2,3}. The initial state set is the           A state s' is reachable from a state s if and only if there is an 
 singular set {0}. With this definition of domain and problem, 
                                                                         execution path with s0 = s and si = s1. 
 we can now formalize a notion of a plan. 
                                                                            For our doorway domain and example joint state-action ta•
 Definition 3 (State-Action Table)                                       ble one execution path from the initial state is, 
 A state-action table for agent i in domain V is a set of pairs 
                                      A joint state-action table 
 constructed from state-action tables for each agent is We are now in a position to define what it means for our plan 
 the set of pairs                                                        to solve a planning problem. We actually define multiple con•
                                                                         cepts increasing in strength. These concepts formalize some 
                                                                         of the intuitive discussion from the previous section about 
 A (joint) state-action table is complete if and only if for any         whether a plan has one or more of the following properties: 
 .s S there exists some pair (s, •) in the state-action table.              • the possibility of reaching the goal, 
    For the doorway domain, a state-action table (or plan) for              • a guarantee of reaching the goal, and 
 each agent might be,                                                       • a guarantee of reaching the goal in a finite number of 
                                                                              steps. 
                                                                         These concepts and their formalization are inspired and 
                                                                         highly related to Cimatti and colleagues' single-agent solu•
 These are also complete state-action tables since they specify          tion concepts [Cimatti et al., 2000]. 
 at least one action for each state. We can combine these ta•
                                                                         Definition 6 (Multiagent Planning Solutions) 
 bles into a complctcjoint state-action table. In general, a joint 
                                                                         Let V be a multiagent planning domain and P = 
 state-action table together with a multiagent planning domain 
                                                                                           be a multiagent planning problem. Let be 
 determines the entire execution of the system. In order to de•
                                                                         a complete joint state-action table for V. Let K — (Q,T) be 
 fine what it means for a plan to be a solution to a planning 
                                                                         the execution structure induced by from 1. The following is 
problem we need to formalize the notion of reachability and 
                                                                         an ordered list of solution concepts increasing in strength. 
 paths of execution. We will do this by first defining the exe•
cution structure of the multiagent system.                                 J. is a weak solution for agent i if and only if for any 
                                                                              state in I some state in is reachable. 
                                                                           2. is a strong cyclic solution for agent i if and only if from 
                                                                              any state in Q some state in is reachable. 
                                                                           3. is a strong solution for agent i if and only i/all execu•
                                                                              tion paths, including infinite length paths, from a state 
                                                                              in Q contain a state in  


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                                          1461                                                               solution for both agents, but given this state-action table for 
                                                              the other agent no strong or perfect plan exists for either 
                                                              agent. So this is also an equilibrium although obviously in•
                                                              ferior to the other equilibria where both agents have higher 
                                                              strength plans. In game theory, such a joint strategy is called 
                                                              Pareto dominated. 

   For our doorway domain, the joint state-action table is a  Collision variation. Consider a variation on this domain 
strong cyclic solution for both agents but not strong (i.e., it where collisions (when both agents choose G) result in the 
has a strength of 2 for both agents). This means that there is robots becoming damaged and unable to move. In this case, 
a path to the goal from any reachable state. But there are also the first two state-action tables above remain equilibria, but 
paths that do not include either agents' goal states, and so it the third inferior table no longer is an equilibrium. This joint 
is not a strong solution for either agent.                    plan is now only a weak solution for both agents since there is 
                                                              a possibility of never achieving the goal. Each agent can also 
  These solutions define what it means for one agent to be 
                                                              change to a different plan where it waits for the other agent to 
successful given a joint state-action table. The goal of plan•
                                                              get through the door thus achieving a strong cyclic plan and a 
ning from one agent's perspective is to find a plan that has the 
                                                              higher strength. 
highest strength given the plans of the other agents. But the 
other agents' selection of a plan is equally contingent upon  Door closing variation. Finally, consider that one agent en•
the first agent's plan. This recursive dependency leads to our tering the room sometimes causes the door to close behind 
main contribution of the paper: planning equilibria.          it. Once the door is closed it cannot be opened and the door•
                                                              way cannot be used. In this case, the same two joint plans 
Definition 7 (Multiagent Planning Equilibria) 
                                                              are again an equilibrium but now they have different strengths 
Let V be a multiagent planning domain and V -
                                                              for the different agents. The first joint state-action table is a 
               be a multiagent planning problem. Let be 
                                                              strong plan for agent A, but only a weak plan for agent B, 
a complete joint state-action table for V. Let K — (Q, T) be 
                                                              though it can do no better. The second is just a symmetry of 
the execution structure induced by from X. is an equilib•     this. 
rium solution to V if and only if for all agents i and for any 
complete joint state-action table such that  
                                                              3 Conclusion 
                                                              We presented a formalization of multiagent planning and in•
I.e., each agent's state-action table attains the strongest solu• troduced the concept of a multiagent planning equilibrium. 
tion concept possible given the state-action tables of the other This is the first known solution concept that explicitly ac•
agents.                                                       counts for the goals of all the agents. This work provides 
                                                              a unifying framework for considering planning in multiagent 
  Note that our example joint state-action table for the door• domains with identical, competing, or overlapping goals. It 
way domain is not an equilibrium. Both agents A and B cur•    also opens up many exciting questions related to practical al•
rently have strength 2, but B can achieve a strength of 4 by  gorithms for finding equilibria, the existence of equilibria, 
choosing a different state-action table. Specifically, B should and the coordination of equilibria selection. 
select the wait (W) action from the initial state and the go (G) 
action in state 1.                                            Acknowledgments 
  To make the concept of planning equilibria clearer, we il•
                                                              This research was sponsored by grant No. F30602-00-2-0549. The 
lustrate it in the doorway domain. We gave above an example 
                                                              content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the position 
joint state-action table that is not a multiagent planning equi•
                                                              of the funding agencies and no official endorsement should be in•
libria for this domain. An equilibria is the following state-
                                                              ferred. 
action tables: 
                                                              References 
                                                              [Cimatti et ai, 2000] Alessandro Cimatti, Marco Pistore, 
In this case agent A goes through the door while agent B         Marco Roveri, , and Paolo Traverso. Weak, strong, and 
waits and then follows through the door. This is a perfect       strong cyclic planning via symbolic model checking. IRST 
plan for both agents and so obviously no agent can achieve a     Technical report 0104-11, Istituto Trentino di Cultura, 
higher strength with a different state-action table. Similarly,  April 2000. 
the symmetric tables where agent B goes through the door      [Jensen and Veloso, 2000] Rune Jensen and Manuela 
while agent A waits is also an equilibrium. There is an addi•    Veloso. OBDD-based universal planning for synchronized 
tional equilibrium,                                              agents in non-deterministic domains. Journal of Artificial 
                                                                 Intelligence Research, 13:189-226, 2000. 
                                                              [Owen, 1995] Guillermo Owen. Game Theory. Academic 
                                                                 Press, 1995. 
Here both agents nondeterministically decide between going 
through the door and waiting. This results in a strong cyclic 


1462                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS 