                  Bidding Marginal Utility in Simultaneous Auctions 

                                                  Amy Greenwald 
                                         Department of Computer Science 
                                            Brown University, Box 1910 
                                               Providence, RI 02912 
                                                 amy@cs.brown.edu 


   One of the key challenges autonomous bidding agents         1 Bidding Principles 
face is to determine how to bid on complementary 
                                                               This paper advocates the following bidding principle for 
and substitutable goods—i.e., goods with combinato•
                                                               agents participating in simultaneous auctions for comple•
rial valuations—in simultaneous, or parallel, auctions 
                                                               mentary and substitutable goods: "coherent" marginal 
 (SAs). Complementary goods are goods with super-
                                                               utility bidding: i.e., bidding marginal utilities on a co•
additive valuations: Sub•
                                                               herent subset of goods. To validate this principle, we 
stitutable goods are goods with subadditive valuations: 
                                                               compare two combinatorial bidding strategics inspired 
                               The simple bidding strat•
                                                               by ATTAC [Stone el a/., 2002] and ROXYBOT [Green•
egy "for each good x in auction x, bid its (independent) 
                                                               wald and Boyan, 2001], two agents in the Trading Agent 
valuation" is inapplicable in this framework. 
                                                               Competition (TAG) (see [Wellman et al, 2002]): 
   Rather than attempt to reason about the independent 
valuations of goods, bidding agents that operate in this         1. one strategy computes the marginal utility of each 
setting can reason about marginal valuations, or the val•           good independently, much like ATTAC 
uation of a good x relative to a set of goods Ar. If an          2. one strategy computes coherent marginal utilities 
agent holds the goods in Ar, it can ask questions such as:          it solves the acquisition problem before bidding 
 "what is the marginal benefit of buying x?" or, "what is           marginal utilities—much like ROXYBOT 
the marginal cost of selling xT To do so, the agent must 
                                                                 It is established that approach 2 outperforms approach 
reason about the set of goods or relative 
                                                               1 in certain environments. In a longer version of this pa•
to the set X—the valuations of which arc well-defined. 
                                                               per, we experiment with stochastic versions of these algo•
   In reasoning about sets of goods bidding agents may 
                                                               rithms, and establish that approach 2 also outperforms 
pose and solve questions such as the following [Green•
                                                               approach 1 in uncertain environments. The insights 
wald and Boyan, 2001]: 
                                                               gained from this study about the design of autonomous 
  1. "Given only the set of goods I already hold, what is      bidding agents are applicable beyond the scope of TAG: 
     the maximum valuation I can attain, by arranging my       e.g., eBay is home to numerous SAs for complementary 
     individual goods into sets of goods?"                     and substitutable goods. 
  2. "Given the set of goods I already hold, and given market 
     prices and supply, on what set of additional goods should 2 Bidding Under Certainty 
     I place bids so as to maximize my utility: i.e., valuation 
     less purchase costs?"                                     In constructing bidding policies mappings from goods 
  3. "Given the set of goods I already hold, and given market  to prices—for multi-unit SAs, such as those that charac•
     prices, supply, and demand, on what set of goods should   terize TAC, we propose the following natural breakdown 
     I place bids or asks so as to maximize my utility: i.e.,  of an agent's bidding decisions: 
     valuation plus proceeds less costs?" 
                                                                 1. how many copies of each good do I want? 
The third, and most general, of these problems, which 
                                                                 2. for the goods I want, how much am I willing to pay? 
we call completion, provides a foundation for bidding 
strategies in simultaneous single- and double-sided auc•         One straightforward approach to answering these 
tions. The second problem, which we term acquisition,          questions, which was employed by ATTAC [Stone et al, 
provides a foundation for bidding strategies in single-        2002], is for the agent to skip question 1, and simply com•
sided auctions. The first problem, allocation, is a special    pute how much it is willing to pay for each copy of each 
case of the others in which all goods cost either 0 or         good. An alternative approach, employed by ROXYBOT, 
oo, and all goods are worth either 0 or These so-              is to explicitly answer question 1 before question 2; in 
called bid determination problems are formally defined         this way, the agent is certain to bid on a "coherent" set 
in [Greenwald and Boyan, 2001], where it is argued that        of goods: i.e., a set of goods which together comprise an 
completion can be reduced to acquisition.                      optimal solution to the acquisition problem. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1463    In this short paper, we compare these two approaches 
under two assumptions: (i) prices are exogenously de•
 termined: i.e., we ignore the impact of agent behav•
iors on prices; and (ii) prices are known with certainty. 
These assumptions are clearly applicable when prices are 
posted. In an auction setting, we interpret these assump•
tions as follows: the payment rule is "pay the known 
price;" the winner determination rule is "win by bidding 
equal to or more than the price." It is as if an agent is 
capable of perfectly predicting all other agents' bids, as 
well as the impact of its own bids on clearing prices. 
   We begin by investigating ATTAC'S approach. One 
formula for determining willingness to pay is to com•
pute marginal utilities (MUs). This direct MU approach 
to answering the aforementioned bidding questions ex•
plicitly answers only question 2, but implicitly answers 
question 1: a willingness to pay 0 suggests that an agent 
wants 0 additional copies of that good. 
   As alluded to earlier, computing MUs depends on solv•
ing the acquisition problem. Let us introduce some no•
tation, and formally define acquisition and MU. Let X 
denote a set of goods; let v(X) denote the (combinato•           The main observations reported in this paper are the 
rial) valuation of X; let p(x) denote the price of a; X        following: (i) for all goods x in an optimal acquisition, 
and p(x)', finally, let u{X) = v(X) -p(X)                      the price of x does not exceed the marginal utility of 
denote the utility of X.                                       x; (ii) for all goods x not in an optimal acquisition, the 
Definition 2.1 Given a set of goods A", a combinato•           marginal utility of x does not exceed the price of x. It 
rial valuation function and an exogenous                       follows that bidding marginal utilities on precisely those 
pricing mechanism p : X , an optimal solution to               goods in an optimal acquisition is an optimal bidding 
the acquisition problem is a subset X s.t                      policy, if prices are exogenous (e.g., an agent's individual 
                                                               bidding behavior does not impact prices), and prices are 
                                                       (i)     known with certainty. 

Definition 2.2 Given a set of goods X, the marginal 
utility of good x is defined as follows:  
        where 
                                                                 ROXYBOT'S strategy answers questions 1 and 2 in 
                                                       (2)     turn, and bids marginal utilities on all the goods it wants. 
                                                               This strategy is optimal, under our assumptions, by the 
                                                               previous observation. In particular, ROXYBOT wins all 
and 
                                                               the goods it wants by bidding marginal utilities. Of 
                                                       (3) 
                                                               course, bidding p(x), or are also optimal 
                                                               policies in this setting. But bidding the marginal utility 
  In words, the marginal utility of good x, relative to 
                                                               of good x is a reasonable heuristic, since it is in fact an 
the set X, is simply the difference between the utility of 
                                                               optimal bidding policy if the prices of all goods other 
X, assuming x costs 0, and the utility of 
                                                               than x are exogenous and certain. 
X, assuming x costs oo,  
  As is evident from the definition of MU, computing 
marginal utilities requires two calls to a combinatorial 
optimization solver. If an agent explicitly answers ques•
tion 1 before question 2, it might determine that it is not 
necessary to compute marginal utilities for all copies of 
all goods (although in the worst case it solves one addi•
tional optimization problem). ROXYBOT explicitly an•
swers question 1, before question 2, and usually achieves 
computational savings over direct MU calculation. But 
the real motivation behind ROXYBOT'S approach is that 
reasoning about individual goods, rather than coher•
ent sets of goods, when valuations are combinatorial, 
is suboptimal. In the following example, ROXYBOT'S 
approach is optimal, but the direct MU approach is not. 


1464                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS 