                    A heuristic model for concurrent bi-lateral negotiations 
                                   in incomplete information settings 

                               Thuc Duong Nguyen and Nicholas R. Jennings* 


                        Abstract                              Since we are interested in situations in time-constrained do•
                                                              mains (such as e-commerce and grid computing), we concen•
     Bi-lateral negotiations represent an important class     trate on the concurrent case and develop a coordinated bid•
     of encounter in agent-based systems. To this end,        ding model in which the various negotiation threads mutually 
     this paper develops and evaluates a heuristic model      influence one another. By mutually influence, we mean that 
     that enables an agent to participate in multiple, con•   the progress and agreement in one negotiation thread is used 
     current bi-lateral encounters in competitive situa•      to alter the behavior of the agent in another thread for the 
     tions in which there is information uncertainty and      same service. For example, having obtained a good deal in 
     deadlines.                                               one thread, the agent may adopt a tougher stance in its other 
                                                              threads, to see if it can get an even better deal than the one it 

                                                              already has2. 
1 Introduction 

Automated negotiation is a key form of interaction in agent-  2 The concurrent negotiation model 
based systems. Such negotiations exist in many different      The agent that wishes to purchase the service is called the 
forms including one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-many.     buyer and the agents that offer the service are called the sell•
Generally speaking, however, the latter two cases are dealt   ers. Service agreements (contracts) are assumed to be multi•
with using some form of auction protocol (be it single-sided  dimensional (covering issues such as price, quality, quantity, 
or double-sided, respectively), while the former are often 
                                                              etc.). The buyer has a deadline tmax by when it must con•
tackled using some form of heuristic method. Here we fo•      clude its negotiations for the service. Similarly, each seller i 
cus on the one-to-one case, in which one agent wants to pur•  has its own negotiation deadline All the agents have 
chase a service1 from another. Moreover, we consider com•     their own preferences about the service and this information 
petitive situations in which the agents have no a priori knowl• is private (as are the strategies the individual agents follow). 
edge about the preferences of their opponents. In such cases, The agents follow an alternating sequential protocol, in which 
the agents exchange proposals, representing acceptable solu•  the illocutions are offer (a proposal made by one agent to the 
tions, until either an agreement is reached or the negotiation other), counter-offer (a counter proposal from an agent in re•
terminates with a failure.                                    sponse to a proposal it received), accept (accept a proposed 
  To date, one of the inherent drawbacks of bi-lateral negoti• offer), finalize (secure a deal with the chosen seller), decline 
ation models is that the agent has to a priori identify a single (reject the previously accepted offer) and withdraw (terminate 
partner to interact with. However, this is inefficient in an un• the negotiation thread). The difference between an accept and 
certain setting where there are multiple providers of the ser• finalize is necessary in this work to deal with the problem of 
vice that each have different characteristics. In this case, there concurrent encounters. If the buyer accepts an offer from a 
are two alternatives: (1) negotiate sequentially with all the seller then this is viewed as binding on the seller (for a spec•
providers or (2) negotiate concurrently with them. The for•   ified period of time that is assumed to be longer than 
mer has the disadvantage that it may result in lengthy negotia• However, it is not binding on the buyer. Thus, the buyer may 
tion encounters, but has the advantage that it is comparatively accept several offers from multiple sellers in any one negoti•
easy to use the outcome of one negotiation to dictate behavior ation episode. However, when it has completed all the nego•
in subsequent ones. The latter case has the advantage of tak• tiations, the buyer will finalize one of the accepted deals with 
ing less time, but the disadvantage that coordinating behav•  one of the sellers and decline the others (thus freeing them 
iors among the various negotiation threads is more difficult. 

                                                                 2This model differs from a onc-to-many auction in that it allows 
   * Department of Electronics and Computer Science, University of direct interaction between the agent requiring the service and the 
Southampton, UK. Email: {tdnOlr, nrj}@ecs.soton.ac.uk         providers offering it. This ability to exchange unmediated counter•
   'A service is here viewed an abstract representation of the capa• offers enables the participants to indicate their preferences and con•
bility of an agent.                                           straints directly to one another. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                      1467  from their commitment to the proposal). This two phase pro•   dinator decides the negotiation strategy for each thread ini•
 cess is necessary so that the buyer can use accepted deals as tially and whether this should change over time to reflect any 
 a base line for the subsequent concurrent negotiations.3      agreements that have been made to date. 
                                                                 To ground our model, at this time we consider the set of 
                                                               strategies S to be composed of the class of time dependent 
                                                               strategies advocated in [Faratin, 2001] for bi-lateral negotia•
                                                               tions in uncertain environments with time constraints. These 

                                                               strategies fall into three categories, namely: conceder (Sc), 
                                                               linear (5/) and tough (St) where S = All of 
                                                               the strategies start with the same initial value that is gener•
                                                               ated in relation to the deadline and the reservation value. The 
                                                               conceder strategy quickly lowers its value until it reaches its 
                                                               reservation value. The linear strategy drops to its reservation 
                                                               value in a steady fashion. Finally, the tough strategy keeps its 
                                                               value until the deadline approaches, then it rapidly drops to 
                Figure 1: System architecture 
                                                               its reservation value. 
                                                                 In his empirical analysis of the behavior of negotiating 
   In more detail, the model for the buyer agent consists of   agents that adopted these strategies, Faratin showed that if 
 two main components: a coordinator and a number of nego•      it is possible to approximate the type of the opponent then 
 tiation threads (see figure 1). The negotiation threads deal  the agent can alter its strategy to be more effective. Given 
 directly with the various sellers (one per seller) and are re• this observation, the coordinator attempts such a classifica•
 sponsible for deciding what counter-offers to send to them    tion. Specifically, at time t: called the 
 and what proposals to accept. For maximum flexibility, we     analysis time, the coordinator tries to determine if a given 
 assume that the buyer agent may adopt different strategies    seller is a conceder or a non-conceder. In particular, assume 

 in each of its threads. We adopt separate semi-independent    Olj is the value of the offer that seller agent i made at time 
 threads for reasons of modularity and coherence. The alter•   j : 0 j t. Then seller i is considered a conceder if 
 native of having every single negotiation move centrally co-                               where is the threshold value 
 ordinated and intercepting all the bids received from all the 
 sellers, is viewed as a computational bottleneck for the time- set on concessionary behavior. There is a similar character•
 constrained environments we are targeting.                    ization of non-conceders and if the agent falls into neither 
   Each negotiation thread inherits the preferences from the   category, it is judged not classified. 
 main buyer agent, including the acceptable ranges of values     Let the set of conceder and non-conceder agents be rep•
 for each negotiation issue, the deadline of the negotiation and resented by and respectively. Now, given the set 
 the current reservation value (the lowest utility value of an of• of strategies S = and the set of agents A = 
 fer that the agent considers acceptable). The coordinator de•           the coordinator changes the strategy for each ne•
 cides the negotiation strategies for each thread. After each ne• gotiation thread based on the type of the agent it is negotiat•
 gotiation round, the threads report back their status to the co• ing with, in order to try and obtain better outcomes. Agents 
 ordinator. If a thread reaches a deal with a particular seller, it belonging to the set Ac are willing to concede in order to 
 terminates its negotiation. Based on the coordination schema  end up with agreements. Therefore, if the agent negotiates 
 it is using (see section 2.1 for more details), the coordinator toughly with some of them (keeping its offer consistent), it 
 will then notify all other negotiation threads of the new reser• may obtain a deal that has higher value than if it continues 
 vation value and it may change the negotiation strategy of    negotiating in its present manner. However, if the agent ne•
 some of them. The detailed working of the two components      gotiates in this way with all the agents, it may not obtain any 
 are described below.                                          deals at all. Therefore, for reasons of balance, the agent will 
                                                               negotiate in a tough manner with a subset of the agents in 
 2.1 The coordinator                                               specifically with a percentage of them. For the re•
                                                               mainder of the agents in Ac, the strategy remains unchanged. 
 The coordinator is responsible for coordinating all the nego• Similarly, if the agent believes a particular agent is in the set 
 tiation threads and choosing an appropriate negotiation strat•
                                                               An then in order to make sure it obtains a deal with some of 
 egy for each thread.                                          them, it makes some of its own strategy more conciliatory. 
   As a first step, the coordinator acts like a blackboard for 
                                                               Specifically, for the agents belonging to the set An, a fixed 
shared information about the ongoing encounters. It receives   percentage of them will have their behavior made con•
the current status from the various negotiation threads (in•   ciliatory, while the remainder have their strategies unchanged. 
cluding the proposal's values), keeps a list of agreements     There is no change to agents whose behavior cannot be clas•
reached and notifies the threads about any changes in their    sified. 
 reservation values. Second, and more importantly, the coor-
                                                               2.2 The negotiation threads 
   3This model is obviously biased in favor of the buyer and future 
work will look at relaxing this constraint so that sellers can also An individual negotiation thread is responsible for dealing 
renege on deals.                                               with an individual seller agent on behalf of the buyer. Each 


 1468                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS  such thread inherits its preferences from the buyer agent and Result 2 The number of proposals that are made in the con•
 has its negotiation strategy specified by the coordinator.    current model is less than the number made in the sequential 
                                                               model. 
                                                               Result 3 To realize the benefits of concurrent negotiations, 
                                                               the buyer agent's deadline must not be too short. 
                                                               Result 4 The final agreements reached by the concurrent 
                                                               model have, on average, higher or equal utility'for the buyer 
                                                               than those of the sequential model (assuming the deadline is 
                                                               not too short). 
                                                               Result 5 Changing the strategy in response to the agent's as-
                                                               sessment of the ongoing negotiation is equal or better than 
                                                               not doing so. 
                                                               Result 6 To improve the performance of the concurrent 
            Figure 2: A single negotiation thread              model, the analysis time should be moderately early (to have 
                                                               time to have some effect) but not too early (so it is reasonably 
   In each thread (see figure 2), there are three main subcom• accurate). 

 ponents; namely communication (represented by the dotted      Result 7 When dealing with sellers in Ac, the tougher the 
 lines), process (represented by the bold lines) and strategy. buyer negotiates the better the overall outcome it obtains. 
 The communication subcomponent is responsible for com•
 municating with the coordinator. Before each round, it checks 4 Conclusions and future work 
 for incoming messages from the coordinator and if there are 
 any, it passes them to the process subcomponent. After each   This paper has developed a heuristic model for managing 
 round, it reports the status of the thread (including proposed concurrent negotiations in time-constrained settings where 
 proposals and the deal's value if an agreement is reached)    agents have no prior knowledge of their opponents or their 
 back to the coordinator. The process subcomponent processes   types. Through empirical evaluation, we showed how the 
 messages from the communication subcomponent. This can        model leads to better deals, more quickly than its sequential 
 either be changing the reservation value or changing the strat• counterpart. We also highlighted the importance of the time 
 egy. The strategy subcomponent is responsible for making      when the opponents' negotiation strategies arc classified and 
 offers/counter-offers, as well as deciding whether or not to  on the response to this assessment in terms of the degree of 
 accept the offer made by the seller agent. It uses the reser• toughness adopted. 
 vation value as the basis for deciding whether to accept the    There are, however, a number of areas that still require fur•
 seller's offer; in this case any offer with a value greater than ther work. First, the means by which negotiation opponents 
 this is accepted, otherwise a counter-proposal is made (unless are classified as being conccder or non-conceder needs to be 
 the deadline has passed in which case a decline is sent).     refined so that this monitoring can be made on an ongoing 
                                                               basis (rather than as a one-off decision). Second, we need 
 3 Empirical evaluation                                        to allow for the possibility of sellers decommitting and then 
                                                               having these commitment changes feedback into the buyer's 
 Having defined the model, the next step is to evaluate it.    negotiation behavior. Third, we wish to extend the implemen•
 Given the aims of our work, we are interested in operational  tation so that the coordinator and the negotiation threads also 
 performance and so we decided to evaluate it empirically. In  embody fundamentally different models of bi-lateral negoti•
 particular, we posed a number of hypotheses and evaluated     ation (e.g. based on constraint-satisfaction, game-theory or 
 them in different types of environment.                       any other method that is likely to be effective). In this case, 
   Our concurrent model is compared against a sequential ne•   the key challenge is in designing the coordinator so that it can 
 gotiation model based on [Faratin, 2001]. In this model, all  select, monitor and modify these strategies in line with the 
 the agents' preferences, as well as the allocation of the strate• agent's overarching negotiation objectives. 
 gies, are drawn from the same distributions as the concurrent 
 ones. The only difference with [Faratin, 2001] is that if the References 
 buyer agent reaches an agreement of value p in negotiation i, 
 then in all subsequent negotiations,p will be its new reserva• [Faratin, 2001] P. Faratin. Automated Service Negotiation 
 tion value.                                                      Between Autonomous Computational Agents, PhD Thesis. 
   We now turn to specific hypotheses. Due to the limitation      Queen Mary College, London, England, 2001. 
 of space, we cannot show the corresponding graphs to sup•     [Nguyen and Jennings, 2003] T. D. Nguyen and N. R. Jen•
 port our claims (see [Nguyen and Jennings, 2003] for more        nings. Concurrent bi-lateral negotiation in agent systems. 
 details), but, nevertheless we can summarize our main find•      Proceedings of the 4th DEXA Workshop on e-Negotiations, 
 ings:                                                            Prague, Czech Republic, 2003. 
 Result 1 The time to complete the negotiation is less for the 
concurrent model than for the sequential one. 


 POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1469 