                    Virtual World as Interface for Human-Robot Interaction 

                                        Eric Normand and Sheila Tejada 
                                             University of New Orleans 
                                                  Lakefront Campus 
                                          Department of Computer Science 
                                                311 Mathematics Bldg 
                                               New Orleans, LA 70148 
                                  enormand@cs.uno.edu and sheila@cs.uno.edu 


                        Abstract                                  The Virtual Synergy system provides a means for agents 
                                                               in the virtual world to create a three-dimensional map by 
     This article describes preliminary work on a 
                                                               placing objects that are detected in the real world in their 
     research environment called Virtual Synergy to 
                                                               corresponding locations in the virtual environment. Each 
     represent a shared virtual map of an area for 
                                                               robot on the team will exist in both the physical world and 
     multiple autonomous robots by modifying the 
                                                               the virtual world of Virtual Synergy. The robot will receive 
     GameBots 3D multi-agent system. The use of 
                                                               information from its sensors in the real environment and the 
     GameBots will allow multiple users to interact 
                                                               Virtual Synergy server. The server will act as a virtual 
     with robots and agents at different levels of 
                                                               sensor, but providing map information instead of data. 
     adjustable or dynamic autonomy. By interacting 
                                                               Because multiple agents will process the information 
     with the robots as another team member, the 
                                                               gathered from multiple sensors, we must deal with the 
     users take on different roles to suit the situation: 
                                                               issues of sensor fusion. 
     supervisor, peer, mechanic, teleoperator, and 
                                                                  A similar system called Player/Stage has been developed 
     spectator. 
                                                               for simulating sensors and robots in a virtual two-
1 Introduction                                                 dimensional world [Gerkey et al., 2001]. Both Player/Stage 
                                                               and GameBots are designed to allow heterogeneous systems 
GameBots [Adobbati et al., 2001] is a modification of the      to communicate with the server over an IP network. 
commercial 3D multi-player video game Unreal                   Player/Stage sends simulated sensor readings to the client 
Tournament. We are creating an adaptation of GameBots          and the client sends actuator commands back to 
for robotic collaboration and intelligent agent research       Player/Stage. The Virtual Synergy system, however, takes a 
called Virtual Synergy. Our system allows the robots to        higher-level approach; it provides mapping and path 
share two environments at once: the physical environment       information; it also has the advantage of a three-dimensional 
and a virtual environment hosted on a GameBots server,         view and the ability for humans to take on a persona in the 
which can be accessed remotely via the Internet; we'll deal    environment. 
with that aspect in section 2. The server also allows a user 
to be present in the virtual environment and interact with the 3 Human Interactions 
robot through various mechanisms, which will be discussed 
                                                               The nature of disaster areas often prohibits humans from 
in section 3. Section 4 discusses the use of software agents. 
                                                               being physically present; therefore, it is necessary to 
Finally, in section 5, we will address how the current system 
                                                               monitor and direct the robots from a distance, occluded by 
can be expanded to include intelligent agents to facilitate 
                                                               walls and debris. Research in teleoperation has focused on 
human-robot interaction. 
                                                               multiple operators controlling one robot. Murphy et al. 
                                                               suggest that teleoperation can lead to "cognitive fatigue" of 
2 Inhabiting Multiple Worlds                                   the operators during long periods of operation and that the 
We are developing a robot team to participate in the AAAI      information received by the user often exceeds the user's 
Urban Search and Rescue (US AR) competition. One of the        capacity to process it [Murphy, 2000J. Our system attempts 
tasks for the robots is to explore a simulated disaster area   to resolve these issues with an intuitive interface that 
and map the environment, locating walls, fallen objects,       mimics physical interaction with the robots. Research 
areas to avoid (for structural reasons), and victims.          dealing with multiple users interacting with multiple robots 
                                                               has shown the need for "adjustable autonomy," in which a 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1473  robot can be controlled to varying degrees by user            robots without overloading the users with information from 
 intervention [Kortenkamp et al., 2002]. Multiple levels of    an increasingly complex team of autonomous agents. 
 adjustable autonomy will be possible with the Virtual            The two problems we are immediately facing are sensor 
 Synergy system.                                               fusion and localization. Localization is important for 
    A user in the environment of a Virtual Synergy server      creating an accurate map of the environment; sensor fusion 
has various modes of navigation; he/she can fly unimpeded      becomes a problem once two robots are involved in building 
by gravity, walk through walls, or use a more realistic        the map: they could potentially be looking at the same 
physics model. The interface for navigation is intuitive; it   object. We would not want the same object to appear twice. 
was chosen because it was designed for navigation of a            The use of two environments, one virtual, one actual, 
three-dimensional environment by multiple human players.       allows for complex human-robot interaction and useful 
    We are researching the use of user roles to facilitate user inter-robot collaboration. Using the 3D environment of 
interactions with robots. Current research [Scholtz, 2002]     Virtual Synergy will give the user an intuitive interface to 
defines three levels of interaction with a robot: supervisor,  interact with the robots as another member of the team. 
peer, and mechanic interactions. The different roles define    User roles will act to define the possible interactions with 
the information displayed to the user and the set of possible  the robots. Intelligent agents will assist the user by 
interactions available to the user. In addition to the three   responding to queries, gathering information, and 
roles described in [Scholtz, 2002], we add two other roles:    automating tasks. 
spectators can view the environment but not interact with 
the robots and teleoperators take complete control of the      References 
robot by temporarily inhabiting its representation in order to 
                                                               [Adobatti et al., 2001] Rogelio Adobbati, Andrew N. 
direct it through areas of difficulty. 
                                                                  Marshall, Andrew Scholer, Sheila Tejada, Gal Kaminka, 
    Perzanowski et al. have developed a system for 
                                                                  Steven Schaffer, and Chris Sollitto. Gamebots: A 3D 
controlling teams of robots using voice and gesture 
                                                                  Virtual World Test-Bed For Multi-Agent Research, 
commands [Perzanowski et al., 2002]. Our robotic 
                                                                  Proceedings of the International Conference on 
interactions are currently not based on speech or gestures, 
                                                                  Autonomous Agents (Agents-2001) Workshop on 
but on direct manipulation of the robot's world model. 
                                                                  Infrastructure for Agents, MAS, and Scalable MAS, 
While navigating in the virtual environment, the user will 
                                                                  Montreal, Canada, 2001. 
instruct the robots through various commands such as 
                                                               [Gerkey et al., 2001] Brian P. Gerkey, Richard T. Vaughan, 
"come here." The commands are English-like only for 
                                                                  Kasper St0y, Andrew Howard, Gaurav S. Sukhatme, and 
purposes of user interface (natural language and gesture 
                                                                  Maja J. Mataric. Most Valuable Player: A Robot Device 
commands are a foreseen addition). The user can also 
                                                                  Server for Distributed Control, Proceedings of the 
directly modify the environment by leaving a path to follow 
                                                                  IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent 
or indicating "hot spots" which suggest areas to explore. 
                                                                  Robots and Systems (IROS 2001), pages 1226-1231, 
The system also provides the user the ability to manipulate 
                                                                  Wailea, Hawaii, October 29 - November 3, 2001. 
the environment in order to rectify any sensor anomalies. 
                                                               [Kortenkamp et al., 2002] David Kortenkamp, Debra 
                                                                  Schreckenghost, and Cheryl Martin. User Interaction 
4 Software Agents 
                                                                  with Multi-Robot Systems in (Eds.) A.C. Schultz and L. 
Autonomous software agents will also inhabit the virtual          E. Parker. Multi-Robot Systems: From Swarms to 
environment as teammates. Agents can facilitate                   Intelligent Automata, pages 177-184, Kluwer Academic 
communication between the users and the robots, effectively       Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2002. 
providing a more natural, more human interface to dealing      [Murphy, 2000] Robin R. Murphy. Introduction to Al 
with information from the robots. Since all agents (robots,       Robotics. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2000. 
software agents, and people) in the virtual environment are    [Perzanowski et al., 2002] D. Perzanowski, A. C. Shultz, W. 
collaborators on the same team, they can all take on the          Adams, M. Bugajska, E. Marsh, J. G. Trafton, D. Brock, 
different roles with each other; in addition to carrying out      M. Skubic, M. Abramson. Communicating with Teams 
user-specified tasks, the software agents could also              of Cooperative Robots in (Eds.) A.C. Schultz and L. E. 
autonomously lead a group of robots with minimal human            Parker. Multi-Robot Systems: From Swarms to 
supervision.                                                      Intelligent Automata, pages 177-184, Kluwer Academic 
                                                                  Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2002. 
5 Conclusion and Future Work                                   [Scholtz, 2002] Jean C. Scholtz. Human-Robot Interactions: 
                                                                  Creating Synergistic Cyber Forces in (Eds.) A.C. 
The ultimate goal of our project is to facilitate human 
                                                                  Schultz and L. E. Parker. Multi-Robot Systems: From 
interaction with a team of robots and agents. We are 
                                                                  Swarms to Intelligent Automata, pages 177-184, Kluwer 
researching ways to increase the efficiency of robot 
                                                                  Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
collaborators; our aim is to decrease the number of humans 
                                                                  2002. 
required to monitor and collaborate with a larger team of 


1474                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS 