                   The Knowledge Required to Interpret Noun Compounds 

                                    James Fan, Ken Barker and Bruce Porter 
                                        Department of Computer Sciences 
                                            University of Texas at Austin 
                                               Austin, TX 78712 USA 
                                      {jfan, kbarker, porter}@cs.utexas.edu 


                        Abstract                               example, noun compounds omit information that can often 
                                                               be inferred, e.g. concrete floor is "a floor made of concrete", 
     Noun compound interpretation is the task of de•
                                                               while gymnasium floor is "the floor region ofa gymnasium". 
     termining the semantic relations among the con•
                                                               Another candidate is metonymic expressions. These expres•
     stituents of a noun compound. For example, "con•
                                                               sions contain incompatible terms and must be expanded to 
     crete floor" means a floor made of concrete, while 
                                                               make meaningful phrases. For example, the statement Joe 
     "gymnasium floor" is the floor region of a gym•
                                                               read Shakespeare, means "Joe read text written by Shake•
     nasium. We would like to enable knowledge ac•
                                                               speare". 
     quisition systems to interpret noun compounds, as 
                                                                 This paper focuses on the first kind of loose-speak: in•
     part of their overall task of translating imprecise 
                                                               terpreting noun compounds in the context of knowledge ac•
     and incomplete information into formal representa•
                                                               quisition. A noun compound is a sequence of nouns com•
     tions that support automated reasoning. However, 
                                                               posed of a head noun and one (or more) modifiers. The head 
     if interpreting noun compounds requires detailed 
                                                               noun determines the type of the whole compound (with few 
     knowledge of the constituent nouns, then it may not 
                                                               exceptions), and the modifiers specialize the type from the 
     be worth doing: the cost of acquiring this knowl•
                                                               head noun. Although we limit our study to only pairs of 
     edge may outweigh the potential benefit. 
                                                               nouns, our results can be applied to longer noun compounds 
     This paper describes an empirical investigation of 
                                                               by bracketing them into pairs of nouns (with few exceptions), 
     the knowledge required to interpret noun com•
                                                               and then interpreting each pair [Liberman and Sproat, 1992; 
     pounds. It concludes that the axioms and ontologi-
                                                               Pustejovsky and Bergler, 1993; Barker, 1998]. 
     cal distinctions important for this task are derived 
                                                                 The computational linguistics community has studied noun 
     from the top levels of a hierarchical knowledge 
                                                               compound interpretation extensively [Leonard, 1984; Down•
     base (KB); detailed knowledge of specific nouns 
                                                               ing, 1977; Levi, 1979; Finin, 1986; Fabre, 1996; Laucr and 
     is less important. This is good news, not only for 
                                                               Dras, 1994; Barker, 1998; Vanderwende, 1994]. In these 
     our work on knowledge acquisition systems, but 
                                                               studies, the task is to select a single semantic category for 
     also for research on text understanding, where noun 
                                                               each pair of nouns. The selection is usually made from a 
     compound interpretation has a long history. A more 
                                                               small list of semantic categories, for example category part-
     detailed version of this paper can be found in [Fan 
                                                               of is selected for noun compounds like human lung, category 
     et al, 2003]. 
                                                               material for marble statue, and category ohject-of for troop 
                                                               movement. 
1 Introduction                                                   Our task is more general. Rather than selecting a single 
Knowledge acquisition involves building knowledge bases        semantic category, our task is to find a sequence of semantic 
(KBs) from the information provided by standard sources of     relations that links two nouns in a compound. Semantic rela•
expertise, such as people and texts. In addition to extract•   tions are a list of about 50 thematic roles such as agent, ob•
ing relevant information, knowledge acquisition involves re-  ject, has-part, location,..... For example, given animal virus, 
expressing the information in a formal language suitable for   a traditional interpretation may classify this as a location cat•
machines to reason with. In general, this is difficult because egory (animal virus is a virus in an animal). A loose-speak 
the information is initially expressed in natural languages,   interpretation may be composed of a combination of semantic 
and these expressions are notoriously imprecise and incom•     relations, such as: "an animal virus is a virus that is the agent 
plete. However, the goal of our project is to improve knowl•   of an invade, such that the object of the invade is the cell part 
edge acquisition methods by automating the translation of      of an animal". 
some kinds of expressions from natural languages to formal       Furthermore, computational linguists approach the noun 
ones. We call this task loose-speak interpretation.            compound interpretation task armed with lots of examples, 
   Several kinds of expressions are good candidates for loose- but little or no knowledge about the constituent nouns. Typ•
speak interpretation by knowledge acquisition systems. For     ical solutions are based on statistical patterns discovered in 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1483  the corpus of examples. In contrast, we approach the task in  compound. Each of the first two steps conducts a breadth-
 the context of the constituent nouns knowledge - their tax-   first search of the knowledge base along all semantic relation 
 onomic classification, at least - but few examples of noun    arcs. The first search starts from C1 and looks for C2 or any 
 compounds, let alone a corpus.                                superclass or subclass of it. The second search starts from C2 
                                                               and looks for C\ or any superclass or subclass of it. Step 3 
 2 Interpreting noun compounds during                          combines the results, sorted by path length. 
     knowledge acquisition                                       To avoid getting results that are skewed to a particular do•
                                                               main or knowledge representation, we used a variety of quite 
 During knowledge acquisition, the domain expert (or, more     different data sets. The first consists of 224 noun compounds 
generally, the knowledge source) may provide a noun com•       from a college-level cell biology text [Alberts ct al., 1998]. 
pound in any dialogue that expects a noun. Our knowl•          The second consists of 294 noun compounds from a small 
edge acquisition system successfully interprets the noun com•  engine repair manual. The third data set consists of 224 com•
pound if it finds a correct sequence of semantic relations be• pounds from a Sun Sparcstation manual. The nouns used in 
tween the head noun and its modifier and builds a correct for• these data sets are mapped to the corresponding concepts in 
 mal representation of the noun compound.                      knowledge bases on these topics. 
   If noun compound interpretation requires a priori, detailed   Despite these commonalities, the KBs differ significantly. 
 knowledge of the head noun and its modifier, then the cost    First they differ in terms of how they were built. The knowl•
of acquiring this knowledge may overshadow the benefit of      edge base for the biology text was built using the generic 
 interpreting the compound. If, on the other hand, noun com•   Component Library [Barker ct al, 2001] to answer end-of-
pounds can be successfully interpreted without much knowl•     the-chapter style questions, as one of the challenge problems 
edge about the specific constituent nouns, then the problem is for DARPA's Rapid Knowledge Formation project [Clark ct 
avoided, and a knowledge acquisition system might interpret    al., 2001]. The knowledge bases for the other two data sets 
one concept (the noun compound) while related concepts (the    (the small engine repair manual and the Sparcstation manual) 
constituent nouns) are only skeletal. Knowledge bases tend to  were built "on top of" the knowledge in WordNet [Fellbaum, 
grow in this uneven way - following the lead of the knowl•     1998]. We augmented WordNet with the upper ontology of 
edge sources providing expertise - and a knowledge acquisi•    the generic Component Library plus about ten concepts that 
tion system should support it.                                 are important to each of the two domains whose partonomies 
   The purpose of this study is to determine what sort of      are not complete in WordNet. Through this process, we en•
knowledge is required to interpret noun compounds, and how     coded 416 concepts in about 50 man-hours. The advantage of 
this knowledge might be obtained. Before delving into the      using WordNet as the foundation for these knowledge bases 
details of the study, it's important to understand what we are is two-fold: it includes most of the terms used in the data sets, 
not attempting to do.                                          linked with both taxonomic and partonomic relations, and it 
   We are not presenting a novel algorithm for noun com•       is widely available and well used. The KBs also differ in 
pound interpretation. Our algorithm is quite simple and is     content. Other than the shared upper ontology of the generic 
derived from previous research. Also, we arc not introducing   component library, they have few concepts in common. 
a new type of knowledge representation or a novel technique 
                                                                 The importance of each level of the ontology is measured 
of automated reasoning. Finally, we are not using a new, com•
                                                               through a series of ablations. When a level is ablated, the 
prehensive knowledge base. We built a couple of them rather 
                                                               concepts on that level and all their axioms are deleted from 
quickly and we're using another - not built for this task - "off 
                                                               the knowledge base. The superclasses of the subclasses of 
the shelf." 
                                                               these concepts are changed to the superclasses of the concepts 
   In summary, what we arc doing is evaluating the knowl•
                                                               being deleted. As a special case, when the 0th level (the root 
edge requirements of a standard search algorithm applied to 
                                                               level concept) is deleted, it is replaced by a generic concept of 
a variety of typical knowledge bases through a series of abla•
                                                               "Thing". Because the root level concept is vacuous, deleting 
tion studies. 
                                                               it has no affect. 
3 Experiments 
                                                               4 Results 
The challenge in measuring an algorithm's sensitivity to 
knowledge base content is that the results may vary across     Ablating levels of the ontology shows that they differ in their 
domains and across knowledge bases. We attempt to neu•         importance for the noun compound interpretation task. With•
tralize these factors by replicating our study in three domains out any ablation, both precision and recall of the noun com•
with quite different knowledge bases.                          pound interpretation arc around 80% across all three knowl•
   The noun compound interpretation task can be viewed as      edge bases. Ablating level one causes a big drop in both pre•
follows: given a knowledge base encoded as a conceptual        cision and recall. Ablating level two introduces a big gap be•
graph, and a pair of nouns corresponding to two nodes in       tween precision and recall because the algorithm does not find 
the graph, find a path of semantic relations between them.     interpretations for many noun compounds. As lower levels in 
The algorithm we used is a breadth-first search algorithm on   the ontology are ablated one at a time, the impact diminishes 
a knowledge base. The algorithm is given a noun compound       and performance improves to the level of a knowledge base 
of the form < C1, C2 > where C\ and C2 are the KB con•         with no ablations. 
cepts that are mapped from the constituents of the given noun    The contribution of the first two levels of the ontology is 


1484                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS observed across all three data sets and knowledge bases. This  LBarker, 1998] Ken Barker. Semi-automatic Recognition oj 
pattern strongly suggests that top levels of the ontology are     Semantic Relationships in English Technical Texts. PhD 
most important for the noun compound interpretation task,         thesis, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, 1998. 
which is likely due to some combination of two factors: 
                                                               [Clark et al, 2001] Peter Clark, J. Thompson, K. Barker, 
  1. Top levels of the ontology include concepts that make        B. Porter, V. Chaudhri, A. Rodriguez, J. Thomcre, 
     important ontological distinctions. For example, ablat•      S. Mishra, Y. Gil, P. Hayes, and T. Reichherzer. Knowl•
     ing the level that introduces Entity and Event blurs the     edge entry as the graphical assembly of components. In 
     distinction between obviously different concept, which       Proceedings of First International Conference on Knowl•
     causes the search to stop with erroneous results. Con•       edge Capture, 2001. 
     sequently, many more interpretations are returned, and 
                                                               [Downing, 1977] Pamela A. Downing. On the creation and 
     because we only use the first interpretation, the possibil•
                                                                  use of English compounds. Language, 53:810-842,1977, 
     ity of it being correct is reduced. 
                                                               [Fabre, 1996] Cecile Fabre. Interpretation of nominal com•
  2. Although they contain relatively few axioms, these ax•
                                                                  pounds: Combining domain independent and domain-
     ioms are important for the task. The top-level ontology 
                                                                  specific information. In Proceedings of Sixteenth Inter•
     contains the most frequently used axioms, such as that 
                                                                  national Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 
     "every Action involves an object that is acted upon". 
                                                                  364-369,1996. 
     These axioms are used in the search as a step along the 
     way. Deleting these axioms makes it difficult to find an  [Fan et al, 2003] James Fan, Ken Barker, and Bruce Porter. 
     interpretation for many of the noun compounds, thereby       The knowledge required to interpret noun compounds. 
     causing recall to lag behind precision.                      Technical Report UT-AI-TR-03-301, University of Texas 
                                                                  at Austin, 2003. 
5 Conclusion                                                   [Fcllbaum, 1998] Christiane Fellbaum, editor. WordNet: An 
This paper reports an encouraging result: interpreting noun       Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Boston, 
compounds does not require detailed knowledge of the con•         1998. 
stituent nouns. Rather, it requires only that the nouns be cor• iFinin, 1986] Timothy W. Finin. Constraining the Inter•
rectly placed in a taxonomy, and that the taxonomy include       pretation of Nominal Compounds in a Limited Context. 
the ontological distinctions and axioms commonly found in         Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc, New Jersey, 1986. 
domain independent upper levels. These requirements are 
                                                               [Laucr and Dras, 1994] Mark Laucr and Mark Dras. A prob•
easily met in the context of knowledge acquisition, which is 
                                                                  abilistic model of compound nouns. In Proceedings of the 
our focus. 
                                                                  7th Australian Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 
   We reached this conclusion using a novel experimental 
                                                                  World Scientific Press, 1994. 
method. We measured the contribution of each level of the 
ontology to the task of interpreting noun compounds. We ab•    [Leonard, 1984] Rosemary Leonard. The Interpretation of 
lated successive levels of the ontology one at a time, thereby    English Noun Sequences on the Computer. Elsevier Sci•
conflating ontological distinctions and removing the axioms       ence, Amsterdam, 1984. 
associated with concepts at each level. We found that the up•  [Levi, 1979] Judith Levi. The Syntax and Semantics of Com•
per levels of the ontology for the KBs we used are the most      plex Nominals. Academic Press, New York, 1979. 
important for noun compound interpretation. As lower levels 
in the ontology are ablated one at a time, the impact dimin•   [Liberman and Sproat, 1992] Mark Liberman and Richard 
ishes to nil. A more detailed version of this paper can be        Sproat. Stress and Structure of Modified Noun Phrases. 
found in [Fan et al, 2003].                                       CSLI Publications, 1992. 
                                                               [Pustejovsky and Bergler, 1993] James S. Pustejovsky and 
Acknowledgments                                                   Anick P. Bergler. Lexical semantic techniques for cor•
                                                                  pus analysis. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):331 -358, 
Support for this research is provided by a contract from Stan•
                                                                  1993. 
ford Research Institute as part of DARPA's Rapid Knowledge 
Formation project.                                             [Vanderwende, 1994] Lucy Vanderwende. Algorithm for au•
                                                                  tomatic interpretation of noun sequences. In Proceedings 
References                                                        of Fifteenth Intional Conference on Computational Lin•
                                                                  guistics, pages 782 - 788, 1994. 
[Alberts et ai, 1998] Bruce Alberts, Dennis Bray, Alexander 
   Johnson, Julian Lewis, Martin Raff, Keith Robert, Peter 
   Walter, and Keith Roberts. Essential Cell Biology: An In•
   troduction to the Molecular Biology of the Cell. Garland 
   Publisher, 1998. 
LBarker et al,,2001] Ken Barker, B. Porter, and P. Clark. 
   A library of generic concepts for composing knowledge 
   bases. In Proceedings of First International Conference 
   on Knowledge Capture, 2001. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1485 