                          Neural Executive Attentional Control in Robots 


                              Jason Garforth1, Sue McHale2, Anthony Meehan1 
              Department of Computing, The Open University, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK 
              Department of Psychology, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, SI 1WB, UK 
                   jpg@janus.demon.co.uk; s.l.mchale@shu.ac.uk; a.s.meehan@open.ac.uk 


                        Abstract                               blocks corresponding to those of the original Norman and 
                                                               Shallice model (see below). These clusters are sparsely 
     We have developed a robot controller based 
                                                               connected to other clusters within the same functional 
     upon a neural implementation of Norman and 
                                                               block or to clusters in neighbouring blocks. The inter•
     Shallice's model of executive attentional control 
                                                               block connections are based on known neuroanatomical 
     in humans. A simulation illustrates how atten•
                                                               structures and pathways. 
     tional control leads to the suppression of action 
                                                                  The functional architecture features a Perception Layer 
     selection errors in neurally controlled robots. A 
                                                               which fuses sensor signals before distributing these to an 
     related demonstration illustrates how lesioning 
                                                               Associative Layer which maps perceptions to a behaviour 
     of the control architecture leads to behavioural 
                                                               layer. The Behaviour Layer holds a number of distinct 
     pathologies that resemble those seen in human 
                                                               networks which individually exhibit basis behaviours 
     patients with damage to the prefrontal cortex. 
                                                               such as 'wander safely', 'aggregate', 'disperse' [Mataric, 
                                                               1996]. Basis behaviours can be combined to provide 
 1 Introduction                                                higher-level behaviours. A Contention Scheduler takes 
Selecting the right action at the right time is important      input from stimulated behaviours in the behaviour net•
for machines exhibiting higher-level behaviours. How•          work requesting access to the robots effector systems and 
ever, many researchers have found that robots exhibit          selects which behaviors are granted expression in the real 
behavioural pathologies in relation to action selection.       world. (Our contention scheduler is an independent im•
Common examples include excessively frequent and in•           plementation of that given by Prescott et al.[1999].) 
appropriate changes of behaviour (appearing either as             Two SAS functions are currently implemented. The 
distractedness or as indecision); inappropriate persistence    monitor network compares the currently intended behav•
of a behaviour; repetitive behaviour in which the robot        iour with the currently expressed behaviour, generating 
appears to lack awareness of failure.                          an arousal stimulus if a disparity occurs. Arousal causes 
   Humans suffering similar behavioural pathologies are        the modulator network to modulate the behavioral signals 
often found to have suffered damage to an area of the          into the contention scheduler from the behaviour layer 
pre-frontal cortex which is functionally labeled the ex•       such that the intended behaviour is potentiated and the 
ecutive [Parkin, 1996], The executive initiates, monitors      other behaviours are attenuated. It is important to recog•
and modulates higher level behaviours. Several models of       nise that this does not guarantee the selection of the in•
the executive exist, notably those of Baddeley and             tended behaviour as this risks overriding behaviours de•
Weiskrantz [1993] and Norman & Shallice [Shallice,             signed to prevent undesirable outcomes such as collision. 
 1998]. Both these models contain an executive called the 
Supervisory System or Supervisory Attentional System           3 Simulation 
(SAS), respectively. 
                                                               This section illustrates the operation of the simulated 
   We have developed a neural implementation of the 
                                                               robot which has both sonar and olfactory sensors and is 
Norman & Shallice architecture as a controller for a 
                                                               equipped with independent drive wheels and a gripper for 
simulated robot with the aim of demonstrating that such 
                                                               picking up objects of interest. The dynamics of the robot 
an architecture can reduce action selection errors. 
                                                               motion and the sensor are based techniques prescribed by 
                                                               Dudek and Jenkin [2000]. We use foraging behaviour 
2 Architecture                                                 (wander until detect food, collect food, take food to 
   The control network (ca. 700 neurons) features clusters     home), to illustrate the normal functioning of the SAS. 
of highly interconnected neurons within functional 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1501 In Figure 1. the robot (Penny) has detected food in a re•     reproduce robot behaviour that appears to correspond to 
gion near the bottom of the world, oriented itself and        similar pathologies exhibited by human patients . 
then moved towards that food, collected it, and is now 
taking it towards 'home'. 


Figure 1. Simulated robot exhibiting foraging behaviour. 

  The successful operation of the SAS is illustrated in       Figure 2. Suppression of inappropriate behaviour by the SAS. 
Figure 2. which provides a sequence of traces which are 
the outputs of clusters and/or functional units of the neu•   References 
ral architecture. Whilst the robot is currently taking food   [Baddeley and Weiskrantz, 1993] A.Baddeley and L. 
home (as in Figure 1) an additional, distracting, food 
                                                              Weiskrantz. Attention: Selection, Awareness, & Control. 
source is introduced into the environment. This occurs 
                                                              Oxford University Press, 1993. 
some 2 seconds into the trace. The top trace shows that 
the robot detects the new food and the 'orient to food' 
                                                              [Dudek and Jenkin, 2000] Gregory Dudek and Michael 
behaviour requests expression via the contention sched•
                                                              Jenkin. Computational Principles of Mobile Robotics. 
uler. Trace 3 shows that this is not the currently planned 
                                                              Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
behaviour (planning input for this behaviour is 'low'). 
However, the strength of the conditioning to the 'orient 
                                                              [Mataric, 1996] Maya Mataric. Designing and Understand•
to food' stimulus leads the Contention Scheduler to select 
(inappropriately) the 'orient to food' behaviour (rising      ing Adaptive Group Behaviour. Adaptive Behaviour 4(1): 
spike in trace 4). But, the SAS monitor sees this (trace 5),  51-80, 1996. 
and correctly generates a modulatory signal to suppress 
the level of excitation of this behaviour as seen by the      [Prescott et al, 1999] T.J. Prescott, P. Redgrave and K. Gur-
Contention Scheduler (trace 6). This results in the falling   ney. Layered control architectures in robots and vertebrates. 
spike of trace 4. Trace 7 illustrates that there was a mo-    Adaptive Behaviour, 7(1):99-127. 1999. 
mentary expression of the inappropriate behaviour at one 
of the motors.                                                [Robbins, 1991] T.W. Robbins. Cognitive Defecits in 
                                                              Schizophrenia and Parkinson's Disease: Neural basis and 
4 Conclusion                                                  the Role of Dopamine. In P. Willner and J. Scheel-Kruger 
                                                              (eds) The Mesolimbic Dopamine System: From Motivation 
We have demonstrated that a neural controller based           to Action, pages 497-526, John Willey, 1991 
upon the Norman and Shallice model of executive atten-
tional control can express willed behaviour required sup•
                                                              [Shallice, 1988] Tim Shallice. From Neuropsychology to 
press otherwise inappropriate behavior. In a related dem•
                                                              Mental Structure. Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
onstration of this simulation, lesion studies are used to 


1502                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS 