                   Action Selection for Single- and Multi-Robot Tasks Using 
                                 Cooperative Extended Kohonen Maps 
                     Kian Hsiang Low , Wee Kheng Leow and Marcelo H. Ang, Jr.  
                          Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore 
                                 3 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117543, Singapore 
                       Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore 
                              10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 119260, Singapore 
                           fieslkh, leowwk@comp.nus.edu.sg, Jmpeangh@nus.edu.sg 

                        Abstract                               for the robot to approach targets, negotiate unforeseen, possi•
                                                               bly concave, obstacles, and keep away from robot kins when 
     This paper presents an action selection framework         it is tracking moving targets (Fig. 1). 
     based on an assemblage of self-organizing neu•              Our ASM framework consists of four types of EKMs: tar•
     ral networks called Cooperative Extended Kohonen          get localization, obstacle localization, robot kin localization, 
     Maps. This framework encapsulates two features            and motor control EKMs. In the presence of a target, neurons 
     that significantly enhance a robot's action selection     in the target localization EKM, which encodes target location 
     capability: self-organization in the continuous state     in the local sensory input space U\ are activated (Fig. la). A 
     and action spaces to provide smooth, efficient and        target field with the shape of an elongated Gaussian is pro•
     fine motion control; action selection via the cooper•     duced (Fig. lb) such that the neurons at and near the target 
     ation and competition of Extended Kohonen Maps            location have the strongest activities. The elongated target 
     to achieve more complex motion tasks. Qualitative         field is crucial to the robot's avoidance of concave obstacles. 
     and quantitative comparisons for single- and multi-
                                                                  Similarly, the presence of an obstacle activates neurons in 
     robot tasks show our framework can provide better 
                                                               the obstacle localization EKMs. The neurons in these EKMs 
     action selection than do potential fields method. 
                                                               at and near the obstacle locations will be activated to produce 
                                                               obstacle fields (Fig. lc). These obstacle fields are stretched 
 1 Introduction                                                along the obstacle directions such that neurons beyond the 
                                                               obstacle locations are also inhibited to indicate inaccessibil•
A central issue in the design of behavior-based control archi• ity. Robot kin fields are activated in a similar way in the robot 
tectures for autonomous agents is the formulation of effective EKMs in the presense of robot kins. 
action selection mechanisms (ASMs) to coordinate the be•         In activating the motor control EKM, the obstacle fields 
haviors. This paper describes a neural network-based ASM       are subtracted from the target field (Fig. Id). If the target lies 
for autonomous non-holonomic mobile robots. Our motiva•        within the obstacle fields, the activation of the motor con•
tion is to develop a motion control strategy that can perform  trol EKM neurons close to the target location will be sup•
distributed multi-robot surveillance in unknown, dynamic,      pressed. Consequently, another neuron at a location that is 
and unpredictable environments. By implementing the ASM        not inhibited by the obstacle fields becomes most highly ac•
using an assemblage of self-organizing neural networks, it in• tivated (Fig. Id). This neuron produces a control parameter 
duces the following key features that significantly enhance    that moves the robot away from the obstacle. While the robot 
the agent's action selection capability: self-organization of  moves around the obstacle, the target and obstacle localiza•
continuous state and action spaces to provide smooth, effi•    tion EKMs are continuously updated with the current loca•
cient and fine motion control, and action selection via the    tions and directions of the target and obstacles. Their interac•
cooperation and competition of Extended Kohonen Maps to        tions with the motor control EKM produce fine and smooth 
achieve more complex motion tasks.                             motion control of the robot to negotiate the obstacle and reach 
                                                               the target. In the case of multi-robot tracking of multiple tar•
2 Action Selection Framework                                   gets, multiple target fields and robot kins fields are activated. 
                                                               The robots act like highly repulsive obstacles to other robots, 
Our proposed ASM, termed Cooperative Extended Kohonen 
                                                               thus separating them from each other. 
Maps (EKMs), is implemented by connecting an ensemble of 
EKMs. An EKM extends the Kohonen Self-Organizing Map. 
Besides encoding a set of input weights that self-organize in  3 Experiments and Discussions 
the sensory input space, the neurons also produce outputs that Two qualitative tests were conducted to demonstrate the ca•
vary with the incoming sensed inputs. Our implementation       pabilities of cooperative EKMs in performing complex mo•
extends the work of [Low et al., 2002] by connecting several   tion tasks. The experiments were performed using Webots, 
EKMs to form cooperative EKMs. These neural networks co-       an embodied simulator for Khepera mobile robots, which in•
operate and compete to produce an appropriate motor action     corporated 10% noise in its sensors and actuators. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1505 Figure 1: Cooperative EKMs. (a) In response to the target 0, the nearest neuron (black dot) in the target localization EKM 
(ellipse) of the robot (gray circle) is activated, (b) The activated neuron produces a target field (dotted ellipse) in the motor 
control EKM. (c) Three of the robot's sensors detect obstacles and activate three neurons (crosses) in the obstacle localization 
EKMs, which produce the obstacle fields (dashed ellipses), (d) Subtraction of the obstacle fields from the target field results in 
the neuron at to become the winner in the motor control EKM, which moves the robot away from the obstacle. 


Figure 2: Motion of robot (dark gray) in an environment with 
unforeseen static obstacles (light gray). The robot success•  Figure 3: Cooperative tracking of moving targets. When the 
fully navigated through the checkpoints (small black dots)    targets were moving out of the robots' sensory range, the 
located at the doorways to reach the goal.                    robot below decided to track the targets moving to the bottom 
  The environment for the first test consisted of three rooms left while the robot above responded by tracking the targets 
                                                              moving to the top right. In this way, all targets could still be 
connected by two doorways with unforeseen static obsta•
                                                              observed by the robots. 
cles (Fig. 2). The robot began in the top corner of the left•
most room and was tasked to move into the narrow corner 
of the right-most room via checkpoints plotted by a planner. 
The robot with cooperative EKMs was able to move through 
the checkpoints to the goal by traversing between narrowly 
spaced convex obstacles in the first and the last room, and 
overcoming an concave obstacle in the middle room. A robot 
with potential fields would be trapped by these local minimas. 
                                                                           (a) (b) 
  The second test (Fig. 3) illustrates how two robots endowed Figure 4: Comparison of observation coverage for (a) robots 
with cooperative EKMs cooperate to track four moving tar•     using different tracking strategies in varying arena size, and 
gets. When the targets were moving out of the robots' sensory (b) varying number of robots with different sensing ranges. 
range, the robot below chose to track the two targets moving 
                                                              robots, each with target and robot sensing radius of 0.3 m, 
to the bottom left while the robot above responded by track•  were deployed in this task. The fixed deployment approach 
ing the two targets moving to the top right. In this manner, all distributed stationary robots uniformly over the arena. The 
targets could be observed by the robots. This test shows that random deployment approach allowed the robots to move 
the two robots can cooperate to track multiple moving targets randomly in a manner similar to the moving targets. Test re•
without communicating with each other.                        sults in Fig. 4(a) reveal that, in very large arenas, tracking 
  Two quantitative tests were conducted to determine the      strategies that respond dynamically to targets' motion (co•
overall tracking performance of the robot team based on the   operative EKMs and potential fields) are significantly better 
following performance index:                                  than those that do not (fixed and random). In particular, co-
                                                       (1)    operative EKMs offered the highest observation coverage as 
                                                              it could overcome local minimas posed by targets and robots. 
                                                                The second test compared the mean observation coverage 
where N is total number of targets, n is number of targets 
                                                              of the cooperative-EKM robots with different sensing ranges 
being tracked at time t, and the experiment lasts T amount of 
                                                              and number of robots. The size of the arena was 6.4 m    , 
time. For both tests, N and T were fixed respectively as 10                                                            2
                                                              which corresponded to the largest arena used for the first test. 
targets and 1000 time steps at intervals of 128 ms. 
                                                              Test results in Fig. 4(b) show that observation coverage in•
  The first test compared the mean observation coverage of    creases with increasing number of robots and sensing range. 
robots adopting four different tracking strategies: coopera•
tive EKMs, potential fields, fixed deployment, and random 
deployment. The environment or arena was an enclosed          References 
obstacle-free region that varied in size. The mobile tar•     [Low et al.9 2002] K. H. Low, W. K. Leow, and M. H. Ang Jr. 
gets were forward-moving, obstacle-avoidance vehicles that       A hybrid mobile robot architecture with integrated plan•
changed their direction and speed with 5% probability. Five      ning and control. In Proc. AAMAS, pages 219-226,2002. 


1506                                                                                                  POSTER PAPERS 