                                         Towards Pervasive Robotics 

                                                  Artur M. Arsenio 
                     Artificial Intelligence Lab - Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
                             545 Technology Square, Room NE43-936, MA 02139 
                                                 arsenio@ai.mit.edu 


                        Abstract 

     Pervasive robotics will require, in a near future, 
     small, light and cheap robots that exhibit complex 
     behaviors. These demands led to the development 
     of the M2-M4 Macaco project - a robotic active vi•
     sion head. Macaco is a portable system, capable 
     of emulating the head of different creatures both 
     aesthetically and functionally. It integrates mech•
     anisms for social interactions, autonomous naviga•        Figure 1: (Left) The M4 Macaco robot, designed to resemble a 
     tion and object analysis.                                 dog's head. (Right) The M4-Macaco robotic head and processing 
                                                               hardware assembled to a Magellan mobile platform. 
1 Motivation 

One approach of AI is the development of robots whose em•
bodiment and situatedness in the world evoke behaviors that 
obviate constant human supervision [Brooks, 1999], With 
this in mind, we developed the M2-M4 Macaco project, 
which is described in this paper. M2-M4 Macaco is a robotic 
active, modular and compact system. This creature was de•
signed to fi tdifferent mobile robot platforms or act as a stand-
alone system. Another design goal was the portability of both 
                                                               Figure 2: (Left) M2-Macaco, a biological inspired robotic head, 
the mechanical and electronic devices and its brain. Macaco 
                                                               designed to resemble a chimpanzee head. (Right) M2 robotic body 
characteristics make it a portable, fully operational robotic 
                                                               built by the MIT LegLab. 
head whenever not assembled to a mobile platform, able to 
act as a social agent. A simple communications interface en•
ables operation onboard mobile platforms, turning the robot    The replacement of a few M2-M4 Macaco's aesthetic com•
into an autonomous, sociable machine.                          ponents allows for the metamorphosis of a dog-like (M4 -
   Research robots are enclosed most of the time at lab facil• see Figure 1) into a chimpanzee-like (M2 - see Figure 2) 
ities in which they are developed, most often operating just   robot. The weight of the head, including motors, gears and 
for demonstration goals. We expect in a near future to have    gyro, is ~ 1.6Kg. The hardware consists of nine small CPU 
both the robotic head and its brain physically present at ex•  boards with Pentium 111 at 800MHz, all modules connected 
hibitions/seminars, interacting socially. This new approach    by an Ethernet network. Four cameras and a total of nine 
with complex, portable research robots will lead to commer•    framegrabbers are used for video acquisition. 
cial applications and increasing synergy among roboticists. 
Eventually, pervasive robotics - robots present everywhere to  2 Implementation 
perform a variety of tasks - will be possible as smaller, lighter Security is one possible operational scenario for this ac•
and cheaper robots become available.                           tive head. For this class of applications, Macaco robot was 
1.1 The Robotic creature                                       equipped with a behavioral system capable of searching for 
                                                               people or faces, and to further recognize them. In addition, 
This robotic mechanism was designed to resemble a biolog•      human gaze direction might reveal security threats, and thus 
ical creature, exploiting several features of an evolutionary  a head gaze detection algorithm was developed. Probable tar•
design, but adding others (such as a thermal camera for hu•    gets for such gazings are other people and mostly important, 
man detection and night vision) for improved performance.      explosives and/or guns. Therefore, salient objects situated in 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1553 the world are processed for 3D information extraction and 
texture/color analysis. Current work is also underway for ob•
ject and scene recognition from contextual cues. 
   Another scenario includes search and rescue missions by 
a mobile robot, which requires additional navigation capa•
bilities in rough terrain. Finally, real world applications are 
often characterized by strong light variations or the absence 
of light. This is taken into account through thermal image 
processing for people detection and for night navigation. 
                                                                         Figure 4: (Left) Object Analysis. (Center) Social and (Right) Nav•
2.1 Visual Pre-Attentive System                                          igation Mechanisms. 
Although the real world does not avail precise or singularly 
adequate perceptual information, unique interpretations of                    a thermal camera. A navigation algorithm based on 
the world can be constructed using an attentional mechanism.                  monocular cues runs at frame-rate, for night navigation. 
A logpolar attentional system was developed to select rele•
vant information from the cameras output, and to combine it              2.3 Architecture 
in a saliency map (see Figure 3). This map is segmented into             The software architecture includes, besides the Visual At•
three regions of stimuli saliency - the attentional focus.               tention system, releasers from body sensors and motiva•
                                                                         tional drives that modulate attentional gains. Action is de•
                                                                         termined by competing behaviors, which also share resources 
                                                                         to achieve multi-behavior tasking. 


                                                                        3 Conclusions 
                                                                         We presented the project of a portable robotic head, mod•
                                                                         ular at the mechanical, hardware and software levels. Al•
                                                                        though equipped with a complex cognitive system, its small 
                                                                        weight and compact size allows it to be incorporated into mul•
                                                                        tiple mobile platforms, and also to be used as a portable au•
                                                                        tonomous sociable robotic creature. 
                                                                        Acknowledgments 
                                                                        Work funded by DARPA project 'Natural Tasking of Robots Based 
                                                                        on Human Interaction Clues", contract DABT 63-00-C-10102. Au•
                                                                        thor supported by Portuguese grant PRAXIS XXI BD/15851/98. 
                                                                        References 
                                                                        [Brooks, 1999] Rodney A. Brooks. Cambrian Intelligence. 
                                                                            MIT Press, 1999. 
                                                                        [Arsenio, 2003] Artur M. Arsenio. A Robot in a Box. Ac•
                                                                            cepted to IEEE 2003 Int. Conf. on Advanced Robotics. 


1554                                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS 