        Quantum Computation and Image Processing: New Trends in Artificial 
                                                    Intelligence 

                                        S.E. Venegas-Andraca and S. Bose 
               Centre for Quantum Computation, Department of Physics, University of Oxford 
                                        Parks Road, Oxford 0X1 3PU, U.K. 
                                           {svenegas, s.bose}@qubit.org 
                                                http://www.qubit.org 


                        Abstract                                2. Entanglement. Entanglement is a special correlation 
                                                                   among quantum systems that has no paragon in classi•
     The analysis and use of visual information is a first 
                                                                   cal systems. Entanglement is seen to be at the heart of 
     order task for AI researchers. Due to the archi•
                                                                   QIP unique properties, and an example of it is its role in 
     tecture of classical computers and to the compu•
                                                                   Quantum Teleportation [Nielsen and Chuang, 2000]. 
     tational complexity of state-of-the-art algorithms, 
     it is required to find better ways to store, process        The previous properties may have deep implications in sev•
     and retrieve information for image processing. One       eral fields of Computer Science, in particular in Artificial In•
     plausible and exciting approach is Quantum Infor•        telligence (AI) both on theoretical (e.g. faster algorithms and 
     mation Processing (QIP). In this poster we present       secure tranmissions) and technological spheres (current tech•
     an initial step towards the definition of an emerg•      nology is now being built taking into account quantum effects 
     ing field, Quantum Image Processing, by showing          due to component size). 
     how to store an image using a quantum system as             The purpose of this poster is to propose an initial step to•
     well as some of the unique properties of that stor•      wards the integration of QIP techniques in image processing 
     age process derived from quantum mechanics laws.         and, as a future work, in related fields as Computer Vision 
                                                              and Pattern Recognition. 
1 Introduction 
In 1985 Deutsch [Deutsch, 1985] developed a theoretical ma•
chine named Universal Quantum Turing Machine (UQTM), 
that is, a machine based on quantum theory capable of per•
forming computations, and showed that such machine was a 
generalization of a universal Turing machine. It is also shown 
in [Deutsch, 1985] that a quantum computer (QC), that is, a 
physical system capable of performing computations accord•
ing to the rules of quantum mechanics, can perform certain 
tasks faster than its classical counterpart. Deutsch and Jozsa 
[Deutsch and Jozsa, 1992] and Shor [Shor, 1994] showed 
concrete problems where such speed-up is possible. 
   Among QC properties, we find:                                     Figure 1: . Mathematical Representation for a qubit 
                                                              a) The canonical counterpart of classical bits {0, 1} in QIP is An arbitrary 
  1. Superposition of states. The basic component of a QC 
                                                              qubit can be written as where — 1. 
     is a qubit, that is, a physical entity (such as an electron 
                                                              b) Note that can be written as a linear combination of an infinite number of bases, 
     or a photon) that can be mathematically represented as a 
                                                              in particular as a combination of either B  — 
     vector in a 2D Hilbert space The general form of a                                    1
                                                              where  
     qubit is  

     where are complex numbers constrained by                 2 Storing an image in a qubit array 
          = 1 and is an arbitrary basis of  
                                                              2.1 Visual Information Storage in a Multi Particle 
     [Nielsen and Chuang, 2000]. Thus, is a superpo•
     sition of states and and therefore can be                      Quantum System 
     prepared in an infinite number of ways by varying the    Let Q = be a set of qubits. 
     values of and See figure 1 .a. In contrast, classi•      Our goal is to store visual information in Q. In order to 
     cal computers measure bit values using only one basis,   take advantage of properties, allowed quantum states 
     {0,1} and the only two possible states are those that cor• used to store visual information in a qubit are M — 
     respond to the measurement outcomes, 0 or 1. 


POSTER PAPERS                                                                                                       1563                                                                properties: secrecy and eavesdropping detection. Indeed, if 
                                                               an eavesdropper tries to read the information in without 
                                                               reading two main advantages with no counterpart in clas•
                                                               sical computers are found: a) the eavesdropper has an only 
                                                               50% chance of reading accurate information (if he/she fails 
                                                               to choose the right measurement basis, he/she will get only 
                                                               a random outcome), and b) the post-measurement state of a 
                                                               measurement performed with a wrong basis allows us to de•
                                                               tect eavesdropping [Bouwmeester et ai, 2001]. This means 
        Figure 2: . Frequency to quantum state apparatus 
                                                               that in order to provide secure transmission of information, it 
 Schematics of an apparatus capable of detecting electromagnetic frequencies and pro•
                                                               is sufficient to send only control qubits |pi) via secure cryp•
 ducing a set of quantum states as output. |i/') being an overall state of that set of qubits tographic scheme. 

   We define a machine B that divides the whole frequency      3 Future Work 
 range of the visible spectra into a partition 
                                                               Next steps include the use of entanglement for gray level 
 and assigns a qubit array (that is, a set of spatially ordered 
                                                               and color image segmentation. The basic idea is to entangle 
 qubit states) Q  to each partition subset Fi (see figure 2). Note 
              t                                                qubits with similar colors and to develop quantum algorithms 
 that B must act as a bijective function between frequency par•
                                                               for image segmentation. 
 tition subsets Fi and sets of qubit states Qt, i.e. it is not al•
 lowed to have the same qubit state distribution for two differ•
 ent frequency subsets. So, for each pixel from a given image, Acknowledgments 
 B produces a particular qubit array from the set              S.E. Venegas-Andraca gratefully acknowledges the receipt of 
   Let us suppose that machine B produces only qubit states    a CONACyT scholarship from the Mexican National Council 
    and Thus, the number of colors that can be repre•          of Science and Technology. 

 sented in an array of n qubits is 2n, just like in the classical The authors want to thank N. Paunkovic for his very stim•
 case (for gray scale or primary color values, for instance) but, ulating and wise comments about this work. 
 if we include qubit states and then the number of 
 different colors that can be stored is 2ln.                   References 
   However, quantum mechanics has a constraint: reading 
                                                               [Deutsch, 1985] David Deutsch. Quantum Theory, the 
 (that is, measuring) non-orthogonal states 
                                                                  Church-Turing Principle and the Universal Quantum Com•
 and are) is a probabilistic process. Thus, if only one ba•
                                                                  puter. In Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Se•
 sis is used to measure all states in M, information retrieval 
                                                                  ries A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Volume 400, 
 will not be accurate. In addition, the postulates of quantum 
                                                                  Issue 1818, pages 97-117, July 8, 1985. 
 mechanics state that the post-measurement quantum state is, 
 in general, different from the pre-measurement quantum state  [Deutsch and Jozsa, 1992] David Deutsch and Richard Jozsa 
 (they are equal if and only if the pre-measurement quantum       Rapid Solution of Problems by Quantum Computation. 
state is equal to one of the orthogonal vectors of the measure•   In Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, 
 ment basis).                                                     Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Volume 439, Issue 
   In order to perform accurate measurements, we now              1907, pages 553-558,"December 8, 1992. 
introduce per each pixel, a set of control qubits C -          [Shor, 1994] Peter Shor. Polynomial-Time Algorithms for 
                                       are the only allowed       Prime Factorization and Discrete Algorithms on a Quan•
quantum states for elements in C. The purpose of this new         tum Computer. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Sym•
element is to use qubit to know which basis has to be            posium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 124— 
used to perform a measurement on (a generalization of             134, Santa Fe, NM, Nov. 20-22, 1994. IEEE Computer 
this scheme is to allow the quantum programmer to choose          Society Press. 
only one storing basis for each pixel). So, by measuring qubit 
                                                               [Nielsen and Chuang, 2000] Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac 
     in the canonical basis, it is possible to perform accurate 
                                                                  L. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum Infor•
measurements. Formally speaking, the observable used to 
                                                                  mation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
measure control qubits is  
                                                                  Kingdom, 2000. 
The observables used to measure qubits are, in the case 
                                                               [Gonzalez and Woods, 1993] R. Gonzalez and R. Woods. 
the outcome in measuring A\ was a1 then  
                                                                 Digital Image Processing. Addison-Wesley Co., 1993 
          while in the case the outcome was then we mea•
                                                               [Bouwmeester et al., 2001 ] Dirk Bouwmeester, Artur Ekert 
sure A 2                                                         and Anton Zeilinger, editors. The Physics of Quantum In•
2.2 Quantum secrecy vs Eavesdropping                             formation. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2001. 
It is relevant to point out the fact that having no a priori 
knowledge of which measurement basis has to be used to 
read information in qubits introduces two very convenient 


1564                                                                                                   POSTER PAPERS 