                     Web Intelligence (WI): What Makes Wisdom Web? 
                              (Invited Talk at IJCAI'03) 

                                               Jiming Liu 
                                 Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC) & 
                      Computer Science Department, Hong Kong Baptist University 
                        Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong jiming@comp.hkbu.edu.hk 

                     Abstract                              alized multimedia representation, and multimodal data 
                                                           processing are required. 
    Web Intelligence (WI) sheds new light on direc•
    tions for scientific research and development which 3. Knowledge-level information processing and man•
    explores the fundamental roles as well as practi•      agement tools. The Web is regarded as a distributed 
    cal impacts of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and ad•    data/knowledge base. We need to develop semantic 
    vanced Information Technology (IT) on the next         markup languages to represent the semantic contents of 
    generation of Web-empowered products, systems,         the Web available in machine-understandable formats 
    services, and activities. This paper gives new per•    for agent based computing, such as searching, aggre•
    spectives on the future WI research and highlights     gation, classification, filtering, managing, mining, and 
    some of the research challenges and initiatives.       discovery on the Web [3]. 

  The notion of Web Intelligence (WI) was first introduced 4. Application-level ubiquitous computing and social 
in [10; 17; 18; 19; 21; 221. Since then, WI has become     intelligence environments. The Web is regarded as a 
a fast growing research field which concerns scientific re• basis for establishing social networks that contain com•
search and development to explore the fundamental roles as munities of people (or organizations or other social en•
well as practical impacts of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and tities) connected by social relationships, such as friend•
advanced Information Technology (IT) on the next generation ship, coworking or information exchange with common 
of Web-empowered systems, services, and environments. WI   interests. They are Web-supported social networks or 
is aimed at producing theories and technologies that will en• virtual communities. The study of WI concerns the im•
able us to optimally utilize the global connectivity, as offered portant issues central to social network intelligence (so•
by the Web infrastructure, in life, work, and play.        cial intelligence for short) 17; 15]. Furthermore, the mul•
                                                           timedia contents on the Web are not only accessible from 
1 Been There, Done That                                    stationary platforms, but increasingly from mobile plat•
                                                           forms [16]. Ubiquitous Web access and computing from 
The Web has irrevocably revolutionized the world we live in. various wireless devices need adaptive personalization 
This impact is inevitable due to the facts that the Web con• for which WI techniques are used to construct models 
nectivity rapidly increases and that the online information as• of user interests by inferring from user behavior and ac•
tronomically explodes. In order not only to live with such a tions [l; 4]. 
change but also to benefit from the information infrastructure 
that the Web has empowered, we have witnessed the fast de• In spite of on-going WI technological advances, it is still 
velopment as well as applications of many WI techniques and rather unclear to many what will be the next paradigm shift in 
technologies, which cover:                             WI. In what follows, I will present new perspectives on this 
                                                       question and at the same time point out some WI research 
  1. Internet-level communication, infrastructure, and challenges. 
    security protocols. The Web is regarded as a computer-
    network system. WI techniques for this level include, for 
    instance, Web data prefetching systems built upon Web 2 What's Next? 
    surfing patterns to resolve the issue of Web latency. The In the movie Star Wars: Episode II, there is an interesting 
    intelligence of the Web prefetching comes from adaptive scene: When Obi Wan Kenobi failed to locate any relevant 
    learning based on observations of user surfing behavior. information about a mysterious planet (where later he discov•
 2. Interface-level multimedia presentation standards. ered the clone manufacturing ground), he turned to his friend 
    The Web is regarded as an interface for human-Internet for advice. His friend, who apparently knew more than the 
    interaction. WI techniques for this level are used to Jedi's academy knowledge banks combined, had the follow•
    develop intelligent Web interfaces in which the capa• ing in reply: Other people seek knowledge, but you my friend 
    bilities of adaptive cross-language processing, person• know wisdom. 


1596                                                                                    INVITED SPEAKERS   The reply in the above scene also provides an answer to 4 10 Capabilities of the Wisdom Web 
our earlier question. The next paradigm shift in WI lies in the In order to make the above Wisdom Web scenario a reality, 
notion of wisdom. The goal of the new generation Wl is to the following 10 fundamental capabilities have to be incorpo•
enable users to gain new wisdom of living, working, playing, rated and standardized: 
and learning, in addition to information search and knowledge 
queries. Here, the word of wisdom, according to the Webster 1. Self-organizing servers: The Wisdom Web will au•
Dictionary (Page: 1658) 114], implies the following mean•  tomatically regulate the functions and cooperations of 
ings:                                                      related Websites and application services available. A 
                                                           Wisdom Web server automatically self-nominates to 
  1. The quality of being wise; knowledge, and the capacity other services its functional roles as well as correspond•
    to make due use of it; knowledge of the best ends and  ing spatial or temporal constraints and operational set•
    the best means; discernment and judgment; discretion;  tings. 
    sagacity; skill; dexterity.                         2. Specialization: A Wisdom Web server is an agent by 
  2. The results of wise judgments; scientific or practical itself, which is specialized in performing some roles in 
    truth; acquired knowledge; erudition.                  a certain service. The association of its roles with any 
                                                           service will be measured and updated dynamically, for 
  In the Web context, the manifestation of wisdom can best instance, the association may be forgotten if it is not used 
be illustrated with a minimalist Wisdom Web example.       for some time. 
                                                        3. Growth: The population of Wisdom Agents will dy•
3 When the Web Offers Practical Wisdom ...                 namically change, as new agents are self-reproduced by 
Imagine that this is your first trip to the city of Montreal. You their parent agents in order to become more specialized, 
would like to find a really nice place to spend your evening. or aged agents are deactivated. 
So, you walk into a Cyber Cafe on Sherbrook Street (the only 4. Autocatalysis: As various roles of wisdom agents are 
street that you can recognize), and decide to get some prac• created through specialization and activated by the Wis•
tical wisdom from a public Wisdom Web outlet. You log in   dom Search requests, their associations with some ser•
with a user name, "Spiderman", and ask:                    vices and among themselves must be aulocatalytically 
                                                           aggregated. In this respect, the autocatalysis of asso•
    "What is the best night life in Montreal during this 
                                                           ciations is similar to the pheromone laying for positive 
    season of the year?" 
                                                           feedback in an ant colony. 
The Wisdom Web thinks for about a second or two and then 5. Problem Solver Markup Language (PSML): PSML 
responds:                                                  is necessary for wisdom agents to specify their roles and 
    "Spiderman, the hockey games are on during this        settings as well as relationships with any other services. 
    season of the year. Would you like to go?"          6. Semantics: The Wisdom Web needs to understand what 
You reply:                                                 are meant by "Montreal", "season", "year", and "night 
                                                           life", and what is the right judgment of "best", by under•
    "Yes"                                                  standing the granularities of their corresponding subjects 
Then the Wisdom Web suggests:                              and the whereabouts of their ontology definitions. 
    "As far as 1 know, there are still some tickets left 7. Metaknowledge: Besides semantic knowledge ex•
    and you may purchase some at the Montreal Forum.       tracted and manipulated in the Wisdom Search, it is also 
    It is easy to get there by taking Metro to the Atwater essential for wisdom agents to incorporate a dynamically 
    station."                                              created source of metaknowledge that deals with the re•
                                                           lationships between concepts and the spatial or tempo•
Now you decide that this could be an interesting evening for ral constraint knowledge in planning and executing ser•
you...                                                     vices. It allows agents to self-resolve their conflict of 
  One hour later, you arrive at the ticket office by Metro, but interests. 
surprisingly find that the tickets left are all for the day after 8. Planning: In the above example, the goal is to find a 
tomorrow when you will be traveling in Quebec City.        function or an event that may sound attractive to a visi•
  As you are a bit disappointed, you notice that there is a tor. The constraint is that they must be happening during 
free Wisdom Web Kiosk right beside the ticket office. Well, this season. There are involved two associated subgoals: 
that's convenient. So, without too much hesitation, you log In order to have an access to the recommended function 
on to the Wisdom Web, again as "Spiderman". The Wisdom     or event, one needs a ticket. Further, in order to go to get 
Web still remembers your conversations an hour ago. As soon the ticket, one can travel by Metro. In the Wisdom Web, 
as it recognizes that you are "Spiderman", it says to you: ontology alone will not be sufficient. 
    "Hello Spiderman, you were in such a hurry last     9. Personalization: The Wisdom Web remembers the re•
    time that I couldn't have a chance to tell you that    cent encounters and relates different episodes together, 
    all tickets available here are only for the day after  according to (1) "Spiderman", (2) time, and (3) attain•
    tomorrow. They are quite expensive too..."             ability of (sub)goals. It may further identify other goals 


INVITED SPEAKERS                                                                                      1597      as well as courses of actions for this user as their conver• such as Web community communication, semantics based 
     sation goes on.                                   agent communication, knowledge based Web retrieval, Web 
 10. A sense of humor: Although the Wisdom Web does    content understanding, and Web community discovery. 
     not explicitly tell a funny story, it adds some punch lines Although ontology engineering has been studied over the 
     to the situation or anxiety that "Spiderman" is presently last decade, there is still a demand for more automatic 
     in when he/she logs on for the second time, which will methods in comprehensive ontology construction and learn•
     make "Spiderman" feel absurd.                     ing 120]. The tedious, cumbersome task of existing manual 
                                                       ontology construction can easily become a bottleneck in the 
5 Research Challenges                                  development of semantics based Web intelligence. 
In the preceding sections, I have stated the goal and vision of 5.3 Wisdom Web Based Computing Paradigm 
the new generation WI, and what constitutes a Wisdom Web. 
In this section, I will point out some WI research challenges. The paradigm of Wisdom Web based computing is aimed at 
                                                       providing not only a medium for seamless information ex•
5.1 Problem Solver Markup Language (PSML)              change and knowledge sharing but also a type of man-made 
                                                       resources for sustainable knowledge creation, and scien•
One practical Wisdom Web issue that has to be addressed 
                                                       tific and social evolution. The Wisdom Web will reply on 
is how to integrate distributed and centralized information 
                                                       grid-like service agencies that self-organize, learn, and evolve 
sources/structures. Information/knowledge on the Web can 
                                                       their courses of actions in order to perform service tasks as 
be either globally distributed throughout the Web or locally 
                                                       well as their identities and interrelationships in communities. 
hosted, centralized on an intelligent portal providing Web ser• They will also cooperate and compete among themselves in 
vices {i.e., an intelligent service provider) that is integrated to order to optimize their as well as others resources and utili•
its own cluster of specialized intelligent applications. How• ties. 
ever, each approach has a serious flaw. As pointed out by 
                                                         Self-organizing, learning agents are computational entities 
Alesso and Smith [1], the intelligent portal approach limits 
                                                       that are capable of self-improving their performance in dy•
uniformity and access, while the global semantic Web ap•
                                                       namically changing and unpredictable task environments. In 
proach faces combinatory complexity limitations. 
                                                       [8], Liu has provided a comprehensive overview of several 
  A way to solve the above issue is to develop and use 
                                                       studies in the field of autonomy oriented computing, with 
the Problem Solver Markup Language (PSML) for collect•
                                                       in-depth discussions on self-organizing and adaptive tech•
ing globally distributed contents and knowledge from Web-
                                                       niques for developing various embodiments of agent based 
supported, semantic social networks and incorporating them 
                                                       systems, such as autonomous robots, collective vision and 
with locally operational knowledge/databases in an enterprise 
                                                       motion, autonomous animation, and search and segmentation 
or community for locally centralized, adaptable Web intelli•
                                                       agents. The core of those techniques is the notion of synthetic 
gent services. 
                                                       or emergent autonomy based on behavioral self-organization. 
  The core of PSML is based on distributed inference en•
gines that can perform automatic reasoning on the Web by in•
corporating contents and metaknowledge, autonomically col• 5.4 A New Turing Test 
lected and transformed from the semantic Web, with locally In order to effectively develop the new generation WI sys•
operational knowledge/databases. A feasible way to work tems, we need to define benchmark applications, i.e., a new 
with PSML is to use existing (Prolog-like) logic languages, Turing Test, that will capture and demonstrate the Wisdom 
together with dynamic contents and metaknowledge collec• Web capabilities. 
tion and transformation agents.                          Take the Wisdom Web based computing benchmark as an 
  By using this information transformation approach, the dy• example. We can use a service task of compiling and generat•
namic, global information sources on the Web can be com• ing a market report on an existing product or a potential mar•
bined with the local information sources in an enterprise por• ket report on a new product. In order to get such service jobs 
tal for decision making and business intelligence.     done, an information agent on the Wisdom Web will mine 
  Ohsuga et al previously used KAUS for representing local and integrate available Web information, which will in turn 
information sources and for performing inferences and rea• be passed onto a market analysis agent. Market analysis will 
soning. KAUS is a knowledge based system that involves involve the quantitative simulations of customer behavior in a 
Multi-Layer Logic and databases based on the relational data marketplace, instantaneously handled by other serviced agen•
model [13]. KAUS enables the representations of knowledge cies, involving a large number of grid agents [2]. Since the 
and data in the first order logic form with multi-layer data number of variables concerned may be in the order of hun•
structures. It can readily be used for inferences and reason• dreds or thousands, it can easily cost a single system years to 
ing as well as for transforming and managing both knowledge generate one predication. 
and data. 

5.2 Automatic Ontology Construction                    6 Recent Initiatives 
Ontology is the basis for designing and implementing the Se• In this section, I will describe two recent WI research ini•
mantic Web for Web intelligence. It plays a crucial role in tiatives: (1) information foraging agents and (2) ubiquitous 
enabling Web based knowledge processing and management, agent communities. 


1598                                                                                    INVITED SPEAKERS 6.1 Information Foraging Agents                        routine activities, such as processing emails, placing orders, 
One of the important roles of wisdom agents is concerned making meeting arrangements, downloading news, etc. 
with searching and filtering information from distributed Web A UAC can interact with its users in various ways. For 
sources. In this respect, understanding and developing the instance, as a person uses a smart handheld device to enter a 
right information foraging behaviors for wisdom agents will subway station on his/her way to work, a UAC can seamlessly 
become a real challenge. In order to tackle this challenge, the upload a list of things to be done to the person's handheld 
first step is to have a clear picture of how humans search in• device. Along with each of the things listed, the informa•
formation, what kind of human behavior dominates, and what tion provided by the UAC can also include its corresponding 
is the origin of Web usage regularities. There have been few tasks necessary to be carried out. Thus, inside the moving 
efforts on describing various aspects of human Web surfing subway train, he/she will be able to go through each of the 
regularities 15; 6]. However, the origin and interrelated vari• recommended task items and to further verify and delegate 
ables of the regularities still remain unknown.        certain jobs to a community agent (c-agent) in the UAC, such 
  Liu and Zhang have developed a model for information for• as forwarding a report or making a meeting appointment. In 
aging agents on the Web [111. The foraging agent model addition to planning and executing the items on a calendar, 
takes into account Web topology, information distribution, the user can also receive other personalized services based on 
and agent interest profile. They have validated this model his/her profile, which may include sports news, urgent emails, 
using empirical Web log datasets, and used it to explain the and specific documents prepared for the day's meetings. 
origin of regularities in Web surfing. In particular, they have Figure 1 gives an illustrative example of personal services 
discovered that it is the unique distribution of agent interest that can be provided by a community of competing and coop•
that leads to the regularities in agent surfing behavior, i.e., erating agents, i.e., a Ubiquitous Agent Community (UAC). 
a power law distribution of agent surfing depth. The Web A UAC contains two types of agents: community agents 
topology can only influence the shape parameters of the dis• (c-agents) and service agents (s-agents). The former makes 
tribution without changing the nature of the distribution. Also task plans as well as contracting decisions on what and where 
discovered is that the power law of link click frequency is some tasks will be carried out, whereas the latter performs 
largely due to agent purposeful surfing behavior. This work the delegated tasks. In the illustrative example of Figure 1, 
shows that Web regularities are interrelated.          suppose a user writes a few words on his/her PDA regarding 
  Also in their studies, they have studied three categories of what he/she plans to do. A c-agent in the distributed UAC 
foraging agents, according to their interests and familiarities will recognize the intention of the user and find similar ser•
with the Web: Random agents who have no obvious inten• vice cases from its case base. Thereafter, it will perform task 
tion in Web surfing, rational agents who have certain goals planning based on the similarity between the task at hand and 
to achieve but are not familiar with the Web structure, and the previous tasks. Once the c-agent completes its task plan•
recurrent agents who have certain specific intents and are ning, a cluster of s-agents will be called upon to distribute and 
very familiar with the Web structure. The ability to predict carry out the planned subtasks. 
the contents at the next level nodes becomes stronger when In the UAC, s-agents will not act alone, but work coordi•
moving from random to recurrent agents. Experimental re• nate,, in order to accomplish their subtasks. Coordination is 
sults with respect to the three agent categories have unveiled one of the most important characteristics of UAC agents. The 
that the regularities of agent surfing depth on pages and do• coordination of UAC agents is essentially the coordination of 
mains still remain the same, while a power law of link click their ubiquitous service actions. 
frequency distribution will disappear as we move from recur• Take a buyer-seller market community as an example. The 
rent agents to random agents. This result shows that the order goal of each agent is to maximize its own interest; agents are 
existing in link click frequency comes from agent's content antagonistic in a certain sense. At the same time, the market 
prediction ability, that is whether or not an agent can deter• exists on the basis of buyer-seller competitions. In this case, 
mine the next step according to its own interest and current the coordination of the market agents is reflected in their com•
information.                                           petitions for the best prices. 
                                                         Generally speaking, the coordination of UAC agents in•
6.2 Ubiquitous Agent Communities                       volves both competition and cooperation. UAC agents han•
One of the key features in wisdom agents is ubiquity. Ubiq• dle their services in two main stages: task allocation and task 
uitous agents are autonomous entities that automatically ex• execution. As mentioned above, a service task often consists 
plore and exploit Wl-based Web services. There have been of several subtasks. Each of the subtasks will be allocated to 
some earlier work performed in the domains of e-business a specific s-agent. Thus, as far as the task allocation is con•
and e-commerce. Related issues and applications in which cerned, various s-agents will compete among themselves in 
various tasks and objectives were achieved can be found in order to get a subtask assignment. In this case, coordination 
[9].                                                   manifests itself as competition. On the other hand, during the 
  In this area of research, a reasonable challenge to begin course of task execution, an s-agent will require assistance 
with would be to develop and demonstrate a Ubiquitous  from other s-agents in order to effectively fulfill the task at 
Agent Community (UAC), i.e., an intelligent infrastructure hand. Thus, coordination also manifests itself as cooperation, 
that enables agents to look ahead, plan, and deliver what a as s-agents exchange information and services among each 
user wants [12]. It works like a personal agency. For in• other. In many ways, the technical issues of implementing 
stance, it can help a user to effectively manage tedious daily UAC can be reduced to those of implementing coordination 


INVITED SPEAKERS                                                                                      1599  Figure 1: A scenario of services being provided by a community of competing and cooperating ubiquitious agents. The community is called 
 a Ubiquitous Agent Community (UAC). 


 among ubiquitous agents.                                      humans to gain wisdom of living, working, playing, in addi•
                                                               tion to information search and knowledge queries. 
 7 Conclusions                                                   I believe that our current efforts will pave the way toward 
 1 have started this paper by giving perspectives on the new   the next biggest technological invention of this century, the 
 generation WI. The Web, as an information infrastructure,     Wisdom Web, whose significance and impact will be equiva•
 will remain to create a strong impact in the future by offering lent to, or even far beyond, those of Alexander Graham Bell's 
 world-wide presence and connectivity. The major challenge     invention of the telephone in 1876. 
 of the Web research and development in the next decade will 
 be Wl-centric, focusing on how we can intelligently make the  The Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC) 
 best use of the widely available Web connectivity. The new 
 WI technologies to be developed will be precisely determined  To meet the strong demands for participation and the growing 
by human needs in a post-industrial era; namely:               interests in WI, the Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC) was 
                                                               formed in spring 2002. The WIC (http://wi-consortium.org/) 
   1. information empowerment;                                 is an international non-profit organization dedicated to pro•
  2. knowledge sharing;                                        moting world-wide scientific research and industrial devel•
  3. virtual social clustering;                                opment in the era of Web and agent intelligence. Its activi•
                                                               ties include collaborations with WI research centers through•
  4. service enrichment; 
                                                               out the world and organization/individual members, technol•
  5. practical wisdom development.                             ogy showcases at IEEE/WIC conferences and workshops, and 
   The next paradigm shift in WI will be towards the notion of WIC publications. 
wisdom. Developing the Wisdom Web will become a tangi•           In addition to various special issues on WI published 
ble goal for WI research. The new generation WI will enable    by several international journals, including IEEE Com-


 1600                                                                                                INVITED SPEAKERS 