                Writer's Aid: Using a Planner in a Collaborative Interface 

          Tamara Babaian Barbara J. Grosz Stuart M. Shieber 
  CIS Department, Bentley College, DEAS, Harvard University DEAS, Harvard University 
         Waltham, MA 02452 Cambridge, MA 02138 Cambridge, MA 02138 
        tbabaian@bentley.edu grosz@deas.harvard.edu shieber@deas.harvard.edu 


                      Abstract                            Digital Library, caching viewable versions of papers and, 
                                                          upon the user's request, presenting the results of the search in 
    Writer's Aid is a collaborative system that works     a formatted list. At this point, the author may select a paper 
    simultaneously with an author editing a docu•         reference from the list, and the system will make sure that the 
    ment providing assistance in identifying and in•      citation is ready for compilation of the document's reference 
    serting citation keys and autonomously finding        list. 
    and caching potentially relevant papers and associ•     While planners have been widely used in information in•
    ated bibliographic information from various on-line   tegration systems (e.g., [Barish et al., 2000; Lesser et al, 
    sources. At the core of Writer's Aid is a domain-     2000]) the distinguishing feature of Writer's Aid is that it sup•
    independent planning system. The use of a plan•       ports a simultaneous ongoing user's activity that is the source 
    ner in Writer's Aid enables an efficient division of  of the information request. A smooth integration of the search 
    labor between a human user and the computer sys•      and selection of cited papers with the process of writing is a 
    tem that autonomously creates and executes plans      key requirement on Writer's Aid's interface: the user can in•
    for getting the bibliographic information while the   sert new citation commands and access possibly incomplete 
    author concentrates on writing. The collabora•        results of the search for any of the citation commands at any 
    tive model of human-computer interaction imple•       time while editing the paper. 
    mented in Writer's Aid places new requirements 
    on the planner, which must posess the expressive      2 System Architecture 
    power to formulate complex planning goals, effi•
    ciently represent and reason about an incompletely    Figure 1 depicts the key components of the system. The Goals 
    specified domain, interleave planning with execu•     database records Writer's Aid's planning goals, while The 
    tion of partial plans, and dynamically re-plan in     State Of Knowledge (SOK) database records its knowledge 
    case of execution failure while avoiding redundant    about papers, their locations, user preferences, and other re•
    information gathering, all in real time.              lated domain information. Both databases use the PSIPLAN 
    In the demonstration the participants will be able    [Babaian & Schmolze, 2000] representation. The kernel of 
    to use the system and evaluate its unique design in   the system is a Planning Problem Manager (PPM) that uses 
    which information integration occurs within a con•    the PSIPOP-SE algorithm to plan and execute the search for 
    text of a writing task that is the source of the user's bibliographic information. 
    information need.                                       A user's request to obtain papers relevant to a set of key•
                                                          words is formulated as three separate PSIPLAN goals that 
1 User Interactions                                       collectively can be summarized in the following statement 
                                                              For each paper that is relevant to a set of specified 
Writer's Aid is activated when an author working on a LATEX   keywords according to some local or remote bibli•
document in Emacs text editor inserts a citation command in•  ography preferred by the user, get that paper and 
side the body of the document. In the citation command the    get the bibliographic record for it. 
author specifies the keywords that identify the potentially rel•
evant papers, and whether s/he is interested in obtaining the The Goal Reduction module picks up a goal posted to the 
viewable version of the papers or the bibliographic records Goals database and separates the part of the goal that is en•
only. While the author continues writing and inserting cita• tailed by the SOK and thus is already accomplished, from 
tion commands, Writer's Aid dynamically creates and exe•  the part that still remains to be achieved. The latter part is 
cutes plans for obtaining the bibliographic records from the passed to the Planning Problem Manager, which creates an 
available author's personal bibliographic collections and pre• instance of a planning problem and hands it to the PSIPOP-
ferred on-line collections l such as Researchlndex or ACM SE planner. The planner constructs and executes a plan or 
   'The set of the preferred bibliographies is specified manually during the initial tune-up of the system to a new user. 


INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS                                                                         1629                                                             4 Planning 
                                                            Most of the Writer's Aid's planning problems do not have a 
                                                            solution plan thai provably achieves the goal. It is possible, 
                                                            houwever, to construct the solution by interleaving the pro•
                                                            cess of planning with execution of some information gather•
                                                            ing steps. Combining planning with execution in PSIPOP-
                                                            SE is implemented as a search in a space of hypothetical 
                                                            plans. Hypothetical plans are partial plans in which the 
                                                            achievement of the goal may be conditioned on certain out•
                                                            comes of sensing. Hypothetical plans condition on the value 
                                                            of an unknown subgoal; by verifying a hypothesis via execu•
                                                            tion of a sensing action the planner eventually collects enough 
                                                            information and reduces the incompleteness of knowledge 
                                                            enough to find a solution plan or establish the goal to be unsat-
                                                            isfiable. For example, having no information on the location 
                                                            of a paper, the planner may adopt a hypothesis that the paper 
                                                            is available from a certain collection, and verify the informa-

                                                            of all hypothetical plans is very large and must be explored 
                                                            gradually to avoid combinatorial explosion resulting from a 
 reports failure if the planning problem is unsolvable. Upon high degree of incompleteness. The parameter that PSIPOP-
 executing the plan actions, the SOK database is appropriately SE uses to control the size of the search space is called the 
 updated to reflect all changes in the knowledge about the state hypothetical level of a plan; it is the maximum number of 
 of the world.                                              consecutive hypotheses supporting a single subgoal in a plan. 
   When a user issues a command to view a list of records and PSIPOP-SE starts by considering plans with hypothetical 
 papers corresponding to a citation, this information is derived level 0, that is, the classical plans with no hypothesis, and 
 from the SOK, formatted, and presented in a separate window only increases the hypothetical level of considered plans after 
 for browsing and selection.                                all plans with lower hypothetical levels have been considered 
                                                            and their hypothesis verified, a kind of iterative deepening in 
                                                            hypotheticals. 
 3 Prioritizing and Reducing Goals                            A more detailed description of the system and the results 
                                                            of a laboratory user study are presented in [Babaian, Grosz, 
                                                            & Shieber, 2002]. 
 Writer's Aid starts out having no or little knowledge about the 
papers and their locations, and therefore substantial amount References 
of information gathering from various on-line sources may 
be required to satisfy a user's requests. However, it is very [Babaian & Schmolze, 2000] Babaian, T., and Schmolze, J. 
likely that the author will be satisfied with only a subset of 2000. Psiplan: Open world planning with forms. In Ar•
the search results. To guarantee a quick delivery of the most tificial Intelligence Planning and Scheduling: Proceedings 
likely relevant results, the goals arising from the informa•  of the Fifth International Conference (AIPS'00), 292-300. 
tion requests are prioritized. For instance, papers and bib• [Babaian, Grosz, & Shieber, 2002] Babaian, T, Grosz, B. J., 
liographic records that are listed in the author's own personal and Shieber, S. M. 2002. A writer's collaborative assis•
collection are more likely to be cited and Writer's Aid will  tant. In Proceedings of Intelligent User Interfaces '02, 7-
work on the goal of getting them first.                       14. ACM Press. 
   To make the partial results on all of the issued requests [Barish et al, 2000] Barish, G., Knoblock, C. A., Chen, Y.-
quickly available to the user, the planning goals are processed S., Minton, S., Philpot, A., and Shahabi, C. 2000. The 
by the Planning Problem Manager in a round-robin fashion. 
                                                              TheaterLoc virtual application. In AAAI/IAAI, 980-987. 
As there may be significant overlap in the information related 
to different citation commands (e.g., location of the papers, [Lesser et aL, 2000] Lesser, V., Horling, B., Klassner, F., 
authors' web sites) each goal posted in the goal database is  Raja, A., Wagner, T., and Zhang, S. 2000. Big: An agent 
reduced to account for already available information prior    for resource-bounded information gathering and decision 
to being sent off to the planner. Such reduction separates    making. Artificial Intelligence 118:197-244. 
the part of the goal that has not yet been achieved, ensur•
ing more efficient operation of the planner. To further ensure 
non-redundancy of operation, all planning problems share the 
game database of knowledge, which is updated after each ex•
ecution of an action to reflect the changes in the world and 
the Writer's Aid's state of knowledge. 


1630                                                                   INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS 