     Sensible Agent Technology Improving Coordination and Communication in 
                                   Biosurveillance Domains 

  K. S. Barber, D. Faith, K. Fuilam, T. Graser, D. C. Han, J. Jeong, J. Kim, D. Lam, R. McKay, 
                                    M. Pal, J. Park, M. Vanzin 
                        The Laboratory for Intelligent Processes and Systems 
                                Electrical and Computer Engineering 
                                  The University of Texas at Austin 
      {barber, daniel, kfullam, graser, dhan, jeongjh, joonoo, dnlam, rmckay, monti, jisun, vanzin} 
                                          @lips.utexas.edu 

Protecting the population from chemical-biological attacks 
and outbreaks of infectious disease is a fundamental goal 2. Adaptive Decision-Making Organization Formation 
of government entities such as the Center for Disease   (ADMF to establish collaborations among agents 
Control (CDC), as well as state and local health agencies. associated with epidemiologists, treatment facilities, 
Early warning is critical for saving lives and implementing pharmacies, schools, and other entities. ADMF 
an effective response, including characterizing disease capabilities involve searching for potential partner 
sources, preventing proliferation, and treating patients. agents, evaluating those partners and ranking their 
However, such biosurveillance activities are inherently capabilities, selecting one or more partners, and 
challenging due to a number of complications:           determining the "best" distribution of decision-making 
                                                        control and execution obligations among selected 
 • Coordinating participants and disseminating 
                                                        partners [2]. 
   information: Biosurveillance requires coordination 
   between local, state, and federal authorities. Local 3. Coordinated Planaing and Executive among 
   entities such as treatment facilities must collect   distributed decision-making agents, allowing them to 
   information and disseminate to decision-making       share preferences and constraints during the planning 
   entities, constrained by communication costs as well process. For example, agents may coordinate 
   as time.                                             interrogation of information sources, motivated by 
 • Determining the relevance and reliability of         reduced overall communication cost. 
   information: The ability of a treatment facility to offer In Texas, biosurveillance is conducted by the Texas 
   a diagnosis with high confidence is in part a function Department of Health (TDH) in cooperation with local and 
   of resources and expertise at their disposal. Thus, federal authorities. Resident epidemiologists gather 
   entities receiving symptom and diagnosis information patient symptom and diagnostic information from 
   must determine information relevance qualified by hospitals, clinics, and other treatment facilities from 
   source reliability.                               throughout the state. TDH is currently a single point of 
 • Drawing epidemiological conclusions from symptoms contact, and has solicited approaches for other network 
   and diagnoses: Significant expertise is required to configurations that allow them to reduce burden and 
   analyze symptoms and diagnoses to assess public risk. provide more rapid response. UT.LIPS has suggested a 
   Such assessments consider an entire region, drawing variety of options for distributing decision-making and 
   together information from all contributing sources. information monitoring using agent technology. 
   Often few epidemiologists are responsible for       Figure I depicts one configuration of agent roles 
   monitoring a large area, resulting in analysis and suggested by UT:LIPS and characterized in this 
   communication overload.                           demonstration. The existing two-layer network is 
  To support epidemiologists and increase the        expanded to three layers, where an interim layer consists 
effectiveness of biosurveillance activities, the Laboratory of Sensible Agents acting as "Disease Agents," each 
for Intelligent Processes and Systems at the University of dedicated to the analysis of a particular disease being 
Texas at Austin (UT:LIPS) is applying its Sensible Agent monitored. Symptom and diagnosis data is sent from 
(SA) multi-agent system (MAS) technology to the      information sources (e.g., hospitals and clinics) to disease 
biosurveillance domain. Specific SA features and their agents, which evaluate the information and send 
applicability to the biosurveillance domain follow:  appropriate epidemiological assessments to a centralized 
                                                     TDH agent. In making an assessment, disease agents 
 l. Evaluation of Information and Information Soure  incorporate source reliability and the confidence values 
                                                     associated with information assigned by those sources. 
                                                     Disease agents may also collaborate in acquiring and 
   transmitting that information to agents responsible for 
   epidemiological analysis [3]. 


INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS                                                              1631                                                                                                how information will 
                                                                                               ultimately be shared. 
                                                                                               Preferences may 
                                                                                               involve agreements 
                                                                                               whereby one disease 
                                                                                               agent acquires 
                                                                                               information from 
                                                                                               selected case agents, 
                                                                                               while a collaborating 
                                                                                               agent acquires 
                                                                                               information from a 
                                                                                               second, disjoint set of 
                                                                                               case agents in 
                                                                                               exchange. 
                                                                                               In summary, we aim 
                                                                                               to demonstrate better 
                                                                                               performance (i.e. 
                                                                                               quicker and more 
 the biosurveillance domain through various scenarios, each                                    reliable) response in 
 emphasizing one of the SA features described above. The     biosurveillance scenarios using Sensible Agent 
 Testbed offers a suite of tools to assist in the experimental technology. 
 testing of multi-agent systems. Tool facilities include 
 execution visualization and configuration of repeatable     Acknowledgments 
 experimental runs, allowing the user to specify what        This research is sponsored in part by the Defense 
 parameters to test and what data to record [1].             Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) Taskable 
   In one scenario, case agents consisting of local hospitals Agent Software Kit (TASK) program, agreement number 
 send patient case symptom and diagnosis information to      F30602-00-2-0588. Additionally, the research reported in 
 disease agents. It should be noted that case agents are     this document/presentation was performed in connection 
 simple reactive agents responsible for period reporting and with Contract/Cooperative Agreement number DAAD17-
 are not endowed with Sensible Agent capabilities such as    Ol-D-0001 with the U.S. Army Research Laboratory. The 
 trust evaluation and ADMF. The disease agent assigns an     views and conclusions contained in this 
 initial reputation to case agents based on the case agent's document/presentation are those of the authors and should 
 quality of facilities, available resources (e.g., equipment not be interpreted as presenting the official policies or 
and staff expertise) and history for providing               position, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Army 
reliable/unreliable data. Disease agents collect information Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government unless so 
on a given patient from multiple case agents, generating a   designated by other authorized documents. 
"net belief about patient symptoms and diagnoses, 
qualified by confidence values on respective data and the    References 
reputations of the case agents. The number of patients       [1] Barber, K. S., McKay, R. M., MacMahon, M. T., 
with a given disease is calculated from net beliefs and      Martin, C. E., Lam, D. N., Goel, A., Han, D. C, and Kim, 
compared to a series of threshold values associated with     J. 2001. Sensible Agents: An Implemented Multi-Agent 
standard degrees of epidemiological alarms: None, Low,       System and Testbed. In Proc. of the Fifth Int. Conference 
Guarded, Elevated, High, Severe. Generated alarms are        on Autonomous Agents (Agents-2001), Montreal, QC, 
passed to the TDH agent and reflected on a simulation        Canada: 92-99. 
visualization.                                               [2] Barber, K. S. and Martin, C. E. 2001. Dynamic 
  Other scenarios involve collaboration between disease      Reorganization of Decision-Making Groups. In Proc. of 
agents in acquiring and analyzing case information.          the Fifth Int. Conference on Autonomous Agents (Agents-
Motivation for collaboration is based on reducing            2001), Montreal, QC, Canada: 513-520. 
communication costs, where collaborators can benefit by      [3] Barber, K. S. and Kim, J. "Belief Revision Process 
(i) sharing information acquired previously; (ii) leveraging based on Trust: Simulation Experiments," Autonomous 
lower communication costs such as time to communicate        Agents 2001, Workshop for Fraud, Deception and Trust in 
between selected disease agents and case agents; and (iii)   Agent Societies, pp. 1-12, May 28-June 1, 2001, Montreal, 
applying economies of scale by "bundling" multiple           Canada. 
queries, thereby amortizing the cost of query initiations 
across multiple requests. Disease agents agree to establish 
collective decision-making frameworks that impact which 
agents will perform planning (i.e. plans to acquire and 
evaluate case data) on behalf of framework members and 


1632                                                                   INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS 