         Comparing Different Cognitive Paradigms with a Virtual Laboratory 

                                        Carlos Gershenson 
                          Centrum Leo Apostel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel 
                           Krijgskundestraat 33, Brussels, 1160, Belgium 
         http://studentvub.ac.be/-cgershen E- mail: cgershen@vub.ac.be 

                    Abstract                        (black cylinders), and spots of different colours (circles): 
                                                    randomly or in specific positions. These also can be generated 
       A public virtual laboratory is presented, where randomly during the simulation at a selected frequency. 
    animats are controlled by mechanisms from different Lightnings turn into rain after ten time steps, and rain turns 
    cognitive paradigms. A brief description of the into food after fifty time steps. 
    characteristics of the laboratory and the uses it has All the animats have an energy level, which decreases 
   had is given. Mainly, it has been used to contrast when their hunger or thirst are high, and is increased when 
   philosophical ideas related with the notion of   these are low. An animat dies if its energy is exhausted. Eating 
    cognition, and to elucidate debates on "proper" food decreases their hunger. They can decrease their thirst by 
   paradigms in AI and cognitive science.           drinking under rains. Hunger and thirst are increased if they 
                                                    attempt to drink or eat "incorrect" stimuli. They lose energy if 
1. Introduction                                     they touch lightnings or rocks. Basically, an animat in order to 
                                                    survive needs to eat when hungry, drink when thirsty, and 
Virtual laboratories have been used in very different areas with avoid lightnings and rocks. We can say that they are cognitive 
different purposes. They are especially useful when they systems if they are successful, because they would know how 
simulate situations which are difficult to reproduce, control, or to survive (Gershenson, 2003). The animats can leave a 
observe. Cognitive science studies phenomena that fall in this coloured trail in order to observe their trajectories. 
category. 
   A virtual laboratory has been developed for the 
comparison of different cognitive paradigms. Experiments 
carried out in this virtual laboratory were used as "opaque 
thought experiments'* for discussing the notion of cognition 
(Gershenson, 2003). Detailed information about the virtual 
laboratory can be found in Gershenson (2002). 

2. A Virtual Laboratory 

   Following the ideas presented in Gershenson, Gonzalez, 
and Negrete (2000), a virtual laboratory was developed for 
testing the performance of animats controlled by mechanisms 
proposed from different perspectives in a simple virtual 
environment. Programmed in Java with the aid of Java3D 
libraries, this software is available to the public, source code 
and documentation included, at 
http://student.vub.ac.be/-cgershen/cogs/keb/. The software There are many models that would solve the problem of 
allows the user to create and repeat controlled experiments for surviving is such an environment, but it was decided to 
comparing the different animats in different situations in a implement representative models of different paradigms in 
friendly and informative fashion.                   order to observe their differences and similitudes. These 
   In the virtual laboratory, the user can create different models are as follows: a rule-based system typical of 
phenomena, such as rocks (grey cubes), food sources (green traditional knowledge-based and expert systems; Maes' (1990) 
spheres), rain (blue semitransparent cylinders), lightnings action selection mechanism, an already classical behaviour-


INTELUGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS                                                               1635  based system; an original architecture of recursive concept cannot be generally measured, but only relatively to specific 
 development (Gershenson, 2002) as an example of the novel  tasks. 
 concept-based approach; a simple feed-forward artificial       Some models were very easy to implement in software 
 neural network; and a Braltenberg-style architecture       code, others not so much, but occasionally it is a different 
 (Braitenberg, 1984). All the animats survive fairly well in the story if we want to implement an architecture in a real robot. 
 simple environment. A short description of each mechanism  Moreover, if a model works in a simulation and/or robot, it 
 follows:                                                   does not mean that animals function in the same way. Some 
 • The rule-based animats have a set of rules (//.. then).  models are very robust. Others would break up quite easily. 
     These receive information from "cheater" sensors, i.e. Some models are quite good if we have just practical purposes, 
     with meaning given by the programmer (e.g. food        and this also depends on the experience of the engineer. Still, 
     perceived, hungry, obstacle close, etc.), and produce  if we are interested in using them as explanatory models, the 
     behaviours (e.g. explore, approach food, eat, avoid    simplicity of their implementation might be secondary. Also, 
     obstacle, etc.), with which a motor system has to deal. if we would like to increment the systems, for example to 
 • The behaviour-based animats also have "cheater"          include more environmental stimuli and internal variables, 
     perceptual and motor systems, but the control is       some would need to be redesigned, others could be easily 
     determined by a network of behaviours (e.g. approach   extended. Some models would have more ease in adapting to 
     food, eat, avoid obstacle, etc.) which inhibit and excite changes of their environment than others, but this does not 
     according to the types of connections they have.       mean that we cannot adjust different architectures in order to 
 • The concept-based animats only have basic sensors (e.g.  obtain the desired behaviour. 
     redness, hardness, flavour, etc.), and they develop        We can say that different models, architectures, and 
     recursively concepts that they associate by reinforcement paradigms, study different aspects of cognition. Will we find 
     learning with predetermined behaviours.                ever a "best" model? It depends on our purposes and our 
 • The neural animats have three sensor pairs and two       context. Generally speaking, we can say that all approaches are 
     motors. Each sensor perceives if a phenomenon (food,   useful, since they illustrate different aspects of cognition. 
     rain, or rock) is left or right of the animat. These signals, The observations in the virtual laboratory were useful for 
     and signals from the internal medium (hunger and thirst) discussing and illustrating ideas related to the notion of 
     are inputs to a three-layered feed-forward neural network cognition (Gershenson, 2003), and to clarify debates 
     with fixed weights. The outputs go straight to the motors. concerning the "proper" paradigm for studying cognition 
 • The Braitenberg animats also have six sensors and two    (Gershenson, 2002). 
     motors, but they are directly connected: food and rain 
     sensors to the inverse motors (left to right, right to left), 4. Conclusions 
     and rock sensors to the corresponding motors (left to left, 
    right to right).                                        Virtual laboratories allow us to explore different avenues than 
                                                            physical laboratories. This virtual laboratory was useful for 
3. Comparison                                               illustrating questions such as "what makes a system 
                                                            cognitive?". It helped in showing that the observer plays a 
Several experiments were performed in the virtual laboratory great deal in the cognition of the system, and that cognition is 
to compare the different properties of the architectures that independent of the implementation of the system. 
control each type of animat (Gershenson, 2002). The reader is 
invited to download the virtual laboratory and compare the  References 
different architectures as well. 
    We could see that we can describe the different animats in Braitenberg, V. (1984). Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic 
the same terms, because it can be said that they perform the    Psychology. MIT Press. 
same behaviours, independently on how these were            Gershenson, C. (2002). A Comparison of Different Cognitive 
implemented. Also, distinguishing which architecture controls   Paradigms Using Simple Animats in a Virtual Laboratory, with 
which type of animat is not possible for a naive observer.      Implications to the Notion of Cognition. Unpublished MSc 
                                                                Thesis. University of Sussex 
    We observed that there is no general "best" architecture 
                                                            Gershenson, C. (2003). On the Notion of Cognition. Submitted to 
for the simple task of surviving in the virtual environment. We IJCAI'03. 
can say that each animat is better in different situations. Yet it Gershenson, G, P. P. Gonzalez, and J. Negretc (2000). Thinking 
seems that this is more a consequence of the particular         Adaptive: Towards a Behaviours Virtual Laboratory. In Meyer, 
implementation than of the paradigm on which it stands,         J. A. et. al (Eds.), SAB2000 Proceedings Supplement. Paris, 
because the models can be adjusted and refuted to any desired   France. ISAB Press. 
degree of detail. In order to judge which architecture is better, Maes, P. (1990). Situated agents can have goals. Journal of Robotics 
we need to refer to a particular context. Their performance     and Autonomous Systems, 6 (1&2). 


1636                                                                   INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS 