  Towards domain-independent, task-oriented, conversational adequacy 

               Darsana P. Josyula1, Michael L. Anderson2, and Don Perlis1'2 
                                   (1) Department of Computer Science 
                               (2) Institute for Advanced Computer Studies 
                             University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 
                                {darsana, mikeoda, perlis}Ccs.umd.edu 


   Humans are often able to communicate effectively to ALFRED is sensitive to whether a word is being used 
 solve a joint task, even when they do not speak much of or mentioned, and interprets the relevant utterance 
 a common language, for instance, when buying a train  accordingly. Following (Saka 1998), we have chosen 
 ticket in a foreign country. Although the conversation to characterize the use-mention distinction in terms 
 might not be fully fluent and error-free, the commu•  of the possible ostensions of words. That is, we con•
 nication does not break down; instead, through clari• sider X is being "used", if the speaker intends to di•
 fications, confirmations and inferences, the dialog can rect the thoughts of the audience to the extension of 
 proceed towards solving the common task. Key to this  X; and X is being "mentioned", if he intends to direct 
 is the ability to note an error (or miscommunication), the thoughts of the audience to some item associated 
 assess it, and address it. We believe that these prin• with X other than its extension. See (Anderson et al 
 ciples of human dialog repair can be used to enhance  2002) for more details. The features that ALFRED 
 the conversational abilities of task oriented interactive uses to make this distinction are context, cues and 
 systems, allowing them to interact more smoothly with meta-dialog. 
 human users (Perlis, Purang, & Andersen 1998). To 
                                                    2. Using meta-dialog 
 this end, we are developing an agent that can act as an 
 interface between the user and a task-oriented system, ALFRED is capable of engaging in meta-dialog with 
 providing a bed for dialog correction and repair.     the human user when necessary, in order to identify 
   Our agent, ALFRED (Active Logic for Reason En•      miscommunication problems and perform dialog re•
 hanced Dialog) is built on a time-tracking, logical   pairs. 
 framework called active logic (Elgot-Drapkin et al 3. Learning new words 
 1993; Elgot-Drapkin & Perlis 1990). Active logic works ALFRED can learn new names that refer to already 
 by combining inference rules with a constantly evolving existing objects in the domain. It can also learn new 
 measure of time (a "Now") that can itself be referenced ways to accept known commands. This feature can 
 in those rules. As an example, from Now(t)-the time   allow a given user to negotiate a more comfortable 
 is now "t"-one infers Now(t+l). Special rules govern• vocabulary for interaction, and helps to increase the 
 ing the persistence of formulas in the database, includ• vocabulary of the system as a whole. We are working 
 ing rules for disinheriting direct contradictions, along on methods of structuring and manipulating concep•
 with a quotation mechanism which allows formulas to   tual relations to allow ALFRED to learn genuinely 
 refer to one another, give active logic the expressive new objects and concepts. 
 and inferential power to monitor its own reasoning, al•
 lowing it to watch for errors (such as mismatches be• 4. Maintaining context 
 tween conveyed and intended meanings), note tempo•    ALFRED maintains the context of the ongoing con•
 ral conversational cues such as pauses that may signal versation by keeping track of user intentions (inter•
 a turn change, and to exert reasoned control over its pretations of past utterances), needs and expecta•
 past and upcoming inferential processes, including re• tions. A "need" is created when there is some re•
 examination and alteration of beliefs and inferences. quirement (like determining the meaning of a word) 
                                                       that has to be met before the system can interpret 
                 Capabilities                          a user utterance. An "expectation" is created when 
                                                       the system expects a particular kind of response from 
 Some of the capabilties that ALFRED currently has are the user. 
 as follows. 
                                                    5. Identifying miscommunication 
1. Understanding the use-mention distinction           ALFRED recognizes miscommunication problems by 
 Copyright © 2003, American Association for Artificial In• looking for contradictions in its interpretations of the 
 telligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.       user's intentions (Traum et al. forthcoming). 


 INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS                                                            1637 6. Connecting to different domains                     user: "What does 'Metro' mean?", and "expects" the 
   ALFRED functions as a kind of translator between    user to provide the answer. This "expectation" helps 
   human natural language and the specialized language in keeping track of the context of the conversation, 
   of the task-oriented domain, and enhances the per•  which is essential for understanding the dialog state, 
   formance of the original system interface by incor• and has particular use in helping distinguish whether 
   porating a suite of dialog error detection and repair a word is being used or mentioned in an utterance. 
   strategies. These can allow a dialog to continue even 7. The user says "Metroliner". The expectation, above, 
   in the presence of various kinds of miscommunica-   helps ALFRED to interpret this elliptical utterance 
   tions.                                              as " 'Metro' means Metroliner". Hence ALFRED 
   The upshot of this is that ALFRED can act as a nat• would learn this meaning so that at any later point 
  ural language interface between a user and any task- in time, if the user says "Metro", ALFRED would be 
  oriented system as long as the specialized language  able to identify the correct referent by introspection. 
  of the task-oriented system is specified explicitly to 8. Once ALFRED gets the meaning of "Metro", the 
   ALFRED. This specialized language can vary from     "need" created above is satisfied, which in turn causes 
  menu driven commands in the simplest case to nat•    the further interpretation of that user utterance. 
  ural language-like commands in a more complicated 
  scenario. However, since the same principles and rea•               Conclusion 
  soning strategies are being used in each case to en•
  hance the dialog, orienting ALFRED to a different  ALFRED can enhance the interactive capability of a 
  domain is as easy as changing the files specifying the task-oriented computer system by adding the ability to 
  specialized language for that domain.              detect and recover from miscommunication problems, 
                                                     including ambiguous references, incompatible or con•
                   Example                           tradictory user intentions (Traum et al. forthcoming), 
                                                     and the use of unknown words. 
Consider a task-oriented system whose domain is de•    This technology can already be usefully applied to 
fined by the following objects and commands.         current application domains, such as home-control soft•
• Domain objects                                     ware, and we expect that the techniques employed can 
  train: Metroliner, Northstar, Bullet; city: Baltimore, be refined and extended to handle more sophisticated 
  Richmond, Buffalo                                  domains. 
• Domain commands                                                     References 
  send: [send train city] 
                                                      Anderson, M. L.; Okamoto, Y.; Josyula, D.; and 
  A stepwise example of command translation and in•   Perlis, D. 2002. The use-mention distinction and its 
tentional discernment follows:                        importance to HCI. In Proceedings of the Sixth Work•
1. User types "Send Metro to Baltimore"; the parser   shop on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialog. 
  sends output to ALFRED                              Elgot-Drapkin, J., and Perlis, D. 1990. Reasoning situ•
2. Since it is a request for an action, ALFRED first  ated in time I: Basic concepts. Journal of Experimental 
  checks whether it is a command for the domain or    and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 2(l):75-98. 
  for itself.                                         Elgot-Drapkin, J.; Kraus, S.; Miller, M.; Nirkhe, M.; 
3. Since it is a domain command, ALFRED will get      and Perlis, D. 1993. Active logics: A unified for•
  the structure of the command from the domain com•   mal approach to episodic reasoning. Technical Report 
  mands knowledge base. In this case, the command     UMIACS TR # 99-65, CS-TR # 4072, Univ of Mary•
  structure is send - [send train city],              land, UMIACS and CSD. 
4. ALFRED then tries to disambiguate the object ref•  Perlis, D.; Purang, K.; and Andersen, C. 1998. Con•
  erences in the user utterance by finding the mapping versational adequacy: mistakes are the essence. Int. 
  from these object references to known domain objects J. Human-Computer Studies 48:553-575. 
  of the types specified in the structure.            Saka, P. 1998. Quotation and the use-mention distinc•
                                                      tion. Mind 107:113-135. 
5. Since there is no direct mapping between "Metro" 
  and any existing train in the domain, ALFRED now    Traum, D.; Andersen, C; Chong, Y.; Josyula, D.; 
  "needs" the meaning of the word "Metro". This       O'Donovan-Anderson, M.; Okamoto, Y.; Purang, K.; 
  "need" causes ALFRED to temporarily stop further    and Perlis, D. forthcoming. Representations of di•
  interpretation of the utterance until this "need" gets alogue state for domain and task independent meta-
  satisfied.                                          dialogue. Electronic Transactions on Artificial Intelli-
6. This "need" then causes ALFRED to introspect (to 
  examine its existing knowledge base or try to reason) 
  about the meaning of the word "Metro". Since it 
  does not get an answer after introspection, it asks the 


1638                                                          INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS 