           Demonstration: Liaison Agents for Distributed Space Operations 

      D. Schreckenghost, P. Bonasso, D. Kortenkamp, C. Martin, T. Milam, C. Thronesbery 
                                   NASA Johnson Space Center 
                      Texas Robotics & Automation Laboratories (TRACLabs) 
                                    1012 Hercules, Houston, TX 
                                          ghost@ieee.org 

                                                   human and the control automation. In the DCI system, 
1 Research Overview                                these liaison agents provide a variety of services, which 
                                                   together support (1) human supervision of automated 
                                                   control systems, (2) direct human control of processes such 
Future manned space operations are expected to include a as crew life support, (3) activity tracking and coordination 
greater use of automation [Cooke and Hine, 2002] This among humans and automated systems interacting with the 
automation will function without human intervention most same process, and (4) asynchronous information exchange 
of the time. However, humans will be required to   among distributed, remote humans and automated systems. 
supervise the automation, and they must be on-call to In addition to liaison agents, DCI provides augmenting 
respond to anomalies or to perform related tasks that are software'. This software includes new capabilities used by 
not easily automated. In such an environment, humans all ARIEL agents (e.g., software to detect events from a 
perform other tasks most of the time, and their interaction control agent) or DCI tools used to integrate existing 
with the automation may be remote and asynchronous. As software into the DCI environment (e.g., an interface to a 
automation becomes more prevalent, better support for centralized planner). In Figure 1, the Event Detection 
such interaction is needed. The Distributed Collaboration Assistant (EDA) and the Conversion Assistant for Planning 
and Interaction (DCI) environment, being developed at (CAP) are representative pieces of augmenting software. 
NASA, investigates the use of software agents to assist The EDA monitors data produced by the control 
humans in this type of remote, distributed space operations. automation for data patterns that are of interest to humans 
  The DCI approach has been applied for use by control supervising this system. The CAP augments a centralized 
engineers at the Johnson Space Center (JSC) who are hierarchical task net (HTN) planner, (the prototype uses 
investigating advanced technology for life support such as AP [Elsaesser and Sanborn, 1990]), for interfacing to 
the water recovery system, or WRS [Schreckenghost, et al, humans and their ARIEL agents. The entities with black 
2002]. The WRS recycles wastewater through biological backgrounds in Figure 1 (the human, the WRS system and 
and chemical processes to remove impurities and produce its control software, and the centralized planner) 
potable water. Managed by an autonomous control    participate in but are not part of the DCI environment. 
program called 3T [Bonasso, et al, 1997], the WRS ran 
unattended in a continuous 24/7 integrated test from 
January 2001 through April 2002 [Bonasso, et al., 2002]. 
WRS control engineers periodically monitored for 
network, hardware, or power failures from remote 
locations, while spending the majority of their time 
carrying out their daily tasks on unrelated projects. The 
current prototype of the DCI environment uses a simulation 
of the WRS 3T system for both demonstration and 
continuing development. The DCI implementation creates 
an environment in which humans and the 3T control 
automation together form an integrated team to ensure 
efficient, effective operation of the WRS. 

2 Approach: DCI Architecture 

The DCI approach uses intermediate liaison agents called 
Attentive Remote Interaction and Execution Liaison 
(ARIEL) agents to provide an interfacing layer between the 
                                                                Figure 1. DCI Architecture 
Copyright © 2002, American Association for Artificial Intelligence 
(www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 


INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS                                                            1641   ARIEL agents, as pictured in Figure 1, provide the  7) The Backup engineer is online and responds to the 
following services for and on-behalf-of their human users: request to acknowledge the change In his schedule. 
• the State Management Service maintains a model of the 8) The Backup engineer travels on-site to JSC, to fix the 
  user's current context, including task, role, and location; problem in the WRS. 
• the User Interface Service manages different modalities, 9) In the Water Processing Facility, the Backup engineer 
  such as display, pager, or email, to present information; reviews a summary of the anomaly situation via a notice 
• the Notification Service extends communication    previously logged by his ARIEL. Based on that review, he 
  protocols to support distributed, assynchronous   determines how to respond. 
  collaboration and to ensure the proper routing of   10) Once the problem is fixed, the Backup engineer's 
  information to users based on their roles, location, etc.; ARIEL notifies him when the water system has returned to 
• the Task Status Service tracks human activity and normal and he leaves the Lab. 
  provides completion status to the automated planner; and 11) When the Prime logs into the DCI environment later, 
• the Location Service provides human location      he reviews his ARIEL'S notifications about how the control 
  information for use in tracking the completion status of team coordinated to resolve the situation and what if any 
  user activities, determining how to notify the user of impacts the problem had on his schedule. 
  events, and customizing the presentation of information. 12) Throughout this interchange, the Coordinator relies 
Three services included in the DCI design have not yet on his ARIEL to inform him of events in the WRS and the 
implemented:                                        response of the control engineers on his team. 
• the Command and Authorization Service will assist a The DCI demonstration showcases the potential to 
  human in commanding the automation by reconfiguring provide unprecedented support for distributed collaboration 
  the automation when transitioning between manual and among humans and automation in the context of future 
  automated commanding and by detecting and resolving manned space operations. The DCI approach also holds 
  potential command conflicts among distributed users; future promise for extended application because similar 
• the Interactive Procedure Service will allow a user to increases in the use of automation can be seen in other 
  specify new operations by modifying an automated  domains ranging from process control to smart houses. 
  procedure and triggering the control automation to 
  perform this procedure; and                       Acknowledgements 
• the Interactive Event Service allows a user to 
  interactively define temporary or new operational events 
                                                    We want to acknowledge the support of Dr. Michael 
  and to control automated monitoring for these events. 
                                                    Shafto, the manager of Human-Centered Computing in 
ARIEL services work together to support an individual 
                                                    NASA's Intelligent Systems Program, under which this 
human's interaction with automation software and with 
                                                    work was done. 
other humans that are geographically and/or electronically 
distributed. 
                                                    References 
3 Demonstration 
                                                    [Bonasso, et al., 1997] Bonasso, R. P., Firby, J. R., Gat, E.. 
The DCI demonstration shows the potential benefits of the Kortenkamp, D., Miller, D. P., and Slack, M. G. 1997. 
DCI system and ARIEL agents in the following typical Experiences with an Architecture for Intelligent, 
scenario involving the WRS and its three control     Reactive Agents. Journal of Experimental and 
engineers: the "Prime" engineer, who is the first called in Theoretical Artificial Intelligence 9: 237-256. 
for WRS problems, a "Backup" engineer, and a        [Bonasso, et al., 2002] Bonasso, R. P., Kortenkamp, D., 
"Coordinator," who oversees the work of the other two. and Thronesbery, C. 2002. Intelligent Control of A 
  1) A loss of controls communication in the WRS control Water Recovery System: Three years In the Trenches. Al 
software requires a human to reinitialize the software. Magazine 24 (1). 
  2) The Prime engineer's ARIEL notifies him about the [Cooke and Hine, 2002] Cooke, D. and Hine, B. 2002. 
problem and the assignment of a new WRS repair task. NASA's New Era in Space Exploration. IEEE Intelligent 
  3) The Prime engineer is offline and doesn't respond to 
                                                     Systems 17 (2). 
the pager notification in a timely manner. 
  4) The Prime engineer's ARIEL re-issues a task    [Elsaesser and Sanborn, 1990] Elsaesser, C. and Sanborn, 
assignment acknowledgement request with increased    J. 1990. An Architecture for Adversarial Planning. IEEE 
urgency.                                              Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 20(1): 
  5) The Prime engineer still does not respond, and his 186-194. 
ARIEL indicates to the planner that the task assignment [Schreckenghost, et al., 2002] Schreckenghost, D., 
has not been acknowledged. The planner reassigns the Thronesbery, C, Bonasso, R., Kortenkamp, D., and 
repair task to the Backup who is located off-site from JSC. Martin, C. 2002. Intelligent Control of Life Support for 
  6) The Backup engineer's ARIEL notifies him about the Space Missions. IEEE Intelligent Systems 17 (5): 24-31. 
assignment of a new WRS repair task. 


1642                                                          INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS 