                    TAGA: Travel Market Framework in Agentcities 
                          Youyong Zou, Tim Finin, Li Ding, Harry Chen, Rong Pan 
                                   Computer Science and Electrical Engineering 
                                    University of Maryland, Baltimore County 
   Travel Agent Game in Agentcities (TAGA) is a framework     Inspired by TAC, we developed Travel Agent Game in 
   that extends and enhances the Trading Agent Competition  Agentcities (TAGA) built on the foundation of FIPA 
   (TAC) system to work in Agentcities, an open multiagent  technology and the Agentcities infrastructure. The agents 
   systems environment of FIPA compliant systems. TAGA      and services use standard FIPA supported languages, 
   makes several contributions: auction services are added to protocols and services to create the travel market envi•
   enrich the Agentcities environment, the use of the seman• ronment providing TAGA with a stable communication 
   tic web languages RDF and DAML+OIL improve the           environment in which messages in expressive semantic 
   interoperability among agents, and the DAML-S ontology   languages can be exchanged. . The travel market is the 
   is employed to support service registration, discovery and combination of auctions and varying markets including 
   invocation. The FIPA and Agentcities standards for agent service registries, service brokerage, wholesalers, peer-
   communication, infrastructure and services provide an    to-peer transactions, bilateral negotiation, etc. This 
   important foundation in building this distributed and open provides a much richer test bed for experimenting with 
   market framework. TAGA is intended as a platform for     agents and web services as well as a rich and interesting 
   research in multi-agent systems, the semantic web and/or scenario to test and challenge agent technology. 
   automated trading in dynamic markets as well as a self-
   contained application for teaching and experimentation   2. TAGA Game and Agents 
   with these technologies. It is running as a continuous open 
                                                            We have designed TAGA as a general framework for 
   game at http://taga.umbc.edu/ and source code is available 
                                                            running agent-based simulations and games. Our first 
   for research and teaching purposes. 
                                                            use of TAGA has been to build a travel competition 
 1 Introduction                                             along the lines of that used in the first three TACs. In 
                                                            this competition, customers travel from City A to City B 
The Trading Agent Competition (TAC) [7] is a test bed       and spend several days there. A travel package includes a 
 for intelligent software agents that interact through      round-trip flight ticket, corresponding hotel accommoda•
simultaneous auctions to obtain services for customers.     tion and ticket to entertainment events. A travel agent (an 
TAC trading agents operate within a travel market sce•      entrant to the game) competes with other travel agents in 
nario, buying and selling goods to best serve their given   making contracts with customers and purchasing the 
 travel clients. TAC is designed to promote and encourage   limited travel services from the Travel Service Agents. 
research in markets involving autonomous trading agents     Customer selects the travel agent with best travel itiner•
and has proven to be successful after three consecutive     ary. The objective of the travel agent is to acquire more 
year's competition.                                         customers, fulfill the customer's travel package, and 
   Although TAC's framework, infrastructure and game        maximize the profit. 
rules have evolved over the past three competitions, the      TAGA provides a flexible framework to run the travel 
assumptions and approach of TAC limit its usefulness as     market game. Figure 1 show the structure of TAGA. The 
a realistic test bed for agent based automated commerce.    collaboration and competition among six kinds of agents 
TAC has used centralized auctions as the sole mechanism     that play different roles in this market, simulating the real 
for service discovery, communication, coordination,         world travel market. We have found that basing our 
commitment, and control among the participating soft•       implementation on FIPA compliant agents has made the 
ware agents. The agents communicate with the central        framework extremely flexible. We'll briefly describe the 
market servers through simple socket interfaces, ex•        different agents in our initial TAGA game. 
changing pre-defined message. The abstractness and            The Auction Service Agent (ASA) operates all of the auctions 
simplicity of the TAC approach helped to launch it as a     and markets in TAGA. Market types currently include English 
research vehicle for studying bidding strategies, but are   and Dutch auctions as well as other dynamic markets similar to 
now perceived as a limiting factor for exploring the wide   Priceline and Ebay's fastbuy. 
range of issues inherent in automated trading in open         A Service Agent (SA) offers travel related service units such 
environments.                                               as airline tickets, lodging and entertainment tickets. Each class 
   Agentcities [4] is an international initiative designed to of travel related service has multiple providers with different 
explore the commercial and research potential of agent-     service quality level and with limited service units; 
based applications by constructing an open distributed        A Travel Agent (TA) is a business that helps customers ac•
network of platforms hosting diverse agents and services.   quire travel service units and organizes travel plan. The units 
The ultimate goal is to enable the dynamic, intelligent     can be bought either directly from the service agents, or 
and autonomous composition of services to achieve user      through an auction server. 
and business tasks, thereby creating compound services        A Bulletin Board Agent (BBA) provides a mechanism 
to address changing needs.                                  through which helps customer agents can find and engage one 
                                                            or more travel agents. 
INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS                                                                            1645   A Customer Agent (CA) represents an individual customer We see two contributions in our work. First, TAGA 
who has particular travel constraints and preferences. Its goal is provides a rich framework for exploring agent-based 
to engage one or more TAs, negotiate with them over travel approaches to ecommerce like applications. Our current 
packages, and select one to try to purchase.        framework allows users to create their own agent (per•
  The Market Oversight Agent monitors the simulation and haps based on our initial prototype) to represent a TA, 
updates the financial model after each reported transaction and SA and to include it in a running game where it will 
finally announces the winning TA when the game is over. compete with other system provided and user defined 
                                                    agents. We hope that this might be a useful teaching and 
                                                    learning tool. Secondly, we hope that TAGA will be 
                                                    seen as a flexible, interesting and rich environment for 
                                                    simulating agent-based trading in dynamic markets. 
                                                    Agents can be instantiated to represent customers, aggre•
                                                    gators, wholesalers, and service provides all of which can 
                                                    make decisions about price and purchase strategies based 
                                                    on complex strategies and market conditions. 
                                                    4. Conclusion and future work 
                                                    As a role-playing market game, TAGA can be used for 
          Figure 1: TAGA Architecture               business research on marketing and auction strategy. In 
                                                    the Agentcities community, TAGA serves as a test-bed 
  The basic cycle of the game is as follows. A customer- for FIPA agent communication in a distributed and open 
generating agent creates a new with particular travel environment. For our own research, has allowed us to 
constraints and preferences chosen from a distribution. explore the integration of multi-agent systems technology 
The CA registers with the BBA, which facilitates contact (FIPA) and the semantic web. 
with a set of TAs, each of which must decide whether to The Agentcities project is exploring the delivery and 
propose a travel package for the CA. Those that do, use of agent-based services in an open, dynamic and 
contact the necessary ASAs and SAs and assemble an  international setting. We are working to increase the 
itinerary to propose to the CA. Note that a TA is free to integration of TAGA and emerging Agentcities compo•
implement a complex strategy using both aggregate   nents and infrastructure and will include agents running 
markets (ASAs) as well as direct negotiation with SAs. on handheld devices using LEAP [3]. We are also 
The final proposal to a CA includes a set of travel units, a working to enhance the ontologies which underlie TAGA 
total price and a penalty to be suffered by the TA if it is and to move them from RDF and DAML+OIL to the 
unable to complete the transaction. The CA negotiates W3C's Web Ontology Language OWL [5]. 
with the TAs ultimately selecting one from which to 
purchase an itinerary based on its constraints, preferences Acknowledgments 
and purchasing strategy (which might, for example,  The research described in this paper is partly supported by DARPA 
depend on a TAs reputation). Once a TA has a commit• contract F30602-00-2-0591 and Fujitsu Laboratories of America. 
ment from a CA, it attempts to purchase the units in the 
itinerary from the ASAs and SAs. There are two out•
comes possible: the TA acquires the units and completes References 
the transaction with the CA resulting in a satisfied CA [1] Ankolenkar et. al., DAML-S: Web Service Description for 
and a profit or loss for the TA, or the TA is unable or the Semantic Web, Proc, lst Int. Semantic Web Conference, 
unwilling to purchase all of the units, resulting in an Sardinia, June 2002. 
aborted transaction and the invocation of the penalty [2] F. Bellifemine, A. Poggi, G. Rimassa, Developing multi 
(which can involve both a monetary and a reputation agent systems with a FIPA-compliant agent framework, in 
component).                                         Software - Practice And Experience, 2001 n31, pp. 103-128 
                                                    [3] F. Bergenti and A. Poggi, LEAP: a FIPA Platform for 
3. Discussion                                       Handheld and Mobile Devices, ATAL, 2001. 
                                                    [4] J. Dale et.al., Agentcities: Challenges and Deployment of 
TAC relies on a few centralized market servers to handle Next-Generation Service Environments. Proc. Pacific Rim 
all interactions and coordination, including service Intelligent Multi-Agent Systems, Tokyo, Japan, August 2002. 
discovery, agent communication, coordination, and game [5] J. Dale and L. Ccccaroni, Pizza and a Movie: A Case Study in 
control. In contrast, TAGA framework uses a distributed Advanced Web Services. In: Agentcities: Chalenges in Open 
peer-to-peer approach based on standard agent languages, Agent Environments Workshop, Autonmous Agents and Multi-
protocols and infrastructure components (FIPA [8],  Agent Systems Conference 2002, Bologna, Italy, July 2002. 
Agentcities), emerging standards for representing ontolo• [6] M. Dean, et. al.. OWL Web Ontology Language 1.0 Refer•
gies, knowledge and services (RDF, DAML+OIL,        ence. W3C Working Draft. 
DAML-S [1]) and web infrastructure (e.g., Sun's Java [7] M. Wellman, et. al., The 2001 Trading Agent Competition. 
Web Start). Several FIPA platform implementations are In 14th Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial 
currently used within TAGA, including Jade [2] and APP Intelligence, pp. 935-941, Edmonton, 2002. 
[5], demonstrating agent interoperability.          [8] FIPA agent standards, http://www.fipa.ory/ 
1646                                                          INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS DEMONSTRATIONS 