                         Making Markets and Democracy Work: 
                           A Story of Incentives and Computing 
                 IJCA1-03 Computers and Thought Award Talk Abstract 

                                        Thomas Sandholm 
                                    Carnegie Mellon University 
                                   Computer Science Department 
                                        5000 Forbes Avenue 
                                       Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
                                      sandholm@cs.cmu.edu 

                   Abstract                        1 Introduction 
                                                   Collective choice settings are the heart of society. Citizens 
    Collective choice settings are the heart of soci• voting determines a president, producers and consumers bid•
    ety. Game theory provides a basis for engineering ding determines a set of trades, and surfers hitting links in 
    the incentives into the interaction mechanism (e.g., web browsers determines a bandwidth allocation. A key dif•
    rules of an election or auction) so that a desirable ficulty in collective choice is that the agents generally have 
    system-wide outcome (e.g., president, resource al• conflicting preferences over the outcomes (e.g., presidents, 
    location, or task allocation) is chosen even though resource allocations, or task allocations). Work in mechanism 
    every agent acts based on self-interest.       design, a subfield of game theory, provides a basis for engi•
    However, there are a host of computer science is• neering the incentives into the interaction mechanism (e.g., 
    sues not traditionally addressed in game theory that rules of an election or auction) so that a desirable—according 
    have to be addressed in order to make mechanisms to some objective—outcome is chosen even though every 
    work in the real world. Those computing, commu• party acts based on self-interest. 
    nication, and privacy issues are deeply intertwined However, there are a host of computer science issues not 
    with the economic incentive issues. For example, traditionally addressed in game theory that have to be ad•
    the fact that agents have limited computational ca• dressed in order to make mechanisms work in the real world. 
    pabilities to determine their own (and others') pref• Those computing, communication, and privacy issues have 
    erences ruins the incentive properties of established to be handled while simultaneously handling the economic 
    auction mechanisms, and gives rise to new issues. incentive issues. This is a particularly exciting research area 
    On the positive side, computational complexity can because those issues are intimately intertwined, as I hope to 
    be used as a barrier to strategic behavior in settings convey. For example, the fact that agents have limited com•
    where economic mechanism design falls short.   putational capabilities can ruin the incentive properties of es•
                                                   tablished auction mechanisms, and give rise to new game-
    Novel computational approaches also enable new theoretic issues. On the positive side, computational com•
    economic institutions. For example, market clear• plexity can be used as a barrier to insincere strategic behavior 
    ing technology with specialized search algorithms in settings where economic incentive engineering is known to 
    is enabling a form of interaction that I call expres• fall short. 
    sive competition. As another example, selective in• Novel computational approaches and algorithms can also 
    cremental preference elicitation can determine the enable new economic institutions. For example, sophisti•
    optimal outcome while requiring the agents to de• cated market clearing technology with specialized search al•
    termine and reveal only a small portion of their gorithms enables a new form of interaction that I call ex•
    preferences. Furthermore, automated mechanism  pressive competition: empowering market participants with 
    design can yield better mechanisms than the best potent expressiveness akin to human-to-human negotiation 
    known to date.                                 while at the same time harnessing the forces of competition, 
                                                   the global scale of the Internet, and the speed and accuracy 
                                                   of algorithmic market clearing with all relevant information 
  *This material is based upon work supported by the National Sci• in hand. Furthermore, even the mechanism itself (such as the 
ence Foundation under CAREER Award IRI-9703122, Grant IIS- rules of an auction) can be designed automatically—in many 
9800994, ITR IIS-0081246, and ITRIIS-0121678.      cases yielding better mechanisms than the best known to date. 


COMPUTERS AND THOUGHT AWARD PAPER                                                              1649   This writeup begins from distributed peer-to-peer negotia• work was for cooperative agents only: an agent was as•
tion (Section 2), and transitions to markets that have have a sumed to take on a task whenever that was feasible. For self-
mediator such as an auction server (Section 3). In this context interested agents, more sophisticated methods are needed. 
1 will lay out the vision and technology for expressive com• A key idea toward this direction was contracting based on 
petition. Section 4 discusses multiagent preference elicitation marginal costs [Sandholm, 1991; 1993; 1996]. When a con-
in auctions and voting settings: can the mediator elicit the tract is proposed to an agent, the agent evaluates the cost of 
information needed to determine the optimal outcome with• taking on the contract obligations (e.g., tasks) by solving its 
out requiring the agents to determine and reveal their prefer• local planning problem once with the new obligations and 
ences about impertinent aspects of the problem? The issue of once without. The difference in the costs of those two lo•
how carefully computationally constrained agents should de• cal plans is the marginal cost of the obligations. An agent 
termine their preferences is addressed in Section 5. It turns using this scheme accepts the proposal if the proposer pays 
out that the computational constraint undermines desirable it more than its marginal cost. Similarly, when proposing a 
incentive properties in established auction mechanisms, and contract, an agent computes its marginal value of unloading 
gives rise to new game-theoretic issues, in particular a phe• some obligations, and pays another agent up to that amount 
nomenon which I call strategic computing: using one's lim• for the other agent to take on those obligations. A desirable 
ited computing to approximate others' preferences at the cost engineering facet of this framework is that it separates the 
of approximating one's own. The reverse is shown in Sec• domain specific marginal cost calculator (planner) from the 
tion 6: computational complexity can be used as a barrier to agent's domain independent negotiation module. 
undesirable strategic behavior. I illustrate this in voting. One practical consideration is that in many settings the lo•
  Section 7 discusses a new idea which I call automated cal planning problems are intractable, so the marginal costs 
mechanism design: designing the interaction mechanism have to be approximated. For example, in the TRACONET 
computationally for the specific setting at hand. Section 8 system for automatically reallocating trucking tasks among 
shows how mechanism design can not only be used to lead to dispatch centers, the local planning problems were J\fP-
a desirable outcome in a multiagent system, but also to deter• complete vehicle routing problems with several side con•
mine a way to execute the outcome. In particular, the writeup straints. The TRACONET work included heuristic meth•
looks at safe exchange mechanisms for carrying out trades ods for deciding how carefully to approximate marginal 
among anonymous parties on the Internet. Finally, conclu• costs [Sandholm, 1991; 1993; 1996; Sandholm and Lesser, 
sions, perspective, and promising avenues for future research 1995b]. This issue is revisited more formally in Section 5. 
are presented. 
                                                    2.2 Iterative reallocation and combinatorial 
2 A first tack: Peer-to-peer negotiation                contracts 
Work on automated negotiation began in peer-to-peer con• Another early idea in automated negotiation was to have 
texts where the negotiating agents (humans or software) make the agents iteratively reallocate the items (tasks) [Sandholm, 
deals with each other. A key insight for analyzing such ne• 1991; 1993]. An agent that had accepted a task could later 
gotiation is to think about the negotiation process as an AI contract out that task to some other agent, who in turn could 
search algorithm where the outcome is characterized by deci• contract it out, and so on. This proved to be highly effective 
sion variables to which the negotiation assigns values [Sathi in the TRACONET system. Marginal cost based contract•
and Fox, 1989; Sandholm, 1991; Corny et al., 1991;Sycara et ing guarantees that every contract improves the utilities of 
a/., 1991; Sandholm, 1993]. For example, in task allocation the contract parties. Therefore, every agent's utility increases 
negotiation there is a decision variable for each task, and the monotonicaliy in the distributed negotiation that keeps real•
variable's value is the name of the agent that the task is allo• locating tasks. It follows that the agents can enter and exit the 
cated to. There are several high-level families of peer-to-peer negotiation dynamically without risking a loss. 
negotiation search algorithms. For example, the agents might The marginal cost based iterative reallocation negotiation 
negotiate one variable at a time, committing to the assign• can be viewed as a distributed hill-climbing search where the 
ment before moving on to the next variable. This is analogous height on the hill is the sum of the agents' utilities [Sand•
to constructive search in AI. As another example, the search holm, 1998]. Under this interpretation it is easy to show 
might start from a status quo assignment of values to vari• that contracting one item (task) at a time against a payment 
ables (for example, the initial assignment of tasks to agents (aka. original (O) contract) does not generally lead to an 
before any negotiation begins), and then the agents might iter- optimal outcome: the search gets stuck in a local optimum. 
atively change the variable assignments whenever the agents This can be addressed by combinatorial contracts that enlarge 
relevant to the variables in question agree [Sandholm, 1991; the neighborhood in the hill-climbing search: contracts where 
1993]. (For example, the current holder of a task can real• multiple items are exchanged for a payment (cluster (C) con•
locate the task to another agent if they both agree.) This is 
                                                   tracts),1 where items from one agent are exchanged against 
analogous to iterative refinement search in AI.    items from another—potentially with a side payment—(swap 
2.1 Contracting based on marginal cost             (S) contracts), and where the contract can involve more than 
    calculations 
                                                      lThe TRACONET system was the first to use combinatorial bid•
In the original contract net framework [Smith, 1980], agents ding to allocate trucking tasks—an approach widely used commer•
allocated tasks among themselves. However, the frame- cially for procuring trucking services today. 


1650                                                         COMPUTERS AND THOUGHT AWARD PAPER two agents (multiagent (M) contracts). If all of these con• and substitutability: the cost of taking on an obligation 
tract types are allowed in a single contract (OCSM contract), usually depends on what other obligations one has. 
then agents that contract using the marginal cost principle will In automated negotiation systems for self-interested 
reach a global optimum (that is, a task allocation that maxi• agents, contracts have traditionally been binding. They do not 
mizes social welfare, which is simply the sum of the agents' allow agents to accommodate future events that are uncertain 
utilities) in a finite number of contracts—and no subset of due to domain uncertainty or negotiation process uncertainty. 
those contract types suffices [Sandholm, 1998; 2000a]. Thus Both of these classes of uncertainty may also include subjec•
the agents can myopically make contracts in any order.' From tive uncertainty due to an agent's limited capability to pro•
a hill-climbing search perspective, the neighborhood is large cess information—for example computationally limited ca•
enough that from any allocation of tasks, a profitable con• pability to do mental lookahead in a (sequential) negotiation 
tract exists that takes the agents to any other task allocation. process. If, in a negotiation, an agent has made a commitment 
Therein also lies a key weakness. Especially in a distributed that turns out unprofitable in hindsight, the agent would like 
setting, it can be difficult to find a combinatorial contract (in• to backtrack that commitment. For example, more lucrative 
volving multiple items and multiple agents) that will improve offers can arrive later, or handling a task can turn out more 
the current solution. Also, the sequence of hill-climbing con• costly than anticipated. 
tracts can be exponentially long in the worst case. There•
                                                      Backtracking in negotiation search can be enabled using an 
fore, in practice, the optimal outcome is not found. Nev•
                                                    instrument called a leveled commitment contract, where each 
ertheless, the combinatorial contracts help reach better out•
                                                    contract party can unilaterally decommit from the contract 
comes than O-contracts [Andersson and Sandholm, 1999; 
                                                    by paying a predetermined penalty [Sandholm and Lesser, 
2000]. 
                                                    1995b; 2001; 2002]. This mitigates both domain uncertainty 
  Another approach for avoiding local optima in search is and negotiation process uncertainty, whether objective or sub•
backtracking. It turns out that a backtracking instrument can 
                                                    jective.3 A concern with this is strategic breach: a rational 
be constructed for negotiation as well, as the next section self-interested agent is reluctant to decommit because there 
shows. It can easily be applied to the reallocation negotiation is a chance that the other party will decommit, in which case 
discussed in this section, instead—or in conjunction with— the former agent gets freed from the contract, does not have 
the combinatorial contract types [Andersson and Sandholm, to pay a penalty, and collects a penalty from the breacher. 
1998]. With that instrument, a backtracking option can be (This is an example issue that arises due to self-interest, and 
added to each (or only some) of the contracts. However, the renders inapplicable traditional backtracking techniques like 
backtracking instrument applies to basically any negotiation distributed constraint satisfaction (e.g., [Yokoo, 2000]) which 
setting, and I will discuss it in that broader context. assume that all parties execute the distributed algorithm faith•
                                                    fully.) Given the contract price, decommitting penalties, and 
2.3 Leveled commitment contracts to enable          the agents' prior distributions of the value of the contract, one 
     backtracking                                   can conduct a Nash equilibrium analysis of the decommitting 
Negotiating agents usually have to act under uncertainty, game (in other words, one can find decommitting strategies 
yielding behavior that is suboptimal in hindsight. For the for the agents such that each agent's strategy is a best re•
purposes of the ensuing discussion, I divide the uncertainties sponse to the other's). Each agent's best-response strategy is 
faced by agents in negotiation into two high-level classes: defined by a threshold on the value of the contract for that 
                                                    agent. If the value is below that threshold, the agent will 
  • Domain uncertainty stems from an agent not knowing 
                                                    decommit. It turns out that strategic breach indeed occurs: 
    how its local situation will change. Such changes affect 
                                                    an agent does not decommit when the contract's value drops 
    the value (cost) and feasibility of the deals that the agent below the point where paying the decommitting penalty is 
    has made. For instance, which of an agent's resources 
    will break (or become available) that affect the agent's 
                                                      3A practical type of subjective uncertainty stems from the fact 
    costs—or even feasibility—of handling different combi• that computing the value (cost) of taking on the obligations of a con•
    nations of its tasks?2                          tract is often intractable—as discussed—so the agents have to resort 
                                                    to approximate marginal value calculation. Leveled commitment al•
  • Negotiation process uncertainty stems from an agent lows an agent to bid based on a rough value calculation. If the agent 
    not knowing what future negotiation events will occur. wins the bid, the agent can invest a more thorough value calculation. 
    Consider, for instance, the following uncertainties that If the contract no longer looks beneficial in light of this more refined 
    an agent may face. Which of my pending bids will get calculation, the agent can decommit. The fact that only the winning 
    accepted? Which (parts) of my tasks will I be able to bidders carry out a refined calculation can save computation system 
    subcontract out in the future, and at what prices? What wide. Also, the negotiations can be carried out faster because agents 
    tasks will I be offered and at what prices? The answers can bid based on less computation. 
    to all of these questions affect the cost of taking on (or Leveled commitment can be used to increase the speed of ne•
    letting go of) other obligation due to complementarity gotiation in an additional way as well. An agent can make (low-
                                                    commitment) offers to multiple recipients although those offers are 
  2An additional source of uncertainty arises through the other mutually exclusive from the agent's perspective. In case more than 
agents' non-negotiation actions. Specifically, how will the others one recipient accepts, the agent can backtrack from all but one. This 
act regarding aspects that have not been contractually bound (this allows the agent to address the recipients in parallel instead of ad•
is pertinent in domains where those actions can affect the agent's dressing them one at a time and blocking to wait for an answer be•
utility by hindering or helping the agent)?         fore addressing the next. 


COMPUTERS AND THOUGHT AWARD PAPER                                                               1651 worth it; rather it needs to drop to a level further down before 3 A paradigm shift to mediated clearing 
the agent decommits. However, despite such strategic breach, 
leveled commitment contracts improve the expected payoffs The Achilles heel of peer-to-peer negotiation is negotiation 
of all contract parties compared to any contract where back• process uncertainty. Agents make commitments without vis•
tracking is not an option [Sandholm and Lesser, 2001]. It ibility into what is going to occur later on in the negotia•
follows that leveled commitment also enables contracts that tion process (and what has already transpired in negotiation 
would not be mutually beneficial without the backtracking among other agents). Leveled commitment contracts reduce, 
option.                                             but do not eliminate, the negative impact of such uncertainty. 
                                                    This uncertainty also introduces strategic problems. For ex•
  Leveled commitment contracts differ based on whether ample, if an agent expects a better deal in the future (which 
agents have to declare their decommitting decisions sequen• it cannot profitably handle if it takes on the contract currently 
tially or simultaneously, and whether or not agents have to offered to it), the agent may want to pass on the current offer. 
pay the penalties if both decommit. These mechanisms lead So, the agent is not best off acting myopically—not even in 
to different Nash equilibria. It is easy to see that in the se• marginal cost based contracting or leveled commitment con•
quential mechanisms the second mover never decommits if tracts as the basic analysis discussed in the previous section 
the first mover does; if the first mover does not, then the sec• assumes. Rather, a rational agent would want to look ahead 
ond mover will decommit if the value of the contract to him into the future, which in turn requires speculating what the 
turns out to be so low that it is worth paying the penalty. In other agents will do. Acting rationally equates to solving for 
the simultaneous game where both pay the penalties if both the agent's best strategy in a game tree whose depth is at least 
decommit, as an agent's penalty approaches zero, the agent the number of contracts that can occur in the system. Such 
becomes truthful. On the contrary, in the simultaneous game lookahead is intractable in practice (although leveled com•
where neither pays if both decommit, as an agent's penalty mitment contracts have been studied in this context with a 
approaches zero, the agent does not become truthful but the small number of tasks to allocate [Andersson and Sandholm, 
other contract party does! Despite the fact that the equilibria 2001]). Even if an agent can conduct such lookahead, un•
of these mechanisms differ, surprisingly, among risk-neutral certainty about the other agents' private information (their 
agents each of the mechanisms leads to the same expected preferences, tasks, resources, etc.) causes the agent to make 
payoffs to the agents if the contract price and decommitting commitments that are suboptimal—in light of later negotia•
penalties are optimized for each mechanism separately [Sand- tion events—for the agent and for social welfare [Andersson 
holm and Zhou, 2002]. For agents with risk attitudes, the dif• and Sandholm, 2001]. As discussed, there is an additional 
ferent mechanisms yield a different sum of utilities, and the problem in peer-to-peer negotiation: it can be prohibitively 
relative ranking of the mechanisms varies based on the exact complex to find a contract that improves the current solution, 
utility functions.                                  especially when using combinatorial contracts involving mul•
                                                    tiple items and multiple agents. 
  Computing plays a key role in operationalizing the idea 
of leveled commitment. Given the contract price, the de- In light of these problems, it is clear that in many settings, 
committing penalties, and piecewise linear prior distributions economically better solutions can be obtained by collecting 
on the contract's value for the different contract parties, the the agents' information to a mediated clearing point such as 
Nash equilibrium decommitting thresholds for each mecha• an auction server, and conducting a search (aka. a clearing) 
nism can be computed in polynomial time in the number of there to determine the outcome, rather than conducting a dis•
pieces [Sandholm et al, 1999]. Furthermore, given the piece- tributed "negotiation" search. The reason is that the mediated 
wise linear priors, it turns out that the contract price and de- clearing has all the information in hand while the distributed 
committing penalties that maximize the sum of the contract search makes decisions based on incomplete views. Further•
parties' payoffs can be determined in polynomial time in the more, the mediated clearing can be programmed to execute 
number of pieces for each of the leveled commitment mech• the search algorithm faithfully while in the distributed search 
anisms. The reader is invited to try a leveled commitment the agents will act based on self-interest—potentially caus•
contract optimizer prototype, eCommitter, on the web [Sand- ing the search not to find an optimal outcome.4 The mediated 
holm, 2002b]. Leveled commitment contracts and the algo• approach can be structured so that it motivates the agents to 
rithms also generalize to deals that involve more than two reveal their information truthfully; this will be discussed in 
agents.                                             Section 3.6. In short, the mediated approach removes the 
                                                    negotiation process uncertainty. (The domain uncertainty re•
  The theoretical results discussed above pertain to a single mains, and the leveled commitment methodology can be used 
contract. In negotiation there is usually a web of contracts, to mitigate it.) In most electronic commerce applications the 
and an agent's breach can cause the victim of the breach to mediated approach also saves communication because there 
want to breach on another contract, and so on. There is gen• is many-to-one communication instead of many-to-many, and 
erally a tradeoff between allowing enough backtracking to because each issue needs to be communicated only once— 
sufficiently explore the space for a good outcome and not rather than repeatedly as is commonly the case in peer-to-peer 
wasting time in deep cascades of decommits—or even infi•
nite loops of decommitting and recommitting. That trade•
                                                      4In the distributed search it can even be difficult to identify 
off can be controlled by carefully increasing the decommit• when an optimal solution has been found, and special termination 
ting penalties over time [Andersson and Sandholm, 2001; detection algorithms are usually needed [Sandholm, 1993; 1996; 
1998].                                              Walsh and Wellman, 2000]. 


1652                                                         COMPUTERS AND THOUGHT AWARD PAPER  negotiation.                                              where bi is the bid of agent i, and S and S' are disjoint sets 
   The shift to mediated clearing introduces the need for tech• of items. In other words, the current techniques focus on cap•
 nology for conducting the clearing. The following subsec- turing synergies (complementarities) among items. However, 
 tions describe the mediated approach in more detail, different in many auctions in practice, some items can at least partially 
 forms of the clearing problem, and algorithms for solving it. substitute for others (e.g., when bidding for an umbrella and 
                                                           a raincoat). For instance when bidding for landing slots for 
 3.1 A canonical example: Combinatorial auction            a given airplane flight, the bidder is willing to take any one 
 Consider a setting where multiple distinguishable items (e.g., of a host of slots, but getting more than one adds only slight 
 a right shoe and a left shoe) are auctioned sequentially, and a value because extra slots beyond the first one obtained only 
 bidder's valuation for a bundle of items is not the sum of those serve as backup. Substitutability causes bids to be subaddi•
 items' valuations. Most multi-item allocation settings exhibit tive: This can lead to problems. 
 such nonadditivity, for example, strategic sourcing, alloca• For example, what happens if agent i bids = 
 tion of trucking lanes, electricity markets, as well as many      = and =and there are no other 
 task and resource allocation problems in computer science. bidders? The auctioneer could allocate items 1 and 2 to agent 
 To bid appropriately for the item that is auctioned first (right 1 separately, charging + = instead of 
 shoe), a bidder needs to guess which other items he will win This problem can be removed by using a bidding language 
 in the later auction(s). This requires lookahead in a game tree, where the bidders can submit XOR-bids, that is, bids on bun•
 which is intractable if numerous items are auctioned. Even dles such that only one of the bids can get accepted [Sand-
 with exact lookahead, the bidder generally does not know de- holm, 2002a], This allows the bidders to express general 
 terministically what will transpire in the auction—due to in• preferences with both complementarity and substitutability. 
complete information about the other bidders' valuations of In other words, the bidder can express any value function 
 the items. For example, some other bidder could be a col•                where m is the number of items for sale in 
 lector of left shoes who also likes right shoes somewhat, but the auction. For example, a bidder in a 4-item auction may 
 less than our bidder. "This can cause our bidder to win just the submit the following input to the auctioneer 
right shoe that has no value to him, that is, a bundle of items 
 that is undesirable to the bidder given the prices. While un•
desirable to our bidder, the outcome (that is, allocation of the 
 items to the agents) also does not maximize social welfare. It 
 would have been better to give both shoes to the other bidder. 
In general, the outcome might not maximize social welfare 
even if each bidder wins a bundle that is worth more than the 
bidder had to pay for it: an even better allocation of the items 
to the bidders might exist. 
   These problems, that are due to the negotiation process un•
certainty of a sequential auction, can be overcome via a com• While XOR-bids are fully expressive, representing one's 
binatorial auction where bids can be submitted on combina• preferences in that language often leads to large numbers of 
tions (bundles) of items [Rassenti et al., 1982]. For exam• bids that are all combined with XOR. To maintain full ex•
ple, a bidder can say: "I am willing to pay up to $100 for pressiveness, but at the same time to make the representa•
items 2,3, and 7 together". This removes the need for looka• tion more concise, one can use a bidding language called 
head and for speculation about others because the bidder can OR-of-XORs [Sandholm, 2002b; 2000b]. In this language, 
evaluate the value of item 2 in the known context where the a set of bids can be combined with XOR, forming an XOR-
bidder hypothetical^ receives items 3 and 7 as well The bid• disjunct. Multiple XOR-disjuncts can then be combined with 
der cannot get stuck with item 2 in an unprofitable way. This non-exclusive ORs to represent independence (much like a 
removal of the so called exposure risk makes bidding easier. lack of an edge represents independence in a Bayes net). For 
It also causes the bidders to bid more aggressively because example, a bidder who wants to submit the same offer as in 
they do not have to factor in the potential downside of getting the example above, can do so by submitting the following 
stuck with undesirable bundles; the aggressive bidding makes more concise input to the auctioneer: 
the seller better off. Finally, social welfare is maximized be•
cause the goods are allocated to the bidders that value them 
the most. 

3.2 Substitutability and XOR-constraints 
The model discussed above, and most other work on com•
binatorial auctions (see for example [Rothkopf et al, 1998; 
DeMartini et al., 1999]), are based on a setting where each The XOR-bidding language is a special case of the OR-
bidder can bid on bundles of items, and any number of a bid• of-XORs language. Therefore, the shortest way to repre•
der's bids can be accepted (except, of course, that bids on sent any particular value function in the OR-of-XORs lan•
overlapping bundles cannot be accepted). This works well   guage is never longer than in the simple XOR-bidding lan•
when bids are superadditive:                               guage. The reader is invited to try out XOR bidding and 


COMPUTERS AND THOUGHT AWARD PAPER                                                                             1653 