                      Incremental Learning of Perceptual Categories for
                                 Open-Domain Sketch Recognition

                       Andrew Lovett       Morteza Dehghani        Kenneth Forbus
                          Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
                              2133 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60201 USA
                           {andrew-lovett, morteza, forbus}@northwestern.edu

                    Abstract                          amount of preprogramming for each particular domain [Al-
                                                      varado et al., 2002]. While these types of systems have
  Most existing sketch understanding systems require a
                                                      certainly proven useful, they limit the communication be-
  closed domain to achieve recognition. This paper de-
                                                      tween the person and the computer. Only information based
  scribes an incremental learning technique for open-
                                                      in domains that the programmers expect the system to work
  domain recognition. Our system builds generalizations
                                                      in can be transmitted.
  for categories of objects based upon previous sketches
                                                          We believe the key to recognition in the absence of
  of those objects and uses those generalizations to clas-
                                                      domain expectations is efficient, on-line learning. This
  sify new sketches. We represent sketches qualitatively
                                                      means that while a user works with the system, it should be
  because we believe qualitative information provides a
                                                      learning from the sketches the user produces, so that when
  level of description that abstracts away details that dis-
                                                      the user sketches an object that has been sketched in the
  tract from classification, such as exact dimen-
                                                      past, it will recognize that object. Such a system has a cou-
  sions. Bayesian reasoning is used in building represen-
                                                      ple of key requirements. Firstly, there must be a simple way
  tations to deal with the inherent uncertainty in percep-
                                                      for the user to tell the system what a sketched object is sup-
  tion. Qualitative representations are compared using
                                                      posed to be. Secondly, an algorithm that can learn a new
  SME, a computational model of analogy and similarity
                                                      category based on only a few examples is required. This is
  that is supported by psychological evidence, including
                                                      difficult if one is relying on quantitative information about
  studies of perceptual similarity. We use SEQL to pro-
                                                      lengths and angles because this information can vary sig-
  duce generalizations based on the common structure
                                                      nificantly from one sketch to another. Therefore, we believe
  found by SME in different sketches of the same ob-
                                                      qualitative sketch representations are necessary.
  ject. We report on the results of testing the system on a
                                                          Several efforts have examined building qualitative rep-
  corpus of sketches of everyday objects, drawn by ten
                                                      resentations of images, although few have dealt with raw,
  different people.
                                                      user-drawn sketches. Museros and Escrig [2004] worked on
                                                      comparing closed shapes. Their representations contained
1   Introduction                                      descriptions of basic features of the curves and angles in the
The problem of sketch recognition has received much atten- shapes. They were able to compare two shapes and deter-
tion in recent years because sketching provides a convenient mine whether one was a rotation of the other.
and natural interface for transferring information from a Ferguson and Forbus’ [1999] GeoRep generated quali-
person to a computer. This problem can be extremely diffi- tative representations based on a line-drawing program that
cult because everyone sketches differently and a single per- allowed users to make perfect lines and curves. GeoRep
son will often sketch the same thing in a different way each applied a low-level relational describer to each drawing to
time. The key is to identify the properties that remain con- find domain-independent qualitative information, such as
stant across each sketch of a given object. In order to deal relative orientation of and connections between lines. Geo-
with this quandary, many programs use a narrow domain Rep also used high-level relational describers to extract do-
containing a small set of possible sketch objects [e.g., circuit main-dependent information from the low-level description.
diagrams: Liwicki and Knipping, 2005; simple symbols: It was used for recognizing objects in particular domains
Anderson et al., 2004; architectural objects: Park and Kwon, and identifying axes of symmetry.
2003]. Thus, the programmers can examine the domain       Veselova and Davis [2004] built a system that produced
ahead of time and either hand-code the classifiers them- a qualitative representation of hand-drawn sketches. Their
selves or train the classifiers on a large body of data (700 representational vocabulary overlapped somewhat with
images for Liwicki and Knipping [2005]). Even systems Ferguson and Forbus’. Their system used several cogni-
designed to work in multiple domains require a certain tively motivated grouping rules to determine the relative


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   447weights of different facts in the representation. The system session as an opportunity for sKEA to learn to recognize
was designed to produce representations for classification, objects in parallel with the user’s sketching of those objects.
although the learning and classification stages have not, to In order for sKEA to learn to recognize objects, three
the best of our knowledge, been integrated.           other components are required: a system for building repre-
    We believe the three systems described above provide sentations of sketched objects, a system for learning percep-
evidence for the effectiveness of using qualitative informa- tual categories of objects, and a system for comparing a new
tion to represent and compare sketches. However, these sys- object’s representation to the category representations in
tems lack the ability to learn robust categories of sketches order to classify it. We will describe the comparison and
based on multiple examples. Here, we describe our system, learning components in the next section.
which we believe takes a step towards accomplishing this
goal. We begin with the sketching environment in which our 3 Comparisons and Generalization
system operates. Next, we give a brief overview of the ap-
                                                      We compare representations using the Structure-Mapping
plications we use for comparing sketches and constructing
                                                      Engine (SME) [Falkenhainer et al., 1989]. SME is a com-
generalizations. We then describe how our system decom-
                                                      putational model of similarity and analogy based on Gent-
poses rough sketches into perceptual elements and how
                                                      ner’s [1983] structure-mapping theory. According to struc-
those elements are represented using a qualitative vocabu-
                                                      ture-mapping, humans draw analogies between two cases by
lary. Finally, we discuss the results from an experiment de-
                                                      aligning their common structure. Each case’s representation
signed to test our system and consider areas for future work.
                                                      contains entities, attributes of entities, and relations. Struc-
                                                      ture is based on the connections between elements in the
2   The Sketching Environment                         representation. A simple relation between two entities has a
Our system uses sketches drawn in sKEA, the sketching small amount of structure, whereas a more complex relation
Knowledge Entry Associate. sKEA  is an open-domain    between other relations has a deeper structure.
sketch understanding system [Forbus et al., 2004]. It is able SME takes as input two cases: a base and a target. It
to reason about user-drawn sketches without any domain finds possible correspondences between entities, attributes,
expectations of what a user is likely to sketch because it is and relations in the two cases. It combines consistent corre-
not dependent on sketch recognition. Rather, it is based on spondences to produce mappings between the cases. SME
the idea that when people communicate through sketching, attempts to find mappings which maximize systematicity,
their communication is a multi-modal process. People ver- the amount of structural depth in the correspondences.
bally describe what they are sketching as they create it. Our system learns categories of objects using SEQL
Similarly, sKEA allows users to label each glyph, or object [Kuehne et al., 2000; Halstead and Forbus, 2005], a model
in a sketch, with categories from its knowledge base. sKEA of generalization built on SME. SEQL is based on the the-
computes a number of spatial relations between glyphs in a ory that people form a representation of a category by ab-
sketch, and it uses this information along with its knowledge stracting out the common structure in all the exemplars of
about the categories of the glyphs to reason about a sketch, that category. SEQL uses SME to compare new cases to the
or to compare two sketches.                           known generalizations. If a new case aligns with a sufficient
    While humans do often describe what they are sketch- amount of the structure in one of the generalizations, the
ing, they also expect others to recognize some objects with- case is added to that generalization. SEQL associates prob-
out having to be told what they are. Thus, it is not surprising abilities with each expression in a generalization, represent-
that sKEA’s requirement that every glyph be labeled can ing the proportion of the instances of that generalization that
become onerous at times, especially if the user is perform- include that particular expression. When a new case is
ing a task that requires the same objects to be sketched and added to the generalization, if its structure does not align
labeled many times. This concern leads to the question of with an expression in the generalization, that expression’s
whether some type of sketch recognition can be added to probability is decremented.
sKEA without sacrificing domain independence.             SEQL is capable of quickly learning new generaliza-
    Our approach to domain-independent recognition is tions. Even a generalization based on a pair of exemplars
based on incremental learning. When a user begins using may be sufficient for classifying new cases. Each additional
sKEA to perform some task, sKEA should have no expecta- exemplar further refines the generalization.
tions about what the user will sketch. However, over time, if
the user sketches the same object more than once, sKEA 4  Perceptual Elements
ought to learn to recognize that object. Thus, the fourth time
                                                      Our system decomposes a sketch into a set of primitive per-
the user draws, say, a building, sKEA could generate a
                                                      ceptual elements. There are two types of primitive elements:
guess as to what that object is most likely to be. If that guess
                                                      segments and the endpoints of segments. These elements
is wrong, the user can perform the usual glyph labeling task
                                                      align with elements of the raw primal sketch in Marr’s
to correct it, just as a person would correct another person
                                                      [1982] theory of vision. Segments may be straight or
who misunderstood part of a sketch. We see any sketching
                                                      curved. Endpoints may be classified as corners, meaning


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   448there is a corner between two segments; connections, mean- a square would be a cyclic edge group containing four
ing they connect two collinear segments; or terminations, edges. Once the edges and edge groups have been com-
meaning the endpoint does not connect to another segment. puted, the system uses this information to build a qualitative
Once the primitive elements are found, they can be grouped representation of the sketch.
to form more complex elements, creating an element hierar-
chy. So far, there is only one level to the hierarchy. Seg- 5 Qualitative Representation
ments and their terminations can be grouped to form edges.
                                                      An appropriate representational vocabulary is crucial for
While there are rules for grouping edges, there are currently
                                                      any kind of comparison between sketches. If the vocabulary
no explicit structures for more complex perceptual elements.
                                                      fails to capture the key properties of each sketch, there will
    Our system begins with the raw output from sKEA,
                                                      be no way to determine whether two sketches are similar.
consisting of a list of polylines. Each polyline is a list of
                                                      Our qualitative vocabulary draws on the work of Ferguson
points corresponding to a line drawn by the user. The sys-
                                                      and Forbus [1999], Museros and Escrig [2004], and Ve-
tem does not assume that the endpoints of polylines match
                                                      selova and Davis [2004].
endpoints of edges in the shape. Rather, it begins by joining
                                                          The terms in our vocabulary can be divided into three
together polylines with adjacent endpoints, provided there is
                                                      types: attributes, pairwise relations,andanchoring rela-
no third adjacent polyline to create ambiguity.
                                                      tions. Attributes convey information about a single edge in
    The system then searches for discontinuities in the
                                                      the sketch. Pairwise relations describe a relationship be-
slope of each polyline, representing potential corners. Dis-
                                                      tween two edges. Because these first two types of terms can
continuities are a key concept at every level in Marr’s
                                                      apply to only one or two entities in the representation, they
[1982] model, and they provide vital information about the
                                                      contain relatively little structural depth. SME uses structure
location of segment endpoints. In our system, evidence for a
                                                      to match two representations, so it is difficult to find corre-
discontinuity includes both changes in the overall orienta-
                                                      sponding entities using only these predicates, particularly
tion and high values for the derivative of the slope of the
                                                      when there is a large number of them in each representation.
curve, as calculated by Lowe [1989]. Polylines are divided
                                                      Thus, anchoring relations are necessary. Anchoring rela-
into segments which are linked by endpoints anywhere there
                                                      tions, which convey information that we believe is particu-
is a sufficiently salient discontinuity.
                                                      larly salient in the match, refer to more than two edges, and
    The system also finds potential corners and connections
                                                      contain greater structural complexity. Because of SME’s
between segments from separate polylines whose endpoints
                                                      systematicity bias, they are generally the first relations SME
are not adjacent. Two segments may have a corner between
                                                      matches up. Thus, they anchor the rest of the mapping.
them if extending the lines beyond their endpoints would
                                                          Attributes describe an edge’s type. An edge can be clas-
result in an intersection at some point in space. They may
                                                      sified as straight, curved,orelliptical, where an elliptical
have a connection between them if they are collinear.
                                                      edge is a curved edge that closes on itself, such as a circle.
    Once the system has located endpoints and gathered
                                                      In addition, straight edges that align with the x or y axes are
evidence, the endpoints must be classified. Previous systems
                                                      assigned the horizontal or vertical attributes.
have used Bayesian Networks (BNets) to deal with uncer-
                                                          Pairwise relations describe the relative position (left-of
tainty in perception [Bokor and Ferguson, 2004; Alvarado
                                                      or above), relative length (same-length or longer-than), or
and Davis 2005]. We utilize BNets which use the evidence
                                                      relative orientation (parallel or perpendicular)ofpairsof
gathered about an endpoint to classify it as a corner, connec-
                                                      edges. One major concern with pairwise relations is deter-
tion, or termination
                                                      mining the pairs of edges for which relations will be as-
    After endpoints have been classified, segments can be
                                                      serted. Asserting relations between every pair of edges in a
grouped together to form edges. Edges consist of maximal
                                                      sketch results in an overly complex representation with a
lists of unambiguously connected segments. Segments are
                                                      large number of redundant or irrelevant facts. We follow
unambiguously connected if there is an endpoint between
                                                      Veselova and Davis [2004] in only asserting pairwise rela-
them that has been classified as a connection and if the con-
                                                      tions between adjacent edges. We further limit the relative
nected endpoints of the two segments are not linked by con-
                                                      length relations between straight edges by only asserting
nections or corners to any other segments. The threshold for
                                                      relative length for pairs of edges that are parallel or perpen-
connection detection is lowered if the segments to be
                                                      dicular.
grouped form a compatible curve.
                                                          Connections between edges, and particularly corners
    Edges inherit connection information from the seg-
                                                      between edges (connections that occur at the edges’ end-
ments upon which they are built. Thus, edges whose seg-
                                                      points), are key to recovering the spatial structure of most
ments were connected will themselves be connected. This
                                                      shapes. We use a general connected relation any time two
connection information is used by the system to group edges
                                                      edges are connected to allow connections of different types
into connected edge groups, lists of sequentially connected
                                                      to potentially align. However, we also classify the connec-
edges. A cyclic edge group is a connected edge group in
                                                      tions into three types: corner, connects-to (where one
which the first and the last edge are connected. These edge
                                                      edge’s endpoint touches the middle of another edge), and
groups represent closed shapes in the sketch. For example,


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   449intersection (when two edges meet between both their end- drawn by subjects, we found significant cross-subject dif-
points). We also use cyclic edge groups to compute the con- ferences in the sketches, although most of the sketches of
vexity of any corners that make up part of a closed shape. each object shared a core set of similarities (see Figure 1).
    We assert two types of anchoring relations. Firstly, we Subjects sketched the objects in sKEA. Of the 10 sub-
use the cyclic edge groups to find any three-sided or four- jects, 5 had previous experience working with sKEA. After
sided closed shapes, i.e., triangles or quadrilaterals. These subjects sketched the objects, each object was labeled by the
shapes are important because they often make up the sur- experimenter using sKEA’s interface.
faces of three-dimensional objects, and because there is evi- We chose to throw out one subject’s set of sketches be-
dence that humans identify basic shapes early on in percep- cause the subject failed to follow the instructions. The re-
tual processing [Ferguson and Forbus, 1999].          maining72sketcheswereusedtotestthesystem.Ineach
    Secondly, we assert junction relations for points in a test run, generalizations for the 8 objects were built based on
sketch where exactly three edges meet. Clowes [1971] dem- sketches by a subset of the 9 users (the training set). Al-
onstrated that junctions between edges provide useful in- though SEQL can determine generalizations automatically,
formation for recovering shape information from line draw- our system forced SEQL to build exactly one generalization
ings. We classify junctions into three types described by from the training sketches of each object.
Clowes: arrow junctions, fork junctions,andtee junc-
tions, as well as a fourth, other type. We also assert
positional relations between junctions.
5.1 Organization of Facts
Unfortunately, we found that when complex shapes were
analyzed, the representations based on the vocabulary de-
scribed above became unmanageably large (600+ facts).
Consequently we limit the number of facts that are allowed
in a representation. We order the facts in our representation
according to a ranking system. Once facts have been appro-
priately ordered, we can cut off the list of facts in a repre-
sentation at different points depending on how large we
want to allow the representations to grow.
                                                             Figure 1. Examples of sketches drawn by subjects
    Facts are ranked based on both the qualitative term and
the edges being described. Among qualitative terms, anchor- After the generalizations were built, they were used to
ing relations are ranked above other relations due to their classify the objects in the sketches by a subset of the re-
importance in the mapping. Among edges, the highest rank- maining users (the test set). A given object was classified by
ing is given to external edges, those that reach the outer comparing its representation to each of the 8 generalizations
bounds of the entire sketch. These edges are considered the and returning the generalization with the strongest match.
most important because the outer edges of an image convey The strength of a match was calculated based on coverage.
vital information about the shape which the image repre- After SME was used to identify the common structure in a
sents [Hoffman and Richards, 1984]. The lowest ranking is generalization (the base) and a new instance (the target), the
given to purely internal edges, those that are not part of any base or target coverage could be calculated by determining
connected edge group containing an external edge. Presently the percentage of expressions in the base or target that were
we do not assert relations between internal edges.    a part of the common structure. For example, if every ex-
                                                      pression in the base matched something in the target, the
6   Experiment                                        match would have 100% base coverage. We found that both
                                                      base and target coverage provided useful information about
We evaluated our system by testing its ability to build gen- the strength of a match. Therefore, the system calculates the
eralizations of sketches of 8 everyday objects: a house, a match’s strength by taking the average of the two.
fireplace, a brick, a cup, an oven, a cylinder, a refrigerator, We validated our results by averaging the scores over
and a bucket. The objects were selected from Sun Up to Sun 80 test runs. In each run, the sketches were randomly di-
Down  [Buckley, 1979], which uses simple drawings in  vided into training and test sets. Because we were unsure
teaching about solar energy. 10 subjects were instructed to how limiting the number of facts in a representation would
sketch each object using the drawings from the book as affect the results, we ran the test with four different limits
guides. The drawings were provided so that the general fea- on the number of facts. In addition, because we were inter-
tures and orientations of the sketches would be similar. ested in the incremental effect of adding more cases to a
However, subjects were told that they needed only sketch generalization, we ran the test multiple times with different
those parts of the object that they believed were necessary training set sizes. We varied the training set size from two
for a person to recognize it. On examining the sketches to six cases, while keeping the test set size constant at three.


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   450                                                      cases in each generalization, the results were 71% and
                                                      88.5% for the strong and weak criteria. With six cases in
                                                      each generalization, the results were 77.5% and 94.2%.
                                                      While there was a clear overall improvement, the differ-
                                                      ences between adjacent pairs of results were generally
                                                      small. Increasing the training set size from 3 to 4 resulted in
                                                      significant performance improvements with both the strong
                                                      and weak criteria (p < .01), but no other differences between
                                                      adjacent pairs were statistically significant.

     Figure 2. Cylinders, buckets, and cups drawn by subjects  100%
    Preliminary tests indicated that many of the classifica-   95%
tion mistakes made by the system involved a failure to dis-    90%
                                                                                                Strong
tinguish between the three cylindrical objects: cylinders,     85%
                                                                                                Weak
buckets, and cups. This is hardly surprising, as these three   80%
                                                             Accuracy
objects have similar shapes, with nearly as much variation     75%
within category as across categories (see Figure 2). There-
                                                               70%
fore, we used two criteria in reporting our results. According       23456
to the strong criterion, only an exact match between an ob-         Examples in Training Set
ject’s actual type and its classified type was considered a
correct classification. According to the weak criterion, a
                                                            Figure 4. Results when the training set size is varied
classification in which the two types did not match was still
considered correct when both were cylindrical types.
                                                      7   Discussion

          95%                                         We believe we have demonstrated the effectiveness of our
                                                      system in learning to classify sketches of simple, everyday
          90%
                                                      objects. While the number of types of objects for classifica-
          85%                          Strong         tion was not large, the objects varied significantly in terms
          80%                          Weak           of shape and complexity. Most importantly, the system
         Accuracy
          75%                                         worked with no prior knowledge of the object classes for
                                                      which it learned generalizations. Based on only two sample
          70%                                         objects for each type, it was able to build generalizations
                100 150  175 225
                                                      that were sufficiently robust to classify new objects into one
                Number of Facts
                                                      of eight categories 71% of the time, and into one of six
                                                      categories 88.5% of the time. As expected, classification
        Figure 3. Results when the fact limit is varied became more accurate as the number of sketches in the
                                                      training set increased, suggesting that each additional sam-
6.1 Results                                           ple allowed the generalizations to be refined and improved.
The results achieved when the limit on the number of facts The relatively narrow range of improvement is most likely
in each representation was varied are found in Figure 3. due to a ceiling effect: the system achieved near-optimal
These results were based on a training set size of 5. The best performance with generalizations based on two examples,
results were achieved with a limit of 175 facts. With this so there was not a great deal of room for improvement.
limit, the strong criterion was met 77% of the time, and the We were concerned that limiting the number of facts
weak criterion was met 93.5% of the time. Note that chance that could be included in a representation might hamper
performance with the strong and weak criteria would be performance. However, we found no significant differences
12.5% and 21.9%, respectively. A t-test was used to look for between performance with 150, 175, or 225 facts. This re-
statistical differences in the results. We found that the in- sult suggests that, given our ordering of the facts, the first
crease in performance when the number of facts went from 150 or 175 facts were sufficient for recovering the shape of
100 to 150 was statistically significant (p < .01) for both the the sketch. Of course, one would expect the necessary num-
strong and weak criteria. There were no significant differ- ber of facts to vary depending on the complexity of the
ences between the results for 150, 175, and 225 facts. shape being represented. However, given the range of the
    The results for different training set sizes, shown in shapes used for this experiment, with the number of facts
Figure 4, were collected with a fact limit of 175 facts. The for a shape ranging from 60 to over 600, we believe the re-
results for both the strong and weak criteria consistently sults support 175 being a good general cutoff for the current
improved as the training set size increased. With only two qualitative representation scheme.


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   451