                     Sellers Competing for Buyers in Online Markets:
                        Reserve Prices, Shill Bids, and Auction Fees∗

            Enrico H. Gerding, Alex Rogers, Rajdeep K. Dash and Nicholas R. Jennings
                       University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK.
                                    {eg,acr,rkd,nrj}@ecs.soton.ac.uk


                    Abstract                            Given this competition, a key research question is how a
                                                      seller should select their auction settings in order to best at-
    We consider competition between sellers offering  tract buyers and so increase their expected proﬁts. In this
    similar items in concurrent online auctions through paper, we consider this issue in terms of setting the seller’s
    a mediating auction institution, where each seller reserve price (since the role of the reserve price has received
    must set its individual auction parameters (such as attention in both single isolated auctions and also in cases
    the reserve price) in such a way as to attract buyers. where sellers compete). In particular, we extend the existing
    We show that in the case of two sellers with asym- analysis by considering how sellers may improve their proﬁt
    metric production costs, there exists a pure Nash by shill bidding (i.e., bidding within their own auction as a
    equilibrium in which both sellers set reserve prices means of setting an implicit reserve price). We do so analyti-
    above their production costs. In addition, we show cally in the case of two sellers, and then develop an evolution-
    that, rather than setting a reserve price, a seller can ary simulation to enable us to solve the general case of mul-
    further improve its utility by shill bidding (i.e., bid- tiple sellers. Moreover, since shill bidding is generally un-
    ding as a buyer in its own auction). This shill bid- desirable (it undermines trust in the institution and decreases
    ding is undesirable as it introduces inefﬁciencies overall market efﬁciency), we then extend our evolutionary
    within the market. However, through the use of    simulation to investigate how the institution can deter shill
    an evolutionary simulation, we extend the analyt- bidding through the use of appropriate auction fees. More
    ical results beyond the two-seller case, and we then speciﬁcally, we make the following contributions:
    show that these inefﬁciencies can be effectively re- •
    duced when the mediating auction institution uses     We analytically describe the seller’s equilibrium strate-
    auction fees based on the difference between the      gies for setting reserve prices for the two-seller case, and
    auction closing and reserve prices.                   we advance the current state-of-the-art by ﬁnding Nash
                                                          equilibria by iteratively discretising the search space.
                                                          We show that, although no pure strategies exist when the
1  Introduction                                           sellers are symmetric, these can be found if production
                                                          costs differ sufﬁciently between the two sellers.
Online markets are becoming increasingly prevalent and ex-
                                                        •
tend to a wide variety of areas such as e-commerce, Grid com- For the ﬁrst time, we investigate shill bidding within a
puting, recommender systems, and sensor networks. To date, setting of competing sellers. To this end, we derive ana-
much of the existing research has focused on the design and lytical expressions for the seller’s expected utility when
operation of individual auctions or exchanges for allocating sellers shill bid. Using these expressions, we show that,
goods and services. In practice, however, similar items are without auction fees, a seller can considerably beneﬁt by
typically offered by multiple independent sellers that com- shill bidding when faced with competition.
pete for buyers and set their own terms and conditions (such • We introduce an evolutionary simulation technique that
as their reserve price and the type and duration of the auction) allows us to extend the analytical approach described
within an institution that mediates between buyers and sellers. above to the general case where an arbitrary number
Examples of such institutions include eBay, Amazon and Ya- of sellers compete, and we benchmark this approach
hoo!, where at any point in time multiple concurrent auctions against our analytical results.
with different settings are selling similar objects, resulting in •
               1                                          Finally, we extend our evolutionary simulation, and use
strong competition .                                      it to compare various types of auction fees. We evalu-
  ∗This research was undertaken as part of the EPSRC funded ate the ability of different fees to deter shill bidding and
project on Market-Based Control (GR/T10664/01).           quantify their impact on market efﬁciency. We show the
  1To illustrate the scale of this competition, within eBay alone novel results that within a market with competing sell-
close to a thousand auctions for selling Apple’s iPod nano were run- ers, auction fees based on the difference between the
ning worldwide at the time of writing.                    payment and the reserve price are more effective than

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1287                                                      through an evolutionary simulation in the general case). Sec-
                                                      ond, we introduce a mediator that charges commission fees to
                                                      the seller for running the auction, and we investigate the case
                                                      that sellers submit shill bids. Such shill bidding has previ-
                                                      ously been researched within isolated auctions [Wang et al.,
                                                      2004; Kauffman and Wood, 2005]. However, our work is
                                                      the ﬁrst that considers shill bidding as a result of sellers hav-
                                                      ing to compete. Finally, we investigate how auction fees can
                                                      best be used to reduce a seller’s incentive to shill bid. This
                                                      is important since in many auctions shill bidding is illegal,
                                                      but since it is hard to detect, it is difﬁcult to prevent in prac-
                                                      tice. Again, whilst using auction fees to deter shill bidding
                                                      has been considered in isolated auctions [Wang et al., 2004],
                                                      here we investigate this issue in the context of competing sell-
                                                      ers, and also consider how the auction fees affect the overall
                                                      efﬁciency of the market.
                                                        Finally, we note that our work is also closely related to
                                                      recent research on simultaneous auctions [Anthony and Jen-
         Figure 1: The competing sellers game.        nings, 2003; Byde et al., 2002]. However, unlike our case,
                                                      this research does not explicitly consider that the sellers need
    the more commonly used auction fees with regards to to tune their auction parameters such as the reserve price in
    deterring shill bidding and increasing market efﬁciency. order to attract buyers.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2
describes related work in this area and section 3 describes 3 Model of Competing Sellers
our model of competing sellers. Section 4 analyses the buyer The model of competing sellers proceeds in four stages (see
and seller strategies, and identiﬁes the cases for which a pure ﬁgure 1). First, the mediator (an institution such as eBay or
Nash equilibrium exists, in the case of two sellers. Section 5 Yahoo! that runs the auctions) announces the auction fees
introduces an evolutionary simulation that allows us to solve to the sellers. The sellers then simultaneously post their re-
the general case of multiple sellers. In section 6 we compare serve prices in the second stage. In the third stage, the buyers
auction fees, and ﬁnally, section 7 concludes.        simultaneously select an auction (or, equivalently, a seller)
                                                      based on the observed reserve prices. In the ﬁnal stage, the
2  Related Work                                       buyers (and possibly the sellers who are shill bidding) sub-
                                                      mit bids and the auctions are executed concurrently. We now
McAfee [1993] was the ﬁrst to consider mechanism design detail the three main components of our model:
and reserve prices in the context of competing sellers. In
his paper, sellers can choose any direct mechanism and these 3.1 The Mediator
mechanisms are conducted for multiple periods with dis-
counted future payoffs. However, he assumed that (i) a seller The mediator decides on the auction fees and determines the
ignores his inﬂuence on the proﬁts offered to buyers by other market rules or mechanism to be used in the auctions. In our
sellers, and (ii) that expected proﬁts in future periods are current model, we use a second-price sealed bid (or Vickrey)
invariant to deviation of a seller in the current period. As auction, in which the highest bidder wins but pays the price
McAfee notes, these assumptions are only reasonable in the of the second-highest bidder.
case of inﬁnitely many players. In contrast, we consider the 3.2 The Sellers
more realistic ﬁnite case, with a small numbers of buyers and
sellers, where strategic considerations become important. A seller has the option to openly declare a minimum or re-
  Subsequent papers have relaxed some of McAfee’s strong serve price. In addition, the seller is able to shill bid.Ifthe
assumptions. In Burguet and S´akovics [1999], a unique equi- shill bid wins the auction, effectively no sale is made, but a
librium strategy for the buyers in the two-seller case is de- seller is still required to pay the auction fees.
rived (see also section 4.1). In addition, they show that there
always exists an equilibrium for the sellers, but this cannot be 3.3 The Buyers
a symmetric one in pure strategies. They are unable to fully A buyer ﬁrst selects a single auction based on the announced
characterize the mixed equilibrium, but argue that sellers set a reserve price, and then bids in the selected auction. Note that
reserve price above their own valuation of the item. This anal- buyers are unaware that sellers shill bid. The bidding strat-
ysis is generalised for a large number of sellers in Hernando- egy is not affected by the reserve price; it is a weakly dom-
Veciana [2005], where it is shown that reserve prices tend to inant strategy to bid the true value [Krishna, 2002].Onthe
production costs in the limit case for asymmetric sellers. other hand, the reserve price is an important factor in deter-
  Our work extends these results in a number of ways. First, mining which auction the buyer should choose. To this end,
we are able to locate pure Nash equilibria for the asymmet- the buyer’s equilibrium strategies for selecting an auction are
ric seller setting (analytically in the case of two sellers and detailed in the next section.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  12884  Theoretical Analysis: Two Sellers                  where G(y) is the probability that a bidder is present in the
                                                      auction and that this bidder has a valuation greater than y.
A complete analysis of equilibrium behaviour and market
                                                        Now, in the auction with no competing sellers, we have the
efﬁciency for the complete model is intractable [McAfee,                                    
                                                      standard result that G y  − F y  and G y     −f y .
1993]. Therefore, in this section, we analyse a simpliﬁed ver-          ( )=1       ( )      ( )=     ( )
                                                      However, for two competing sellers, we must account for the
sion with two sellers and no auction fees (in section 5 we
                                                      fact that the number and valuation of the bidders in the auc-
consider the general case of more than two sellers and in sec-
                                                      tion is determined by the bidders’ cut-off point w. Thus, for
tion 6 we address the complete model). We assume that there
                                                      sellers (with the lower reserve price) this probablity is given
are N risk neutral buyers, each of whom requires just one
                                                      by:
item. Each buyer has valuation v independently drawn from
                                      F                                 
a commonly known cumulative distribution with density                     1+F (w) − F y y<w
f             ,                                                             2       ( )
  and support [0 1]. Each risk neutral seller offers one item   G1(y)=    1−F (y)                     (2)
for sale, has production costs xi, and decides upon a reserve               2           y ≥ w
price ri and shill bid si. Production costs are only incurred
                                                      and for seller 2, by:
in case the item is sold. The preferences of buyers and sell-               
ers are described by von Neumann and Morgenstern utility                      1−F (w)
                                                                                2    y<w
functions.                                                          G2(y)=    1−F (y)                 (3)
                                                                                2    y ≥ w
4.1  Buyer Equilibrium Behaviour
                                                      Thus, the sellers’ expected utility depends on the reserve price
The buyers’ behaviour for two sellers has been analysed of both sellers and the equilibrium behaviour is complex. We
in [Burguet and S´akovics, 1999]. A rational buyer with val- now apply this result to three different cases: (i) where both
uation v<r1  will not attend any auction. Furthermore, if sellers declare public reserve prices, (ii) where one seller de-
r1 <v<r2, the buyer will always go to seller 1. The inter- clares a public reserve price and the other submits a shill bid,
esting case occurs when v>r2. In a symmetric Nash equi- and (iii) where both sellers shill bid3.
librium, there is a unique cut-off point 1 ≥ w ≥ r2 where
buyers with v<wwill always go to seller 1, and buyers with Both Sellers Announce Public Reserve Prices.
v ≥  w will randomize equally between the two auctions2. In this case, the equilibrium strategy of each seller is given
The cut-off point w is exactly where a buyer’s expected util- by a Nash equilibrium at which each seller’s reserve price
ity is equal for both auctions, and is thus found by solving: is a utility maximising best response to the reserve price of
                           w                         the competing seller. When x1 = x2, no pure strategy Nash
             N−1                      N−2                             [                        ]
   r1F(r1,w)     +(N  − 1)    yF(y,w)     dF (y)      equilibrium exists Burguet and S´akovics, 1999 .However,
                           r1                         when the sellers have sufﬁciently different production costs,
                                           N−1        we ﬁnd that a pure Nash equilibrium exists where the reserve
                                = r2F(w, w)
                                                      price of both sellers is higher than their production costs. We
where F(y,w)=F   (y)+[1−   F (w)]/2. Given this cut-off ﬁnd this equilibrium numerically by iteratively discretising
point, we can now calculate the sellers’ expected revenue. the space of possible reserve prices. That is, for all possible
                                                      values of r1 and r2 that satisfy the conditions x1 ≤ r1 ≤ 1
4.2  Seller Equilibrium Behaviour                     and r1 ≤ r2 ≤  1, we calculate w and hence the expected
                                                      utility of the two sellers. We then search these reserve price
To calculate the equilibrium behaviour of the sellers, we de-                       r∗     r∗
rive a general expression for the sellers’ expected utility. This combinations to ﬁnd the values of 1 and 2 that represent
is calculated by considering the probability of one of three the utility maximising best responses to one another. By it-
events occurring: (i) no bidders having valuations above the erating the process and using a ﬁner discretisation at each
reserve price and the item does not sell, (ii) only one bidder stage, we are able to calculate the Nash equilibrium to any
having a valuation above the reserve price and the item sells degree of precision, and we can conﬁrm that this is indeed
at the reserve price, or (iii) two or more bidders having valua- the pure Nash equilibrium by checking that the utility of
                                                      seller 2 cannot be further improved by undercutting seller 1
tions above the reserve price and the item sells at a price equal U r ,x <U r∗,x ∀ r <r∗
to the second highest valuation. Thus, the expected utility of (i.e. 2( 2 2) 2( 2 2) 2  1 ). Figure 2 shows
                                                      an example of the utilities of each seller at this equilibrium
seller i who has a production cost of xi and sets a reserve
                                                      (in this case x1 =0.25, x2 =0.50 and N =10). Note
price of ri is:
                                                      that in this case there is clearly no advantage for seller 2 to
                                    N−1                                                     r     .
 Ui(ri,xi)=N(ri  − xi)G(ri)(1 −G(ri))                 undercut seller 1, and the reserve prices of 1 =049 and
              1                                      r2 =0.63  represent a stable Nash equilibrium from which
                                        N−2
 + N(N   − 1)   (xi − y)G (y)G(y)(1 −G(y))   dy (1)   neither seller will unilaterally deviate. Figure 3 shows a plot
              r1                                      indicating the range of asymmetric cases (i.e., cases where
                                                      x1 = x2) in which we ﬁnd a pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
  2In the case of multiple sellers, the buyers’ equilibrium strategy
yields a sequence of cut-off points [Hernando-Veciana, 2005].How- 3When a seller shill bids, the declared reserve price has no ad-
ever, in this case, the sellers’ equilibrium strategy can not be solved ditional beneﬁt. Thus we assume they declare no reserve price (or,
analytically, thus in section 5.1 we present an evolutionary simula- equivalently, declare a zero reserve price). In the next section, how-
tion approach to ﬁnd this equilibrium.                ever, we relax this assumption.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1289               Utility of Seller 1 (r =0.63)
                               2                                      Equilibrium Strategy Plot
      0.46                                                     1
                                                             )
                                                             2

      0.45                                                    (x 0.8 Pure Strategy
                                                                    Nash Equilibria

      0.44                                                    0.6
         0     0.2    0.4  r 0.6    0.8    1
                          1
               Utility of Seller 2 (r =0.49)
                               1
      0.20                                                    0.4
                                                                                    Pure Strategy
      0.18                                                    0.2                  Nash Equilibria
                                                             Seller  2 Production Costs

      0.16                                                     0
         0     0.2    0.4  r 0.6    0.8    1                    0     0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8    1
                          2
                                                                      Seller 1 Production Costs (x1)

Figure 2: Nash equilibrium at which the reserve price of each Figure 3: Regions where pure Nash equilibria exist (shaded
seller is a utility maximising best response to the reserve price grey) for N =10and a uniform buyer valuation distribution.
of the competing seller (x1 =0.25, x2 =0.50 and N =10).
                                                      binations as a normal form game (in this case N =10,
As can be seen, the symmetric case is very much a special x1 =0.25,andx2 =0.5). Note that both sellers have domi-
case, and the majority of possible production cost combina- nant strategies to submit shill bids (this result holds in general
tions yield unique pure strategy Nash equilibria, at which we in the absence of auction fees). At this equilibrium, seller 2
can calculate the seller’s expected utility.          achieves its maximum possible utility. However, seller 1 re-
                                                      ceives more when neither seller shill bids and would thus pre-
One Seller Shill Bids.                                fer a mechanism that deters shill bidding.
Rather than announce a public reserve price, either seller may
choose to announce a reserve price of zero to attract bidders, 5 Empirical Analysis: Beyond Two Sellers
and then submit a shill bid to prevent the item from selling
at too low a price. Thus, the seller who does not shill bid In this section, we describe and validate an evolutionary sim-
(seller 2 since r2 will be greater than r1) should declare a re- ulation that allows us to simultaneously solve both the buyers’
serve price that is a best response to the zero reserve price an- and sellers’ equilibrium strategies in the more general setting
nounced by the bidder who does shill bid. This reserve price beyond the two-seller case. Since our goal is to use this evo-
is simply given by the value of r2 that maximises U2(r2,x2), lutionary simulation to compare auction fees, we also relax
given that we calculate G2(y) as in equation (3) and take the assumption that a seller places a zero reserve price when
r1 =0in order to calculate w. Given the best response re- shill bidding. This assumption was reasonable in the previous
serve price of seller 2, and the resulting value of w, we can section and allowed us to derive analytic results. However, in
also calculate the shill bid that seller 1 should submit in order the presence of auction fees we require that sellers are able to
to maximise its own expected utility. By substituting s1 for trade-off between the reserve price that they set, and the value
r1 in equation 1, and using G1(y) as given in equation (2), we of the shill bid that they submit.
ﬁnd the shill bid that maximises U1(s1,x1).             We chose an evolutionary simulation, or more precisely
                                                      evolutionary algorithms, since they provide a powerful
Both Sellers Shill Bid.                               metaphor for learning in economics. In the past, they have
Finally, when both sellers declare a zero reserve price and been successfully applied to settings where, like the one we
shill bid, the bidders will randomise equally between either consider here, game-theoretic solutions are not available [An-
auction, since there is no reserve price information to guide thony and Jennings, 2003; Bohte et al., 2004].
their decision. Thus we ﬁnd the equilibrium shill bids of both In the following, M refers to the number of sellers in the
sellers by again substituting si for ri in equation 1 and hence game, and N to the number of buyers.
ﬁnding the value of si that maximises Ui(si,xi) when w =0.
                                                      5.1  The Evolutionary Simulation
Table 1 shows an example of the resulting four strategy com- Our simulation works as follows. The evolutionary algorithm
                                                      (EA) maintains two populations, one with seller and one with
                              Seller 2                buyer strategies. A seller strategy determines both the shill
                          RP          SB              bid and reserve price for each auction4. As each of the M
                 RP   0.452 , 0.189 0.403 , 0.220
      Seller 1                                           4
                 SB   0.457 , 0.188 0.423 , 0.220        Note that, although a seller always places a shill bid, setting this
                                                      value below or equal to the reserve price is equivalent to not shill
Table 1: Sellers’ expected utility when either declaring a re- bidding. Moreover, the simulation has the option to disable the shill
serve price (RP) or to shill bidding (SB).            bid or the reserve price, which is used in Section 5.2 to validate the
                                                      simulation results against the analytical solutions.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1290      Seller 1 - Reserve Price  Seller 1 - Reserve Price    Seller 1 - Shill Bid       Seller 1 - Shill Bid
      Seller 2 - Reserve Price   Seller 2 - Shill Bid      Seller 2 - Reserve Price    Seller 2 - Shill Bid
 0.6                        0.6                       0.6                        0.6


 0.4                        0.4                       0.4                        0.4


 0.2                        0.2                       0.2                        0.2
                                                      Expected  Utility         Expected  Utility
 Expected  Utility         Expected  Utility
                   Seller 1                  Seller 1                   Seller 1                  Seller 1
                   Seller 2                  Seller 2                   Seller 2                  Seller 2
  0                          0                         0                          0
    2      10        20       2       10        20       2      10        20       2       10        20
       Number of Bidders (N)     Number of Bidders (N)      Number of Bidders (N)     Number of Bidders (N)

Figure 4: Plots showing agreement between analytical equilibrium (continuous curves) and evolutionary results (error-bars
denoting 95% conﬁdence intervals) for the competing sellers game with varying number of buyers for the cases where none,
one or both sellers shill bids (with production costs x1 =0.25 and x2 =0.50). Experimental results are averaged over 30 runs.

sellers can have different production costs affecting the op- determined by the ‘real’ game).
timal values, a strategy contains separate reserve prices and The results in this paper are based on the following EA set-
shill bids for each seller in the game (thus the number of sell- tings. Each population contains 30 strategies and the evolu-
ers M affects the size of the strategies, but not the size of tionary results are obtained after 500 generations. Each strat-
the seller population, which is independent of M). A buyer egy is evaluated by playing 1000 competing sellers games
strategy determines the cut-off points for selecting one of the with randomly generated buyer valuations. These valuations
sellers as described in section 4.1. The buyer and seller strate- are selected from a uniform distribution with support [0, 1].
gies are encoded using real values within the range [0, 1].
  The strategies are evaluated as follows. At each genera- 5.2 Validation
tion, M seller and N buyer strategies are randomly selected In order to validate our evolutionary simulation we compare it
from the populations and compete against one another in a to the analytical results for two sellers from section 4.2. Fig-
number of games. Although each strategy in the seller popu- ure 4 shows a comparison for all four cases whereby the two
lation contains the reserve price and shill bid for all sellers in bidders either announce a non-zero reserve price, or alterna-
the game, it is important that they are evaluated by compet- tively, announce a zero reserve price and then submit a shill
ing against different strategies. Otherwise, a strategy would bid. In these experiments, seller 1 and 2’s production costs are
maximise the payoff in self-play, and would not be encour- set to 0.25 and 0.5 respectively. These settings were chosen
aged to reach the Nash equilibrium solution. When a game to illustrate representative outcomes when both sellers have
is played, each of the M selected strategies takes on the role non-zero and asymmetric production costs. However, simi-
of one of the sellers in the game. In order to evaluate each lar results are obtained for other combinations of production
strategy as a whole, the game is played several times with the costs (such results are not shown due to space limitations).
same strategies but with different roles for the seller strate- As can be seen, the results show an extremely good match.
gies. The average payoff in these games then determines the In addition, we ﬁnd that, although analytical results are not
strategies’ ﬁtness. This process is repeated until all strategies available for more than two auctions, even with more sellers
are evaluated and the ﬁttest strategies are then selected for the the simulation results converge and are consistent across runs
next generation. Furthermore, new strategies are explored by with different initial random seeds.
slightly modifying existing individuals using a mutation oper-
ator. The evolutionary process is repeated for a ﬁxed number 6 Auction Fees and Market Efﬁciency
of generations.
  It is important to note that, as explained earlier, we assume In this section we consider how the mediating institution can
that buyers are unaware that sellers shill bid (i.e., the sellers in deter shill bidding by applying appropriate auction fees. To
the game have private information). Thus, we are not simply this end, we apply the evolutionary simulation to compare
ﬁnding the Nash equilibrium of one large game, but we are ef- two types of auction fees. In addition, we investigate to what
fectively ﬁnding equilibria in two interrelated games; a buyer extent the market is efﬁcient and how auction fees and shill
game in which buyers select sellers based on the announced bidding affect this efﬁciency. Efﬁciency is a desirable prop-
reserve prices of the sellers, and a seller game, where sellers erty since an efﬁcient market extracts the maximum surplus
seek to attract buyers by announcing attractive reserve prices that is available, and thus, it is important to take efﬁciency
whilst simultaneously using shill bids to increase their rev- into consideration when setting the auction fees.
enue. To achieve this within the evolutionary algorithm, we
simultaneously co-evolve the populations of buyer and seller 6.1 Auction Fees
strategies, but determine the payoffs of the buyer and seller We consider two types of fees: (i) the closing-price (CP) fee
strategies separately (i.e., the buyer payoffs are determined that is a fraction, β, of the selling price (where β is the CP
as though sellers do not shill bid, whilst the seller payoffs are commission rate) and (ii) the reserve-difference (RD) fee that

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1291