 A Size-Based Qualitative Approach to the Representation of Spatial Granularity∗

                              Hedda R. Schmidtke     and  Woontack Woo†
                             Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
                                     {schmidtk,wwoo}@gist.ac.kr


                    Abstract                          irrelevant: to a mobile robot, e.g., near objects may be of im-
                                                      mediate relevance, and information about what is near is of-
    A local spatial context is an area currently under
                                                      ten more certain, more reliable, and more detailed than about
    consideration in a spatial reasoning process. The
                                                      what is further away; for planning ahead, however, details
    boundary between this area and the surrounding
                                                      about the immediate vicinity are secondary, and a less de-
    space together with the spatial granularity of the
                                                      tailed representation of the wider surroundings is needed. As
    representation separates what is spatially relevant
                                                      Hobbs [1985] pointed out, the ability to switch between rep-
    from what is irrelevant at a given time. The ap-
                                                      resentations of different granularity may be one of the funda-
    proach discussed in this article differs from other
                                                      mental characteristics of intelligence.
    approaches to spatial granularity as it focusses not
    on a partitioning of the spatial domain, but on the This article discusses a qualitative account of spatial gran-
    notions of grain-size and the limited extent of a spa- ularity in which the notions of proximity and grain-size,
    tial context as primary factors of spatial granularity. which are formally both related to distance, are combined
    Starting from a mereotopological characterization into a characterization of spatial granularity and local spa-
    of these concepts, the notions of relevant and irrel- tial context. In contrast to the geometric approach presented
    evant extension in a context are deﬁned. The ap-  in [Schmidtke, 2003; 2005a], the concepts are axiomatically
    proach is qualitative in the sense that quantitative, characterized in a way so as to be compatible with mereotopo-
    metric concepts are not required. The axiomatic   logical axiomatic systems and reasoning mechanisms. The
    characterization is thoroughly evaluated: it is com- notion of grain-size is formalized using relations of compar-
    pared to other mereotopological characterizations ison; quantitative, metric concepts are not necessary. The
    of spatial granularity; soundness is proven with  approach differs from other mereotopological approaches to
    an example model; and applicability for Knowl-    spatial granularity, such as the stratiﬁed rough sets of [Bit-
    edge Representation is illustrated with deﬁnitions tner and Stell, 2003] or the granular partitions of [Bittner and
    for common sense conceptualizations of sameness,  Smith, 2003], as it focusses on the notions of grain-sizes and
    and adjacency of locations.                       the limited extent of a spatial context as primary factors of
                                                      spatial granularity. These notions can be used to organize the
                                                      spatial locations of a domain into levels of granularity, with-
1  Introduction                                       out requiring partitioning of the domain.
Representation of local, granular spatial contexts is crucial Ways for applying our approach in the representation of
for reducing complexity of reasoning in AI applications, such spatial context for ubiquitous computing environments, and
as mobile robots or spatial conﬁguration systems. Via the no- issues of vagueness and change of granularity have been dis-
tion of spatial context-awareness, this topic has gained impor- cussed in [Schmidtke, 2005b; Schmidtke and Woo, 2006].In
tance also in other ﬁelds of research, such as research on im- this article, we give a model as a proof of soundness for a sim-
proved human-computer-interfaces, ubiquitous computing, pliﬁed axiomatic characterization, show its formal relation to
and location-based augmented reality [Chen and Kotz, 2000; other approaches on spatial granularity, and demonstrate its
Dey and Abowd, 2000; Kanter, 2003; Schilit et al., 1994]. applicability for representing common sense concepts.
  A local spatial context is understood in this article as an Starting from a mereotopological framework, the notion
area currently under consideration in a spatial reasoning pro- of spatial granularity is speciﬁed based upon special regions,
cess. The boundary between this area and the surrounding called extended locations, which are characterized so as to
space together with the spatial granularity of the representa- serve as both grain-regions and context-regions (Sect. 2). An
tion separates what is relevant at a given time from what is extended location can be a region, such as, e.g., a room in
  ∗This work was supported by Seondo project of MIC, Korea, by a building, that—on a coarse level of granularity—is con-
the UCN Project, the MIC 21st Century Frontier R&D Program in ceived to be a point-like location, whose extension is irrele-
Korea, and by the BK 21 Project in 2006.              vant, or—on a ﬁner level of granularity—the spatial extension
  †Corresponding author                               of a context, which delimits what is relevant in the context.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   563The approach is thoroughly evaluated in Sect. 3 with respect reﬂexive (A3), transitive (A4), and linear (A5) relation, and
to related works, soundness, and expressive power. An ex- all parts of a location are smaller or of the same size as the
ample for modeling of a domain in two scenarios is sketched. location (A6).
Applicability for common sense Knowledge Representation                    ∀  :  ≤
is demonstrated with formal speciﬁcations of otherwise dif-                 x  x   x                 (A3)
ﬁcult notions involving a concept of granularity-dependent       ∀x, y, z : x ≤ y ∧ y ≤ z → x ≤ z    (A4)
relevance of extension, namely: point-like locations, as re-          ∀x, y : x ≤ y ∨ y ≤ x          (A5)
gions with an irrelevant extension, adjacency of locations as
                                                                     ∀x, y : x  y∧→x  ≤ y           (A6)
overlap in an area of irrelevant extension, and spatial indis-
tinguishability of locations as sameness up to irrelevant parts. The relation ≤ can be used to deﬁne an equivalence relation
                                                      of congruence of size ≡ (same size) and an asymmetric sub-
2  Characterization of Spatial Granularity            relation < (smaller).
In this section, the mereotopological framework for a qualita-             def
                                                                     x ≡ y ⇔ x ≤ y ∧ y ≤ x           (D2)
tive, size-based axiomatization of spatial granularity is pre-
                                                                          def
sented. After the rudimentary relations of connection and           x<y⇔     x ≤ y ∧¬y ≤ x           (D3)
part are speciﬁed, extended locations can be characterized as
                                                                                        ≡
linearly ordered by an ordering relation smaller (Sect. 2.1). The equivalence classes with respect to correspond to the
This latter relation is the central tool for the formalization of possible sizes in a domain. However, this notion of size does
size-based granularity in Sect. 2.2.                  not necessarily correspond to a notion of distance supporting
  In contrast to the axiomatic characterization presented in the axioms of a metric. Further restrictions would be neces-
[Schmidtke and Woo, 2006], we do not distinguish in this sary to ensure this. Stronger geometric characterizations of a
article between arbitrary regions and extended locations, i.e. region-based notion of size are given in [Dugat et al., 2002;
                                                                                                  ≤
regions which can be grains and context regions. This choice Borgo et al., 1996], in which a relation similar to is the
simpliﬁes the discussion in Sect. 3, but would severely re- basis for characterizing spheres; a weak geometric character-
strict the possibilities for representing the location of objects. ization of region-based size for which the triangle inequal-
As Sect. 3.3 illustrates, extended locations can justiﬁably be ity of a metric is not a consequence has been presented in
termed point-like locations. For an application in which both [Schmidtke, 2003; 2005a]. An advantage of a less restric-
point-like, coarse locations, and detailed shape information tive formalization is that it is gives more representational
about objects is to be represented, extended locations could freedom for modelling a domain and choosing an appropri-
be modeled in a sorted logic as a subtype of regions. ate granulation. The notion of size characterized with the
                                                      relation ≤ does not need to correspond to a purely spa-
2.1  Extended Locations                               tial notion of size as derived from, e.g., the Euclidean met-
A mereotopological basis was chosen for the characteriza- ric, but could, for instance, also include functional aspects:
                                                      a small kink in the blade of a knife could thus be mod-
tion of extended locations. Extended locations fulﬁll basic                                       2
requirements for regions [Casati and Varzi, 1999; Asher and eled as being more important than in its handle. This
Vieu, 1995; Randell et al., 1992]: connection C is a reﬂexive notion of size and relevance is compatible with the above
(A1) and symmetric relation (A2); the relation  (part of ) axiomatization, but would not be supported by the more
can be deﬁned in terms of C (D1): x is part of y, iff every restrictive geometric characterizations [Dugat et al., 2002;
region that is connected to x is also connected to y.1 Schmidtke, 2003].
                    ∀x : C(x, x)              (A1)    2.2  Grain Regions and Context Regions
              ∀x, y : C(x, y) → C(y, x)       (A2)    Granularity, as characterized by [Hobbs, 1985] is a means to
                ⇔∀def : (   ) →  (   )               retrieve simpliﬁed, ﬁltered representations of a domain from
           x   y    z  C  x, z   C y, z       (D1)    more complex, richer representations. Spatial and temporal
It can be shown that  is a reﬂexive, antisymmetric rela- granularity are closely related to the concept of grain-size in
tion. For a thorough treatment of mereotopological ontolog- a local spatial or temporal context [Schmidtke, 2005b]. Parts
ical questions, however, a more elaborate framework would of an object that are smaller than the grain-size can be disre-
be needed [Casati and Varzi, 1999; Asher and Vieu, 1995; garded as unimportant details; objects beyond the range of the
Randell et al., 1992].                                area of the local context are not in the focus of current consid-
  In contrast to general regions, extended locations have a erations; and objects which extend beyond this range likewise
unique size, i.e. can be ordered uniquely according to their need not be represented as a whole, representing local parts
size. More precisely, the notion of size, and thus size-based would be sufﬁcient for many purposes in this case. If objects
granularity, can be derived from a linear ordering ≤ (smaller beyond this range or objects smaller than the grain-size need
or of equal size) on extended locations. The relation ≤ is a to be accessed, a change of context has to be initiated: as we
                                                      zoom out a larger area is covered, but small details are lost,
  1In order to abbreviate formulae, the scope of quantiﬁers is to zooming into a scene, smaller details are focussed, and ob-
be read as maximal, i.e. until the end of a formula, or until the jects further away become irrelevant. This photo metaphor
ﬁrst unmatched closing bracket after a quantiﬁer. Additionally, the
                                   def
following precedence is used: ¬, ∧, ∨, →, ↔, ⇔.          2This example has been suggested to us by a reviewer.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   564of spatial granularity has been discussed by [Galton, 2000, [Schmidtke, 2005b; Schmidtke and Woo, 2006]. Semiorders
§1.6]; the results of [Kosslyn, 1980] can be understood as and non-transitive indistinguishability play an important role
supporting evidence for granularity phenomena in spatial im- in the mathematical modeling of vagueness in perceptual
agery.                                                classiﬁcation [Suppes and Zinnes, 1963], e.g., of lengths or
  The notion of an extended location being a grain location colors in psychophysical experiments [Palmer, 1999, p. 671]:
relative to a context location is axiomatically characterized if direct comparison is not possible, subjects may judge two
using a relation | , with x | y denoting that x is a grain lengths A and B to be the same, and the length B to be
location of the context location y. Zooming out then is an the same as C, without necessarily judging A and C to be
operation of changing from a context location c1 to a larger the same lengths. A composition table for reasoning about
location c2 containing c1, with the grains of c2 also being semiorders has been given in [Schmidtke and Woo, 2006].
larger than the grains of c1. Axiom A7 formally characterizes The mechanisms for managing contextual change of granu-
this property: grains are ordered in the same way as their larity as described in [Schmidtke, 2005b] for the case of tem-
respective context locations and vice versa.          poral granularity can be applied accordingly.
  For a given domain, it might be useful to have atomic loca-
tions that do not have any parts and thus no grain locations ei- 3 Evaluation
ther. We accordingly deﬁne as proper context locations those
                                                      In this section, the approach is evaluated with respect to re-
extended locations which have grain locations (D4); and de-
                                                      lated works, soundness, and expressive power. A formal
mand that such locations are covered by grains without any
                                                      comparison between the chosen size-based approach and the
gaps (A8): any location that is connected to a proper context
                                                      partitioning approach of [Bittner and Smith, 2003] is pre-
location c is connected to some grain of c. It is worth not-
                                                      sented in Sect. 3.1. Soundness of the axiomatic characteri-
ing that this axiom is the only ontological axiom in a narrow
                                                      zation is proven with an example model of an ofﬁce scenario
sense, as it actually guarantees existence of locations under
                                                      (Sect. 3.2), which also serves to illustrate application of the
certain conditions. The last axiom (A9) states that the grains
                                                      concepts in standard scenarios in the ﬁelds of robotics and
of a context are proper parts of the context.
                                                      ubiquitous computing. The gained expressive power is illus-
                                                      trated in Sect. 3.3 with granularity-dependent speciﬁcations
         ∀c1,c2,g1,g2 : g1 | c1 ∧ g2 | c2 →
                                              (A7)    for otherwise difﬁcult common sense notions involving the
                        [c1 <c2 ↔ g1 <g2]             concept of irrelevant extension in a context.
                CL(  ) ⇔∃def : |
                   x      g  g   x            (D4)    3.1  Comparison to Partitioning Approaches to
              ∀c, x : C(x, c) ∧ CL(c) →                    Granularity
                                              (A8)
                  ∃g : g | c ∧ C(x, g)               The above axioms are neutral with respect to the question
            ∀c, g : g | c → g  c ∧ g = c   (A9)    whether space is partitioned by the extended location regions.
                                                      Axiom A8 demands that space is completely covered by ex-
          ∀c, x, y : x | c ∧ y | c → x ≡ y    (1)
                                                      tended locations on every given level of granularity, but al-
          ∀g, x, y : g | x ∧ g | y → x ≡ y    (2)   lows for locations to overlap. Axiom A7 does not restrict this
Since (A7) demands that grain locations are ordered with re- either. However, it may be desirable for some applications
spect to ≤ in the same way as their respective context loca- to impose stronger restrictions, in order to increase inferen-
tions, we obtain from (A7) with c1 = c2 that all grains of tial power. A partitioning of context regions, i.e. that each
a context location have equal extension (1). For g1 = g2 context-region is completely partitioned by its grains, can be
in (A7), it follows accordingly that all context locations of enforced with (P): a grain does not overlap another grain of
a grain have equal extension (2). The range of sizes cor- the same context region.
responding to the sizes equal to or smaller than a given
                                                                 ∀c, x, y : x | c ∧ y | c ∧ x = y
proper context location and equal to or larger than its grains                                        (P)
thus can function as a level of spatial granularity in accor-             →¬∃z   : z  x ∧ z  y
dance with the axiomatization of levels of granularity given This formalization only restricts grains of the same context-
  [               ]
in Schmidtke, 2005b . In particular, it is possible to charac- region, but not, e.g., grains of different sizes, which are still
terize a corresponding ordering on levels of spatial granular-
              ≺     ≈                                 allowed to also partially overlap. A stronger restriction is
ity with relations and : c1 is of ﬁner granularity than c2, stated in the axiom MA4 in the theory of granular partitions
iff there is a grain of c2 that is larger than c1 (D5); c1 is of [Bittner and Smith, 2003, p. 119]: “If two cells within a parti-
compatible granularity with c2,iffc1 is not smaller than any tion overlap, then one is a subcell of the other.” This require-
grain of c2 and c2 is not smaller than any grain of c1 (D6). ment can be formulated in the given theory by demanding that
                  def
           c1 ≺ c2 ⇔∃g  : g | c2 ∧ c1 <g     (D5)    two locations can only overlap if one is contained in the other
               def                                    (C).
        c1 ≈ c2 ⇔∀g1,g2 : g1 | c1 ∧ g2 | c2
                                              (D6)      ∀  1  2  :    1 ∧    2 →   2   1 ∨ 1   2
                        →  g1 ≤ c2 ∧ g2 ≤ c1             x ,x ,z  z   x   z   x     x    x   x    x   (C)
It can be shown that, if restricted to the class of CL-locations A consequence of (C) with (1) is that every context-region
(D4), ≺ is a semiorder with ≈ as a relation of indistinguisha- is partitioned by its grains (P). Actually, (C) is stronger than
bility. The proof follows along the lines of those given in (P): (P) concerns only locations of the same size, whereas (C)

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   565                                                      ≤∗ containing the relation  (interpreted by ⊆) as demanded
                                                      by (A6), the elements of R as being of the same granularity
                                                      according to above assumption, and the ordering on the discs
                                                      in LI derived from the ordering ≤R on the radii of discs.
                                                           ∗                                         2
                                                          ≤  = {(M1,M2)  | M1,M2  ∈ LI ,M1 ⊆ M2}∪R
                                                                ∪{(D(P1,r1),D(P2,r2)) | r1 ≤R r2}
             (a)                   (b)
                                                      With ⊆ and ≤R being ordering relations that do not conﬂict
Figure 1: Situation (a), showing two overlapping grains of with each other, (A3)–(A5) follow accordingly.
a context, is permitted by neither (P) nor (C). Situation (b), For the axioms in Sect. 2.2, an interpretation for | is
depicting locations of different sizes overlapping each other, needed: the grains of A are the rooms and the hallway; the
can occur with (P) but not with (C).                  grains of a disc of radius r can be set to always have the size
                                                      r                           1 4
                                                      c , for a certain ﬁxed factor c> ; and the grains of rooms
                                                                                         rmax
                                                                                                  ≤  max
                                                      are discs of a certain ﬁxed radius rg, with c <rg r .

                                                        | I = {(M,AI ) | M ∈ R}∪
                                                              {(D(P, r1),D(Q, r2)) | D(P, r1),D(Q, r2) ∈ LI
                                                                  ∧ D(P, r1) ⊆ D(Q, r2) ∧ r1 = r2/c}∪

                                                              {(D(P, rg),M) | M ∈ R ∧ D(P, rg) ⊆ M}

Figure 2: The simple layout of an ofﬁce domain as an exam- Axiom A8 holds since R was deﬁned so as to cover AI , and
ple of a model for the axiomatic system.              there is a disc D(P, r) for every size 0 <r≤ rmax around
                                                      every point of AI . All grains are subsets of their respective
                                                      context regions and elements of LI , and no context is its own
additionally demands that the locations of one size group into grain (A9). Axiom A7 can also be shown: the regions in R
the locations of a larger size, i.e., that locations of different are contained in AI ; for every disc, there is a disc of the same
sizes are not permitted to overlap, as illustrated in Fig. 1b. size contained in a region of R since rmax was required to be
This restriction is too strong for the intended modeling in smaller than half of the width of a room; and for the ordering
                                                                          r1   r2
Sect. 3.3. The more general approach suggested here allows                            1   2
                                                      on discs, we obtain that c < c ,iffr <r .
for different partitions to be modeled as belonging to the same A similar structure, with a restricted minimum size for the
granularity if they agree with respect to  and <.    discs, could be the result of representing a certain ofﬁce envi-
                                                      ronment for an application in robotics or ubiquitous comput-
3.2  An Example Model                                 ing. In a scenario of a service robot moving through an ofﬁce
In order to show soundness of the characterization and as environment, the level of granularity of the ofﬁces could be
an example for illustration of the concepts to be deﬁned in used, e.g., for possible addresses in commands to the robot,
Sect. 3.3, a simple model for the axiomatic system is provided
                                        2             whereas the level of granularity corresponding to discs hav-
in terms of point sets in the coordinate space R : the space ing the diameter of the robot can serve as the level of exact
is given by the quadratic area A covering a simple layout of point-like locations of the robot. For planning local motion,
                                           =[0 1]2
ofﬁces (Fig. 2); it is interpreted by the point set AI , . e.g., a robot may employ numeric relative coordinates, whose
Connection C is interpreted by non-empty intersection, and accuracy varies with the speed of motion. Discs of larger
                      ⊆
 , by the subset relation ( ). The set LI interpreting the sizes can be used to represent such vague coordinates.As
domain of extended locations consist of AI , the set of ar- errors add up, a computationally more expensive logic-based
     =  {                            }
eas R    HI ,O1I ,O2I ,O3I ,O4I ,O5I ,O6I containing the reasoning process for relocalization can be triggered. The for-
point sets corresponding to the seven regions of the hallway malism thus allows for reasoning about qualitative long range
H and of the rooms O1–O6 (including the walls separating navigation as well as quantitative short range navigation in a
them and any door spaces, see Sect. 3.3), and the set of cir- unifying manner. A similar interpretation can be given for a
cular discs (with respect to a presupposed distance function ubiquitous computing scenario, as location sensing technolo-
δ and a certain ﬁxed maximal radius rmax, smaller than half gies differ with regard to accuracy and type of sensed location
the width of a room) around points lying in AI .      [Hightower and Borriello, 2001].
      =  {  }∪    ∪
   LI     AI   R                                      3.3  Deﬁnition of Granularity-Dependent Concepts
         {D(P, r) | P ∈ A ∧ r ∈ R ∧ 0 <r≤ rmax}
                        I                             Granularity-dependent and context-dependent concepts such
where D(P, r) is the disc of radius r ∈ R around the point as spatial indistinguishability and adjacency of locations can
       3
P ∈ AI : D(P, r)={Q    ∈ AI | δ(P, Q) ≤R r}. The re-  be described with reference to an underlying partitioning of
lation ≤ is interpreted by the transitive closure of the relation
                                                         4This simple characterization sufﬁces for the purpose of con-
  3
   More precisely, D(P, r) is the intersection of AI with the disc structing an example model and illustrating the concepts. For actual
around P .                                            applications, however, limitations of accuracy have to be considered.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   566                                                        • To which ofﬁce a certain wall belongs does not have to
                                                          be decided. The walls can be modeled as boundaries
                                                          with irrelevant extension.
                                                        • The relation of relevant overlap can be used to model
                                                          accessibility, and to describe the viable paths.
                                                        • The discrete representation of space on the level of gran-
                                                          ularity of the ofﬁces can be combined with a dense or
              (a)                  (b)                    continuous conceptualization of space on ﬁner levels.
Figure 3: Adjacency and relevant overlap in the ofﬁce sce- The example also shows how a modeling using extended lo-
nario of Fig. 2: the hallway and the ofﬁce share a relevant cations can offer beneﬁts over a modeling based on points.
(and viable) sublocation, adjacent ofﬁces share sublocations For the possible positions of a robot moving through the do-
of irrelevant size.                                   main, only the unoccupied locations of sufﬁcient size are pos-
                                                      sible locations: the robot could be localized by a location of
                                                      at least the size of its extent, a coarser location would be the
the plane. So it remains to show, how these notions can be ex- room it is currently in. From the perspective of a perceiv-
pressed in the size-based approach and in which way the two ing mobile robot, its location on the ﬁnest level is determined
approaches differ as regards expressiveness. The key concept only relative to a larger surrounding context region. Its abso-
to achieve this is the distinction between relevant and irrel- lute position in the domain can be inferred by combining this
evant locations contained in a context-region: a location x local relative position with knowledge about its position on a
is a relevant sublocation of a context region xc if it is com- coarser granularity. Self-localization thus is meaningful only
pletely contained in the context-region and has at least grain- as localization relative to a larger context.5
size (D7).                                              Given different levels of temporal granularity, the move-
          def                                         ment of a robot on a trajectory can be discretized into a se-
    x  xc ⇔ x  xc ∧∀xg : xg | xc → xg ≤ x  (D7)
                                                      quence of extended locations x1,x2,...,xn representing
This notion can be used to distinguish between different types the robot’s position at different times:
of overlap between two size-congruent locations: if two lo- • on a very ﬁne level of temporal granularity, no relevant
cations are distinguishable only by sublocations of irrelevant motion is perceivable: consecutive positions x and x +1
                                            ⊂⊃                                                  i     i
size, they can be called spatially indistinguishable (D8); are indistinguishable: xi ⊂⊃ xi+1,
two locations relevantly overlap ⊃⊂ (D9), iff they share a com-
                                                        • on an intermediate level of temporal granularity, consec-
mon relevant sublocation, but are not indistinguishable; and
                                                          utive positions can additionally be adjacent or relevantly
locations having only common sublocations of irrelevant ex-
                                                          overlapping, depending on the velocity of the robot.
tension are called granularly adjacent ⊃|⊂ (D10).
                                                        •
           def                                            for a coarse level of temporal granularity, consecutive
    x1 ⊂⊃ x2 ⇔ x1 ≡ x2 ∧∀x :(x  x1 ∨ x  x2)
                                              (D8)        positions have to be of a coarser spatial granularity, in
                       →  C(x, x2) ∧ C(x, x1)             order to be related.
                  def                                 The example of motion shows another advantage for the rep-
          x1 ⊃⊂ x2 ⇔ x1 ≡ x2 ∧¬x1 ⊂⊃ x2 ∧
                                              (D9)    resentation with extended locations over the representation
                     ∃  :     ∧   
                      x  x  x1   x   x2               by points. The different cases listed above cannot be dis-
          def
  x1 ⊃|⊂ x2 ⇔ x1 ≡ x2 ∧¬x1 ⊂⊃ x2 ∧¬x1 ⊃⊂ x2 ∧         tinguished in a point-based representation: two points on a
                                             (D10)
             ∃  :     ∧                             trajectory can only be identical or disjoint. A region-based
              x  x   x1  x   x2                       representation without granularity adds additional relations,
These relations can be used to model granularity-dependent such as overlap and external connection [Galton, 2000, §6.3].
adjacency and vague identity of locations as well as modes Spatial granularity, as characterized here, encoding strata of
of movement of objects. In Fig. 3, the extended locations basic sizes, adds further concepts of approximate location.
corresponding to ofﬁces are determined by the region an of- The relation ⊂⊃, like ≈, is symmetric and reﬂexive, but transi-
ﬁce occupies including the walls and any door spaces. If the tive only if space is partitioned by the extended locations.
parameter rg in the model is chosen so that the grains of the
context regions of ofﬁces are larger than the width of the walls 4 Outlook and Conclusions
but smaller than the door spaces, e.g. as corresponding to the In this article, an approach to spatial granularity was dis-
size of possible positions of a service robot, then we obtain cussed in which granularity is represented as based on the
that an ofﬁce is classiﬁed                            sizes of certain regions, called extended locations. The
  • as adjacent to the ofﬁces with which it shares a wall, mereotopological basis for the axiomatic characterization
  • as relevantly overlapping the hallway.            allows for combination and comparison with related ap-
                                                      proaches. The axiomatized theory could be shown to be a
  The example illustrates that space can be structured with
the proposed characterization of granularity in a similar way 5Closely related to this conclusion is the question whether the
as with a partitioning, but without imposing unnecessary re- statement “I am now here” should be a tautology in a logic for spatial
strictions, thus opening additional options for representation: and temporal context, cf. [Forbes, 1989].

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   567