    A New Approach for Stereo Matching in Autonomous Mobile Robot Applications 
                Pasquale Foggia                                    Jean-Michel Jolion 
    Dipartimento di  Informatica e Sistemistica     Lyon Research Center for Images and Information 
  Università di Napoli, Via Claudio 21, I80125,      Systems, UMR CNRS 5205 Bat. J. Verne INSA 
                 Napoli, ITALY                          Lyon 69621, Villeurbanne Cedex, France 
                foggiapa@unina.it                           Jean-Michel.Jolion@insa-lyon.fr 

                            Alessandro Limongiello     Mario Vento  
                 Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione ed Ingegneria Elettrica  
              Università di Salerno, Via Ponte don Melillo, I84084 Fisciano (SA), ITALY  
                                   [mvento, alimongiello]@unisa.it 

                    Abstract                           All the approaches, in the literature, are based on this 
                                                     punctual definition of the disparity. In this paper we propose 
    We propose a new approach for stereo matching in an extension of that concept, namely we define a disparity 
    Autonomous Mobile Robot applications. In this    value for a whole region of the scene starting from the two 
    framework an accurate but slow reconstruction of homologous views of it in the stereo pair. The main reason 
    the 3D scene is not needed; rather, it is more   of this extension is that a punctual approach is redundant for 
    important to have a fast localization of the     Autonomous Mobile Robot (AMR) applications. In fact, in 
    obstacles to avoid them. All the methods in the  AMR applications, it is not very important to have a good 
    literature are based on a punctual correspondence, 
                                                     reconstruction of the surfaces, but it is more important to 
    but they are inefficient in realistic contexts for the identify adequately the space occupied by each object in the 
    presence of uniform patterns, or some perturbations scene (as soon as possible to avoid collisions), even by just 
    between the two images of the stereo pair. Our idea 
                                                     assigning to it a single disparity information. Moreover the 
    is to face the stereo matching problem as a      punctual approaches are lacking in robustness in some 
    matching between homologous regions, instead of  realistic frameworks, especially for video acquired from a 
    a point matching. The stereo images are 
                                                     mobile platform. The algorithms based on correlation, 
    represented as graphs and a graph matching is    which are available in off-the-shelf systems, are unable to 
    computed to find homologous regions. We present  deal with large uniform regions or with vibration of the 
    some results on a standard stereo database and also 
                                                     cameras. On the contrary, some efforts have been done in 
    on a more realistic stereo sequence acquired from a the literature to improve the robustness of the algorithms, 
    robot moving in an indoor environment, and a     but in despite of the running time. Our method estimates the 
    performance comparison with other approaches in 
                                                     average depth of the whole region by an integral measure, 
    the literature is reported and discussed. Our method and so has less problems with uniform regions than other 
    is strongly robust in case of some fluctuations of methods have. The estimate of the position of the regions is 
    the stereo pair, homogeneous and repetitive 
                                                     sufficiently accurate for navigation, also in the mentioned 
    regions, and is fast. The result is a semi-dense cases, and it is fast enough for real time processing. 
    disparity map, leaving only a few regions in the   Now, we report a brief description of several methods to 
    scene unmatched.                                 show better the limits of punctual approaches. For more 
                                                     details, there is a good taxonomy of dense two-frame stereo 
1 Introduction                                       correspondence algorithms, recently proposed by Scharstein 
A pair of images acquired from a stereo camera contains and Szeliski [2002], and a survey on stereo vision for 
depth information about the scene: this is the main  mobile robot by Zhang [2002]. There are two major types of 
assumption of stereo vision, based on the binocular parallax techniques, in the literature, for disparity matching: the area-
property of the human visual system. The main difficulty is based (also known as correlation-based) and feature-based 
to establish a correspondence between points of the two techniques. Moreover, the area-based algorithms can be 
images representing the same point of the scene; this classified in local and global approaches.  
process is called disparity matching. The set of       The local area-based algorithms [Kanade and Okutomi, 
displacements between matched pixels is usually indicated 1994; Fusiello and Roberto, 1997; Veksler, 2001] provide a 
as disparity map.                                    correspondence for each pixel of the stereo pair. They 


                                               IJCAI-07
                                                 2103assume that a pixel is surrounded by a window of pixels We prefer to have a 2D and ½ representation of the scene, 
with the same disparity, and these windows of pixels are assigning a constant disparity value to a whole region and 
matched. They produce a dense disparity map, excessive for only to some significant regions. Therefore, we propose a 
AMR aims. Furthermore, they can be quite unreliable not new stereo matching approach based on a region 
only in  homogeneous regions, but also in textured regions segmentation of the two images and a graph representation 
for an inappropriately chosen window size.           of these regions, to face the matching problem as a graph 
  On the other side, the global area-based approaches try to matching problem. The computational process is simpler 
propagate disparity information from a pixel to its neighbors and faster, because we consider only some significant 
[Marr and Poggio, 1976; Zitnick and Kanade, 2000], or they regions, i.e. big areas, or some areas selected by a specific 
define and minimize some energy function over the whole target. The result is more robust in a realistic context, 
disparity map [Geiger et al., 1995; Roy, 1999; Boykov et because an integral measurement of the disparity for the 
al., 2001]. They have a better performance in homogeneous whole region can mitigate some local and global 
regions, but they frequently have parameters which are fluctuations between the two images.  
difficult to set, and are highly time-consuming.       This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an 
  The feature-based approaches [Marr and Poggio, 1979; overview of our approach; Section 3 is devoted to the 
Grimson, 1981; Candocia and Adjouadi, 1997] detect and segmentation and the graph representation of the stereo pair; 
match only “feature” pixels (as corner, edges, etc.). These Section 4 shows the graph matching between the left and 
methods produce accurate and efficient results, but compute right image and Section 5 shows the disparity computation. 
sparse disparity maps (only in correspondence to the feature Finally, in Section 6 there is a discussion of experimental 
points). Therefore, AMR applications require more details, results on standard stereo database and also on our stereo 
in fact some information about the size; also a rough shape video sequence. Conclusions are drawn in Section 7. 
of the objects is needed for guiding a robot in the 
environment or for basic recognition tasks (e.g. in industrial 2  Overview of our approach 
applications, or for platooning of robots). 
  All the proposed methods, as already said, look for a The main idea of our approach is to obtain a disparity map 
punctual matching in the stereo pair. Therefore, some looking at the distance between homologous regions 
constraints both on the scene and on the input images have (instead of pixels) in the stereo images. Let these regions be 
been introduced, since the first works on the stereopsis by called blobs. In this way the computation of the disparity 
Marr and Poggio [1976;1979], in order to guarantee good map is carried out on a set of pixels having the same spatial 
results and to reduce the complexity. To guarantee these and color proprieties, producing a more robust performance 
constraints, the stereo pair is supposed to be acquired from a with respect to local and global perturbations in the two 
sophisticated system, so that the energy distributions of the images.  
two images are as similar as possible. Moreover, a pre-          Left Image           Right Image 
processing phase is needed, before the correspondence 
finding step, to compensate the hardware setup (calibration
phase), or to assume an horizontal epipolar line (epipolar 
rectification). Unfortunately, in realistic applications of 
                                                              Segmentation          Segmentation
mobile robot these constraints are not easy to guarantee. The 
two images of the stereo pair could have a different lighting, 
the motion of the mobile platform on a rough ground should       Graph                 Graph 
produce mechanical vibrations of the cameras, and             Representation       Representation
consequently local or global perturbations between the two 
images, that could undermine the initial phases of                     Recursive Weighted 
calibration and rectification. We want to relax some                 Bipartite Graph Matching 
constraints on the input images in order to consider a more 
realistic acquiring system, and consequently we add some        matched                  don’t care 
constraints on our goal.                                         areas                    areas 
  In this paper we propose, as said before, an extension of 
the disparity concept. The main idea is to determinate a            Disparity  
unique disparity value for a whole region of the scene and        Computation 
not for a pixel. In fact, even if we can suppose an unique                            Semi-dense 
correspondence between each pixel in the left and right         Performance          Disparity map 
images from an optical point of view (as said by the               map 
uniqueness constraint), in some cases we can not have  Figure 1: A scheme of our approach. 
enough information to find this correspondence looking just 
at a single pixel. Let us consider, for example, pixels inside It should be noted that a blob is not an object; objects are 
homogeneous areas, or belonging to repetitive patterns, or decomposed into several blobs, so the overall shape of the 
pixels suffering from perspective or photometric distortions. object is however reconstructed, except for uncommon 


                                               IJCAI-07
                                                 2104pathological cases. An example of pathological case can be are very similar, considering an adaptive quantization for 
a uniform object almost along the line of sight, but it has each image according to its lighting condition. A connected 
been satisfactorily dealt with only by global criteria component detection procedure is applied on each 
optimization, which is extremely time consuming.     segmented image to obtain 4-connected areas of the same 
  In our approach (see Figure 1), the left and right images color. Each connected area (blob) is then represented as a 
are segmented and each area identifies a node of a graph node of an attributed graph. Each node has the following 
(see section 3). The segmentation process is simple and very attributes: 
fast. In fact, we are not interested in a fine segmentation,  colMean: the RGB mean value of the blob (m_r, m_g, 
because we do not pursue a reconstruction aim. Anyway, we m_b); 
need similar segments between the left and right image in 
                                                         size
order to correctly find homologous regions. This objective  : the number of pixels in a connected area; 
is possible, in fact the stereo images are likely similar  coord: the coordinates of the box containing the blob 
because they represent two different view points of the same (top, left, bottom, right); 
scene. Moreover, the segmentation process does not 
                                                         blobMask
influence the rest of algorithm, because a recursive             : a binary mask for the pixels belonging to 
definition of the matching (see section 4) and a performance the blob.  
function (see section 5) guarantee a recovery of some  It is easy to understand that a segmentation yielding many 
segmentation problems.                               segments can be more accurate but creates lots of nodes, 
  A bipartite graph matching between the two graphs is consequently requiring a more expensive graph matching 
computed in order to match each area of the left image with process. On the other hand, a rougher segmentation process 
only one area of the right image. This process yields a list of generates matching nodes that are very dissimilar in size and 
reliably matched areas and a list of so-called don’t care shape. As a compromise, we consider a segmentation 
areas. By calculating a vertical displacement between the process tuned to over-segment the image, and subsequently 
corresponding areas, a depth is found for those areas of the we filter the image in order to discard small noisy areas. 
reference image (i.e. left image). The list of the don’t care 
areas, instead, could be processed in order to refine our 4 Graph Matching 
result (see section 4). 
  As it is clear, this approach is robust even in case of Formally our matching algorithm can be described in the 
uniform texture and it does not need a strong calibration following way. A number of nodes is identified in each 
                                                     frame (left and right image) and a progressive label is 
process because it looks for area correspondence and not                            L      L     L
                                                     associated to each node (blob). Let G  = {N0 ,…,Nn } and 
pixel correspondence. On the other hand, an effort is R      R     R
required in graph matching to assure real-time requirements. G  = {N0 ,…,Nm } be the two graphs representing the left 
The application time is reduced using some constraints for a and right image respectively. The solution of the spatial 
quicker computation of the bipartite graph matching (see matching problem, between two stereo frames, is an 
                                                     injective mapping between a subset of GL and a subset of 
section 4). Our method can be classified as a systemic R
approach [Jolion, 1994], in fact we consider constraints G . The problem at hand can be represented by using a 
                                                     matrix whose rows and columns are respectively used to 
coming from the scene, from the objective and from the                          L
observer. In particular, with regard to scene constraints, we represent the nodes of the set G , and the nodes of the set 
                                                     GR (correspondence matrix). The element (i,j) of the matrix 
assume a strong continuity constraint for each selected                                       L
                                                     is 1 if we have a matching between the element Ni  with the 
region, and the compatibility and the uniqueness constraints  R
are applied on the whole region and not longer on each element Nj , it is 0 otherwise. Each row contains no more 
pixel. The horizontal epipolar line constraint is generalized than one value set to 1. If the j-th row or the i-th column 
                                                     contains only zeros, it means that it is a don’t care node. The 
in a horizontal epipolar band (see section 4), to take the              L     R
nature of the mobile observer into account. Moreover, the bijective mapping  : G   G solves a suitable Weighted 
observer is supposed to move in an indoor environment and Bipartite Graph Matching (WBGM) problem. A Bipartite 
not too fast. Finally, the objective is considered to be real- Graph (BG) [Baier and Lucchesi, 1993] is a graph where 
time and highly related to the AMR applications. Therefore, nodes can be divided into two sets such that no edge 
                                                     connects nodes in the same set. In our problem, the first set 
all these constraints are taken into account to achieve our L                 R
goal.                                                is G , while the second set is G . Before the correspondence 
                                                     is determined, each node of the set GL is connected with 
                                                     each node of the set GR, thus obtaining a Complete BG. In 
3  Segmentation and Graph representation             general, an assignment between two sets GL and GR is any 
The first phase of the algorithm is the segmentation of the subset of GL  GR, i.e., any set of ordered pairs whose first 
stereo images and their graph representation. We need a elements belongs to GL and whose second elements belongs 
very fast segmentation process that produces similarly to GR, with the constraint that each node may appear at most 
segmented areas between the left and right images. We have once in the set. A maximal assignment, i.e. an assignment 
used a simple multi-threshold segmentation. It is essentially containing a maximal number of ordered pairs is known as a 
based on the quantization of the histogram in some color matching (BGM) [Kuhn, 1955]. 
ranges (of the same size). The left and right segmentations 


                                               IJCAI-07
                                                 2105                                                L
  A cost function is then introduced, so that each edge (Ni , maximum horizontal displacement of two corresponding 
  R
Nj ) of the complete bipartite graph is assigned a cost. This nodes (generally its value can be a few pixel). Disparity 
                                                L 
cost takes into account how similar are the two nodes Ni band, instead, is a vertical displacement, so a node of the 
      R
and Nj . The lower is the cost, the more suitable is that right image can move on the left almost of  *maxdisparity 
edge. If the cost of an edge is higher than a threshold pixels (with  a small integer). These two displacements are 
(thrMatch), the edge is considered unprofitable and is computed with respect to the centers of the bounding box  of 
removed from the graph (its cost is considered to be  ). the two blobs. 
  Let us now introduce the cost function:              The graph matching process yields a list of reliably 
                                                     matched areas and a list of so-called don’t care areas. The 
         colCost  d i mCost posCost                  matched areas are considered in the following section for 
   Cost                             
                     3                               the disparity computation. The list of the don’t care areas, 
  Where:                                             instead, is processed in order to group adjacent blobs in the 
                                  L          R       left and right image and consequently reduce split and 
                           colMeani  colMeani        merge artifacts of the segmentation process. Finally, a new 
            i m _ r,m _ g,m _ b
   colCost                                           matching of these nodes is found. The recursive definition 
                          3* 256                     of this phase assures a reduction of the don’t care areas in 
                                                     few steps, but sometimes this process is not needed because 
                          (i L j L ) (i R j R )
                                                     don’t care areas are very small. 
             i bottom,right
              j top,left
   d i mCost
                       width height                  5 Disparity Computation 
                               L   R                   The disparity computation is faced superimposing the 
                              i   i                  corresponding nodes until the maximum covering occurs. 
             i bottom,right,top,left
   posCost                                           The overlapping is obtained moving the bounding box of 
                 2 * (width height)                  the smallest region into the bounding box of the largest one; 
where width and height are the dimensions of the frame. The precisely, the bounding box with the minimum width is 
matching with the lowest cost among the ones with maximal moved horizontally into the other box, and the bounding 
cardinality is selected as the best solution. The problem of box with the minimum height is moved vertically into the 
computing a matching having minimum cost is called   other box. The horizontal displacement, corresponding to 
Weighted BGM (WBGM). This operation is generally time- the best fitting of the matched nodes, is the disparity value 
consuming; for this reason the search area (that is the subset for the node in the reference image (left image).  
of possible couples of nodes) is bounded by the epipolar  
and disparity bands (see Figure 2).  
  L                         R 


                                                                                                       
                                                       Figure 3: Some examples of matched regions. In grey 
                                                     color the region from the right image and in white color the 
                                           epipolar  region from the left image. 
  R                                         band  

                              Two nodes that do not 
                              belong to the search 
                                   area  
                                                                                                      
                                                       Figure 4: The overlapping process minimizes the 
      disparity           max                        mismatching between the two matched regions. 
        band             disparity                      
                                                       A lot of objects have some appendices (see Figure 4) 
  Figure 2: Epipolar and disparity bands: some constraints depending on the different segmentation between left and 
to optimize the WBGM.                                right image. However, this process finds the correct value 
                                                     for the disparity, minimizing the mismatching between the 
  These constraints come from stereo vision geometry, but two matched regions. Moreover, we propose a performance 
in our case they represent a generalization. The epipolar measurement for the disparity computation in order to 
band is a generalization for epipolar line, that is the 


                                               IJCAI-07
                                                 2106consider also some cases with larger errors coming from quantitative performance evaluation for disparity map but in 
both segmentation and matching process.              case of reconstruction aims. The following figure presents a 
                          max Fitting                stereo pair from the Tsukuba data set.  
           performance                  
                        max(sizeL, sizeR)
  It is the percentage value of the best fitting area size 
(maxFitting) with respect to the maximum size of the two 
matched regions (sizeL and sizeR). 
                                                                                                 
                                                       Figure 7: The reference image (on the left) and the 
                                                     ground truth (on the right), from Tsukuba data set. 
                                                        
                                                       The second image in Figure 7 represents the ground truth 
                                                     of the disparity map. An object has a higher grey level 
  Figure 5: On the left side our disparity map; on the right (corresponding to a high disparity between the two images) 
side a graphical representation of the performance function the closer it is to the camera, i.e. the lamp is in front of the 
(a brighter region has the upper value of performance). statue that it in front of the table, etc.  
                                                       The following Figure 8 shows our result on the Tsukuba 
  The result of our algorithm can be represented in a graph, DB and a comparison with other approaches. We have 
the so-called disparity graph, and, as it is clear from the selected the best methods in the literature: squared 
Figure 5, the nodes of this graph can have a don’t care differences (SSD), dynamic programming (DP) and graph 
attribute or, alternatively, the couple of disparity and cuts (GC) [Scharstein and Szeliski, 2002]. The first is a 
performance attributes. Therefore, we could select a local area-based algorithm, the other two ones are global 
minimum performance value, and label the regions below area-based algorithm. The experiments have been performed 
this value as don’t care. All these don’t care areas could be on a notebook Intel P4 1.5 GHz, 512 Mb RAM, and we 
processed again in the WBGM, as say in the section 3, if we have considered a resolution of 384x288 pixel. 
should need to refine the result. Anyway, in our 
experimental results, we use a simple post-filtering in order 
to reduce don’t care regions. Each 4-connected don’t care 
area is labeled choosing the most frequent among the 
disparities of the adjacent regions. This assumption comes 
from the continuity constraint, but it is clear that it is 
applicable only inside a region and not between two      SSD: Time < 1 sec    DP: Time 2 sec         
different regions, so it is checked that most of the adjacent 
regions have the same disparity value. An example of the 
post-filtering use is shown in the Figure 6. 
 
 
 
 
                                                         Graph Cut: Time 70 sec OUR: Time 1.14 sec 
                                                      Figure 8: A comparison with other approaches. 
 
  Figure 6: On the left side the original disparity map; on Before             Before 
the right side the result after applying the post-filtering. 

6 Experimental results 
In the literature, tests are usually performed with standard 
databases composed of static images, well-calibrated and 
acquired in uniform lighting. The web site of Scharstein and After             After 
Szeliski [Middlebury web site] is a good reference for some 
stereo images and to compare some stereovision algorithms. 
In this section we want to show our qualitative results and 
discuss some errors of the best algorithms in the literature, 
when applied to real cases. Nowadays, in AMR applications 
it is not defined a quantitative measurement for performance 
                                                             SSD: Time < 1 sec   OUR: Time 1.14 sec 
evaluation. On Middlebury web site it is proposed a                              OUR: Time 1.14 sec  


                                               IJCAI-07
                                                 2107