 Detection of Cognitive States from fMRI data using Machine Learning Techniques

                       Vishwajeet Singh, K.P. Miyapuram, Raju S. Bapi* 
                                    University of Hyderabad 
          Computational Intelligence Lab, Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
                              Gachibowli, Hyderabad, India 500046 
                                     bapics@uohyd.ernet.in

                   Abstract                      task. This could have potential applications in Lie Detectors, 
                                                 Cognitive control of artifacts, Cognitive control of mental 
    Over the past decade functional Magnetic Reso-
                                                 states (Neurofeedback), etc. 
    nance Imaging (fMRI) has emerged as a powerful 
                                                   An fMRI scanner measures the value of the fMRI signal 
    technique to locate activity of human brain while 
                                                 at all the points in a three dimensional grid, or image every 
    engaged in a particular task or cognitive state. We 
                                                 few seconds (6 sec in our data). The voxels (volume pixels) 
    consider the inverse problem of detecting the cog-
                                                 in a typical fMRI study have a volume of a few tens of cubic 
    nitive state of a human subject based on the fMRI 
                                                 millimeters and the 3D brain image contains 1,84,707 vox-
    data. We have explored classification techniques 
                                                 els that constitute the whole brain, thereby resulting in very 
    such as Gaussian Naive Bayes, k-Nearest 
                                                 high dimensional data. Since the signals measure tiny fluc-
    Neighbour and Support Vector Machines. In order 
                                                 tuations in the magnetic field, known as the Blood Oxygen 
    to reduce the very high dimensional fMRI data, we 
                                                 Level Dependent (BOLD) response, the signal-to-noise ratio 
    have used three feature selection strategies. Dis-
                                                 (SNR) for fMRI data is very low. Thus the other characteris-
    criminating features and activity based features 
                                                 tic of fMRI data is that they are very noisy. This problem 
    were used to select features for the problem of 
                                                 domain is quite interesting from the Machine Learning per-
    identifying the instantaneous cognitive state given 
                                                 spective, as it provides a case study of classifier learning 
    a single fMRI scan and correlation based features 
                                                 from extremely high dimensional and noisy data. 
    were used when fMRI data from a single time in-
                                                   We borrow Mitchell’s [Mitchell, 1997] definition to state 
    terval was given. A case study of visuo-motor se-
                                                 more formally the problem of detection of cognitive states 
    quence learning is presented. The set of cognitive 
                                                 from fMRI data.    
    states we are interested in detecting are whether the 
                                                 Definition: A computer program is said to have learned 
    subject has learnt a sequence, and if the subject is 
                                                 from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and 
    paying attention only towards the position or to-
                                                 performance measure P, if its performance at tasks in T, as 
    wards both the color and position of the visual 
                                                 measured by P, improves with experience E. In our case,  
    stimuli. We have successfully used correlation 
                                                 T: classification of cognitive state of human subject 
    based features to detect position-color related cog-
                                                 E: labelled training data mapping fMRI scans to the instan-
    nitive states with 80% accuracy and the cognitive 
                                                 taneous cognitive state 
    states related to learning with 62.5% accuracy. 
                                                 P: performance accuracy of the algorithm over the unseen 
                                                 fMRI data. 
 1 Introduction                                    The case study in this paper is a Visuomotor sequence 
 Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is a power- learning experiment [Miyapuram, 2004]. Human Subjects 
 ful imaging tool, which can be used to perform brain activa- perform a motor task (pressing a key on a keyboard) in re-
tion studies my measuring Blood Oxygen Level Dependent sponse to visual stimuli (having position and colour attrib-
(BOLD) signal [Ogawa et al., 1990]. Human brain carries utes). The problem that we have attempted in this study is to 
out various functions at a time. The operations within the classify fMRI data into a discrete set of cognitive states that 
brain like, “the process of thinking” and “the process of are “subject has learnt a sequence”, “subject did not learn 
remembering”, that affect our mental contents are called as the sequence”, “the subject is paying attention only towards 
‘cognitive processes’ and the person is said to be in the par- the position of the visual stimuli” and “the subject is paying 
ticular ‘cognitive state’. Our aim is to identify the cognitive attention towards the color and the position of the visual 
state of a human subject that is persistent within a certain stimuli”. The various machine learning algorithms we have 
interval of time, given the fMRI activity within that interval. applied on this fMRI data are Gaussian Naive Bayes Classi-
Our motivation in the detection of cognitive states is that fier (GNB), k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) and Support Vector 
this could lead to our understanding of the hidden cognitive Machines (SVM). To deal with the high dimensionality of 
states a human passes through while performing a particular the data we have used three feature selection strategies 


                                            IJCAI-07
                                              587 namely, Discriminating features, Activity based features and ordinate system of a standard brain. This transformation 
 Correlation based features.                     would help in standardization of reporting of co-ordinates of 
                                                 the brain space across different studies. To achieve this, two 
 2  Materials and Methods                        types of brain images were collected for each subject. The 
                                                 first type of image referred to as a functional image, cap-
 2.1  Machine Learning Classifier Techniques     tures brain activation via the BOLD response. The second 
                                                 type of image, called the structural image, captures the static 
  A classifier is a function which takes input a set of exam- physical brain structure at higher resolution. First the struc-
ples and outputs a class label to each input example, where tural images of all the subjects were standardized [Friston et 
class label belongs to a discrete set of possible categories. In al., 1995] to a template image and the resulting parameters 
our case the classifier is a function of the form: were used for standardizing all the functional images of 
f : fMRI-sequence(t1, t2) CognitiveState         each subject to the template. The end result of this preproc-
where fMRI-sequence(t1, t2) is the sequence of fMRI images essing step is that all the image data are in same size and 
 collected during the contiguous time interval [t1, t2], and approximately same shape.  
where CognitiveState is the set of cognitive states to be dis-
criminated.                                      Data Abstraction: As we are interested in training classifi-
  We explored three classifier training methods: a Gaussian ers that work across subjects and as the strength of the 
Naive Bayes (GNB), k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN), and linear BOLD response varies from subject to subject, abstracting 
Support Vector Machines (SVM). These classifiers were the data is very important. Hence we adopted a normaliza-
selected because they have been used successfully earlier by tion method in which the algorithm rescales the data in each 
[Mitchell et al., 2003, 2004; Wang et al., 2004] for solving scan of every subject such that the mean value of the result-
similar problem as well as in other applications involving ing data is zero, i.e. 
high dimensional data. For example, Naive Bayes Classifi- Yt = (Xt – meanXt) / stdXt, t = 1 … n 
ers, kNN and SVM have all been used for text classification Where Xt's and Yt's are the data before and after normaliza-
problems [Nigam et al., 2000], where the dimensionality of tion, respectively and, meanXt and stdXt are the mean and 
                      5
the data is approximately 10 , corresponding to the natural the standard deviation of Xt, respectively. 
 language vocabulary.                              The other approach for data abstraction is a method that 
                                                 takes the correlation of the selected features to transform the 
 2.2 fMRI Task Procedure                         real image data.  
 The fMRI experiment consisted of a visuomotor sequence 
 learning task. A set of two circles filled with different col- Feature Selection: Feature selection, as a preprocessing 
 ours (Yellow, Red, Green or Blue) appeared simultaneously step to machine learning, is effective in reducing dimen-
 at two distinct positions (Top, Bottom, Left, or Right) on a sionality, removing irrelevant data, increasing learning ac-
 screen. The correct order of the sequence is to be learnt by curacy, and improving result comprehensibility. However, 
 trial and error based on the spatial positions of the visual the increase in the dimensionality of the data poses a severe 
 stimuli. In one task (P2P), the response was required to be challenge to many existing feature selection methods with 
 generated according to the position of the stimuli. In another respect to efficiency and effectiveness. The enormity of data 
 task (P2C) the subjects had to respond using an arbitrary may cause serious problems to many machine learning algo-
 rule with the following mapping: Green – Top, Red – Right, rithms with respect to scalability and learning performance. 
 Blue – Bottom, and Yellow – Left. The entire sequence to For example, high dimensional data (i.e., data sets with 
 be learnt consisted of six such sets. Hence this sequence hundreds or thousands of features) can contain high degree 
 learning task is called a 2 x 6 task. Subjects continue to of irrelevant and redundant information which may greatly 
 practice the same sequence repeatedly for 4 sessions (6 se- degrade the performance of the learning algorithms. There-
 quence blocks, of 36 sec each, per session). Human brain is fore, feature selection becomes very necessary for machine 
 involved in many activities at a time. There are many back- learning tasks when facing high dimensional data. The first 
 ground processes such as respiration, heart beat, mood, etc. two methods, i.e. Discrim and Active, are the same as used 
 that are not related to the task being performed. Hence fMRI by [Mitchell et al., 2003, 2004; Wang et al., 2004]. 
 studies must be designed to quantify relative changes in Select the n most discriminating voxels (Discrim): In this 
 brain activity. For this purpose, the sequence blocks alter- method, voxels (features) are selected based on their ability 
 nated with baseline blocks (18 sec each) in which subjects to distinguish one target class from the other. 
 performed keypresses (using the same rule as in sequence Select the n most active voxels (Active): In this method, 
 task) viewing visual stimuli presented randomly one at a voxels are selected based on their ability to distinguish ei-
time.                                            ther target class from the baseline condition.  
                                                 Select the n feature pairs whose correlation discrimi-
 2.3  Feature Selection and Data Abstraction     nates the target classes (CorrPair): This technique is in-
 Data preprocessing: The case studies involve fMRI data of spired from the feature selection algorithm Corona [Yang et 
five normal subjects. As shape and size of brain varies for al., 2005] which uses correlation information among fea-
 each individual, images need to be transformed into the co- tures to select them. Traditional feature subset selection 


                                            IJCAI-07
                                              588techniques such as Recursive Feature Elimination [Am- to train a classifier function of the form f : It CognitiveS-
broise and McLachlan, 2002] and Fast Correlation Based tate, where It is an fMRI scan at a single time instance and 
Filter (FCBF) [Yu and Liu, 2003] lose this information as CognitiveState takes values of P2P or P2C. Results of single 
they use the feature data only. In this method, voxel pairs subject classification are shown in Table 1.  
are selected based on their ability discriminate the target For multiple subjects, the detection of instantaneous cog-
classes. The correlation value between these voxel pairs is nitive state using Discrim and Active features was below 
then used as feature vector to train the classifiers.  random classification. We have successfully used the corre-
                                                lation based feature selection to train the classifier function 
3  Case Study                                   of the form f: <I1 … It> CognitiveState where <I1 … It>
                                                is a set of fMRI scans taken in a time interval of length t and 
Our case study involves fMRI data collected when subjects CognitiveState takes on values P2P and P2C. 
are enagaged in visuo-motor sequence learning experiments. 
In these experiments, subjects learn the correct  sequence of Table 1: Results of Single-Subject Classifiers detecting instantane-
response by trial and error and continue to perform it until ous cognitive states in P2P Vs P2C classification study 
the end of the experiment. Therefore there are task–related Feature No. of GNB KNN KNN  SVM
changes at the neuronal level occurring continuously in dif- Selection Features (k = 5) (k = 9) 
ferent areas of the brain. These changes are reflected as Discrim 50  97.91 98.332 97.78 98.61
changes in the activity at different voxels in fMRI images.  
                                                 Discrim 100      98.19    100 99.86     98.61
3.1 P2P Vs P2C Classification Study              Discrim 200      98.61 99.722 99.72     98.61
Firstly, we have considered the problem of training classifi- Active 50  92.34 98.332 97.34 98.47
ers to detect the cognitive states, “the subject is paying at- Active 100  92.49 98.472 98.05 98.47
tention only towards the position of the visual stimuli” and Active 200  92.91 99.026 98.61 98.47
“the subject is paying attention towards the color and the 
position of the visual stimuli”. When the subject is perform- Table 2 shows the results of using correlation based fea-
ing the P2P task he pays attention towards the position of ture selection technique where the average accuracy of the 
the visual stimuli and responds only according to the posi- multiple subject classifier is above that of a random classi-
tion of the stimuli, the color of the stimuli is irrelevant. fier, for t taking values 12, 36 and 72. The “leave-one-
Whereas when the subject is performing the P2C task he subject-out” strategy was used for training multiple-subject 
pays attention towards the position of the visual stimuli and classifiers.
responds according to the color of the stimuli. Hence the 
essential difference between these two tasks is the way in Table 2: Results of Multiple subjects classifiers using CorrPair 
which the response is generated after seeing the position of 
                                                feature selection in P2P Vs P2C classification study 
the visual stimuli.  
                                                 Feature No. of  GNB KNN KNN         SVM
                                                 Selection Features    (k = 5) (k = 9) 
                                                  t=12 200        56.66 51.66     58   51.65
        Visual     P2C       Arbitrary 
                                                  t=36 200          65 67.5       65   57.5
       Stimuli               Mapping
                                                  t=72 200          75 65         75     60
                                                  t=12 474        58.33 51.66 50.8     44.1
                                                  t=36 474          75 67.5       75     60
                                                  t=72 474          80 75         80     70

                   P2P                            All three classifiers, GNB, kNN and SVM have per-
                              Response          formed successfully and have given much better results than 
                                                random-chance classification. Using the CorrPair (t=72) 
                                                feature selection method gave the optimal results where the 
                                                number of features is 474 and the number training samples 
Figure 1: The Difference in the response generated during P2P and were 16. The results show the superior performance of GNB 
P2C Tasks                                       and kNN (k=9) classifiers over the SVM.  

The assumption here is that since the set of brain areas un- 3.2 Early Vs Late Learning Study 
derlying spatial and color perception are distinct, the cogni- In the second phase, we have considered the problem of 
tive states reflecting the two tasks can be distinguished training classifiers to detect the cognitive states, “subject has 
based on the fMRI signals.                      learnt the sequence (Late stage where the performance is 
 In this particular case study we have tried to capture this smooth and automatic)” and “subject did not learn the se-
difference in our classifier function. We have used the Dis- quence (Early stage where the performance is deliberate and 
criminating features and Active feature selection strategies error-prone).” In both the tasks, P2P and P2C, the subjects 


                                           IJCAI-07
                                             589 have to learn the position sequences (or the order in which Table 4 shows the results of using correlation based fea-
 to press on the keypad, given the visual stimuli). This se- ture selection technique where the average accuracy of the 
 quence is learnt by a process of trail and error.  multiple subject classifier is above that of a random classi-
                                                 fier, for t taking values 12, 36 and 72. The “leave-one-
                                                 subject-out” strategy was used for training multiple-subject 
                                                 classifiers.
        Visual     Early     Trial &
        Stimuli              Error               Table 4: Results of Multiple Subject classification using CorrPair 
                                                 feature selection in Early Vs Late: Learning Study 
                                                  Feature No. of  GNB KNN KNN            SVM
                                                  Selection Features     (k = 5) (k = 9) 
                                                   t=12 200          62.5    51 62.5       52.5
                                                   t=36 200          52.5    55      65     35
                   Late                            t=72 200           55     50      55     30
                               Response            t=12 445          56.7    50 58.3       42.5
                                                   t=36 445          62.5    43      60     50
                                                   t=72 445           55     55      50     35
 Figure 2: The Difference in the response generated during Early 
 and Late Learning Periods                         All three classifiers, GNB, kNN (k=9) have performed 
                                                 satisfactorily and have given better results than random 
  In this case study we try to detect whether the subject has classification, whereas the performance of the SVM was 
learnt the sequence or not, irrespective of the task he is per- very poor. Using the CorrPair (t=36) feature selection 
forming. It is to be noted that this classification task is po- method gave the optimal results where the number of fea-
tentially more difficult than the earlier one. The assumption tures is 445 and the number of training samples were 32. 
here is that the brain processes related to early learning are The results show the superior performance of GNB and 
distinguishable from those engaged in the later part. Further, kNN (k=9) classifiers over the SVM.  
it is also assumed that the cognitive states corresponding to One important point that we have noticed is that the over-
the two learning stages are similar across the P2P and P2C all performance of the multi-subject classifier in this case 
tasks. We have used the Discriminating features and the study has decreased as compared to the “P2P Vs P2C” case 
Activity based feature selection methods to find a classifica- study. One possible reason for this could be that that differ-
tion function of the form f : It CognitiveState where It is a ent subjects learn the sequence at different rates. For this 
 fMRI scan at a single time instance and CognitiveState takes purpose, we have designated the first two sessions of the 
 values as either “Early Learning” or “Late Learning”. As in experiment as the “Early Learning” period and the last two 
 previous case study, we were successful in training single sessions as the “Late Learning” period. This criterion might 
 subject classifiers.                            not efficiently account for the subjective variations.  

 Table 3: Results of Single-Subject Classifiers detecting instantane- 4 Discussion  
 ous cognitive states in Early Vs Late Learning study 
  Feature No. of  GNB KNN KNN           SVM        The field of machine learning techniques for classifica-
 Selection Features      (k = 5) (k = 9)         tion of data is very huge. We have tried a number of differ-
  Discrim 50         50     100    100    98.6   ent techniques [Singh, 2005] that are suited for the high 
  Discrim 100        60     100    100    98.6   dimensional data of fMRI. The paper has taken up as a case 
                                                 study data from a real fMRI experiment employing visuo-
  Discrim 200        65     100    100    98.6   motor sequence learning task. Here the present state of brain 
  Active 50          80     100    100    98.6   is a function of its previous states and the present input (vis-
  Active 100         80     100    100    98.6   ual stimuli), a function which is unknown. Hence classifica-
  Active 200         80     100    100    98.6   tion in such a dynamically varying situation is a very chal-
                                                 lenging. The learning task in this paper is inherently differ-
  We obtained less than random classification for multiple ent from previous case studies of [Wang et al., 2004], such 
subject classifications using Discrim and Active features.  as the Picture Vs Sentence Study, in which the present state 
We have successfully used the correlation based feature of the brain is just a function of its present input (picture & 
selection to train the classifier function of the form  sentence). As with any cognitive experiments, there will be 
                                                 overlapping and distinct brain areas associated with the re-
f: < I1 … It > CognitiveState, where < I1 … It > is a set of 
 fMRI scans taken in a time interval of length t and Cogni- spective cognitive processes – position and  colour process-
tiveState takes on values — “Early Learning” or “Late ing in our case studies. As the focus of the present paper is 
Learning”.                                       detection of cognitive states, comparision of our results to 
                                                 the literature in cognitive neuroscience is beyond the scope. 


                                            IJCAI-07
                                              590Problems related to artifacts in data have been dealt with 2. Finding new future selection methods for such a high 
appropriate preprocessing techniques commonly used for dimensional and periodically changing data.  
FMRI data. The additional challenge posed by this data was 
feature selection. Hence, we have focused on comparison of Acknowledgments 
different classifiers and also the feature selection strategies. 
The three difficulties namely, ‘high dimensionality', `differ- The fMRI data was collected by grants from Kawato Dy-
ent shapes & sizes of the brain' and `variations in the activ- namic Brain Project, Exploratory Research for Advanced 
ity level across subjects', are the major reasons for the supe- Technology, Japan. We thank Drs. Kenji Doya and Kazu-
rior performance of the single-subject classifiers over multi- yuki Samejima for their help with fMRI experiments. 
subject classifiers and are primary hurdles in the `feature 
selection problem'.                             References 
 The existing feature selection algorithms, like FCBF and [Ambroise and McLachlan, 2002] C. Ambroise and G. J. 
Corona, could not be implemented in such a high dimen- McLachlan. Selection bias in gene extraction on the ba-
sional feature space. Hence we had to opt the strategies sis of microarray gene-expression data. Proceedings of 
which were described earlier in the section 2. The drawback the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 99(10):6562–
of these strategies is that we do not know the optimal num- 6566, May 2002. 
ber of features to select, and hence we have to do a lot of 
trial and error until we get good result or we conclude that [Friston et al., 1995] K. Friston, J. Ashburner, C. Frith, J. 
we cannot get any better result further. In spite of these Poline, J. Heather and R. Frackowiak. Spatial registra-
drawbacks, the correlation based strategies outperformed the  tion and normalisation of images. Human Brain Map-
activity based or discriminating feature selection methods ping, 2:165–189, 1995. 
when tested across subjects. Also, this can be successfully [Mitchell, 1997] T. Mitchell. Machine Learning. McGraw 
used in the absence of a domain expert, who identifies the Hill, 1997. 
regions of interest (ROI’s) in the human brain given the [Mitchell et al., 2003] T. Mitchell, R. Hutchinson, M. Just, 
nature of the task and reduces the need of feature selection. R. Niculescu, F. Pereira and X. Wang. Classifying in-
 The reason for the better performance of the correlation stantaneous cognitive states from fMRI data. In Ameri-
based features as compared to the Discriminating features can Medical Informatics Association Symposium, 465–
and the Activity based features in the multi-subject classifier 469,  2003. 
training scenario is that they are not using the voxel (fea-
ture) activity values directly as feature vector to train the [Mitchell et al., 2004] T. Mitchell, R. Hutchinson, R. Ni-
classifiers, instead they are abstracting the voxel values and culescu, F.Pereira, X. Wang, M. Just and S. Newman. 
using the correlation between the voxels as the feature vec- Learning to decode cognitive states from brain images. 
tor for training, hence the problem of variations in the activ- Machine Learning, 57(1-2):145–175, October 2004. 
ity level across subjects is addressed. Whereas the Discrimi- [Miyapuram, 2004] K. P. Miyapuram, Visuomotor Map-
nating features and the Activity based features use the voxel pings and Sequence Learning: A Whole-Brain fMRI In-
activity values directly as features to train the classifiers and vestigation, Master's thesis, Department of Computer  
face the problem of difference in the activity levels across and Information Sciences, University of Hyderabad, In-
the subjects.                                     dia,  2004. 
 The results showed superior performance of GNB and [Nigam et al., 2000] K. Nigam, A. McCallum, S. Thrun and 
kNN over the SVM. This was similar to Semantic Category T. Mitchell. Text classification from labeled and unla-
Study of [Mitchell et al., 2003] where the number of train- beled documents using EM. Machine Learning, 39:103–
ing samples per class was very less (10). This is quiet oppo- 104, 2000. 
site to the results obtained in the Picture versus Sentence 
study, where the number of training samples per class was  [Ogawa et al., 1990] S. Ogawa, T. Lee, A. Kay and D. 
40 and the SVM out-performed the GNB and kNN. So we Tank, Brain magnetic resonance imaging with contrast 
speculate that when the training samples are small in num- dependent on blood oxygenation. In Proceedings of the 
ber GNB out-performs SVM.                         National Academy of  Sciences, USA, 87:9868–9872, 
                                                  1990. 
5 Conclusions                                   [Singh, 2005] Vishwajeet Singh, Detection of Cognitive 
The results obtained in the two case studies, i.e., “P2P Vs States from fMRI data using Machine Learning Tech-
P2C Study” and “Early Vs Late Learning Study”, prove that niques, Master’s thesis, Department of Computer and In-
the problem of detection of cognitive states in such a high formation Sciences, University of Hyderabad, India,  
dimensional feature space is feasible when right choice of 2005. 
features is made along with methods to abstract data  As [Wang et al., 2004] X. Wang, R. Hutchinson, and T. 
future work to this project we suggest the following:  Mitchell. Training fMRI classifiers to detect cognitive 
1. The problem of multiple subject classifiers learning to states across multiple human subjects. In Advances in 
   detect the instantaneous cognitive states.     Neural Information Processing Systems, 16:709–716, 
                                                  2004. 


                                           IJCAI-07
                                             591